  Lars Rohde: The international and domestic factors impacting 
Denmark’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 1 December 2014. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak today. 
I would like to start by describing international developments. After that, I will comment on 
the Danish economy and the capitalisation of firms and of the agricultural sector. And finally, 
I will talk about the issue of Danish membership of the Banking Union. 
The world economy continues to grow at a modest pace, while the euro area is still waiting 
for  the  upswing. This  situation  is  attributable  to,  inter  alia,  the  conflicts  in  Ukraine  and  the 
Middle East, which have reduced consumer and business confidence, possibly by more than 
could  be  expected.  The  slowdown  since  the  summer  has  led  to  downward  adjustment  of 
growth forecasts for Germany and other countries. On the other hand, the USA and, to some 
extent, the UK are seeing robust growth in economic activity. 
Euro area consumer prices are being curbed by falling energy prices. At a more fundamental 
level, wage growth is low. Inflation is currently well below the European Central Bank’s target 
of just under 2 per cent. Combined with weak growth, this in early September led the ECB to 
announce  two  new  purchase  programmes  for  securities  issued  by  the  private  sector. 
However,  only  a  very  small  share  of  production  is  limited  by  shortage  of  credit.  The 
overriding  issue  is  lack  of  demand  and,  to  a  somewhat  lesser  extent,  lack  of  access  to 
labour. So we should not have too high expectations that more credit will in itself lead to a 
surge in investment and employment. 
At  the  end  of  October,  the  Federal  Reserve  decided  to  discontinue  its  purchases  of 
government  and  mortgage-backed  bonds.  It  has  been  important  to  avoid  turmoil  in  this 
connection. And indeed, the decision was expected in the markets and reflects the continued 
improvement of the US economy. It also underlines the divergence between the US and euro 
area economies. 
In all the major economies, monetary policy is supporting growth by reducing market interest 
rates and risk premia to very low levels. On the flip side, a prolonged period of low interest 
rates and low volatility could result in underestimation of risks and excessive risk exposure 
among credit institutions and their customers. 
A sudden reversal of the international hunt for yield could cause prices to plummet, and the 
trend may be intensified by sales spirals and queues at the exit, which may have a knock-on 
effect across asset classes. A shortage of liquidity in the market could further accelerate the 
process. 
There  are  currently  no  indications  that  major  systemic  risks  have  built  up  in  the  Danish 
financial  system.  All  the  same,  there  is  reason  to  be  on  guard.  Credit  institutions  should 
ensure  that  they  are  able  to  withstand  both  direct  losses  due  to  price  adjustments  for 
financial  assets  and  the  derived  effects  of  the  potential  market  turmoil  triggered  by  such 
adjustment – e.g. because market access becomes more difficult. 
Turning to the real economy, the Danish economy has grown since the end of 2012 if we 
adjust for falling output of North Sea oil and gas these years. Growth has been driven mainly 
by domestic demand. 
Developments in the labour market have been positive over the last year. Employment has 
risen  sharply,  and  unemployment  has  fallen.  According  to  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s 
estimate, the current unemployment gap is only around 10,000, so if the recovery continues, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  it will soon close. The potential for increasing the labour force is greater, but this is also more 
difficult. 
Inflation  is  also  low  in  Denmark  due  to  factors  such  as  falling  oil  prices.  In  the  coming 
months, price inflation will remain low, but looking ahead we can expect inflation to pick up 
as the effect of falling energy prices fades away. 
Interest  rates  in  Denmark  have  continued  to  fall,  to  historical  lows,  and  the  low  level  of 
interest rates is set to continue for some time yet. In spite of this, investment activity is low 
and  corporate  savings  high.  This  is  the  case  not  only  in  Denmark  but  in  most  advanced 
economies and no-one can really say when this circle of restrained private consumption and 
low investment appetite will be broken. 
It is not purely bad that corporate savings are high. Other things being equal, a firm is more 
robust to economic shocks the higher its equity is relative to its total assets. That reduces the 
risk  that  the  firm  will  fail.  It  also  reduces  the  probability  that  the  firm’s  bankers  will  suffer 
losses  on  their  lending  to  the  firm.  Hence,  a  high  solvency  ratio  has  a  positive  impact  on 
financial stability. 
A high solvency ratio also gives the individual firm greater flexibility when choosing between 
alternative  sources  of  funding  and  greater  certainty  of  obtaining  the  desired  funding.  An 
analysis by Danmarks Nationalbank shows that since the financial crisis erupted, loan capital 
in the Danish banking system has to a large extent flowed to the soundest, most profitable 
and productive firms. This is healthy in a banking system and should induce firms with small 
buffers  to  consider  whether  it  might  be  a  good  idea  to  increase  their  capitalisation.  This 
applies not only to limited liability companies, but also to sole proprietors – including farms, 
for example. 
In  the  pre-crisis  years,  the  Danish  agricultural  sector  experienced  a  land  price  bubble  that 
inflated prices per hectare to unrealistic levels. The high land prices were to a large extent 
used to pledge land as collateral for raising further debt. Since 2008, the average price per 
hectare has almost halved. This has left many farmers with high debts and a low equity base. 
This makes them more vulnerable to fluctuations in the prices of agricultural produce, which 
have shown considerable volatility over time. 
The shaky foundations of Danish agriculture were partly masked by favourable conditions for 
the  sector  in the  period 2010–13,  with  good  prices  and  rising  terms  of trade.  At the  same 
time,  farms  could  be  financed  at  historically  low  rates  of  interest.  Nevertheless,  return  on 
equity  was  unsatisfactory  for  many  farms.  This  points  to  fundamental  structural  problems 
within the agricultural sector. 
The prices of grain, pigs and milk have fallen since the spring, partly on account of Russia’s 
boycott of western agricultural produce. However, prices have not fallen more sharply than 
we have seen on many previous occasions, and the current price level is relatively normal in 
a  long-term  perspective.  Production  and  sale  of  highly  volatile  goods  such  as  agricultural 
produce require well-consolidated production units that are resilient to such repeated price 
fluctuations.  The  current  situation  has  highlighted  the  weak  capital  base  of  many  farms. 
Capitalisation must be strengthened. 
Now I will turn my attention to the Banking Union. On Tuesday, 4 November 2014, the EU’s 
Single Supervisory Mechanism entered into force. Responsibility for major supervisory tasks 
in the participating member states was transferred to the ECB. This marks an important step 
in the implementation of the Banking Union. 
Seen from the outside – from Denmark – it is difficult to spot any change. But we must not be 
mistaken. 4 November 2014 was a red-letter day in Europe. The member states participating 
in the Banking Union have set the future course for supervision and crisis management of 
their banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  They  have  chosen  to  have  one  strong  authority  to  supervise  all  their  banks  in future.  And 
they  have  chosen  to  transfer  responsibility  for  crisis  management  to  a  Single  Resolution 
Board  from  January  2016.  This  Resolution  Board  will  guarantee  credible  and  consistent 
application  of  the  bail-  in  rules  in  relation  to  distressed  banks.  The  claims  of  unsecured 
creditors will be converted into equity or written down. Tax payers will no longer have to help 
clear up the mess left by irresponsible banks. 
In  the  debate  on  the  Banking  Union  it  is  now  and  then  argued  that  –  if  we  participate  – 
Danish banks risk having to pay for problems experienced by banks in other member states. 
In my view, that point of departure is wrong. After all, when it comes to distressed banks, the 
key element of the Bank Union is bail-in, not bail-out. 
The  Banking  Union  creates  the  basis  for  a  gradual  strengthening  of  the  single  market  for 
financial goods in the coming years. Common rules and uniform implementation will lead to 
less  bureaucracy  and  will  be  a  good  thing  for  competitive  banks,  which  will  have  better 
opportunities to compete across national borders. This can be expected to lead to increased 
price  and  product  competition,  to  the  benefit  of  households  and  firms  in  the  participating 
member states. 
The  Danish  Bankers  Association  has  published  a  report  with  deliberations  on  Danish 
participation in the Banking Union. I agree with large parts of your analysis. 
For example, I agree when it comes to competition and financial stability aspects. As I have 
just said, the Banking Union can be expected to create potential for more competition. And it 
will  strengthen  financial  stability  to  have  a  single  authority  that  is  expected  to  be  better  at 
preventing, predicting and managing financial crises. 
Those  are  sound  observations.  Therefore  I  am  a  little  surprised  to  see  that  the  overall 
conclusion of the Danish Bankers Association is that Denmark should wait and see before 
deciding whether to join the Banking Union. 
The Danish Bankers Association lists a number of outstanding issues to be clarified before 
we make up our minds. For example, the report mentions uncertainty about how the Banking 
Union  will  handle  distressed  banks.  And  it  mentions  uncertainty  as  to  how  the  market  will 
assess the Union. 
As  I  see  it,  this  wait-and-see  conclusion  leaves  one  central  question  unanswered:  What, 
exactly, is it we should wait for? Both the handling of distressed banks and market players’ 
assessments of the Banking Union will be dynamic processes. 
It may have been sensible to wait for the results of the asset quality review and stress test 
concluded by the ECB in October. But what are we waiting for now? What will it take before 
we have enough information to make a decision? 
Wait and see – without clearly indicating what we are waiting for – is de facto a “no”. A “wait 
and  see”  decision  is  precisely  –  a  decision.  If  we  are  not  participating,  we  are  de  facto 
outside the cooperation which the participating member states have now begun. I find that 
unwise. 
In all fairness, I should say that it would not be a disaster if we waited or if we chose to opt 
out.  There  is  a  life  outside  the  Banking  Union.  But  non-participation  will  have  some 
implications and bring some challenges that we will have to take into account in the coming 
years, should that be the path we choose. 
The implications may seem small today, but in the longer run they could be considerable. 
Going forward,  Denmark  cannot  expect  to  be  compared  with  the  members  of the  Banking 
Union  when  international  players  try  to  assess  the  risks  in  the  Danish  banking  sector. 
Instead, relevant benchmarks will be Sweden and Switzerland. As in Denmark, the assets of 
the  largest  banks  in  these  countries  amount  to  approximately  1.5  times  GDP.  In  these 
countries, which will not be joining the Banking Union, the authorities already impose stricter 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  requirements on the largest banks than we do. People will invariably begin to ask whether 
the Danish requirements are sufficiently high. And so will Danmarks Nationalbank. 
In addition, it will become relatively more costly for international investors to invest in Danish 
credit institutions. Inside the Banking Union, investors will have to study one single rulebook 
and the ECB’s implementation of this rulebook before assessing which of the many banks 
within the Union to invest in. We will be a small country outside the Banking Union. Investors 
will have to understand our unique national setup – and where it deviates from the Banking 
Union – before assessing which Danish banks they might want to invest in. That will require 
a  lot  in  terms  of  communication  from  banks  and  authorities.  But  no  matter  how  good  our 
communication  is,  international  investors  will  need  to  be  compensated  for  the  extra 
resources spent understanding our particularities. 
When  we  discuss  the  Banking  Union,  one  issue  always  crops  up  in  Denmark  –  and  not 
without  reasons.  That  is  the  Danish  mortgage  credit  system.  And,  indeed,  the  mortgage 
credit system is one of the uncertainties that make the Danish Bankers Association say “wait 
and see”. 
Again,  I  do  not  quite  follow  your  argument.  In  recent  years,  Denmark  has  applied 
considerable political muscle to ensure that our mortgage credit system has a place in the 
new single European regulation. We have negotiated with 27 member states, all with their 
separate national interests to safeguard. And the negotiations went well. 
This does not mean that current regulation is the end of the road. Rather, a game changer 
has been introduced. Decisions will be taken by the members of the Banking Union. They 
will, as a matter of course, negotiate and reach a conclusion among themselves – and will 
then stand together as one large group that cooperates closely when it comes to banking. 
The outsiders, on the other hand, will be a small, diverse group. 
In that situation we may ask ourselves how we can best protect the Danish mortgage credit 
system.  By  participating  in  future  negotiations  within  the  group  of  cooperating  member 
states?  Or  by  opting  out  together  with  a  few  other  member  states  that  have  no  particular 
interest in supporting our mortgage credit model? 
As  you  know,  it  is  not  for  the  Danish  Bankers  Association  or  Danmarks  Nationalbank  to 
decide whether Denmark should participate in the Banking Union. It is a political issue. The 
politicians determine when the time is right to make a decision – and they make the decision. 
But those of us who play a role in the sector have an obligation to be frank and honest about 
our views and opinions. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  firmly  believes  that  both  credit  institutions  in  Denmark  and  the 
Danes in general have an interest in participating in the Banking Union. Together with the 
Danish mortgage credit sector we should knock on the front door of the Union. 
The Banking Union aims to provide security for citizens. No element of the Union makes it 
more  expensive  to  be  a  homeowner  or  bank  customer.  On  the  contrary  –  increased 
competition could make it less expensive. 
The  Banking  Union  will  have  a  huge  impact  on  Denmark  –  whether  or  not  we  choose  to 
participate. Therefore we need a broader debate so that the pros and cons become crystal 
clear. In this connection I can already reveal that Danmarks Nationalbank’s assessment will 
be elaborated on in our upcoming Monetary Review. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for our good cooperation in relation 
to  the  establishment  of  the  Straksclearing  express  clearing  system.  It  has  been  a  large 
project for all of us. But now we have upgraded the Danish payments infrastructure so that it 
is possible to transfer money instantly between accounts in different banks. Today I think we 
can all see the advantages of having implemented this project that brings Denmark right up 
to date in the field of payments. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
