  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  October  2014  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
31 October 2014. 
 Original presentation is on the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey’s website: http://www.tcmb.gov.tr/ 
wps/wcm/connect/47fed704-6c8d-48a4-9fce-458bc4bad30b/ER_Ekim_2014_Konu% 
C5%9Fma_%C4%B0ngilice.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=47fed704-6c8d-48a4-9fce-458bc4bad30b 
Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the briefing held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report. I will now 
present an overview of the report, which will be published on our website soon.  
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes six boxes 
entailing  interesting  and  up-to-date  analyses  on  various  topics.  For  example,  the  report 
presents boxes that analyze how the determinants of bond flows into emerging economies 
change over time and the sensitivity of inflation to output gap and loans. Moreover, there are 
studies  elaborating  on  current  account  fluctuations  and  current  account  deficit  corrections, 
non-core  liabilities,  the  correlation  between  capital  flows  and  loan  growth  across  a  wide 
range  of  economies  and  the  role  of  macroprudential  measures  in  the  elasticity  of  loans  to 
capital flows. Titles of the boxes are shown on the slide. All of these analyses shed light on 
noteworthy issues in the Turkish economy. I strongly recommend that you read these boxes, 
which will soon be published on our website. 
Distinguished Guests, 
I  would  like  to  commence  my  speech  by  reviewing  the  global  economic  outlook  given  its 
undeniable  influence  on  our  policies.  In  the  third  quarter  of  the  year,  the  uncertainty  over 
advanced  country  monetary  policies  led  to  a  partial  volatility  increase  in  global  financial 
markets.  While  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  ended  its  quantitative  easing  program, 
uncertainties regarding the timing and size of a policy rate hike continued. In this period, the 
European  Central  Bank (ECB)  cut  its  policy  rates  against  the risks  of  economic  slowdown 
and deflation and announced a kind of quantitative easing program of buying covered bonds 
and asset-backed securities. In the second and third quarters of 2014, indicators for global 
economic activity performed lower than expected, causing growth forecasts for this year to 
be  revised  down.  Financial  market  volatility  and  falling  global  growth  rates  led  to  some 
fluctuation in capital flows to emerging economies (Chart 1). Following the weakening global 
growth outlook, commodity prices dropped markedly as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    
Regarding  the  developments  in  the  Turkish  economy,  the  recent  global  financial  volatility 
appears to have affected Turkey in a way similar to other emerging economies. In the third 
quarter,  Turkey’s  risk  premium  indicators  fluctuated  on  par  with  those  of  other  emerging 
economies  (Chart  2).  Economic  activity  lost  some  momentum  after  the  first  quarter.  The 
slowing  EU  growth  and  geopolitical  tensions  have  restrained  external  demand.  Despite 
waning external demand, exports continue to support the balanced growth. 
 
  The macroprudential measures and our tight monetary stance have had positive implications 
for  the  core  inflation  trend.  A  sizable  amount  of  the  significant  first-half  increase  in  core 
inflation indicators was reversed in the third quarter. Annual core goods inflation continues to 
slow down as the negative effects from exchange rate changes diminish. Moreover, falling oil 
prices  restrict  the  inflationary  pressures  on  energy  items.  However,  elevated  food  prices 
cause inflation to hover significantly above the target. We expect significant disinflation for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the upcoming year. The continued decline in cumulative exchange rate effects, the return of 
food  inflation  to  the  average  level  of  previous  years  and  the  fall  in  commodity  prices, 
especially oil, will be the main factors contributing to disinflation. Moreover, we believe that 
the tight fiscal stance set out in the Medium Term Program (MTP) will support the decline in 
inflation. 
Monetary policy and monetary conditions 
1. 
Distinguished Guests, 
The  Central  Bank  implemented  a  front-loaded  and  strong  monetary  tightening  in  the  first 
quarter of 2014 and then lowered policy rates gradually amid reduced domestic and external 
uncertainty in the second quarter. During the third quarter, we firstly cut the one-week repo 
auction rate from 8.75 to 8.25 percent, and the overnight borrowing rate from 8 to 7.5 percent 
in July. In August, to operate within a more symmetric interest rate corridor, we lowered the 
overnight  lending  rate  from  12  to  11.25  percent,  and  the  rate  on  borrowing  facilities  for 
primary dealers via repo transactions from 11.5 to 10.75 percent (Chart 3). In this period, we 
provided  the  CBRT  funding  primarily  from  one-week  repo  auctions  (Chart  4).  Thus,  the 
average  funding  rate  came  close  to  the  one-week  repo  rate.  Yet,  taking  into  account  the 
geopolitical tensions and the financial market volatility, we have fortified our tight monetary 
stance  with  a  tight  liquidity  policy  since  September.  Accordingly,  the  BIST  overnight  repo 
rates, that neared the one-week repo auction rate in July and August, has lately followed a 
course close to the upper end of the interest rate corridor. 
 
 
While  we  had  measured  rate  cuts,  we  have  maintained  a  tight  monetary  policy  stance  by 
keeping the yield curve nearly flat in this quarter as well. The spread between 5-year market 
rates  and  the  BIST  Interbank  Overnight  Repo  rates  has  been  at  negative  levels  as  of 
October (Chart 5). In addition, as we have tightened our liquidity policy recently, short-term 
rates  have  risen  substantially.  Thus,  we  are  able  to  keep  the  yield  curve  on  a  nearly  flat 
course. On the other hand, the spread between long and short-term rates continues to hover 
below  its  historical  levels  (Chart  6).  We  will  closely  monitor  inflation  expectations,  pricing 
behaviors and other factors affecting inflation in the upcoming period and maintain our tight 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  monetary policy stance by keeping a flat yield curve until there is a significant improvement in 
the inflation outlook. 
 
  
We aim to support the continuity of the balanced growth and capital inflows in Turkey during 
the  global  monetary  policy  normalization.  To  this  end,  we  have  changed  the  foreign 
exchange  deposit  rates  that  the  banks  pay  when  they  borrow  from  the  CBRT  within  their 
limits through the Foreign Exchange Deposit Market. As of 9 October 2014, the rates applied 
to  banks'  one-week maturity  borrowings from the  CBRT  as  a  last  resort facility  have  been 
reduced from 10 percent to 7.5 percent for USD and from 10 percent to 6.5 percent for EUR. 
Moreover, considering the increase in the size of the banks’ balance sheets and the CBRT’s 
international  reserves,  we  announced  that  we  will  revise  the  banks’  USD  10.8  billion 
transaction limits in the Foreign Exchange and Banknotes Markets at the press meeting on 
“Monetary  and  Exchange  Rate  Policy  for  2015”.  In  addition,  we  stated  that  it  is  crucial  to 
further  strengthen  the  currently  solid  structure  of  the  banking  sector  for  financial  stability 
purposes.  In  this  context,  we  announced  on  21  October  2014  that  we  will  provide  further 
support to core liabilities to spur balanced growth and domestic savings. As an incentive, we 
decided  to  remunerate  the  Turkish  lira  component  of  required  reserves  of  financial 
institutions. Additionally, with this arrangement, we aim to reduce the sensitivity of the costs 
of holding Turkish lira required reserves against the CBRT’s policy rates and thus strengthen 
the automatic stabilization feature of the Reserve Option Mechanism. 
Distinguished Guests, 
As for the loans, we see that the macroprudential measures and our tight monetary stance 
have helped to keep the pace of loan growth at reasonable levels. The annual rate of total 
loan growth is 16 percent, below the 2007-2013 average of 23 percent, as of October 2014. 
In terms of loan trends, the annualized growth rate of consumer loans continues to hover at 
low levels while commercial loans remain relatively more robust (Charts 7 and 8). I would like 
to emphasize that this loan outlook will both restrain medium-term inflationary pressures and 
support the improvement of the current account balance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Macroeconomic developments and assumptions 
2. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. 
Annual  consumer  inflation  fell  by  0.3  points  quarter-on-quarter  to  8.86  percent  in  the  third 
quarter of 2014, while inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco at 8.37 percent was 
mostly consistent with our July Inflation Report forecasts (Charts 9 and 10). Due to adverse 
weather conditions and cumulative effects of exchange rate changes, food prices remained 
the subcategory making the greatest contribution to inflation. However, the main drivers of 
this third-quarter fall in inflation were energy and core goods. Annual inflation continued to 
decline across the core goods category thanks to decreased negative effects of exchange 
rate  developments.  Regarding  underlying  inflation  trends,  there  has  been  a  significant 
improvement  in  the  core  goods  category.  Meanwhile,  the  services  category  produced  a 
relatively negative outlook. 
 
 In 
the 
third 
quar
ter, 
the 
core 
inflat
ion 
tren
d 
reco
rded 
a 
decli
ne 
5 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   following  the  favorable  impact  of  the  macroprudential  measures  and  our  tight  monetary 
stance (Chart 11). Accordingly, the marked first-half inflation increase in core indicators was 
reversed in the third quarter. Yet, I would like to note that underlying trend indicators are still 
above the target-consistent levels. In this period, international commodity prices, especially 
oil,  fell  in  line  with  the  weak  global  growth  outlook  and  USD-denominated  import  prices 
dropped. In addition to this favorable outlook of import costs, aggregate demand conditions 
and the relatively slow pace of growth in consumer loans alleviate the pressures on inflation. 
In fact, excluding food products and associated services subcategories, we see that annual 
consumer inflation declined considerably in the third quarter (Chart 12). 
 
  
In sum, the negative effects of cumulative exchange rate developments continued to wane in 
the third quarter, yet food prices remained on a relatively unfavorable track. The prolonged 
high  level  of  consumer  inflation  and  the  ongoing  deterioration  in  inflation  expectations 
adversely affect pricing behaviors in certain categories, particularly services.  
We expect the fall in commodity prices, which is driven by the weak global demand, to bring 
consumer inflation down, and the awaited moderate pace of domestic demand to restrain the 
upside  risks.  Thus,  we  believe  that  underlying  inflation  will  move  downward  in  the 
forthcoming period. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Now, I would like to give a brief account of developments in economic activity and the short-
term outlook on which the inflation forecasts are based. According to the GDP data of the 
second quarter of 2014, economic activity was relatively weaker compared to the outlook we 
presented  in  the  July  Inflation  Report.  In  the  second  quarter,  we  saw  that  industrial 
production remained virtually unchanged quarter-on-quarter, while national income posted a 
decline after eight quarters in seasonally adjusted terms (Chart 13). This decline was mostly 
attributed to the agricultural sector, which made a 0.3 point negative contribution to quarterly 
growth.  Therefore,  national  income  growth  lagged  behind  industrial  production  growth 
(Chart 14). 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
Industrial production, which grew by 1.1 percent in the July-August period of 2014 compared 
to the preceding quarter, contributed to growth in the third quarter. On the other hand, we 
may  see  some  decline  in  the  agricultural  value  added.  Thus,  there  are  signals  that  GDP 
growth may fall short of the industrial production growth in this period as well. Factors like the 
slowdown in the European economic growth and geopolitical developments led the external 
demand to decelerate, inducing a marked slowdown in the growth of exports excluding gold 
(Chart  15).  As  a  result,  although  we  expect  the  slowdown  in  external  demand  in  the  third 
quarter to be partially offset by the rebound in domestic demand, I would like to emphasize 
that the third-quarter growth accommodates downside risks stemming from the agricultural 
sector. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
  A  steady  recovery  in  consumer  and  investor  confidence  is  yet  to  appear,  suggesting  that 
downside  risks  to  domestic  demand  still  persist.  We  believe  that  the  deceleration  trend  in 
external  demand  will  curb  the  rise  in  exports  for  a  while.  However,  we  expect  falling 
commodity prices to contribute positively to the current account balance by reducing import 
costs (Chart 16). 
Distinguished Guests, 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
In the third quarter of the year, oil and import prices remained below the path we envisaged 
in the July Inflation Report (Chart 17). Accordingly, we revised our assumptions of average 
oil  and  import  prices  for  2014  and  2015  downwards.  Given  the  current  outlook,  due  to 
external prices, year-end inflation forecasts for 2014 and 2015 were revised downwards by 
0.3 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively. Considering also the high course in food inflation 
in the third quarter, we revised our year-end inflation assumption for food prices upwards to 
12.5 percent for 2014 and 9 percent for 2015. These revisions in food prices drove our year-
end  inflation  forecasts  for  2014  and  2015  higher  by  0.8  and  0.3  percentage  points, 
respectively. 
 
  
Our  medium-term  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  tax  adjustments  and 
administered prices are consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. 
Price  increases  in  electricity  and  natural  gas  of  9  percent,  which  were  released  in  early 
October, have slightly exceeded our assumptions in the July Inflation Report. Thus, our end-
2014  inflation  forecast  was  revised  upwards  by  0.2  percentage  points.  We  based  our 
assumptions about the medium-term fiscal policy stance on the MTP projections covering the 
2015-2017 period. Accordingly, we assume that a tight fiscal stance will be implemented and 
the primary expenditures to GDP ratio will taper off. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook 
3. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output gap forecasts  based  on  the  outlook  I 
have described so far. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our  medium-term  forecasts  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  our  tight  monetary  policy 
stance  will  be  maintained  by  keeping  a  flat  yield  curve.  A  further  assumption  is  that  the 
annual loan growth rate will reach nearly 15 percent by the end of 2014 and stabilize around 
these  reasonable  levels  on  the  back  of  the  macroprudential  measures.  Accordingly,  we 
expect inflation to be, with 70 percent probability, between 8.4 percent and 9.4 percent (with 
a  mid-point  of  8.9  percent)  at  end-2014  and  between  4.6  percent  and  7.6  percent  (with  a 
mid-point of 6.1 percent) at end-2015. We expect inflation to stabilize around 5 percent in the 
medium term (Chart 18). 
 
  
We  expect  inflation  to  considerably  exceed  the  5-percent  target  by  the  year-end,  and 
decrease  significantly  as  of  the  start  of  2015  and  fall  to  6.1  percent  at  end-2015.  This 
noticeable  decline  we  forecast  in  inflation  is  driven  by  the  projections  that  cumulative 
exchange  rate  effects  will  continue  to  taper  off,  food  inflation  will  recede  to  past  year 
averages and commodity prices, chiefly oil, will stay at expected lower levels. Moreover, we 
believe that demand conditions and the announced tight fiscal policy stance will support the 
decline in inflation in this period. The fluctuating course in 2015 inflation forecasts that you 
see on the slide stems from the base effects (Chart 18). 
Distinguished Guests, 
In  addition  to  these  forecasts,  alternative  scenarios  on  the  inflation  outlook  and  the  global 
economy  are  discussed  in  the  Risks  section  of  the  Inflation  Report.  You  can  examine  the 
Report for details. 
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
