  William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York, 7 October 
2014. 
 Good afternoon. I am pleased to be here today at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). It is 
always  a  pleasure  to  speak  with  members  of  the  different  communities  that  make  up  our 
region, and it is particularly exciting to have the opportunity to speak with the students and 
faculty  here  at  the  Lally  School  of  Management  and  Technology.  Much  of  my  day  in  the 
Albany  area  has  been  focused  on  the  intersection  of  technology,  the  workforce  and 
innovation,  so  it  is  a  pleasure  to  speak  with  the  people  who  are  the  future  leaders  in  this 
fascinating evolution. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the grassroots level of our economy. Earlier on this trip, I met with government and business 
leaders to learn about some of the challenges the region faces as well as the collaborative 
efforts  being  taken  to  further  economic  development.  I  listened  to  community  leaders 
describe the problems in affordable housing, workforce development and employment facing 
many in the lower income communities. I was also impressed by the potential innovations in 
energy production at the GE Global Research Center. These could have large consequences 
not only in the United States but in developing nations as well. 
We plan these trips so I can meet with a diverse array of representatives. This allows me to 
get a comprehensive picture of economic conditions in the region and a fuller understanding 
of the major issues and concerns. This is our fifth trip to Upstate New York in the past few 
years. Other recent trips have taken us to Northern New Jersey, the boroughs of New York 
City, Long Island and Fairfield County, Connecticut. 
My outreach trips complement the ongoing efforts of the New York Fed to assess conditions 
in  the  Upstate  New  York  economy  and  throughout  our  District.  We  monitor  economic 
performance on a monthly basis through special indexes we have created and through our 
monthly  surveys  of  New  York  State  manufacturers  and  business  leaders  in  the  non-
manufacturing sector. We also get important input on economic conditions from our Upstate 
Advisory Board, whose members play important roles in the Upstate economy. We conduct a 
biannual  poll  of  small  businesses  to  understand  their  credit  needs  and  availability.  The 
results of one particular poll led us to develop a series of clinics for small businesses to help 
them  take  the  next  step  to  access  capital  and  identify  new  sources  of  funding.  We  have 
constructed  a  consumer  credit  panel  that  allows  us  to  better  understand  the  financial 
condition of U.S. households and students. More recently, we extended this national analysis 
to include more detail about the states in our district, including a profile of households in New 
York State and the Albany area. We look at how much consumers are borrowing, what they 
are borrowing for and if they are experiencing difficulties in making their payments. 
As I mentioned earlier, we are always eager to engage with students, and our commitment to 
the  region  includes  a  number  of  educational  programs  worth  highlighting.  First,  Math  x 
Economics, which encourages students attending schools serving lower-income families to 
consider  a  career  in  finance  or  economics.  And,  second,  our  yearly  Fed  Challenge 
competitions, in which teams of students from high schools and colleges in the District take 
on  the  roles  of  the  members  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  and  debate 
what the appropriate next step is for U.S. monetary policy. 
All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues fully engaged with the communities 
we represent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let me now review recent developments in the national and regional economy, and at the 
end  of  my  talk,  I  will  be  happy  to  answer  questions  you  may  have  about  the  economic 
outlook. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
National economic conditions 
Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy 
has  grown  at  a  disappointing  2.2  percent  compound  annual  rate.  Several  times  over  that 
period it looked as though growth was breaking out on the upside, but each time such hopes 
were dashed. 
We  are  again  at  a  similar  junction.  A  wide  array  of  economic  indicators  now  suggest  that 
growth in the U.S. has picked up and is widely expected to be around 3 percent during the 
second half of 2014 and in 2015. 
These  forecasts  seem  quite  reasonable  to  me  and  are  consistent  with  views  I  have 
expressed in the past. Various “headwinds” have been impeding economic activity, but some 
of  these  forces  have  gradually  subsided,  allowing  the  substantially  improved  underlying 
fundamentals to exert themselves more forcefully. For example, fiscal restraint, which was a 
big  factor  last  year,  has  subsided  and  is  likely  to  disappear  altogether  next  year.  Credit 
availability  has  also  improved,  reflecting  healthier  bank  balance  sheets  and  improving  job 
and income prospects for prospective borrowers. In addition, the excess supply of housing 
built up over the boom of the previous decade has been worked off, and both home prices 
and rents suggest that the supply of housing is not keeping pace with demand. 
This  has  allowed  supportive  financial  market  conditions,  spurred,  in  part,  by  a  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy,  to  shine  through.  As  a  result,  aggregate  household  net 
worth  has  climbed  relative  to  income  and  consumer  balance  sheets  are  healthier.  On  the 
business side, financial markets conditions suggest that risk aversion has subsided, leading 
to some firming in business investment spending. All of these developments help boost the 
confidence of consumers and businesses that this consensus forecast will in fact unfold. 
Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will be either 
weaker  or  stronger  than  the  point  forecast.  While  I  believe  that  the  risks  around  this 
consensus  forecast  are  reasonably  well  balanced,  I  also  believe  that  the  likelihood  that 
growth will be substantially stronger than the point forecast is probably relatively low. 
Several  factors  lead  me  to  this  conclusion.  First,  despite  the  fact  that  the  household 
deleveraging  process  appears  to  be  largely  over  and  aggregate  household  net  worth  has 
been restored to pre-crisis levels, consumer spending is not as strong as one might expect 
given these conditions. As a result, the personal saving rate is currently significantly above 
what  the  historical  relationship  between  household  net  worth  and  personal  saving  would 
suggest.  There  are  several  potential  explanations  for  this  development.  Access  to  credit, 
while  certainly  improved,  is  probably  still  not  fully  restored,  particularly  for  those  with  less 
than sterling credit histories. It is also quite likely that, in the wake of the deep recession and 
relatively sluggish growth of the past five years, households have higher than normal levels 
of precautionary saving. 
Another  reason  for  seeing  less  than  normal  upside  risk  for  consumer  spending  is  that  the 
growth stimulus from the consumer durable goods cycle is likely to weaken going forward. 
For example, sales of light-weight motor vehicles have steadily recovered from a low of 9.4 
million units (annual rate) at the depths of the recession to an average of nearly 17 million 
units over the three months ending in September. The fastest pace of sales in the previous 
business  cycle  was  17  million  units  for  all  of  2005.  While  there  may  be  some  additional 
upside potential to these sales given the quite long period over which they were depressed 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  relative  to  fundamentals,  it  seems  unlikely  that  they  will  continue  to  grow  at  the  rate  they 
have over the past few years. 
Housing  is  another  area  where  the  upside  risks  are  likely  to  be  less  than  what  we  might 
expect under more normal conditions. We have seen an impressive recovery of multi-family 
housing starts over the past few years. However, starts of single-family homes continue to 
languish  at  relatively  low  levels  despite  the  fact  that  home  prices  have  risen  substantially 
over the past two years and mortgage rates remain quite low. Mortgage lenders continue to 
be  extremely  risk  averse  and  mortgage  credit  to  those  with  lower  credit  scores  is  still 
significantly constrained. There is nothing on the horizon that would lead me to believe that 
situation will change in a material way any time soon. 
Lastly,  over  the  past  few  months  the  exchange  value  of  the  dollar  has  appreciated  while 
growth  prospects  of  key  trading  partners,  particularly  the  Euro  Area,  have  dimmed.  Of 
course, the appreciation of the dollar is likely due in part to increasing confidence that growth 
prospects in the U.S. have improved. Therefore, this development does not mean we should 
abandon the consensus forecast. Rather, as with the other issues I have discussed, I view 
this development as limiting the upside risk to that forecast. 
Despite the limiting factors discussed above, the pace of growth envisioned in the consensus 
forecast implies that overall labor market conditions will continue to improve. But there is a 
great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  the  resulting  path  of  the  unemployment  rate,  with  some 
forecasters  expecting  a fairly  steep  decline  to  around  5  percent  by  the end  of  2015,  while 
others anticipate a much more gradual decline. 
In addition to how strong output grows, the ultimate path of the unemployment rate will also 
depend  on  the  behavior  of  productivity  growth  and  the  labor  force  participation  rate.  The 
labor force participation rate has declined a great deal since 2007, the previous cyclical peak, 
due  to  a  combination  of  demographic  factors  and  protracted  cyclical  weakness  in  labor 
demand.  The  behavior  of  the  participation  rate  and  its  likely  future  path  is  an  issue  we 
continue  to  monitor  and  study  intently. While  I  still  believe  that  the  participation  rate  could 
move back up again as the demand for labor strengthens, I am less confident about this than 
earlier as the downward trend in participation rates has persisted even as the labor market 
has  improved.  What  I  can  say  with  greater  certainty  is  that  there  still  is  a  significant 
underutilization  of  labor market  resources.  I  come  to  this  conclusion  after  assessing  many 
labor market indicators, not just the level of the unemployment rate. For example, the fact 
that the rate of growth of labor compensation costs remains so subdued is consistent with 
this conclusion. 
With  respect  to  prices,  inflation  has  been  running  somewhat  below  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
objective  of  a  2  percent  annualized  rate for  the  personal  consumption expenditures  (PCE) 
deflator.  The  latest  Congressional  Budget  Office  forecast  has  the  four-quarter  percent 
change of the core PCE deflator moving up from 1½ percent in the second quarter of 2014 to 
1.9  percent  by  the  fourth  quarter  of  2015.  As  with  growth,  I  find  this  forecast  to  be  quite 
reasonable, but would argue that the risks are on the side that inflation moves upwards more 
slowly  than  this.  First,  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar  and  weakening  of  foreign  growth 
prospects  that I mentioned  earlier  both  act  to  dampen  inflation  pressures.  Second,  energy 
production in the U.S. is rising much faster than I would have guessed just a few years ago, 
helping  to  reduce  energy  prices  which  in  turn  reduces  a  wide  range  of  production  and 
distribution costs. Lastly, I would note that research suggests that inflation expectations play 
a very important role in the inflation process. Those expectations remain well anchored at the 
present  time,  despite  concerns  by  some  that  the  amount  of  slack  in  the  economy  has 
declined substantially. I am quite confident that those expectations will remain well anchored 
in  the  future,  limiting  the  increase  in  inflation  set  in  motion  by  faster  growth  and  further 
reductions in slack. 
So  what  does  this  imply  for  monetary  policy?  We  have  made  substantial  progress  with 
respect to the labor market outlook since we began our current program of large scale asset 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  purchases  in  2012.  Because  it  looks  very  likely  that  the  program  will  have  fulfilled  its 
objectives, I expect to support a decision to end the asset purchase program at the end of 
this month. At the same time, it still is premature to begin to raise interest rates – the labor 
market still has too much slack and the inflation rate is too low. The consensus view is that 
lift-off will take place around the middle of next year. That seems like a reasonable view to 
me. But, again, it is just a forecast. What we do will depend on the flow of economic news 
and how that affects the economic outlook. For example, firmer growth, higher inflation, and 
a  more  rapid  tightening  of  the  labor  market  could  cause  us  to  move  earlier.  Conversely, 
should economic growth disappoint, the timing of lift-off could be pushed later. 
I hope the economy cooperates. If it does and lift-off begins sometime next year, that will be 
something to be very excited about. It will signal that the economy is finally getting healthier 
and  that  the  Fed  is  getting  closer  to  achieving  its  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum 
sustainable employment and price stability. That would be very good news even if it were to 
cause a bump or two in financial markets. 
Regional economic conditions 
Let  me  now  turn  to  economic  conditions  a  bit  closer  to  home.  While  Upstate  New  York 
outperformed the nation during the Great Recession, it has now returned to its more typical 
pattern  of  modest  growth.  This  is  not  unexpected  as  many  regions  in  the  Northeast  have 
tended to grow more slowly in recent decades as the population has shifted to other parts of 
the country and as jobs in the once dominant manufacturing industry have diminished. That 
being said, some parts of the region are really struggling: Syracuse, Utica, Binghamton and 
Elmira have all yet to see a meaningful recovery in employment, which is troubling. 
The Capital region, on the other hand, is a true bright spot. While Upstate New York as a 
whole  has  gained  back  only  a  little  more  than  half  of  the  jobs  lost  during  the  Great 
Recession,  Albany  is  close  to  regaining  all  of  the  jobs  that  were  lost.  Though  the  Capital 
region’s  public  sector  has  exerted  some  downward  pressure  on  job  growth  during  the 
recovery, the education and health care sectors have been an ongoing source of stability and 
strength for the region. Employment in the education sector has climbed nearly 25 percent 
since the end of the recession, an increase of around 5,000 jobs, and the health care sector 
has added about 3,000 jobs. 
And  there’s  some  especially  good  news  to  report  from  the  Capital  region’s  manufacturing 
sector:  jobs  are  growing,  and  growing  quite  strongly  –  a  testament  to  the  success  of  the 
area’s  burgeoning  high  tech  sector.  Since  the  recovery  began,  the  area  has  added  over 
4,000 manufacturing  jobs, many  of  which  are tied  to computers  and  electronics. That’s  an 
increase of nearly 25 percent. This pace of job growth is four times as great as the national 
pace.  In  fact,  there  are  now  more  people  employed  in  the  Capital  region’s  manufacturing 
sector than before the recession. Not many places can say that, and this is certainly not true 
for the nation as a whole. 
In  part,  the  success  of  local  manufacturing  reflects  the  presence  of  strong  partnerships 
between industry and higher education. These cooperative arrangements, which help in the 
creation,  development  and  commercialization  of  new  products  and  processes,  drive 
innovation  and  put  local  companies  at  the  leading  edge  of  technology.  Moreover,  these 
partnerships directly support local jobs. Not only are students gaining real world experience 
by working in shared facilities while they are in school, but strong connections between local 
businesses  and  higher  education  institutions  help  workers  train  for  jobs  that  are  available, 
and help employers find the skilled workers they need. During my last trip to the region, I saw 
firsthand how universities and companies can successfully work together during my visits to 
the  State  University  of  New  York  Nanotech  Center  and  the  production  facilities  at  Global 
Foundries. 
Of course, RPI has a long history of developing cutting edge technologies and fostering start-
up companies. RPI’s Emerging Ventures Ecosystem initiative provides an excellent example 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  how  a  leading  university  can  help  local  firms  access  the  knowledge  and  intellectual 
property  provided  by  its  faculty  and  students.  These  types  of  collaborations  are  a  key 
ingredient to improving the competitiveness of local businesses and increasing the relevance 
of the universities to the communities they serve. We should take every opportunity to exploit 
these partnerships as much as possible to unleash their full potential. The strong foundation 
that has already been built has clearly been successful, and I expect these partnerships will 
support the region’s economic vitality going forward. 
College graduates finding jobs 
Finally, I know that many of you here today are students, and you may be concerned about 
your ability to find a good job upon graduation. There is no doubt that this is a difficult time to 
be  graduating  from  college  and  starting  your  career.  While  finding  a  job  has  gotten  a  bit 
easier over the past few years, finding a good job can still be a challenge. Indeed, research 
we’ve  conducted  at  the  New  York  Fed  finds  that  underemployment  among  recent  college 
graduates  has  continued  to  climb  even  as  the  unemployment  rate  has  fallen.  This  is  a 
troubling trend, and one we are actively trying to better understand. 
Despite the challenges now facing recent college graduates, I want to assure you that the 
value of a college degree remains high. While the Great Recession and its aftermath have 
made it more difficult to find a job out of college these past few years, those without a college 
degree  have  had  an  even  tougher  time.  Students  who  major  in  technical  fields  –  such  as 
engineering, mathematics and computer science – have tended to have a much easier time 
finding a good job and have earned a high return on their educational investment. Although it 
is  true  that  the  labor  market  has  been  difficult  for  college  graduates  in  recent  years,  I  am 
confident  that  most  of  you  will  find  good  jobs,  especially  as  the  labor  market  continues  to 
improve. 
Thank you for your kind attention and I would now be happy to take some questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
