  Rundheersing Bheenick: Review of the financial sector in Mauritus 
Statement  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  Port  Louis, 
13 October 2013. 
 “Time for us to move on and sharpen our focus on our next destination – a 
high-income economy…” 
Looking  back  over  the  global  landscape  in  recent  years,  characterised  as  it  has  been,  by 
painful adjustments in financial and economic affairs, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that 
we  have  been  lurching  from  crisis  to  crisis.  We  have  continually  seen  elusive  signs  of 
recovery,  buffeting  both  business  confidence  and  consumer  sentiment,  and  nurturing 
continued apprehensions about the adverse impact on world markets and on the vulnerable 
emerging economies in particular. Can we now, at long last, expect the global economy to 
secure itself on a firmer footing? What about the risks still looming on the horizon? I am a 
strong optimist – had it not been so, I can hardly imagine how I could have stayed on this job. 
Whenever  I  am  asked  how  we,  in  Mauritius,  an  isolated,  vulnerable,  and  small  open 
economy  turned  in  such  a  creditable  performance  in  such  an  unpromising  environment,  I 
reply “We never allowed ourselves to lose our nerve, or our focus.” 
Despite global uncertainty, the Mauritian economy stood its ground and logged a growth rate 
of  3.2  per  cent  in  2013.  This  growth  was  driven  by  all  sectors,  except  construction. 
Unemployment  remained  stuck  around  8  per  cent.  We  succeeded  in  anchoring  inflation 
expectations.  Indeed,  since  2009,  the  annual  average  rate  of  inflation  has  been  close  to 
4 per cent, and its volatility much reduced compared to previous years. We did everything 
within our statutory powers to achieve a low-inflation environment, hand-in-hand with a stable 
exchange rate, to ensure a solid basis for sustainable, equitable, and broad-based growth. 
Headline  inflation  and  year-on-year  inflation  stood  at  3.3  per  cent  and  4.0  per  cent, 
respectively,  in  June  2014.  Domestic  and  external  imbalances  remained  contained.  We 
continued with our reforms domestically to secure a sound financial sector through a series 
of initiatives detailed in the report. 
We expect our economy to grow by about 3.5 per cent in 2014, and inflation to remain below 
4.0  percent  in  2014.  On  current  trends,  we  do  not  expect  the  international  economic 
environment to improve significantly. It is time for us to move on and sharpen our focus on 
our next destination – a high-income economy. We should be under no illusion that we can 
get  there  without  accelerating  the  pace  of  reforms  and,  preferably,  embracing  the 
commitment to reform as our national credo. 
Banking sector developments 
Our banking sector remained robust. Total assets, which had crossed the Rs1 trillion-mark in 
May  2013,  grew  by  7.5  per  cent  during  the  period  under  review.  Total  deposits  and  total 
loans increased by 6.0 per cent and 2.7 per cent, respectively. Banks were well-capitalised, 
with  a  capital  adequacy  ratio  of  16.7  per cent  and  low  non-performing  loan  ratios. In  April 
2014, we  welcomed two new banks in our jurisdiction, the first to be granted a licence for 
stand-alone private banking business. 
Macroeconomic and financial stability 
The  relative  stability  in  our  nominal  effective  exchange  rate,  contrasting  sharply  with  the 
turbulence registered in leading emerging markets, benefited both domestic consumers and 
producers, while also enhancing our attraction as an investment destination and as an IFC-
in-the-making. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Cross-border  banking  has  been  growing  rapidly.  We  have  supported  its  development  by 
bilateral agreements with several international regulatory bodies to secure a better exchange 
of  information  between  home  and  host  supervisory  authorities.  In  November  2013,  we 
organised our first-ever Supervisory Colleges for our two largest banking groups to enable 
their host regulators in other jurisdictions, and ourselves, to get a holistic view of the risks 
posed by these institutions, within and beyond our borders. We are also actively engaged in 
several  initiatives  to  harmonize  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices  to  promote  financial 
stability within the region. 
The persistence of low interest rates led to excessive credit growth in some sectors which, if 
left unchecked, could have resulted in higher non-performing loans. In October 2013, after 
much  soul-searching,  we  rolled  out  a  suite  of  macroprudential  measures  to  contain  these 
risks. These measures which include “Loan-to-Value ratios”, “Debt-to-Income ratios”, “Risk-
Weighted Assets”, “Additional Portfolio Provision” and “Sectoral Limits”, became effective this 
year.  We  issued  our  guideline  for  dealing  with  domestic  systemically  important  banks 
(DSIBs)  in  July  2014.  It  provides  a  framework  for  assessing  the  systemic  importance  of  a 
bank  based  on  key  indicators  such  as  size,  interconnectedness,  structure  and  complexity, 
amongst others. The banks, which would be identified as DSIBs, will be subject to a capital 
surcharge as from March 2016. 
We followed up on the recommendations of the Reserve Bank of India Team which came 
over  to  assist  the  Bank  in  the  in-depth  investigation  of  the  Ponzi  Schemes  which  we 
unearthed  early  last  year.  There  was  a  clear  need  for  a  stronger  framework  to  gather 
intelligence  on  financial  transactions  and  analyse  information  on  actual  and/or  looming 
financial  breaches.  In  December  2013,  we  set  up  a  dedicated  Market  Intelligence  Cell  to 
meet this need. In January 2014, we mainstreamed this cell with our work on compliance and 
enforcement. This will assist the Bank in fulfilling one of its new mandates, namely to carry 
out  investigations  and  take  measures  to  suppress  illegal,  dishonourable  and  improper 
practices, market abuse, and any potential breach of the banking laws. 
We  made  considerable  progress  with  our  plan  to  implement  Basel  III  to  enhance  the 
resilience  of  the  banking  sector.  The  opening  shot  was  the  release  in  October  2012  of  a 
consultation  paper  on the  likely  implications  of  Basel  III  implementation. In  June  2014,  we 
issued guidelines on the scope of application of Basel III and eligible capital. 
Monetary policy 
Throughout 2013–14, the Key Repo Rate (KRR) was kept unchanged at 4.65 per cent. One 
important development was the publication of the technical presentations made by various 
parties at the MPC meetings, once again highlighting our commitment to a fully-transparent 
decision-making  process.  The  divergence  of  opinion  regarding  the  monetary  policy  stance 
persisted. On the one hand, the internal MPC members called for a gradual and smooth exit 
from  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  This  view  was  motivated  by  the 
improving  external  environment,  rapid  credit  growth,  the  rise  in  non-performing  loans,  and 
the need to halt the decline in domestic savings while also anchoring inflation expectations. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  external  MPC  members  were  more  concerned  with  stimulating 
domestic  growth,  which 
fragile,  and  supported  an 
accommodative monetary policy. 
In April 2014, the Bank started to use Taylor Rule estimates as a guide to monetary policy-
making.  Estimates  of  the  neutral  interest  rate  suggested  that  monetary  policy  was  falling 
behind  the  curve.  Internal  members  were  of  the  view  that  it  was  high  time  to  start  the 
normalisation  process.  However,  the  majority  of  MPC  members  voted  to  keep  the  KRR 
unchanged.  The  Monetary  Policy  Transmission  Mechanism,  already  weakened  by  the 
excess liquidity that had been plaguing the system for the past few years, broke down when 
some banks adjusted their savings rates downwards although the MPC had decided to leave 
the KRR on hold. At the July 2014 meeting, the MPC decided, by consensus, to keep the 
they  perceived  as  being  still 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  KRR unchanged at 4.65 per cent, with a majority of members agreeing that it was time to 
normalise interest rates, and giving forward guidance on the direction of the change in the 
KRR in the first quarter of 2015. 
We renewed our efforts to restore the monetary transmission mechanism. We made some 
progress in our efforts to persuade the Treasury to share sterilisation costs. We prevailed on 
the Treasury to introduce three savings products targeting individual savers, two varieties of 
Five-Year and one Three-Year Government of Mauritius Savings Bonds to mop up some of 
the excess liquidity. A Memorandum of Understanding between the Treasury and the Bank is 
at an advanced stage of negotiation: it will provide the burden-sharing modalities, and may 
necessitate some enabling changes in the Public Debt Management Act 2008. 
Improving customer experience 
In  June  2014,  we  released  the  Report  of  the  Task  Force  on  Unfair  Terms  in  banking 
contracts,  Banking  Your  Future:  Towards  a  Fair  &  Inclusive  Banking  Sector.  It  makes 
100 recommendations, including the abolition of 19 fees and the review of 13 others, and a 
free  basic  bank  account 
for  all  Mauritian  citizens  above  16  years  old.  These 
recommendations aim to improve the bank-customer relationship and help both banks and 
customers  to  achieve  a  fairer  deal.  The  report  is  open  for  public  consultation  up  to 
31 October 2014. After the consultation period, the Bank will analyse the report, along with 
the feedback and decide on an action plan. 
It  is  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  Bank  that  a  Task  Force  has  been  set  up  to  look 
holistically into banking practices prevailing in the country, and the first time in the history of 
banking in Mauritius that these practices have been examined so closely with inputs from all 
categories  of  stakeholders. It  seems  that  the  customer  around  whom  banks  should  centre 
their  business  has  been  gradually  left  on  the  side  over  the  years.  The  Report  seeks  to 
provide  a  framework  to  bring  the  customer  back  at  the  heart  of  banking  business.  All 
stakeholders and the general public were invited to participate in this banking reform initiative 
by commenting on the proposed recommendations, making suggestions and proposals, so 
that  together  we  can  pave  the  way  to  a  modern,  efficient,  and  customer-centric  banking 
sector. 
Regional and international involvement 
We pursued our involvement in regional fora. In October 2013, the Bank hosted the fourth 
meeting of the Financial Stability Board Regional Consultative Group for Sub-Saharan Africa, 
which I co-chair. In January 2014, the Bank hosted a meeting of the Committee of African 
Banking  Supervisors  of  the  AACB,  which  is  chaired  by  a  senior  colleague  from  the 
Directorate of Supervision. In May 2014, the Bank hosted the IFSB Summit. Our work with 
SADC  and  COMESA  continued  apace,  making 
the  area  of 
macroeconomic convergence, financial stability, and development of the regional payments 
system.  We  also  welcomed  a  delegation  of  the  African  Union’s  High  Level  Panel  on  Illicit 
Financial  Flows  from  Africa,  headed  by  His  Excellency  Thabo  Mbeki,  former  President  of 
South Africa. The visit offered an opportunity to share our experience on such matters as our 
due diligence process and the application of international best practices and standards in the 
field. 
further  progress 
in 
The banking sector of the future 
I intend to spend the rest of my third mandate to prepare the transition of our banking sector 
to meet the needs of the high-income economy that is within our sights. We recognise that a 
lot still remains to be done, especially if we want to hasten progress in this direction – which 
is  a  perfectly  legitimate  objective  in  view  of  our  past  trajectory.  We  have  continuously 
strengthened  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  to  reinforce  the  resilience  of  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  banking  sector.  We  have  stepped  up  our  efforts  to  modernise  our  payments  system 
infrastructure,  and  floated  international  tenders  for  the  National  Payment  Switch.  This  will 
revolutionise  the  payment  space,  reduce  transaction  costs,  and  level  the  playing  field  for 
smaller banks and other potential payment processors who cannot currently compete away 
the  high  margins  prevalent  in  the  industry  because  of  the  prohibitive  cost  of  installing 
alternative platforms for the provision of new technology-driven products. We have amended 
legislation to allow differentiated banking licences in such areas as Islamic banking, private 
banking and investment banking. We have set out a framework to provide for agent banking 
for more efficient delivery of banking services and to promote financial inclusion. 
In parallel, the Bank has been vested with new powers, giving us explicit responsibility for 
promoting  public  understanding  and  awareness  of  financial  products,  and  for  conducting 
investigations. Credit unions with assets of more than Rs20 million have also come under our 
purview.  We  recognise  the  pioneering  role  that  credit  unions  have  played  in  improving 
financial  access  to  previously  unbanked  segments  of  society  and  we  shall  apply 
proportionality in our approach to supervising and regulating the sector. We have launched 
the eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL) project that will simplify data collection 
and  reporting  by  banks  and  other  regulated  institutions  while  also  facilitating  in-depth  and 
timely analysis at the Bank. 
We have continued with process re-engineering and organisational restructuring to deliver on 
our  extended  mandate,  to  meet  new  challenges,  and  to  incorporate  new  technology.  In 
addition to the Intelligence, Compliance, and Enforcement Section mentioned earlier, we also 
set up a specialised unit for reserve management to serve as the nucleus for a Middle Office 
and Risk Management Division which we created just after the period covered by this report. 
We re-jigged the Economic Research Division and tasked it with developing our forecasting 
and  modeling  capacity  to  support  our  expected  move  to  an  explicit  Inflation  Targeting-
regime. 
None  of  these  moves  would  have  been  possible  without  recruiting  new  staff,  with  the 
requisite experience, at an appropriate level in the Bank’s hierarchy. Already a technology-
intensive industry, banking will become a battlefield for still more disruptive technologies in 
future. An ageing staff, with dated skills and outmoded work habits, will be hard-pressed to 
cope with the emerging challenges facing the regulator. We placed considerable emphasis 
on upgrading our in-house skills and recruiting new blood. We opened our doors to regular 
graduate interns two years ago. We followed it up this year by launching a Graduate Trainee 
Programme which will allow the Bank to spot potential new recruits, enhance its professional 
competence, and rejuvenate its workforce. 
The Rupee goes polymer 
Last  August,  the  Honourable  Prime  Minister  launched  our  very  first  polymer  bank  notes, 
which have been in circulation since then. I am happy to say that two of the three polymer 
bank  notes  have  received  international  recognition.  The  Rs25  polymer  bank  note  and  the 
Rs500  polymer  bank  note  were  shortlisted for  their  state-of-the-art  security  features  at  the 
International Association of Currency Affairs 2014 Technical Excellence in Currency Awards. 
Our  Rs25  bank  note  came  out  2nd  in  this  contest.  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  our  efforts  to 
adhere to the highest standards in all business areas have paid dividends. 
Words of appreciation 
I have always been guided by my sens du devoir in discharging the immense responsibility 
entrusted to me by the Prime Minister to lead the central bank of the country in the midst of 
challenging times for  our  economy  and  our  people.  It  has  not  been  an easy  ride.  My  task 
would have been still more difficult, had I not received the support of the staff of the Bank, in 
particular  my  close  collaborators  in  the  Governor’s  Office,  the  Policy  Unit,  and  elsewhere, 
and my Deputy Governors and their key staff. Supporters and well-wishers beyond the Bank 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have played a crucial role, especially when my resolve appeared to flag. I wish to express my 
deepest gratitude to all of them. Our economy has reached a tipping point. If we unite our 
efforts  and  pull  in  the  same  direction,  we  will  be  able  to  carry  through  the  much-needed 
reforms to take us forward to new levels of development. The tantalising prospect of a high-
income economy beckons… 
Looking ahead 
Inclusiveness  and  sustainability  of  growth  and  development  are  the  two  areas  where  the 
Bank can make its biggest contribution to this transformation. This can best be achieved in 
the context of a dynamic and competitive financial sector, effectively serving the interests of 
both savers and investors. For our vision of a modern, fair, and inclusive banking sector to 
come to life, it is today that we must make a start on shaping it! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
