  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Malaysia’s experience in macroprudential 
policies and insights on financial inclusion 
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Meeting  of  Central  Bank  and  Monetary  Authorities  of  the 
Organisation of Islamic Cooperation Member Countries, Surabaya, Indonesia, 6 November 
2014. 
 Allow me to share the five broad principles which the design, deployment and calibration of 
macroprudential policies in Malaysia are premised upon: 
First, macroprudential policies introduced must be complementary to other 
microprudential, monetary and fiscal policies 
I will share on the measures we implemented since November 2010, where we introduced a 
series of macroprudential policies in concert with a package of monetary, fiscal, regulatory, 
supervisory and long-term structural measures (e.g. enhancing housing supply) to curb the 
excessive  credit-fuelled  speculation  in  the  Malaysian  housing  market  and  to  reign  in  the 
increasing level of household indebtedness. This required coordination with other part of the 
government. 
There was one particular measure that we introduced in November 2010, called a loan-to-
value  (LTV)  ratio  where  a  maximum  limit  of  70%  was  imposed  on  the  third  and  above 
outstanding house financing per individual. A cap of 10 years on the tenure of financing for 
personal  use  and  35  years  on  the  tenure  of  house  financing  were  also  introduced  in  July 
2013 together with gradual implementation of real property gain tax, consumer education and 
debt  management  measures.  The  approach  must  be  comprehensive  as  macroprudential 
measures will not be effective if it is done in isolation. 
Since we operate in a dual financial system, all macroprudential measures are applicable to 
both  the  Islamic  and  conventional  financial  systems,  as  both  have  exposures  in  housing 
market and household debts. 
Second, the measures were targeted to minimise unintended cross-sectional 
spillovers 
Instead of a broad-based LTV ratio limit, we imposed the measure only on borrowers with 
three or more house financing to ensure a continued access to financing for eligible first time 
house buyers and those investing long-term in a second house for wealth diversification. In 
Malaysia, we have an on-line system called Central Credit Reference Information System or 
(CCRIS))  which  allows  us  to  have  more  granular  data  to  monitor  borrowers  with  multiple 
outstanding house financing. In other words, we have an on-line system where each citizen 
and companies having exposures in the banking system will have their data centralised in 
one particular database. That way we know at any point in time, the detail exposures of any 
companies and individuals. 
The other important point to note is that we did not narrow the application of measures to 
specific  geographical  locations  and  house  type  or  price  in  order  to  avoid  circumvention  or 
abuse  as  developers  and  lenders  can  easily  build  or  finance  houses  at  the  edge  of  a 
restricted  zone  or  price  range,  or  even  create  a  new  house  type  (e.g.  Small  Office  Home 
Office (SOHO)). In this case, we need to conduct a bit more research before we implement 
any macroprudential policies. 
The  caps  on  financing  tenure,  together  with  requirements  to  comply  with  responsible 
financing  practices  (including  adoption  of  prudent  debt  service  ratio  (DSR)  threshold  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  definition of income and debt obligations for computation of DSR), were not limited only to 
banks.  The  caps  were  also  imposed  on  non-regulated  entities  in  order  to  avoid  regulatory 
arbitrage or shifting of risks to these non-bank lenders. 
Third, preserving appropriate discretion for authorities to act is important, with 
respect to the timing, mix and calibration of measures. We do not adopt a rule-based 
approach to the implementation of macroprudential measures. 
The reason is that, it can avoid a “self-fulfilling prophecy” if the formula for determining the 
timing, quantum and criteria for the deployment of macroprudential policies are made public 
or applied in mechanistic way – unintended consequences could arise or systemic risk could 
suddenly build up right before the effective date as economic agents try to “beat the clock” by 
getting ahead of the implementation. 
This approach provides us with greater flexibility to use an optimal mix of macroprudential 
and other measures under varying circumstances – this is different from the UK where legal 
constraints limit the choice of macroprudential instruments that can be used, or compared to 
Turkey which uses quantitative triggers for the new reserve requirement framework. 
However,  discretion  needs  to  be  accompanied  with  political  willingness  to  act  when 
required  –  this  has  to  be  demonstrated  over  time  and  supported  by  a  matured,  effective 
governance  and  accountability 
the  key 
administrators  in  the  Government  fully  understand  the  objective  of  the  macroprudential 
measures to keep the household indebtedness and the housing speculation in check, prior to 
the implementation. 
In  Malaysia,  we  ensured 
framework. 
that 
Fourth, pre-emptive implementation is key to create space for measures to be 
implemented progressively and incrementally. This is important to ensure orderly 
adjustments; avoid “overshooting” or over-reaction among affected parties; and 
minimise unintended deleveraging. 
Timely calibration, and where required, uplifting or introduction of other measures are critical 
in this aspect. 
The  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  measures  are  inherently  difficult  to  assess.  It  is 
therefore extremely important that macroprudential measures are well-supported by effective 
surveillance  systems  and  capability.  This  provides  the  agility  for  authorities  to  respond  to 
market reactions which can often be unpredictable. Very often, there will be a need to extend 
or recalibrate the measures to ensure that they remain effective. 
For  example,  following  the  implementation  of  the  LTV  ratio  limit  of  70%  on  the  third  and 
above outstanding housing loan per individual in November 2010, we observed an increasing 
growth  of  housing  loans  undertaken  by  non-individual  (registered  business)  borrowers,  i.e. 
they used their business entities to buy properties. This was clearly a circumvention of the 
measures, leading to the introduction of a LTV ratio limit of 60% on housing loans by non-
individuals  in  December  2011.  We  need  to  actually  look  at  how  the  market  reacts  to  the 
measures introduced. It can only be done if we have an effective surveillance framework. 
Fifth, effective communication is crucial 
4Cs – clarity, concise, consistent and credible – core features of effective communication: 
i. 
Clarity  –  market,  investors  and  public  typically  fear  the  worst  in  absence  of  clear 
information. 
Concise – “more” is not always effective; we allow for some “constructive ambiguity”. 
Consistent  way  of  communication  across  time  and  different  stakeholders  would 
strengthen credibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
ii. 
iii. 
2 
   Credible – reducing misinformation helps shape and influence expectations. 
iv. 
It may not always be possible to engage with affected parties prior to the implementation of 
some  macroprudential  policies.  For  example,  there  was  a  spike  in  the  growth  of  average 
house prices in the few months leading up to the announcement of the first LTV ratio limit. 
This could be due to a rush to lock in financing at a higher LTV ratio prior to rumoured timing 
of implementation of the limit. Some developers and banks also used aggressive marketing 
campaigns  (e.g.  “buy  before  the  LTV  ratio  limit  kicks  in!”)  before  the  effective  date  of  the 
measure. In this case, we opted to impose the measures with immediate effect on the date of 
announcement to minimise circumvention. 
Let me delve on another key policy priority, which is financial inclusion. I will raise five points 
that I hope will provide some perspectives on financial inclusion based on our experiences 
back home. 
First, financial inclusion is an international agenda that has captured the attention of 
many governments which has national importance 
The 2.5 billion unbanked and underserved remains a global challenge. A significant portion 
of them are from countries with predominantly Muslim population, thus there is an urgency to 
address imbalances among the “ummah”. 
For comparison, 2.5 billion people is equal to the population of China and India combined or 
is equal to 8 times the population of USA. 
Financial  inclusion  can  only  be  achieved  with  the  collective  effort  of  all  countries.  Peer-to-
peer  learning  and  sharing  of  best  practices  can  help  countries  leapfrog  the  trial  and  error 
stages  in  designing  and  implementing  financial  inclusion  policy,  without  having  to  reinvent 
the wheel. 
For  example,  when  we  introduced  microfinancing,  we  made  a  tour  to  Indonesia  to  learn 
about  how  Indonesia  actually  implemented  microfinancing.  With  that  knowledge,  we 
implemented microfinancing in Malaysia and it has been very successful. When we wanted 
to  introduce  agent  branch  banking,  we  went  to  Mexico  and  Brazil  to  learn  on  how  they 
actually use agent branch banking as effective means to expand financial services. We learnt 
and  implemented  some  of  the  measures  on  financial  inclusion.  We  avoid  unnecessary 
mistakes and reduce cost in implementing of those policies. 
In this case, we found that it is useful to be a member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion 
(AFI)  –  a  network  of  policymakers  from  developing  countries  working  together  to  advance 
financial  inclusion  globally  –  where  we  can  collaborate  to  develop  more  innovative, 
contextualised and effective financial inclusion solutions, and this is one area which I believe 
has the potential to grow. OIC members, who are not a member of AFI, may wish to consider 
becoming one. 
Second, commitment from the top drives the financial inclusion policy implementation 
on the ground 
Leadership  and  clear  vision  on  outcomes  are  important  elements  in  driving  the  financial 
inclusion agenda. 
In  Malaysia’s  experience,  the  New  Economic  Model  (NEM)  emphasised  the  goal  of 
inclusiveness to enable all communities to fully benefit from the economic development. 
In line with the Government’s vision for an inclusive economy and to promote accountability, 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  legislated  financial  inclusion  as  one  of  the  primary  functions  of  the 
Bank. This is to ensure that the pursuit of financial inclusion as a policy priority will be passed 
down to the future generations of central bankers. It would help if there is a clear mandate 
and accountability so that resources can be allocated and mobilised. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Setting a national target has shown to galvanise real tangible policy changes on the ground. 
During the  Global Policy Forum in  Kuala Lumpur last year, the 121 members of  AFI have 
adopted the Sasana Accord to set quantifiable and measurable financial inclusion indicators 
as national targets. 
It is also encouraging to know that 28 OIC members have direct membership in AFI, while 
4 others are indirectly affiliated through regional central banks. 
Further, 
involve  cross-disciplinary  collaboration. 
Policymakers could consider a national coordination mechanism, for example, in the case of 
Tanzania and Mexico to effectively identify policy priorities and allocate the right resources in 
implementing the policies. 
inclusion  solutions 
financial 
typically 
Third, data and technology are key enablers of innovative policy solutions 
Robust data collection and gap analysis help policymakers to connect with realities on the 
ground and identify real needs for intervention. Data also facilitates monitoring and impact 
assessment to determine if a particular policy is achieving its intended outcome. 
Technology plays a critical role as it provides low cost, scalable channels to deliver financial 
inclusion solutions. It is particularly effective in overcoming geographical barriers to financial 
inclusion. 
The  Malaysia’s  experience  in  agent  banking  shows  how  data  and  technology  enable 
innovative policy solutions. It also helps to make an informed decision on resource allocation. 
In  2011,  the  Bank  conducted  the  Financial  Inclusion  Demand  Side  Survey  to  complement 
supply side data collected from financial institutions. Data highlighted that there was a lack in 
the provision of access points, as only 46% of 837 sub-districts with a population of more 
than 2,000 have at least one ﬁnancial access point. 
The cost of building brick-and-mortar branches to outreach to rural users is high. Hence, the 
Bank developed the agent banking initiative to leverage on technology and deliver financial 
services to the rural groups in a low cost and scalable manner. It saves cost and the impact 
is enormous. 
Under the agent banking initiative, licensed financial institutions provide financial services to 
customers through third-party agents, such as retail outlets and post offices. Agents perform 
banking transactions such as deposit and withdrawal of funds in a safe manner using real 
time terminal technology i.e. Point-of-Sale (POS). 
Putting in place a mechanism to monitor performance is crucial to determine whether policy 
initiatives are effective. Just to give a flavour of what we have done, we actively  track the 
coordinates  of  agent  banks  to  ensure  that  access  is  provided  to  sub-districts  in  need  of 
financial access points. Since its implementation in 2012, 95% of sub-districts now have at 
least one ﬁnancial access point, a signiﬁcant increase from 2011. As at August 2013, there 
were 5,661 agents and the total number of transactions has exceeded 25 million, with a total 
value of RM2.8 billion. 
Fourth, Islamic finance can play a huge role in financial inclusion given the strong 
parallels between the two 
The  concept  of  financial  inclusion  –  to  develop  a  prosperous,  egalitarian  economy  that 
contributes towards social development and social justice – is very much in line with the core 
principles  of  the  Islamic  economy,  which  place  great  emphasis  on  social  justice,  inclusive 
growth and equitable distribution of resources. 
In  advancing  the  Islamic  financial  inclusion  agenda,  crucial  criteria  such  as  injection  of 
innovation  and  enhancement  of  products  and  services  as  well  as  distribution  channels  to 
reach targeted groups especially the rural areas are essential: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
       One  of  such  example  in  Malaysia  is  the  introduction  of  profit  and  risk  sharing 
investment accounts, where savings are matched with funding required by SMEs for 
financing specific projects. 
Greater outreach to microenterprises and SMEs can also be achieved through the 
wider application of equity-based structures in financing for Islamic microfinance and 
SMEs. This contributes towards the overall objective of generating inclusive growth 
that enhances job creation. 
Other financial products such as microtakaful and waqf can also provide a financial 
solution for lower income groups and small businesses. 
Through Islamic finance, we can also further explore the concept of agent banking 
or branchless banking to leverage on the role of traditional community centres such 
as  mosques.  This  would  harness  more  efficient  means  of  outreach  amongst 
Muslims, which is of particular relevance in many OIC Members. 
Another important sphere that has not been explored exhaustively, Islamic financial 
institutions  may  also  leverage  on  its  large  distribution  network  to  facilitate  the 
collection and mobilisation of zakat and waqf. 
Fifth, proportionate regulation can achieve objectives of inclusion, stability and 
integrity 
Proportionate regulation ensures that the costs of regulation do not outweigh the benefits of 
regulation and that regulation is commensurate to risks. 
Of  significance,  proportionate  regulation  protects  the  stability  and  integrity  of  the  financial 
sector,  and  at  the  same  time  encourages  innovative  financial  inclusion  solutions.  It  is 
important  to  recognise  that  regulation  that  is  proportionate  to  risks  does  not  necessarily 
equate  to  “lighter  regulation”  as  many  perceive.  For  example,  there  are  fundamental 
differences between the risk drivers in microfinance and commercial banking. Microfinancing 
is labour-intensive, usually highly decentralised, and among the borrowers, the factors that 
are  predictive  of  repayment  capacity  are  very  different  from  commercial  bank  borrowers. 
These  differences  need  to  be  better  understood  to  achieve  well-designed  regulatory 
frameworks. 
For example, Mexico’s tiered bank account approach prescribes different degrees of Know-
Your-Client  (KYC)  requirements  and  transaction  restrictions  that  are  proportionate  to  the 
value  of  the  account.  A  low  value  account  requires  less  KYC  requirement  due  to  typically 
lower money laundering risk. However, the lower KYC requirement is compensated by more 
transaction restrictions. The proportionate approach expanded access to bank accounts. 
On  stability,  Pakistan  introduced  proportionate  capital  requirements  for  microfinance 
institutions  based  on  the  size  of  the  population  they  intended  to  serve.  Microfinance 
institutions  at  district,  regional,  provincial  and  national 
levels  have  varying  capital 
requirements, so that they could serve distinct market niches sustainably without the burden 
of holding excess capital that is disproportionate to the risk. 
The  global  Standard-Setting  Bodies  (SSB)  have  adopted  proportionality  as  a  principle  in 
developing risk-based standards. SSBs are collaborating with developing countries through 
the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  to  clarify  implementation  of  standards,  build 
supervisory capacity and address data issues. This has helped countries to better implement 
proportionate regulation worldwide. 
To end my discussion today, let me summarise that macroprudential regulation and financial 
inclusion – could indeed go a long way in enhancing the financial wellbeing of a country and 
the  people,  and  promoting  sustainable  growth  through  complementary  factors.  Differences 
across jurisdictions are inevitable, particularly in comparing the various regulatory systems 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  and  socioeconomic  structures  amongst  all  OIC  Members.  This  is  where  collaboration  can 
help  us  achieve  a  greater  level  of  understanding.  I  believe  this  meeting  is  the  appropriate 
channel  for  enhanced  cooperation  amongst  financial  regulators  of  OIC  Members  –  be  it 
together, or through other platforms such as AFI – to ensure our respective financial systems 
are well regulated and inclusive. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
