Andreas Dombret: Designing a stable monetary union – progress and 
open issues 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Brookings Institution, Washington DC, 8 October. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  having  me  here  today.  It  is  a  privilege  to  speak  at  an  institution  as 
distinguished as Brookings. For almost a century now, this institute has provided essential 
analytical input for the work of policymakers around the world. Naturally, this includes central 
banks such as the Bundesbank. 
And it is at the Bundesbank that my speech begins. Allow me to bring up my very first week 
in office – a week I still remember vividly. Naturally, it was a decisive week for me, but even 
more important, it was a decisive week for the euro area. My first day of work was on 3 May 
2010. 
On the day before, on 2 May 2010, the EU finance ministers had agreed to support stumbling 
Greece  with  a  €110  billion  rescue  package.  One  week  later,  on  10  May  2010,  the  ECB 
decided  to  buy  government  bonds  in  order  to  stabilise  the  financial  markets  –  a  decision 
which the Bundesbank has criticised. 
Looking  back,  no  one  can  deny  that  this  first  week  of  May  2010  was  a  turbulent  one.  To 
many, it even counts as the “official” start of the euro crisis. To me, it was a time when two 
things became obvious. 
First,  many  observers  from  outside  Europe  –  notably  from  the  US  –  underestimated  the 
political will in Europe to hold the euro area together. Second, many observers from inside 
Europe  –  including  myself  –  overestimated  the  stability  of  the  euro  area’s  institutional 
framework. 
What is the logical conclusion of these two insights? The conclusion is that we have to take 
advantage  of  the  apparent  political  will  in  order  to  improve  the  euro  area’s  institutional 
framework. But how? 
In my view, the overarching theme in this regard is integration. To be sure, Europe’s political 
landscape now features a number of parties that are riding a wave of euro-scepticism and 
anti-European rhetoric. This is a disturbing development. Nevertheless, political leaders and 
the  majority  of  people  throughout  Europe  are  still  very  much  convinced  of  the  idea  of  a 
unified Europe. 
And  from  an  economic  point  of  view,  deeper  integration  could  help  to  strengthen  the 
framework of the European monetary union. Let us take a look at three areas where further 
integration could be the way forward. 
Fiscal union – beyond the horizon 
2. 
The first area is public finances. And in order to understand the core of my argument, it is 
important  to  be  familiar  with  the  particular  features  of  the  European  monetary  union.  The 
European monetary union is special in that it combines a single monetary policy with national 
fiscal policies. 
The  monetary  policy  for  the  18  countries  of  the  euro  area  is  decided  by  the  Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt.  However,  the  fiscal  policies  of  the  18  euro-area  member 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
states  are  a  matter  for  the  national  policymakers  –  each  country  decides  on  its  own 
government revenues and expenditures. 
This imbalance of responsibilities gives individual countries an incentive to borrow – a “deficit 
bias” is built into the system. Our objective should be to counter that deficit bias to ensure a 
stable monetary union. This can only be achieved by realigning responsibilities – liability and 
control have to be in balance. 
And one way to rebalance liability and control is deeper integration. If we were to take this 
path, the European level would gain certain control rights over national budgets. This would 
amount  to  what  is  known  as  a  fiscal  union.  However,  such  a  step  would  depend  on  the 
countries  of  the  euro  area  transferring  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  –  for 
example, by giving the European level the right to intervene in the event of unsound public 
finances. 
Giving  up  sovereignty  in  this  way  would  be  a  radical  change  and  require  wide-ranging 
legislative changes nationally and at the European level. More than anything, such changes 
would need the support not only of policymakers but also of the general public. And on this 
point we need to be realistic. I cannot identify any willingness to do that at present – not in 
Germany or in any other country of the euro area. 
This means that, for the foreseeable future, control of fiscal policy in Europe will remain at 
the national level. Thus, in this area, deeper integration still lies beyond the horizon. 
But if the current state of lopsided integration prevails, the national level must assume liability 
for  its  policies.  That  would  mean  strengthening  the  current  set  of  rules  on  borrowing:  the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  These  rules  have  since  been  tightened  –  now  they  have  to  be 
applied and complied with. 
This framework is supplemented by a permanent crisis resolution mechanism: the European 
Stability Mechanism, or ESM in short, which was established in 2012. The objective of the 
ESM  is  to  be  able  to  counter  severe  risks  to  financial  stability  in  the  euro  area.  The 
effectiveness  of  the  ESM  is  based  on  the  idea  of  a  strong  deterrent:  as  long  as  markets 
believe the ESM to be powerful enough to act in a crisis, they have much less incentive to 
speculate against any euro-area country. This principle is now being called into question by 
an idea that the President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, has recently 
floated.  He  suggests  using  free  ESM  funds  to  finance  investments  in  infrastructure.  In  my 
view, such a step would greatly reduce the effectiveness of the ESM. 
In a way, the discussion about liability and control relates to monetary policy. The Governing 
Council of the ECB recently decided to buy asset-backed securities. This decision represents 
a far-reaching change in the ECB’s monetary policy: the objective is not just to boost lending, 
but also to directly pump money into the economy. 
The  effect  of  this  measure  would  be  to  transfer  credit  risks  taken  by  private  banks  to  the 
central bank and, ultimately, to the taxpayer. Were this to take place even despite the lack of 
an adequate compensation for the risks, we would have another specific policy measure that 
increases the imbalance between liability and control: bank owners would not be responsible 
for their credit decisions, leaving taxpayers to once again foot the bill. This contradicts nearly 
all the G20 initiatives that are currently underway. 
Banking union – tomorrow’s reality 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, at this point in time, a fiscal union remains more of a vision than of a 
concrete step to be taken anytime soon. However, in another area, Europe is about to take a 
significant step towards deeper integration. 
Less  than  a  month  from  today,  the  ECB  will  assume  direct  supervision  of  the  120  largest 
banks in the euro area – thereby erecting the first pillar of a European banking union. The 
120 banks which will come under the supervision of the ECB account for more than 80% of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the aggregated balance sheet for the euro-area banking sector. Thus, the ECB will become 
one of the world’s largest supervisors. 
The banking union is certainly the biggest step towards financial integration in Europe since 
the  launch  of  our  common  currency.  And  to  me,  it  is  the  most  logical  step  to  take.  Single 
monetary  policy  requires  integrated  financial  markets  –  which  includes,  without  doubt, 
European-level banking supervision. 
European  banking  supervision  will  allow  banks  throughout  the  euro  area  to  be  supervised 
according to the same high standards. In addition, cross-border effects can be covered better 
through joint supervision than by national supervisors. And adding a European perspective to 
the national view will put more distance between the supervisory authority and the entities it 
supervises. This will minimise the danger of supervisors getting all too close to their banks 
and thus treating them with “kid gloves” out of national interest. 
Meanwhile,  a  comprehensive  banking  union  has  to  comprise  more  than  just  an  effective 
European  banking  supervision.  The  second  pillar  of  the  banking  union  is  a  European 
resolution mechanism to deal with future bank failures. This mechanism will be in place from 
2016  onwards.  If  push  comes  to  shove  and  a  bank  is  no  longer  viable,  shareholders  and 
creditors will be first in line to bear banks’ losses, and taxpayers’ money will only be the very 
last resort. Thus, the European resolution mechanism will also contribute to disentangling the 
close  connection  between  banks  and  public  finances,  which  was  a  central  problem  in  the 
euro crisis. 
However, one thing should be clear: regulation will not solve all of our problems. The banks 
themselves  have  to  adapt  to  the  challenges  they  face.  One  of  these  challenges  is 
profitability.  Given  the  costs  of  stricter  regulation  and  the  prevailing  low-interest-rate 
environment,  remaining  profitable  poses  a  challenge  to  many  euro-area  banks.  Thus,  it  is 
essential that banks recognise their weaknesses and do something about them early on. 
Looking at German banks, this could be achieved by boosting income in fee and commission 
business  and  by  looking  into  cost-cutting  measures.  There  is  traditionally  a  strong  branch 
network in Germany. Streamlining it could reduce costs. Mergers might also make sense for 
some  credit  institutions,  with  the  focus  in  each  case  being  on  the  sustainability  of  each 
business model. 
Capital markets union – the day after tomorrow? 
4. 
In  any  case,  the  banking  union  is  definitely  a  major  step  forward  in  designing  a  better 
framework for the European monetary union. However, we should broaden our view beyond 
the banking sector. A deeper integration of capital markets would also contribute to sharing 
opportunities and risks. 
To be sure, we have come a long way in integrating capital markets in Europe. According to 
statistics provided by the Bank for International Settlement, European banks’ claims within 
Europe stood at 36% of GDP at the end of the 1990s. By 2008 the share had grown to 77%. 
This share has fallen during the crisis, but still stands at around 48% of GDP. 
However, there are two caveats regarding this trend of capital markets integration in Europe. 
First,  the  financing  structure  of  European  companies  is  still  predominantly  bank-based.  A 
look at the balance sheets of German companies, for instance, shows that bank credit still 
accounts for about 15% of the liability side. This is certainly lower than the 22% observed at 
the end of the 1990s, but compared to the US or the UK there is still room to increase the 
share of capital market financing. 
Second, although banks’ cross-border exposures have increased, capital market integration 
remains incomplete. In the banking sector, for instance integration has concentrated on the 
interbank  market  while  credit  markets  for  companies  remain  predominantly  national.  The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
integration  of  the  markets  for  capital  may  have  increased  in  Europe,  but  the  ownership 
structures of many companies have not. They are still strongly national. 
The relatively low level of integration in European capital markets represents a barrier for risk 
sharing. Equity holdings in the US, for instance, are much more widely dispersed throughout 
the  entire  country.  Thus,  when  a  negative  shock  hits  an  industry  or  a  specific  region,  the 
resulting  losses  are  spread  widely  beyond  that  region.  In  Europe  they  are  not,  because 
equity holdings are much more concentrated nationally. 
Empirical  studies  for  the  United  States  show  that  integrated  markets  for  capital  cushion 
around  40%  of  the  cyclical  fluctuations  between  the  US  federal  states.  A  share  of  around 
25%  is  smoothed  via  the  credit  markets,  while  fiscal  mechanisms  cushion  just  20%  of 
shocks. Studies for Canada and Sweden come to similar conclusions. 
Against this backdrop, two general lines of action could be followed in Europe. First, it might 
be beneficial to increase the share of capital markets in the financing structure of companies. 
This  would,  of  course,  require  a  shift  away  from  the  traditional  bank-based  system  to  a 
certain degree. In this context, it might be worth taking a closer look at tax regimes, among 
other  things.  Currently,  tax  treatment  still  favours  debt  financing  over  equity  financing. 
Removing this bias in taxation would encourage companies to strengthen their equity base 
and thus turn more towards capital markets in their search for sources of funds. 
On a side note: strengthening the equity base is also a central issue with regard to banks, as 
the crisis has shown. Nevertheless, strengthening the equity base of banks is less a question 
of  providing  the  right  incentives,  but  rather  a  question  of  outright  regulatory  requirements. 
And here, we have already come a long way. 
The second line of action would be to deepen the integration of capital markets, which might 
eventually  result  in  the formation  of  a capital  markets  union. To  be  sure,  the concept  of a 
capital  markets  union  is  not  as  clear-cut  as  that  of  a  banking  union.  Capital  markets  are 
complex  and  non-bank  finance  takes  many  forms:  corporate  bonds,  private  equity,  public 
equity, venture capital or peer-to-peer lending, to name just a few. And integration not just 
relates to financial products but also to integral elements of the respective markets, such as 
stock  exchanges  and  central  counterparties.  Thus,  any  attempt  to  form  a  capital  markets 
union would require a lot of different measures in a lot of different areas. 
Nevertheless,  the  idea  of  a  capital  markets  union  has  gained  some  traction  lately.  Among 
others, the President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, and Yves Mersch, 
Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, have promoted the concept of a capital markets 
union.  To  me,  it  would  be  a  logical  step  to  supplement  the  banking  union  with  a  capital 
markets union. It would reduce fragmentation in European financial markets and, at the same 
time, enhance their efficiency and stability. Thus, it is certainly a goal worth pursuing. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
George Washington is credited with having written, more than two centuries ago in a letter to 
a friend, that a United States of Europe would come into being. This is certainly a bold vision 
which  has  been  voiced  repeatedly  since  the  days  of  George  Washington  –  by  Winston 
Churchill  and,  more  recently,  the  former  Vice-President  of  the  European  Commission, 
Viviane Reding. 
The vision of a United States of Europe is a very broad approach aiming at an encompassing 
political integration. In my speech today, I have taken a more modest approach and argued 
from  an  economic  point  of  view.  I  have  highlighted  three  areas  where  deeper  integration 
might help to enhance the stability of monetary union. 
The first area is public finances, although a fiscal union is currently a rather unrealistic vision. 
The second area is the banking system, and here we are on the eve of a major step towards 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
integration – in November of this year, the banking union will become reality. The third area 
is capital markets. Looking to the future, I consider a capital markets union another project 
that would contribute to enhancing the stability of monetary union. 
In  my  view,  integration  is  the  way  forward  as  long  as  it  is  balanced.  Not  all  proposals  for 
deeper integration that are currently being discussed fulfil this criterion. Take the example of 
eurobonds: in essence, eurobonds would provide a joint guarantee for individual sovereign 
debt. This step would increase the imbalance of integration I mentioned when I discussed the 
issue of a fiscal union. Thus, what we need are balanced steps of integration such as those I 
have described in my speech. 
To be sure, these are all big steps, but in my view they are worth taking. A stable monetary 
union  will  eventually  benefit  all  member  states,  including  Germany.  This  is  a  deep  belief  I 
hold, a belief that has even grown since my first week at the Bundesbank. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
