  Erkki Liikanen: On a sound and growth-enhancing financial sector in 
Europe 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  joint 
Conference  “The  Comprehensive  Assessment,  the  ECB’s  New  Role  and  Limits  of  a 
Common  Supervision  in  the  EU”,  organised  by  the  Financial  Risk  and  Stability  Network, 
Deutsches Institut für Wirtschaftsforschung (DIW Berlin), European School of Management 
and  Technology  (ESMT),  Jacques  Delors  Institut  Berlin  and  Bruegel,  Berlin,  30  October 
2014. 
 The social costs of the financial crisis – such as the losses in the GDP and the increases in 
unemployment – have been very high. If policymakers – in central banks and in governments – 
had not learned from the policy mistakes made during the Depression in the 1930s, the crisis 
could have been even more destructive. 
To avoid such crises in the future, or to at least limit their likelihood, we need a more stable 
and resilient banking and financial system in Europe. To that end, we need better regulation 
and  supervision  of  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  than  before.  Well-designed 
regulation provide banks with the right incentives to choose their business model, scope, and 
size efficiently to best serve the society. 
It is a key responsibility of our generation to make the financial system much safer than it has 
been.  To  be  sure,  we  do  not  need  to  return  to  the  repressive  regulation  of  the  post-war 
period, and we need to ensure that the financial system does not prevent the recovery from 
the  global  crisis.  But  we  do  need  to  find  a  better  balance  between  rules  and  flexibility  in 
regulation than we have had. 
The  rest  of  this  speech  is  organised  as  follows.  First,  I  take  a  brief  look  at  the  European 
financial sector and especially the banking sector before the crisis. Then I discuss the main 
building blocks of reforms to European financial system. Finally, I provide views on the next 
steps: future developments in the financial sector and necessary policy actions. 
The European financial sector before the crisis 
The banking sector has traditionally been and still is the dominant component in the European 
financial  sector,  and  developments  in  banking  have  also  been  of  clear  relevance  to  the 
emergence  of  the  financial  crises  in  Europe.  As  the  recent  report  by  the  Advisory  Scientific 
Committee of the European Systemic Risk Board tells us, over the past 20–25 years banking 
systems in Europe had become too leveraged, too concentrated, and sometimes also too big. 
As documented by the ESRB report, banks’ domestic private lending as well as their total 
balance sheets  had ballooned.  The  total  assets  of  the  EU  banking  sector  were  over  three 
times  the  EU  GDP  in  2013.  In  several  EU  countries,  the  ratio  is  much  bigger.  As  to  the 
concentration, the report points out that since 2000, the share of the three largest domestic 
banks of the national banking system total assets had increased in all major EU countries 
except  Italy.  The  increase  in  leverage  is  illustrated  by  the  decline  in  the  median  equity  to 
assets ratio of the largest listed EU banks to only just over 3% by 2008 from around 6% in 
the late 1990’s. 
The increases in bank sizes and bank lending were not matched by an equivalent increase in 
market-based financial intermediation. For example, the ratios of stock market capitalisation 
to bank credit decreased considerably in the 2000s in the biggest EU countries. As a result, 
the  European  financial  structure  became  even  more  bank-based  than  before.  The  large 
reliance  of  European  firms  –  especially  the  SMEs  –  on  bank  finance  has  recently  been  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  drag on the recovery of the European economy as banks’ ability to lend has been weak in 
many EU countries in the aftermath of the crises. 
It is now obvious that many of the developments in the European banking since the 1990’s 
sowed the seeds of the banking and sovereign debt crisis: 
 
 
Too-big-to-fail and too-big-to-save problems became more severe; 
Banks  misallocated  too  much  funds  in  asset  markets  fostering  unsustainable 
bubbles; 
Weakly capitalised banks’ resilience to shocks became poorer; 
Increased  concentration  of  the  banking  system  made  banks  more  interdependent 
and vulnerable to contagion. 
 What has been done to develop the financial sector? – Lessons from the crisis 
With this background in the banking sector, Europe faced the dramatic events of the financial 
crisis. A wide-ranging discussion emerged and has continued on the reasons and lessons of 
the crisis. One of the early, and one of the best accounts of the crisis was provided by Nobel 
Laureate Jean Tirole.1 Professor Tirole accentuated the role of the inappropriate and poorly 
implemented regulation as one of the critical factors explaining the emergence of the crisis. 
In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  large  number  of  international  and  EU  wide  regulatory  reforms 
have  been  launched.  I  will  focus  on  three  key  areas  of  reform.  These  are  new  prudential 
regulatory requirements for banks mainly following the standards set by the Basel Committee 
of Banking Supervision; structural reforms planned for banks; and finally the introduction of 
the Banking Union in Europe, especially the Single Supervisory Mechanism, or the SSM. 
New prudential requirements 
Prudential requirements set for the banking sector are undergoing a thorough reform. A lot 
has already been achieved especially in the area of capital requirements developed by the 
Basel Committee and implemented in Europe by EU legislation. 
New  capital  requirements  can  go  a  long  way  to  reduce  incentives  to  take  excessive  risks 
across  different  banking  operations.  Above  all,  they  will  improve  banks’  loss  absorbing 
capacity.  These  effects  reduce  the  probability  of  bank  failures.  At  the  same  time,  sounder 
capital  requirements  support  banks’  credibility  and  ability  to  intermediate  funding  also  in 
difficult market conditions. 
Importantly,  prudential 
to  address 
macroprudential,  system  wide  vulnerabilities  and  risks  –  in  addition  to  targeting  institution-
specific risks. As also pointed out in the IMF’s most recent Global Financial Stability Report,2 
the introduction of macroprudential policy is a key step to promoting the soundness of the 
financial sector especially in times of asynchronous economic and financial risks. Within the 
euro  area,  country-specific  macroprudential  policy  seems  particularly  useful  as  single 
monetary policy is conducted for the entire euro area. 
While  EU  Member  States  have  designated  macroprudential  authorities,  and  the  ECB  also 
has  been  assigned  a  new  role  in  macroprudential  policy  in  the  SSM  Regulation,  it  is 
important  to  note  that  the  financial  system  would  benefit  more  if  all  actors  in  the  financial 
requirements  are 
increasingly  set 
regulatory 
                                                 
1   Published  in  English  in  Balancing  the  Banks  –  Global  Lessons  from  the  Financial  Crisis,  co-authored  by 
Mathias Dewatripont, Jean-Charles Rochet and Jean Tirole, Princeton University Press, 2010. 
International Monetary Fund: Global Financial Stability Report: Risk Taking, Liquidity, and Shadow Banking – 
Curbing Excess while Promoting Growth, October 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
2  
2 
   sector, supervisors, banks and their customers alike, paid more attention to systemic risks 
emanating for example from excessive credit growth and leverage or misaligned incentives in 
the financial system. 
Closely  linked  and  complementary  to  prudential  requirements,  the  introduction  of  the  new 
recovery  and  resolution  regime  will  help  avoid  bank  bail-out  or  make  it  a  rare  exception. 
When successfully implemented, it will provide for a set of tools to enable an orderly “failure” 
of banks. The main tool will be the possibility to “bail-in” bank debt holders to absorb losses. 
Moreover, the new recovery and resolution tools, provided that they are credible, will reduce 
the  implicit  government  guarantee  and  distortive  risk-taking  incentives  created  by  bail-out 
expectations and artificially low funding costs. 
Structural reform 
While the improved capital and liquidity requirements and the new resolution regime take us 
a long way in addressing the too-big-to-fail problem, they do not take us all the way. 
In October 2012 the High-level Expert Group on reforming the structure of the EU banking 
sector  proposed  mandatory  separation  of  a  deposit  bank  and  a  trading  entity  within  the 
banking group to complement, not to substitute the ongoing regulatory reform. 
The motivation for our decision to propose separation was the following: 
 
First, to limit the spill-over of benefits from the deposit guarantee system and any 
implicit government guarantees to certain trading activities of banks. 
Second, to simplify the structure of large, complex banks. Reducing complexity by 
means of separation facilitates management and implementation of incentives and it 
facilitates supervision and monitoring by outside stakeholders such as shareholders, 
bank creditors and other market participants, thus reinforcing market discipline. 
Third, to make it easier to impose recovery and resolution measures if a bank would 
nevertheless get into severe problems. Simplifying the structure of the bank ex-ante 
would also serve this purpose. It is crucial to make credible the resolution also of the 
largest and most trading-intense banks. 
Fourth,  to  reduce  the  mixing  of  two  very  different  management  cultures  in  1)  the 
customer-based retail and commercial banking and 2) the transaction-based trading 
activities. The aim was to shift the focus from short-term to long-term, which is more 
in line with the interests of the real economy and society at large. 
   The choice of where to draw the line between the deposit bank and the trading entity was 
made  so  as  to  enable  banks  to  service  the  real  economy  in  the  best  way  possible,  while 
separating the activity that should not enjoy the benefit of the implicit government guarantee. 
Because the difference between proprietary trading and market making is hard to distinguish, 
the  Group  proposed  to  keep  them  together  in  the  separated  trading  entity.  In  this  way, 
market making would be provided on equal terms by trading units within banking groups and 
entities outside the regular banking sector. 
The High-level Expert Group also suggested that exposures to shadow banking entities such 
as hedge funds ought to be separated from deposit-taking and lending activities. 
Finally,  we  wanted  to  preserve  the  universal  banking  model  and  keep  the  trading  activity 
within the bank supervisory umbrella. This would also reduce the risk of migration of activities 
to the shadow banking system. Having the deposit bank and trading entity under one roof 
would also allow “one–stop banking” to continue where it is to the benefit of customers. 
In  January  2014  the  European  Commission  presented  its  proposal  for  a  Regulation  on 
structural measures improving the resilience of EU credit institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  the  competent  authority 
The  Commission  proposal  would  cover  the  largest  and  most  trading-intense  banks  in 
Europe.  The  proposal  obliges  the  competent  authority  to  review  trading  activities  and 
empowers 
to  require  separation  of  market-making,  risky 
securitisation and complex derivatives when specific conditions prevail. 
The Commission proposal leaves an important role for the future judgment of the competent 
authorities (which in most cases would be the ECB), the EBA and the Commission itself in 
detailing  the  separation  process  and  metrics  to  be  used.  Here  transparency,  predictability 
and  public  accountability  are  crucial.  Moreover,  the  elements  of  discretion  need  to  be 
implemented without compromising the level playing field in banking and the integrity of the 
internal market. 
In  some 
the  Group’s 
recommendations.  The  Commission’s  proposal  includes  an  outright  ban  on  organised 
proprietary  trading  instead  of  requiring  it  to  be  assigned  to  a  separate  and  separately 
capitalised legal entity. Even though the definition of proprietary trading is rather narrow, the 
Commission proposal resembles the structural reform implemented in the United States. 
The Commission proposal is now in the hands of the Council and the European Parliament. 
the  proposed  Regulation  does  also  differ 
respects, 
from 
Banking Union 
Today,  our  focus  is  on  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  an  important  element  in  the 
European  Banking  Union.  The  changeover  to  the  Banking  Union  is  definitely  the  biggest 
change in the European financial regulatory framework since the adoption of the euro. With 
the SSM taking its fully operative role in just a few days, this conference could not be better 
scheduled to discuss the developments in supervision. 
The decision on the creation of the common supervision was taken by the European Council 
only two years ago in June 2012. The idea of common European supervision was not new, 
but  it  had  been  debated  in  various  forms  and  fora.  One  of  the  proponents  of  common 
supervision was Professor Jean Tirole who proposed integration of supervision with the ECB 
as an early lesson from the financial crisis. 
On  Sunday,  the  first  core  project  of  the  SSM  was  finalised,  when  the  results  of  the 
comprehensive  assessment  were  published.  This  exercise  provides  a  very  good  starting 
point  for  both  the  European  banking  sector  and  the  ECB  as  a  common  supervisor.  For 
banks,  the  comprehensive  assessment  was  intentionally  designed  to  be  very  tough  and 
demanding. In comparison to previous supervisory actions, the comprehensive assessment 
included  not  only  the  stress  test,  but  an  asset  quality  review  to  ensure  that  the  basis  for 
stress testing is robust and the results comparable. 
I believe that this strong exercise as a whole helps the European banking sector repair its 
credibility  by  enhancing  transparency  and  improving  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector 
through  corrective  measures.  In  this  way,  the  comprehensive  assessment  supports  banks’ 
ability  to  provide  funding  to  non-financial  economy,  which  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
restoring growth in Europe. 
However,  prompt  action  is  vital  to  further  harmonise  banking  regulations  in  Europe.  In 
particular, making the quality of bank capital consistent across Member States should be a 
priority, also for the SSM. 
Also to make the SSM operational, the comprehensive assessment has been a very useful 
exercise. During the past months, the national competent authorities and the ECB have got 
the first flavour of acting closely together. The comprehensive assessment also provides the 
ECB with a deep knowledge of the major banks to be under its direct supervision. 
After thorough preparations since last year, the SSM will assume its supervisory tasks next 
week.  I  am  confident  that  due  to  the  SSM,  we  will  have  a  more  effective  and  efficient 
supervision, making the banking sector safer and helping it fulfil its tasks in the economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   For  the  ECB,  taking  over  the  responsibility  on  banking  supervision  is  a  big  challenge.  An 
important question is how the ECB will reconcile its primary task of monetary policy and the 
tasks assigned to it by the SSM regulation. It is crucial that the tasks of the ECB related to 
micro-prudential banking supervision are clearly separated from the ECB’s primary monetary 
policy  function.  The  separation  of  the  policy  functions  is  essential  for  safeguarding  the 
independence  of  monetary  policy,  and  it  also  helps  the  supervisory  function  achieve  its 
objectives. 
The separation of the supervisory function is required by the SSM legislation the provisions 
of  which  require,  for  instance,  strictly  separated  decision-making  arrangements  of  the 
Governing Council for different policy functions, but also separation of the supervisory staff 
from the staff for monetary policy and other policy functions. 
 The other main pillar of the banking union is the Single Resolution Mechanism, or SRM, that 
better  enables  the  resolution  also  of  banks  operating  across  the  Banking  Union  Member 
States. 
The legislation on the SRM was approved earlier this year. Now it is of utmost importance 
that the institutional framework is promptly implemented for the SRM to be fully operational 
by January 2016. 
The next steps for the financial sector in Europe? 
How  is  the  European  financial  sector  developing  now,  and  what  are  the  new  policy 
challenges? Given the legacy of the crisis, the policymakers still face several challenges in 
financial market policies. 
In  the  short  term,  one  challenge  is  that  we  must  first  find  ways  to  boost  bank  lending 
especially  to  SMEs  to  invigorate  economic  growth  in  Europe.  There  are  issues  on  the 
demand side but also on the supply side. 
A  special  market  segment  has  drawn  attention  during  last  months,  it  is  the  state  of  the 
European securitisation markets. Public issuances in the European ABS markets remain low, 
trading is thin in some market segments and the whole market carries a stigma in spite of the 
fact that most European structured finance products performed well throughout the crisis. 
In the short term, we have a clear need to stimulate ABS markets to stimulate credit creation. 
In  the  longer-term  the  revitalisation  of  ABS  markets  would,  among  other  things,  (i)  allow 
better  risk  sharing  among  investors  (ii)  help  banks  to  diversify  their  funding  structure  thus 
increasing their resilience, and (iii) make firms less reliant on bank finance. 
Concerning  short  term-challenges  in  the  economy,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has 
recently  published  decisions  on  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  as 
well as ABS and covered bond purchase programmes. Together, the aim of these measures 
is  to  further  enhance  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Their  aim  is  to  facilitate  credit 
provision to the euro area economy. 
Turning  to  more  longer-term  developments,  I  am  confident  that  if  the  planned  regulatory 
reforms are properly implemented, they will make the European financial sector sounder and 
better able to fulfil its tasks in the economy, channelling funds from savers to borrowers in a 
healthy manner. 
Key financial sector reforms in the EU have focused on the banking sector. Banks’ reputation 
and  the  public  confidence  towards  banks  have  suffered  since  the  financial  crisis.  While 
making banks more resilient, better structured and better supervised, the regulatory reforms 
also advance the aim of rebuilding the confidence on banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  At the same time, banking sector will very likely be complemented by financial markets and 
other  institutions  in  allocating  funds  to  final  customers.  The  new  ECB  report  on  banking 
structures3 points out that the expansion of the traditional banking sector in the euro area has 
slowed down since the beginning of the crisis whereas the growth has continued in the non-
banking financial sector, especially in shadow banking. 
The  diversification  of  the  financial  system  in  Europe  is  a  healthy  development.  However, 
more attention needs to be drawn to the alternative funding channels to achieve two goals. 
To remove any undesirable impediments to their efficient functioning. And to ensure that they 
do not create new threats to financial stability. 
Several new initiatives have been taken in the areas that go beyond banking. 
These include the public consultation4 in early summer by the ECB and the Bank of England 
to  stimulate  discussion  on  how  to  build  a  better  functioning  securitisation  market  in  the 
European Union. In particular, this consultation highlighted a suggestion to create standards 
for the so-called qualifying securitisations to identify low-risk ABS products that are simple, 
robust and transparent. The responses, published earlier this month,5 broadly supported this 
initiative. 
In January 2014, the Commission published a proposal for a regulation aimed at increasing 
transparency of certain shadow banking transactions. The aim of this proposal is to improve 
the reporting and increase the efficiency of supervision on securities financing transactions 
so that the links to the banking sector are properly understood. 
In his Political Guidelines for the next European Commission, President-Elect Jean-Claude 
Juncker  called  for  a  Capital  Markets  Union  to  develop  and  integrate  capital  markets,  also 
with the aims of developing alternatives for bank funding, especially for SMEs, and making 
Europe a more attractive place to invest. 
These and other initiatives to develop functioning of shadow banking and financial markets 
are very welcome. Work on this field still needs more systematic and serious reflection, but 
we already have a good starting point. 
Concluding remarks 
Banks  play  a  particularly  important  role  in  the  financial  sector  in  Europe,  as  the  most 
important  source  of  finance  for  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises.  Banks  also  played  a 
critical  role  in  the  background  for  the  financial  crisis.  The  crisis  initiated  a  comprehensive 
reform of regulatory and supervisory framework of the banking sector, including new capital 
requirements, structural changes, as well as the Banking Union with the Single Supervisory 
and Resolution Mechanisms. 
The regulatory and supervisory reforms are still partly ongoing, and they need to be carefully 
completed and implemented. With the good progress achieved this far, the banking sector 
seems to become more sound and resilient over time, thereby better able to provide loans 
and other services without compromising financial stability. 
At the same time, to complement bank finance in providing for adequate growth potential in 
the  real  economy,  alternative  ways  of  funding  need  to  be  enhanced.  But  we  also  need  to 
                                                 
3   European Central Bank: Banking Structures Report, October 2014. 
4   Bank of England and European Central Bank: The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the 
European Union – A Discussion Paper, May 2014. 
5   Bank of England and European Central Bank: The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the 
European Union – A Discussion Paper – Responses, October 2014. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  improve  our  understanding  of  risks  going  beyond  the  traditional  banking  sector  and  to  be 
able address any threat they create to financial stability. 
Both of these elements are important. Combining a better regulated and supervised banking 
sector with a strengthened non-bank financial sector will contribute to financial stability and 
improve the long-term growth prospects of the European economy and thus the welfare of 
European citizens. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
