Miroslav Singer: Czech central bank head sees lowered risk of deflation 
– interview in The Wall Street Journal 
Interview with Mr Miroslav Singer, Governor of the Czech National Bank, in The Wall Street 
Journal, conducted by Paul Hannon on 11 October 2014. 
 The threat of a slide into deflation or a long period of very low inflation in the Czech Republic 
has diminished, the head of the country’s central bank said Saturday, although he intends to 
maintain the weak-koruna policy at least into the start of 2016. 
In an interview with The Wall Street Journal during the annual meetings of the International 
Monetary  Fund  in  Washington,  Miroslav  Singer  said  he  had  been  encouraged  by  the 
stimulus  measures  announced  by  the  European  Central  Bank  since  June,  since  he  had 
expected it to take longer to react to very low inflation rates. 
Mr.  Singer  also  said  that  he  was  confident  the  central  bank  could  bring  its  weak-koruna 
policy to an end without risking a “snapback,” or a sharp strengthening of the currency. 
The  Czech  Republic  is  a  member  of  the  European  Union,  but  has  chosen  not  to  use  the 
euro. It does have close economic ties to the currency area and particularly Germany. As a 
result, low growth and low inflation in the eurozone have been a big problem for the central 
bank. 
Mr. Singer said that while the central bank remains worried about the possibility of another 
“hiccup” in the eurozone, he is less concerned than he was before the ECB first indicated in 
May that it was preparing to take action. 
“The outcome was more positive than I  would  have expected five months ago, and things 
look  less  gloomy  than  they  appeared  before  they  (ECB  policy  makers)  found  some 
consensus,” he said. 
The eurozone’s persistent economic weakness has been the main concern for policy makers 
gathered  here  over  recent  days.  Those  concerns  were  heightened  by  a  run  of  very  weak 
data from Germany that indicated the economy may have contracted for a second straight 
quarter in the three months to September. 
Mr.  Singer  believes  those  figures  from  August  that  recorded  large  falls  in  industrial 
production, manufacturing orders and exports are not reflective of the underlying state of the 
German economy, but instead the fact that there was a larger number of holidays than usual 
taken during that month. He said the Czech economy, which has a similar focus on industry 
rather than services, had experienced similar volatility in output over the summer months. 
“I would be unpleasantly surprised if the weakness in Germany continues,” he said. 
With  its  benchmark  interest  rate  already  at  0.05%,  the  Czech  central  bank  last  November 
pledged to maintain the koruna’s exchange rate at above 27 to the euro, effectively setting 
the firmest acceptable level for the currency. 
Mr.  Singer  said  that  the  weak-koruna  policy  has  persuaded  Czechs  that  the  central  bank 
won’t allow consumer prices to fall, and removed the risk of a slide into a prolonged period of 
deflation. 
Central  bankers  aren’t  worried  so  much  about  falling  prices  as  about  the  threat  that 
consumers and businesses will come to expect prices to continue to fall and will postpones 
their purchases, weakening economic growth and pushing prices down further. 
“We were afraid of this problem of postponed consumption and investment,” Mr. Singer said. 
“But people have realized the central bank is not going to allow a deflationary slide.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Mr. Singer said that retail sales are picking up, driven by higher auto sales, an indication that 
consumers  aren’t  postponing  purchases  in  the  expectation  goods  will  be  cheaper  in  the 
future. He cited a decline in the savings rate as another indication that the risk of deflation 
has been lessened. 
The central-bank chief said that while food prices may rise at a slower pace in response to a 
good  harvest,  he  was  not  worried  about  that  development  because  people  can’t  postpone 
food purchases. 
Measured according to an EU standard, the annual rate of inflation in the Czech Republic 
picked up to 0.7% in August from 0.6% in July, and Mr. Singer said he is confident it will rise 
to  the  2.0%  midpoint  of  the  central  bank’s target  range  next  year,  assuming  the  eurozone 
follows a “baseline scenario” of a return to modest growth. 
The ECB has indicated it will keep its benchmark interest rate low through 2017, while the 
Bank  of  England  and  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve  are  expected  to  raise  their  benchmark 
interest  rates  next  year.  Some  policymakers  worry  there  is  a  risk  of  “snapback”  when  the 
process of returning to more normal monetary policy begins. 
Mr.  Singer  said  the  central  bank  has  the  power  to  ensure  that  doesn’t  happen,  and  could 
intervene to counter an overly rapid appreciation of the koruna. 
“We will not tolerate snapback,” Mr. Singer said. “Our promises are credible to the markets, 
and obviously we are willing to prevent snapback.” 
The  central-bank  head  said  that  for  the  time  being,  the  balance  of  power  in  the  foreign-
exchange markets had shifted towards central banks, since tougher capital standards mean 
banks have fewer resources with which to move a currency against policy makers’ wishes. 
“Temporarily, the power of central banks vis-à-vis market players has increased,” he said. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
