  Dimitar Bogov: Improving education and access for children and youth 
to financial services 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at the 3rd Annual Regional Meeting for Europe and Central Asia (ECA), Skopje, 2–3 October 
2014. 
 Dear Ministers, 
Esteemed guests, 
Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my honor and privilege to welcome you all here in Skopje, Macedonia to this important 
event for the region of Europe and Central Asia. The aim of this meeting is to gather together 
in  one  place  the  regional  leading  policy-makers,  financial  institutions  and  experts  that  are 
engaged in the issues of children and youth access to financial services, financial inclusion 
and financial education, employability and entrepreneurship opportunities, to share success 
stories and challenges. 
There  has  been  some  progress  made  in  these  fields  because  of  the  existence  of 
international  movements  such  as  Child  and  Youth  Finance  International  that  are  keen  to 
develop  a  generation  that  will  be  better  prepared  to  prevent  future  financial  crisis  by 
increasing  the  financial  education,  access  to  finance,  employability  and  entrepreneurship 
skills  of  children  and  youth.  On  a  global  level,  significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in 
advancing the mentioned priorities. 
Important  steps  have  already  been  made  in  the  area  of  improving  access  to  financial 
services  in  the  previous  years.  Access  needs  to  be  complemented  by  the  quality  of  the 
financial  services.  The  quality  of  financial  services  and  the  participation  in  the  financial 
system  is  equally  important  for  all  participants  in  the  system.  Children  and  youth  are 
participants as well. They are undoubtedly part of every economy, part of the societies and 
their opinion matters. 
What  we  need  to  do  today  and  tomorrow,  is  to  make  sure  that  all  70  children  and  youth 
participants  from  across  Europe  and  Central  Asia  will  present  to  the  policy  makers  their 
action points for creating appropriate and sustainable youth economic opportunities. As the 
mission of Child and Youth Finance International states: “By ensuring youth are included as 
active participants in the decision-making process we believe that the policies shaped will be 
more youth-focused and inclusive, and the youth themselves will be more inclined to agree 
with the policies as they helped create them.” 
There  is  an  existence  of  appreciation  that  the  level  and  quality  of  financial  education  and 
financial inclusion of youth in every economy will have a significant impact on the prospect 
for  sustainable  growth.  The  financial  inclusion  will  also  provide  an  opportunity  for  further 
advancement that would support and facilitate sustainability of financial stability. A key point 
for ensuring the financial stability is the financial capability of consumers itself so that they 
can meaningfully participate in the financial system. Financial education is a powerful driver 
of empowerment of consumers’ skills. It empowers them with tools and knowledge on how to 
manage and make their personal financial decisions and budget. 
Smart financial planning such as the personal budget, savings, investments and retirement 
can help every household to enjoy better lives while diminishing financial shocks at the same 
time.  Financial  education  can  play  a  key  role  in  getting  to  these  outcomes.  The  financial 
education  supports  not  only  the  individual  well-being,  but  also  the financial  stability  in  one 
economy.  Referring  to  the  recent  financial  crisis,  consumers  that  can  make  informed  and 
sound  decisions  about  financial  products  and  services  are  helping  to  promote  sounder 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economic stability. Not only the consumers will gain knowledge through financial education, 
but more important is that they are assured of fair treatment. 
Consumers need to apply the economic way of thinking while making their important financial 
decisions.  In  order  to  develop  important  skills,  we  need  to  provide  them  good  quality 
education  that  will  enrich  their  behavior  with  critical  thinking  and  decision  making  skills  as 
well. 
To  provide  contextual  and  conceptual  effective  financial  education,  we  need  to  include 
financial  education  in  the  schools  curriculums.  Financially  literate  consumers  can  assess 
risks and make informed decisions about the suitability of financial products to their specific 
situation.  The  individual  responsibility  for  financial  planning  takes  on  greater  importance. 
Consumers  need to  clearly  understand  how  the  system  works  and  what  the  new  products 
really offer. 
At the institutional level, in 2011, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia launched 
its own Financial Education Project that has been growing and developing year after year, 
embracing  many  different  activities  mainly  focusing  on financial  education  for  children  and 
youth. We are trying to build financial capabilities among the population lunching the project 
that has a goal to raise the awareness for the importance of savings. 
At  the  national  level,  by  improving the cooperation  between  the regulatory  authorities,  it  is 
vital to ensure that the respective strategies are aligned to achieving the common goals of 
financial education and financial inclusion. Since last year, there have been some efforts for 
institutional  arrangements  to  bring  authorities  together  in  the  Coordinating  Body  of  the 
Regulatory  Authorities  for  Financial  Education  in  Macedonia  to  secure  a  joint  commitment 
towards  clearly  defined  and  measurable  financial  education  and  financial  inclusion  goals. 
With joint strength, we will establish national co-ordination frameworks, and our main goal is 
to define the national financial education and financial inclusion strategies. While we focus on 
financial  education  initiatives  at  the  national  level,  equally  important  is  that  adequate 
attention be accorded at the global level. 
We begin this two-day regional conference with our vision firmly focused on our long-term 
goal of universal access for children and youth to financial services. This event provides an 
opportunity that brings together knowledge, expertise and best practices from all across the 
Europe and Central Asia that I am sure will prove useful for all of you here and will provide 
fruitful meetings, interesting sessions and most importantly – will make an impact. 
Thank you very much! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
