  Marzunisham Omar: Statistical science for a better tomorrow 
Welcoming remarks by Mr  Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the International Statistical Institute Regional Statistics 
Conference 2014 “Statistical Science for a Better Tomorrow”, Kuala Lumpur, 17 November 
2014. 
 Good morning, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I am pleased to welcome you to this inaugural ISI Regional Statistics Conference 2014 on 
“Statistical  Science  for  a  Better  Tomorrow”.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  most  honoured  to 
jointly host this event, together with the International Statistical Institute and its South East 
Asia Regional Network, the Department of Statistics Malaysia, and the Malaysia Institute of 
Statistics. 
Today, we have more than 500 statistical researchers, practitioners, policymakers and users 
of  statistics  from  around  40  countries.  With  such  diversity  of  participants,  I  believe  the 
conference  provides  an  excellent  platform  for  the  participants  to  share  insights  on  the 
application of statistical science for knowledge discovery, innovation and policy. 
The  importance  of  statistics  cannot  be  overstated.  The  formulation  of  decisions  –  by 
individuals, businesses and especially policymakers – is as good as the statistics collected 
and the capacity to interpret the data. While the need for accurate and reliable statistics is 
common across all fields of study, two other requirements for the compilation and analysis of 
economic and finance-related statistics can be considered to be rather unique. 
The first is timeliness, given the rapid pace in which economic and financial developments 
can change. For example, while policymakers were aware that trade activity had deteriorated 
during the height of the global financial crisis around October to November 2008, it was not 
until January 2009 that the extent in which global economic activity had fallen off the cliff was 
realised. Indeed, as financial conditions are often vulnerable to sudden shifts in sentiments 
and  herd  behaviour,  the  window  of  opportunity  to  take  decisive  policy  action  is  often  very 
small – potentially, just a matter of hours during periods of crisis. This is where availability of 
statistics on a timely manner does make a difference. 
The  second  is  the  continuous  re-evaluation  of  underlying  relationships.  Beyond  errors  in 
reporting and limitations in aggregation, statistical estimates of economic variables are also 
subject  to  movements  in  relationships  amongst  variables  across  time  (the  so  called 
“structural breaks”). As a consequence, in the words of former Governor Duvvuri Subbarao 
of the Reserve Bank of India, “the chance of being fooled by randomness is much higher in 
the assessment of economic events”. Why is this so? It is because, in the field of economics 
and  finance,  outcomes  are  shaped  by  human  behaviour  –  which,  contrary  to  fundamental 
assumptions, is not always rational. In addition, economic systems are reflexive, in the sense 
that beliefs about what will happen often influence what does happen. 
Going forward, as the global landscape and expectations of economic agents adjust to, as 
yet, an unknown new normal, the demands on the timeliness and quality of data and analysis 
will only  increase further. In addition, an economic or financial crisis often  would prompt a 
rethink of our approach to policy-making and of relevance, a re-evaluation of the statistics we 
use  as  the  basis  for  our  decisions.  In  this  regard,  the  recent  Global  Financial  Crisis  is  no 
different. Allow me to highlight two lessons from the recent financial crisis. 
First,  the  crisis  highlighted  that  our  understanding  of  the  financial  system  was  insufficient. 
Financial  innovation had resulted in a significant increase in financial intermediation taking 
place  outside  the  regulated  banking  sector  –  what  is  today  known  as  shadow  banking. 
Excessive risk-taking and leverage, by both regulated and shadow financial institutions, had 
significantly  increased  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial  system.  Focus  on  the  stability  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  individual institutions alone was not sufficient. Instead, attention is required on the stability of 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  These  underscore  the  importance  of  improving  data 
coverage to keep pace with the constantly evolving economic and financial landscape. 
Second,  the  unprecedented  scale  and  scope  of  the  crisis  demonstrated  that  the  interplay 
between  exposures  in  the  regulated  financial  system,  the  unregulated  shadow  banking 
system and the real economy can have interrelated implications. Financial imbalances – in 
the form of excessive leverage and asset price bubbles – had built up amid stable inflation 
prior  to  the  crisis.  Consequently,  the  long  drawn  out  process  of  deleveraging  and  balance 
sheet  repair  by  financial  institutions,  households  and  governments  have  suppressed 
aggregate demand amid less effective expansionary policies. In hindsight, more micro-data 
would have detected increasing systemic vulnerabilities in the residential property market, as 
well as increasing exposures among economic agents throughout the economy. To this end, 
more  granular  data  would  overcome  the  limitations  of  aggregated  data  in  detecting 
vulnerabilities  that  are  concentrated  in  selected  segments  of  the  economy  and  financial 
system. 
While these challenges in totality may appear to be rather daunting, I strongly believe they 
are surmountable, especially with greater collaboration amongst statisticians, compilers and 
end-users  of  data.  It  is  with  this  in  mind  that  the  Regional  Statistics  Conference  was 
envisioned, organised and realised. 
On behalf of the Local Organising Committee, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all 
our key partners in making this conference a reality. Special thanks to the ISI and its SEA 
Regional Network for choosing to have this inaugural regional conference in Kuala Lumpur. I 
would  also  like  to  thank  Tan  Sri  Andrew  Sheng;  Professor  Dr.  Pedro  Silva;  and  Mr.  Agus 
Sudjianto, as well as all paper presenters for sharing their thoughts and experiences at the 
conference. 
As  part  of  our  effort  to  encourage  more  involvement  of  young  statisticians  in  statistical 
conferences and to recognise their participation in this conference, we will confer the Young 
Statistician’s Award of the ISI-RSC 2014 at the end of this conference. There are 26 entries 
for  4  prizes  under  this  award.  The  winners  will  be  announced  at  the  closing  ceremony  on 
Wednesday afternoon. 
I look forward to the productive and engaging discussions during this conference, and wish 
you a pleasant stay in Kuala Lumpur. I shall now invite the ISI President, Professor Vijay Nair 
to deliver his Opening Remarks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
