  Njuguna Ndung’u: Promoting access to affordable credit in Kenya 
Remarks  by  Professor  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
launch of the Strategic Plan for the Association of Kenya Credit Providers (AKCP), Nairobi, 
27 October 2014. 
 Mr. Charles Ringera, Chairman, Association of Kenya Credit Providers; 
Mr. Habil Olaka, Chief Executive Officer, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. Benjamin Nkungi, Chief Executive Officer, Association of Microfinance Institutions 
of Kenya; 
Association of Kenya Credit Providers Governing Council Members; 
Chief  Executive  Officers  of  Credit  Reference  Bureaus,  Commercial  Banks, 
Microfinance Banks and Development Finance Institutions; 
Representatives of IFC, FSD Kenya and USAID FIRM; 
Members of the Press; 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen; 
Good morning... 
It  is  my  honour  and  pleasure  to  join  you  this  morning  to  launch  the  Association  of  Kenya 
Credit Providers (AKCP’s) 2015–2019 Strategic Plan. As you may recall, almost exactly one 
year ago, AKCP was officially launched in this same room. Today marks the start of AKCP’s 
concrete journey of providing a solid platform through which all credit providers in Kenya can 
actively  engage  in  the  pursuit  of  a  comprehensive  and  all-embracing  credit  information 
sharing mechanism. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  success  of  any  entity  depends  on  its  strategic  orientation.  I 
applaud AKCP for moving with speed to develop a five year strategic plan that maps out its 
priority focus over the period. The main mandate of AKCP is to promote the development of 
an  effective  functioning  Credit  Information  Sharing  (CIS)  mechanism  in  Kenya.  I  note  with 
appreciation  that  the  strategic  priorities  identified  for  the  five  years  including:  Institution 
Building,  Legal  Reform,  Capacity  Building,  Communication  &  Awareness  and  Knowledge 
Generation,  are  all  relevant  for  AKCP  to  kick-start  the  process  of  strengthening  the  CIS 
mechanism in Kenya. This has well defined its place in the financial ecosystem in Kenya as 
well its viability and sustainability. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The rate of a country’s economic growth is driven by investments 
and these investments are largely dependent on the ease with which productive enterprises 
access  funding  to  transform  their  viable  ideas  and  opportunities  into  productive  ventures. 
That  is  why  I  am  proud  to  be  associated  with  AKCP’s  tag  line:  “Towards  a  more  open 
credit market” because with more transparent credit markets, investors are able to easily 
access affordable funding. As a result of implementation of several innovative initiatives and 
reforms in Kenya’s financial sector including introduction of the CIS mechanism, the sector 
has recorded improved efficiency. Similarly, formal financial inclusion has been on an upward 
trend  from  26.4%  in  2006  to  66.7%  in  2013.  Consequently,  financial  stability  has  been 
strengthened through the enhanced credit risk management systems as well as the improved 
economic conditions. 
Despite  this  progress,  the  current  level  of  private  sector  credit  in  Kenya  of  about  40%  of 
Gross  Domestic  Product  is  still  far  below  the  levels  recorded  in  comparable  emerging 
economies such as Malaysia, South Africa and Mauritius. The main factor cited as impeding 
private sector credit in Kenya is high lending rates, that can be dealt with through concerted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  efforts of all players in the sector. With AKCP bringing together several categories of credit 
providers, its voice on this issue and the technology to provide sustainable solutions should 
be loud enough. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  As  you  may  be  aware,  a  high  level  Committee  was  established 
under the leadership of the Cabinet Secretary to the National Treasury in January 2014 to 
explore ways of increasing the supply private sector credit and mortgage finance in Kenya. 
The main focus of the committee was to make proposals for transparent pricing that should 
allow competition and movements in the market and thus lower lending rates commensurate 
to returns on investments as well as reduce the risk profile and premium loaded to market 
participants. 
The  committee  finalized  its  task  in  April  2014.  Among  the  recommendations  made  by  the 
committee  was  the  introduction  of  a  transparent  pricing mechanism,  where  all  banks  price 
their loans based on a common reference rate, the Kenya Banks’ Reference Rate (KBRR). 
KBRR became effective on 8th July 2014 and borrowers are now able to compare lending 
rates across banks. Prior to this, every bank had its own base rate, whose composition was 
not known to the borrowers and so not comparable. 
Banks are now required to explain to their customers and the Central Bank the composition 
of  the  premium  (k)  they  charge  above  the  KBRR.  The  Central  Bank  will  shortly  start  to 
periodically publish, on its website, the details of the premiums (k) obtained through returns 
from banks. This will promote transparency and competition in the pricing of credit. This is 
one  of  the  avenues  of  increasing  credit  to  the  productive  and  profitable  sectors  of  our 
economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: Credit Information Sharing (CIS) plays a critical role in enhancing 
credit  to  the  private  sector.  It  enables  credit  providers  to  undertake  effective  credit  risk 
assessment  based  on  the  available  credit  histories  whereas  the  borrowers  are  able  to 
negotiate for better credit terms based on their good credit histories. Since the rollout of the 
CIS  mechanism  in  2010,  commercial  banks  and  microfinance  banks  had  requested  more 
than  4.8  million  credit  reports  from  the  two  licensed  credit  reference  bureaus  as  at 
30th September 2014. The borrowers have on the other hand accessed 77,422 credit reports 
over  the  same  period.  As  the  full-file  sharing  introduced  in  February  2014  takes  root,  the 
usage of the CIS mechanism will continue increasing. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: As already alluded to, the establishment of AKCP was informed by 
our desire to optimize the benefits of the CIS mechanism. This is only possible when most of 
the  credit  providers  are  participants.  That  is  why  AKCP’s  initial  task  is  to  recruit  credit 
providers who are not yet members of the Association. We all appreciate that most Kenyans 
are  multi-borrowers  and  their  credit  reports  can  only  be  complete  if  all  credit  providers 
participate  in  the  CIS  mechanism.  A  wider  membership  of  AKCP  enhances  a  quick 
optimization  of  the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  the  CIS  mechanism.  This  is  only  possible 
when an encompassing regulatory framework for all credit providers, both regulated and non-
regulated, is developed. This is the other main task for AKCP. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  When  CIS  was  launched,  the  only  products  on  offer  were  basic 
credit  reports.  However,  the  introduction  of  full-file  credit  information  sharing  in  February 
2014  enabled  credit  reference  bureaus  to  introduce  value  added  products  such  as  credit 
scoring. Credit scoring not only enriches the value of credit reports to the lenders but greatly 
improves the lenders credit risk management. Credit scores will help borrowers to know their 
risk profiles and how their loans will be priced. 
Credit  scoring  will  also  go  a  long  way  to  complement  the  Kenya  Banks  Reference  Rate 
(KBRR).  This  is  because  credit  scores  will  form  an  objective  basis  for  credit  providers  to 
determine the risk premium to be charged above KBRR. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  As  I  conclude,  I  challenge  all  players  represented  here  today  to 
closely work with AKCP to ensure the realization of its strategic objectives. As identified in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  Government  Report  on  Increasing  Private  Sector  Credit  and  Mortgage  Finance  in 
Kenya, CIS has an important role to play in promoting access to affordable credit. The report 
encourages full implementation of the Credit Reference Bureau Regulations 2013 as well as 
the expansion of the mechanism to non-banks. In order to ensure sustainability of this new 
Association, I urge all potential members to support AKCP via membership subscriptions and 
other avenues as well as also to engage actively through the committees that constitute its 
governance structures. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure to declare the Association 
of Kenya Credit Providers (AKCP’s) 2015–2019 Strategic Plan officially launched. 
Thank You 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
