Mark Carney: Regulatory work underway and lessons learned 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial  Stability  Board,  at 
International  Banking  Seminar, 
Washington DC, 12 October 2014. 
the  29th  Annual  G30 
 Six years ago when the financial crisis was in full force, the G7 met here in Washington. We 
backstopped our entire financial systems. 
The G20 then committed to its fundamental reform. 
The first objective was to fix the deep and varied fault lines that caused the crisis. 
We are now in prospect of substantially completing that job at the Brisbane Summit. 
Core financial institutions are more resilient. 
Effective bank capital requirements have increased seven-fold. Major banks are on track to 
meet these requirements five years in advance. And for the first time liquidity standards have 
been established. 
There have been fundamental changes to banks’ relative incentives to engage in proprietary 
trading,  market-making  and  lending,  as  well  as  restrictions  on  contingent  exposures  to  off 
balance sheet vehicles, such as SIVs. 
Shadow banking is being transformed into resilient market-based financing. 
Minimum margin requirements have just been agreed for the repo market, and a variety of 
shadow banking institutions, including money market funds, have been reformed. 
Derivative markets are safer. 
Trading is now simpler and more transparent. 
Central clearing and trade reporting requirements are coming on-stream, backed up in over 
half  of  FSB  jurisdictions  by  capital  requirements  and,  from  December  2015,  margining 
requirements. 
Half of interest rates swap transactions are now centrally cleared. 
Ending too big to fail 
Those are significant achievements but the job of fixing the fault lines cannot be complete 
without ending Too Big to Fail. 
Operating  in  a  heads-I-win-tails-you  lose  bubble,  the  world’s  largest  banks  threatened  the 
stability of the global financial system. Their bail-out using public funds undermines market 
discipline and goes to the heart of fairness in our societies. 
This cannot be allowed to continue. 
It is essential that all systemically important financial institutions can be resolved when they 
fail: 
– 
– 
Tackling the rampant moral hazard at the heart of the financial system hasn’t been easy. And 
our  success  can  never  be  absolute.  Specifically,  we  can’t  expect  to  insulate  fully  all 
institutions from all external shocks, however large. 
Without the need for taxpayer support. 
And without disruption to the wider financial system or real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
But  we  can  change  the  system  so  that  systemically  important  institutions  bear  the  cost  of 
their own actions and the risks they take. 
After much hard work, and extensive cross-border co-operation, the FSB is on track to agree 
proposals that, once implemented, will be decisive in achieving that. 
The  use  of  statutory  resolution  powers  to  resolve  global  systemic  banks  will  finally  be 
possible. 
The proposals will be presented to the Brisbane G20 Leaders summit in November. 
That Summit will be the watershed in ending Too Big to Fail. 
The first is an internationally agreed standard on the total loss absorbing capacity (or TLAC) 
that globally systemic banks must hold. 
It will be based on clear principles. But it will be much more than a list of aspirations. It will 
include a detailed indicative term sheet that will cover the amount; the type, and the location 
of that loss absorbing capacity. 
It will establish a level playing field between global systemic banks, while taking into account 
differences in national resolution regimes. 
It  will  ensure  globally  systemic  banks  finally  have  the  quantum  of  total  loss  absorbing 
capacity that extensive analysis show balances the benefit of greater resilience against the 
higher funding costs for the banks that results from the removal of public subsidies. 
It will set clear roles for home and host regulators in a resolution. 
It will give host nations the confidence that they won’t again be side-swiped by the failure of a 
large foreign bank. 
And,  by  removing  the  implicit  subsidy  that  systemic  banks  have  long  enjoyed,  it  will  re-
establish market discipline. 
Once  implemented,  it  will  make  our  financial  systems  more  resilient  and  our  economies 
stronger. 
The  proposal  will  be  subject to  a  rigorous  consultation  and  Quantitative  Impact  Study  and 
market  survey  in  2015  and  will  take  into  account  insights  from  the  FSB’s  ongoing 
Resolvability Assessment Process for every systemic bank’s resolution plan. 
The  TLAC  agreement  will  be  complemented  by  another  agreement  just  announced 
yesterday. This initiative of the private sector sets out the terms under which the 18 largest 
dealer banks, which represent 90% of derivative activity, would stay cross-border derivative 
contracts temporarily when a global bank fails. 
This is a fundamental step to closing off the risk that foreign counterparties take their money 
and run. 
By  agreeing  to  a  short  stay,  cross  border  resolution  becomes  much  more  realistic  and 
achievable. 
Once  this  agreement  is  concluded,  other market  participants must  be  brought  onto  similar 
terms to those of the 18 big dealers, and FSB members must deliver on their commitments to 
establish regulatory requirements for contractual stays. 
There  is  more  to  do.  Resolution  plans  must  be  finalised;  we  must  systematically  remove 
remaining  legal  and  operational  impediments  to  resolvability,  we  must  think  through 
mechanisms  to  ensure  firms  have  adequate  funding  in  resolution,  and  we  must  ensure 
resolution regimes for systemic non-banks are as effective as they are for banks 
But make no mistake. Brisbane will be the watershed in our collective effort to end Too Big to 
Fail. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Building an open, global financial system 
Fixing the fault lines behind the last crisis isn’t enough. 
The  second  objective  of  the  G20’s  efforts  is  to  rebuild  trust  in  an  open,  global  financial 
system. 
Trust between financial institutions. 
Trust between regulators. 
Trust between industry and finance. 
And most fundamentally, trust between the public and the financial system. 
That trust is essential to maintaining a truly global financial system that integrates all major 
economies. 
Only that system can serve all economies. 
Only that system can support the investment and trade necessary for strong, sustainable and 
balanced growth in advanced and emerging economies alike. 
Trust can only be restored if completing one job isn’t equated with downing tools. 
Policymakers must now begin to look beyond how they will reform the core of the system to 
how they will regulate and supervise it. 
That approach has three elements. 
First, intensive co-operation. 
That  is  essential  if  national  authorities  are  to  continue  to  resist  temptations  to  safeguard 
markets  unilaterally  through  ring-fencing,  compulsory  subsidiarisation  or  extra-territorial 
application of domestic rules. 
Of course, national authorities need some scope to develop measures tailored to their own 
jurisdictions.  Circumstances  sometimes  differ  across  jurisdictions,  whether  because  of  the 
stage  of  an  economy’s  development,  its  degree  of  integration  into  the  world  economy,  or 
specific features of a local legal system. 
But the impact of these measures must be monitored closely for spillovers to others and – 
where there are not detailed international standards – authorities must resolve cross-border 
issues by applying the principle of deferring to each other’s rules where those rules produce 
similar outcomes. 
The second involves rigorous and transparent peer review and assessment processes. 
That  commitment  is  vital  not  just  to  ensuring  that  agreed  standards  are  being  applied 
consistently, but also to allow policies to be adjusted where material unintended impacts are 
identified. 
Through  such  work  we’ve  already  learned  about  unintended  consequences,  and  are  now 
addressing them. 
For  example,  we  amended  the  liquidity  coverage  ratio  to  take  into  account  unintended 
consequences  under  stress  on  core markets  such  as  commercial  paper  and  to  clarify  that 
liquid asset buffers are there to be used in times of stress. 
We changed the leverage exposure measure, for example by recognising that cash variation 
margins are effectively pre-settlement payment of the fair value of the derivative. In doing so, 
we  reinforced  banks’  incentives  to  centrally  clear  their  clients’  derivative  trades.  In  other 
words,  we  simultaneously  reduced  bank  leverage  while  increasing  the  robustness  of 
derivative markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
And  we’ve  learned  about  the  unintended  consequences  of  prudential  capital  and  retention 
requirements on the securitisation market. 
Regulatory changes arguably treat asset-backed securities in ways that appear to be unduly 
conservative, particularly relative to other forms of long-term funding. 
Efforts to rebalance these incentives are now a priority. 
As  the  Bank  of  England  the  ECB  have  argued,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  differentiating 
between securitisations that are simple, transparent and consistent, and those that are not. 
The regulatory treatment of those securitisations should reflect their lower risk profile. 
By  making  changes,  policymakers  are  applying  a  mature  approach.  We’re  learning  and 
adjusting. We will continue to do so, in a thoughtful, open, and deliberative fashion. 
The  third  element  of  the  new  approach  is  turning  our  attention  to  new  and  emerging 
vulnerabilities. 
Work  to  assess  new  market  developments  and  co-ordinate  responses  will  become 
increasingly  important  as  macroprudential  risks  arise  from  outside  the  traditional  banking 
sector. 
In  some  economies,  such  as  the  UK,  the  biggest  risks  are  associated  with  the  housing 
market, which is why macroprudential actions have been taken. 
More  generally,  as  the  FSB  has  recently  concluded:  “there  are  increased  signs  of 
complacency  in  financial  markets,  in  part  reflecting  search  for  yield  amidst  exceptionally 
accommodative monetary policies. Volatility has become compressed and asset valuations 
stretched across a growing number of markets, increasing the risk of a sharp reversal.” 
Those  risks  arise  against  a  backdrop  in  which  assets  managed  by  investment funds  have 
reached  almost  90%  of  global  GDP  –  more  than  two  thirds  the  size  of  the  commercial 
banking system. 
The  growth  of  the  asset  management  sector  brings  welcome  diversity  to  financial 
intermediation. 
However, there must also be a focus, as there has been with banks, on the systemic risks it 
could create. 
Although the sector is becoming more concentrated, the risks don’t simply arise from the size 
of asset managers. 
They arise from the particular activities some in the sector undertake. The biggest risks arise 
from combining high levels of leverage with holdings of illiquid assets and commitments to 
provide liquidity at short notice. 
In the current environment, those types of activities need careful monitoring, and possibly a 
deliberate policy response. 
Conclusion 
There is no doubt that the reforms made thus far, along with a stronger framework for global 
co-operation mean we are in a better position to face new risks. 
But  as  we  move  to  the  next  phase  of  post-crisis  regulation,  many  commentators  find  it 
tempting to succumb to world-weary arguments. 
That any reform will be arbitraged 
That any insurance will promote risk taking 
That there is a trade-off between stability and growth 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And that there will always be financial crises. 
We were right to reject such fatalism when we embarked on reform and we are right to reject 
it now. 
While  all  recognise  that  future  crises  cannot  be  ruled  out,  the  steps  taken  in  the  past  six 
years have certainly reduced the likely frequency and severity of such crises. 
Where  banking  systems  have  raised  capital  and  restored  trust  in  their  creditworthiness, 
access to credit has returned. This central lesson from the US and the UK recoveries could 
not be clearer. 
Publicly provided insurance is being removed from the system as the Too Big to Fail problem 
is addressed and the public subsidy for globally systemic banks is eliminated. 
Market forces are being restored. The system is more transparent. It is clear who bears risk. 
And the scope for arbitraging new regulation has been reduced through a global approach to 
reform that has established common standards and encompassed shadow banking. 
In  short,  any  serious  look  at  the  experience  of  post-crisis  reform  shows  that  reform  and 
regulation support – not damage – long-term prosperity. 
As I said in Washington three years ago: in no other aspect of human endeavour do men and 
women not strive to learn and improve. 
The crisis showed that there was ample scope to improve the efficiency and resilience of the 
global financial system. 
Through  clarity  of  purpose  and  resolute  implementation  Brisbane  will  mark  an  important 
milestone in our efforts. 
That we have reached this point is a triumph of the optimists. 
But we must not stop work. There is still much scope to improve. 
The process of reform is not over. 
We will continue to learn and adjust. 
And we must continue to manage the system effectively in the face of new risks. 
With  that  we  can  deliver  the  open  and  resilient  financial  system  that  can  support  strong 
sustainable balanced growth around the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
