  Jens Weidmann: Demographic challenges in Germany 
Speech  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of 
the 
Wirtschaftsgespräche  am  Main  economic  talks,  hosted  by  Wirtschaftsinitiative  Frankfurt  / 
Rhein-Main e.V., Frankfurt am Main, 27 November 2014. 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at 
 Introduction 
1 
Mr Bender, Ms Reinhardt-Lehmann, ladies and gentlemen. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  today  and  thus  to  be  able  to  accept  the 
invitation which Mr Bender and Ms Reinhardt-Lehmann sent me some time ago. 
Not only did planning ahead play a role in finding a date for today’s economic talk, it will also be 
the central theme of my remarks today. As you will no doubt have gathered from the invitation, 
I would like to talk to you today about the demographic challenges that Germany faces, a topic 
which is also likely to be familiar to you by another name: the ageing of the population. 
On the subject of ageing, the American poet Ezra Pound once said, “The older one gets, the 
more  one  appreciates  the  art  of  constructive  silence.”  In  this  regard,  it  appears  that  I  am 
obviously  not  yet  old  enough.  And  what  is  more,  silence  is  not  particularly  entertaining, 
especially if you have been invited to deliver a speech. 
The subject of ageing makes most of us uneasy, both with a view to ourselves and to society 
as  a  whole.  This  is  probably  mainly  because  getting  older  is  unavoidable  and,  as  well  as 
ideally  bringing  the  wisdom  that  comes  with  old  age,  is  also  associated  with  other,  more 
negative side effects. And anyway, who wants to resign themselves to the inevitable? But it 
is precisely because it is inevitable that we must face up to it. 
For the next few minutes, I would therefore like to show you, from an economic perspective, 
how demographic change in Germany will develop, what macroeconomic impact it may have 
and how policy-makers should try, as far as possible, to deal with this impact. The political 
response  to  the  demographic  challenge  will  help  to  decide  whether  the  German  economy 
can retain its leading position in many areas. 
Demographic trends in Germany 
2 
Let me first briefly outline the demographic trends that await us, with the help of the Federal 
Statistical Office’s 12th coordinated population projection from 2009. 
Based on certain assumptions regarding the birth rate, life expectancy and net immigration, 
the Federal Statistical Office predicts that, by 2060, Germany’s population will shrink by up to 
20%  from  today’s  figure.  Although  we  know  that  Germany  has  become  more  attractive  to 
immigrants since this study was published, we also know that immigration can only cushion 
the demographic process in Germany, not prevent it. 
However,  even  more  important  than  the  contraction  process  in  itself  is  the  fact  that  the 
decrease  in  the  population  is  accompanied  by  a  distinct  ageing  of  society.  One  of  the 
reasons for the ageing of the population and the shift in the balance between young and old 
is,  of  course,  that  life  expectancy  is  expected  to  carry  on  increasing,  which  is  certainly  a 
positive  development for  those  concerned.  However,  the fact  that the  numbers  of  younger 
people are decreasing sharply is having a much larger impact. In comparison to 2008, the 
decline in Germany’s birth rate will almost triple by 2060. 
Similarly,  the  working-age  population  will  contract  significantly  and  will  also  age.  In  other 
words, there will be fewer people of working age and considerably larger numbers of elderly 
people  in  future.  Or,  to  quote  a  comparison  once  made  by  the  demographer  Herwig  Birg, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  “Our country is like a rowing boat. The number of rowers is falling, while the number of older 
passengers will increase for a number of decades.” 
Ladies  and gentlemen, the  demographic  trends I  have  just  outlined  have  basically  already 
been evident for a long time and are practically  irreversible. For example, even if the birth 
rate were to rise again significantly in the medium term, the trend towards a shrinking and 
ageing  population  over  the  next  few  decades  would  not  be  reversed.  The  reason  that  the 
demographic  trend  is  so  strong  is  that,  because  Germany’s  birth  rate  has  been  falling  for 
decades,  those  who  would  now  perhaps  be  thinking  about  having  children  were  never 
actually born. 
Even  though  demographic  forecasts  are  somewhat  uncertain  by  nature,  the  demographic 
trend is clear and we must ask ourselves how we intend to tackle it using social policy and 
what implications it will have for economic policy. I would now like to focus on this second 
point in particular, highlighting various areas and pointing out possible courses of action for 
each. Let us first consider the labour market. 
3 
Impact and economic policy implications 
Labour market, labour force participation and immigration 
3.1 
As the working-age population shrinks, the total number of hours that can be  worked also 
decreases,  which  has  a  dampening  effect  on  aggregate  output  and  therefore  on  gross 
domestic  product.  The  first  implication  of  this  trend  for  economic  policy  is  obvious.  To 
counteract  the  decrease  in  the  number  of  hours  worked,  we  need  measures  that  raise 
Germany’s labour force participation. 
In Germany, reserves for this are most likely to be found among the elderly and people with 
family commitments. Measures aimed at improving the work-life balance are therefore a step 
in the right direction in terms of both social and economic policy. 
Looking at the elderly population, the decision made a few years ago to gradually raise the 
retirement age to 67 also helped to keep people in this age group in work for longer. Labour 
force participation among the over-60s has already risen significantly over the last few years. 
However,  allowing  workers  to  draw  a  full  pension  after  45  years  of  contributions  has  now 
somewhat blurred the signal sent out by raising the retirement age to 67. “Retirement at 63” 
is something which favours age groups that are currently close to retirement to the detriment 
of  younger  generations.  This  brings  to  mind  a  quote  by  the  American  comedian,  Groucho 
Marx, who died almost forty years ago: “Why should I care about future generations? What 
have they ever done for me?” 
But retirement at 63 is not only a step in the  wrong direction in terms of our demographic 
challenges. In the short term, it also means that workers who are still needed in the labour 
market  are  retiring.  The  shortage  of  skilled  workers  is  already  inhibiting  growth  in  many 
regions of Germany. Companies in the Rhine-Main region now also appear to be expressing 
support for bonuses for workers who find them new employees. 
Ladies and gentlemen, given the ever decreasing number of skilled workers in Germany, the 
topic of immigration has attracted more and more attention over the past few years. I have 
already  spoken  briefly  about  the  pleasing  development  of  stronger,  labour  market-oriented 
immigration. 
And, in fact, encouraging the immigration of skilled  workers is a useful economic policy to 
combat  the  growing  shortages  on  the  labour  market  and  to  better  meet  the  demand  for 
qualified employees. But, on a realistic scale, immigration of this kind can only mitigate the 
demographic  change  taking  place  in  Germany  –  it  cannot  stop  or  even  reverse  the  trend. 
However,  as  a  society,  we  should  certainly  remain  open  to  the  rest  of  the  world  and  thus 
continue to be an attractive choice for people who decide to live and work in Germany. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Labour productivity, education and innovation 
3.2 
Ladies and gentlemen, aggregate output depends not only on how many hours are worked, 
of  course,  but  also  on  labour  productivity.  Given  that  the  ageing  effect  I  have  already 
mentioned  is  also  taking  place  among  the  labour  force,  we  must  ask  ourselves  how  this 
group’s labour productivity is likely to develop. Is it true that productivity drops as the labour 
force ages, as has often been suggested? 
The answer appears to be “no”. More recent empirical studies in this area suggest that the 
level of labour productivity of employees who are getting older is likely to remain largely the 
same.  Although  physical  and  cognitive  capacities  generally  decrease  with  age,  they  are 
compensated  for  by  growing  professional  and  practical  experience.  As  a  result,  the 
contrasting  productivity  effects  are  likely  to  more  or  less  balance  each  other  out.  Or,  in  a 
nutshell, the young can run faster but the old know the shortcuts. 
But  this  does  not  mean  that  overall  productivity  will  remain  unaffected  by  demographic 
change in the long term. Growing fiscal burdens and a potential decrease in innovation may 
have  a  restraining  effect.  As  well  as  measures  to  increase  aggregate  productivity  through 
greater  competition  and  stronger  technological  progress,  measures  aimed  at  increasing 
labour productivity in the economy are also needed. Such measures would at least cushion 
the negative impact of demographic change. 
Qualifications and education are – and will remain – a cornerstone of this, in addition to an 
economy’s capacity for innovation and thus its technological progress. It cannot be said often 
enough: education and innovation – supplemented, of course, by curiosity and the urge to 
explore  and  discover  –  are  the  crucial  driving  forces  behind  human  and  economic 
development.  They  therefore  play  a  key  role  in  increasing  the  growth  potential  of  the 
economy. In an ageing society, each individual must retain their ability and willingness to be 
open to new ideas. 
For  education  and  innovation  to  actually  fuel  progress,  society  must  be  free,  democratic, 
competitive  and  growth-inducing.  Expanding  knowledge  and  education  will  require  an 
education  system  that  meets  high  standards  which  are  comparable  across  Germany  and 
which will give children, teenagers and young adults the breathing room and the assistance 
necessary to develop their talents to the fullest. 
Studies show that adolescent educational achievement in Germany is closely correlated with 
social  background,  which  also  impacts  on  subsequent  employment  prospects.  This 
contradicts an important social principle – equal opportunities for all members of society – 
and is damaging in terms of economic policy. Because educational achievement in later life 
is  often  decided  mainly  at  the  pre-school  stage,  it  makes  sense to  increase  the resources 
spent on education for infants and pre-school students and to devote more public funding to 
it than in the past. 
Economic growth, investment and growth strategy 
3.3 
Ladies and gentlemen, when we look at things from an economic perspective, what is known 
as potential growth is a particularly relevant factor. Potential growth is normally defined as 
the aggregate growth that can be achieved when utilisation of all production factors is normal 
over time. 
Economic  potential  growth  cannot  be  observed  directly,  meaning  it  cannot  be  measured 
directly either. Instead, it has to be estimated as precisely as possible. I don’t intend today to 
go into the methods used and the imponderables they entail. However, I think the connection 
between  demographic  trends  and  economic  potential  growth  can  be  summed  up  with  the 
following words. Regardless of the uncertainty surrounding estimates of this kind over long 
periods of time, German potential growth is likely to be weaker in future than in past decades 
due, above all, to the demographics-driven decline in the number of hours worked. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  And yet, the question does arise in this context whether, given the declining and ageing society, 
the expansion rates of past decades can serve as a suitable yardstick for advanced economies. 
Ultimately, however, this has been a valid question in Germany for quite some time now. If 
we  compare  the  average  growth  rates  of  the  last  few  decades,  we  find  a  consistently 
downward  trend.  In the 1970s  we  were  at  just under  three  per  cent.  Since  the  turn  of the 
century, it has been little more than one per cent on the whole. 
Thus,  when  looking  ahead,  it  would  probably  be  more  useful  to  adopt  a  per  capita 
perspective and compare Germany’s relative growth position with that of similar countries. 
But  such  a  forward-looking  comparison  does  not  put  Germany  in  a  particularly  good  light 
either.  According  to  estimates  by  the  OECD  in  its  report  entitled  Looking  to  2060,  the 
German economy will generate the second slowest growth of all 42 countries in the study in 
the period up to 2030, and the slowest growth up to 2060. Per capita growth looks somewhat 
better because of the falling population. However, here too, Germany is mired in mediocrity 
by European standards, according to the OECD. 
Faced  with these prospects,  our economic policy-makers  would do  well  to follow the path of 
sustained growth all the more vigorously and hence to fight back. To this end, measures need to 
be taken which heighten the ability primarily of the private sector to adapt, innovate and invest. 
There are ultimately a number of different approaches towards achieving those objectives. 
These  include  the  areas  I  have  already  looked  at,  namely  the  labour  market,  immigration, 
education and the capacity to innovate. To this list I would add the physical infrastructure. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  an  efficient  infrastructure  is  vital  for  economic  development. 
International  comparisons  show  that  Germany  does  indeed  have  a  good  infrastructure 
overall, particularly in the transport sector. However, if we turn our attention away from the 
overall  picture  to  the  details  of  the  individual  components,  shortcomings  or  constraints  in 
infrastructure are clearly evident in some regions, while overcapacities may exist elsewhere. 
In the public debate, clear calls have been made for higher investment expenditure. But in 
order  to  use  taxpayers’  money  prudently  and  maximise  the  value  added  for  society,  more 
public funds should be spent only after thoroughly weighing up the costs and benefits of a 
specific infrastructure project. Not every investment undertaking is worth the money, as you 
as entrepreneurs know all too well. And that applies to public investment as much as it does 
to private investment. 
At the same time, higher public investment spending should be counter-financed by making 
savings  elsewhere.  Because  demographic  change  also  makes  heavy  demands  of  public 
finance – and I will come back to that in a moment. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  promote  growth  and  competition  more  strongly  also  requires 
measures  that  make  business  start-ups  easier  and  remove  barriers  to  market  entry.  A 
constituent element of our market economy is that enterprises must also be allowed to fail 
and, in consequence, to exit the market. At the end of the day, only if entrepreneurs are held 
liable for their business decisions will they make those decisions responsibly. 
Yet it is crucial for market processes that new enterprises step in to replace those that fail. 
The  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter,  who  died  in  1950,  called  this  concept  “creative 
destruction”. Where  no  new  businesses  are  set  up,  however,  a  market  economy  loses  its 
creativity – with negative implications for innovation and growth as well as for employment 
and income opportunities. 
There is still considerable scope in Germany to facilitate new business start-ups, as is shown 
–  for  instance  –  by  the  table  the  World  Bank  prepares  once  a  year  as  part  of  its  Doing 
Business  report.  In  the  sub-category  of  the  report  that  compares  the  time,  cost  and 
procedures  involved  in  setting  up  a  new  business,  Germany  ranks  a  lowly  114th  –  faring 
markedly worse than many other euro-area countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conversely, this means that measures to ease the process of establishing a new business 
and,  where  necessary,  of  removing  red  tape,  are  unlikely  to  cost  much  money,  yet  would 
boost growth potential appreciably. 
Ladies and gentlemen, when we talk of setting up new businesses, the question of financing 
them  is  never  far  away.  Because  young  innovative  enterprises  entail  a  higher  level  of 
economic  risk,  they  need  capital  more  than  anything  else.  From  a  growth  perspective, 
therefore, measures would probably be useful which promote investors’ willingness to put up 
venture capital. 
In this context, Europe-wide – which is to say cross-border – efforts would certainly be the most 
promising.  The  venture  capital  market  here  in  Europe  is  in  poor  shape,  unlike  in  the  United 
States,  for  example.  One  of  its  weaknesses  is  that  it  is  often  still  segmented  along  national 
borders – a situation that different investor protection and insolvency regimes help to perpetuate. 
And with regard to the willingness to raise capital, the fact that business tax laws in Germany 
provide for different tax treatment of debt and equity capital is not very helpful either. 
Moreover, growth forces could be mobilised by applying at the European level the principles 
of  the  single  market  more  strongly  to  the  market  for  services,  and  by  bringing  the  single 
market into the digital age. 
Public finances under increasing pressure 
4 
Ladies and gentlemen, strengthening growth forces is also an issue of great relevance for 
public finances, as they, too, will feel the severe impact of demographic trends – and not only 
because  the  politically  crucial  median  voter  is going to grow  older,  which  could  incentivise 
policy-makers to shift burdens into the future. 
Despite the great complexity of the issue when viewed in detail, I can be rather brief here as the 
overall  picture  is  quickly  summed  up.  On  the  one  side  of  the  picture  are  the  revenues:  in 
Germany, the working-age population bear the brunt of the government’s financing burden in 
the form of taxes and social contributions. On the expenditure side, the simple fact of the matter 
is that those of retirement age tend to be net recipients of government benefit payments. 
Because of the ageing of the population I have just talked about and the effects it is likely to 
have on economic growth, public revenues will grow more slowly in future. At the same time, 
expenditure  will  rise  as  a  result  of  demographic  change.  The  bottom  line  is  that  public 
finances  will  come  under  increasing  strain  and,  in  the  absence  of  adjustments,  are  not 
sustainable. The options are either higher social contribution burdens or more debt. 
As the German Council of Economic Experts explains in its latest annual report, public debt 
in 2060 would total around 247 per cent of aggregate output unless changes were made to 
the  status  quo.  By  way  of  comparison:  at  the  end  of  2013,  it  was  estimated  at  just  under 
77%, However, to continue building up new debt would be, as Kurt Beidenkopf, the former 
Minister President of Saxony, once put it, “tantamount to issuing bills of exchange which my 
grandchildren will pay off”. 
It  is  therefore  evident  that  there  is  no  way  around  a  more  stringent  fiscal  policy  and 
corresponding reforms to ensure that public finances remain on a sound footing. Against this 
backdrop, the retirement age should not be lowered, but ought gradually to be lifted. In fact, it 
would be worth considering carrying out such a measure in future subject to certain rules, for 
example by adjusting the retirement age according to further life expectancy. 
5 
Demographic trends, the independence of monetary policy and the culture of 
stability 
Ladies and gentlemen, faced with the far-reaching economic repercussions of demographic 
change, we must assume that it will have implications for monetary policy, too. Although the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  ECB Governing Council defines the monetary policy for the entire euro area, meaning that 
country-specific developments only have an indirect influence, I would like to say a few brief 
words about potential monetary policy problems. There is justification in that because all the 
large euro-area countries will be affected by an ageing society. 
Given  the  growing  strain  on  public  finances  that  I  spoke  of  a  few  minutes  ago,  there  is  a 
danger that monetary policy will also experience greater political pressure to safeguard the 
government’s  solvency.  What  I  mean  is  that  the  central  bank  could  be  pressured  into 
pursuing  a  laxer  monetary  policy,  primarily  one  of  low  interest  rates,  to  keep  government 
financing costs as low as possible. In this way, an increase in the real debt burden would at 
least be curbed via higher inflation. 
In  an  extreme  scenario,  this  could  even  lead  to  a  situation  known  as  “fiscal  dominance”, 
whereby monetary policy is harnessed to the service of fiscal policy and made to subordinate 
its policy to the interests of government financing. Price stability could suffer as a result. Both 
theory  and  practice  teach  us  that  in  a  stability-oriented  economic  order,  the  distribution  of 
roles should be quite the opposite. 
This means that the task of fiscal policy-makers is to see to sound public finances, leaving 
the central bank free to focus its monetary policy, with as few restrictions as possible, on its 
own primary task of ensuring monetary stability. After all, stable money benefits everyone. 
This  is  something the founders  of  monetary  union  also  realised. Indeed,  the  Eurosystem’s 
independence and the fiscal policy rules that are enshrined in the treaties of the European 
Union are designed to allow the Eurosystem to concentrate on safeguarding price stability. 
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Eurosystem’s  independence  is  an  important  pillar  for  stable 
money. Yet independence and commitment to stability aren’t worth very much if this principle 
is not shared by the population as well. Otmar Issing, who was a member of the Directorate 
of the Bundesbank and went on to become the ECB’s chief economist, once said that every 
society eventually gets the rate of inflation that it deserves – and that it ultimately wanted. 
Demographic change, too, can play a role in this context. 
It seems reasonable to suppose that an ageing population would attach greater importance 
to  monetary  stability,  as  they  would  not  want  to  see  the  savings  accumulated  during  their 
working  life  and  their  current  pension  benefits  eaten  up  by  inflation.  The  findings  of  a 
Bundesbank study indicate – at least for Germany and the euro area – that older investors 
hold a greater share of assets that would be devalued through inflation. 
Thus,  if  an  ageing  society  really  does  develop  a  stronger  aversion  to  inflation,  a  stability-
oriented monetary policy can look forward to growing support. Monetary policy-makers will 
then be better able to stick to a course of monetary stability. 
Ultimately, then, we are seeing two opposite effects – political pressure driven by rising debt 
and a growing aversion to inflation demonstrated by the ageing societies of the euro area. 
Conclusion 
6 
Ladies and gentlemen, Mark Twain once said that it’s a terrible death to be talked to death. 
So  let  me  leave  you  with  the  image  of  the  rowing  boat  I  mentioned  earlier.  Because 
demographic change means that there will be fewer and fewer people to do the rowing, it is 
imperative that the economic policy direction we are rowing in is the right one. 
Measures that promote growth, productivity and technological progress and measures that 
contribute to the consolidation of public finances are the right course to take. 
Thank you for your attention. I now look forward to answering your questions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
