  Yves Mersch: Capital markets union – the “why” and the “how” 
Dinner speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the joint EIB-IMF high-level workshop, Brussels, 22 October 2014. 
 Dear Mr Tănăsescu (Mihai Tănăsescu, Board Member of the EIB), 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In  four  days’  time,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  will  disclose  the  results  of  its 
comprehensive  assessment  of  banks’  balance  sheets  –  what  we  have  called  a  financial 
health check. This will mark the end of a tremendous effort by both banks and supervisors. 
Around 6,000 experts have been working full-time over the past twelve months to review the 
balance  sheets  of  130  banks  in  the  euro  area  and  Lithuania.  Together,  these  banks 
represent roughly 85% of total bank assets in the euro area. 
One reason you are here tonight may be not only the dinner but also that you would like me 
to let you in on the secret of the numbers we will publish at noon on Sunday. 
I am afraid I have to keep you on the edge of your seats for four more days. Before we can 
disclose  the  outcome,  we  have  to  give  banks  the  opportunity  to  review  their  results  and 
prepare for publication. That review period will start tomorrow. 
What  we  already  know  is  that  the  banks  that  will  fall  under  our  direct  supervision  have 
strengthened  their  balance  sheets  by  almost  €203bn  since  the  summer  of  2013.  This 
includes €59.8bn of gross equity issuance, €31.6bn issuance of contingent convertible bonds 
(CoCos), €26bn of retained earnings, €18.3bn of asset sales, €17.6bn of one-off items and 
additional provisioning and about €50bn of other measures. 
These  numbers  show  that  even  before  the  results  are  announced,  the  comprehensive 
assessment  is  delivering  on  its  objective  of  repairing  and  strengthening  banks’  balance 
sheets as the ECB takes on its new supervisory responsibilities. 
But  tonight,  I  would  like  to  look  beyond  Sunday  to  the  bigger  picture  surrounding  the 
comprehensive assessment. What some perceive as a burdensome exercise, analysing very 
technical aspects of bank balance sheets, is in reality a display of the ambition to create a 
more integrated financial market in Europe. 
The comprehensive assessment is an important prerequisite and foundation for the Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  which  will  start  operating  on  4  November.  Together,  they 
constitute a sea change in Europe’s banking markets. For the first time, common legislation 
and rules will be applied by a single authority, strongly increasing transparency and banks’ 
comparability across countries. 
But we must recognise that we have not reached the end of the journey. A single supervisor 
can  more  easily  ensure  comparability  where  there  are  single  rules.  Remember  the 
discussion about the different national definitions of non-performing loans in the context of 
the asset quality review. This is a telling example that the singleness of Europe’s financial 
market is still challenged by piecemeal national rules and standards. 
In addition to banking supervision, there is a second area where fragmentation of Europe’s 
financial market remains a stumbling block. Seven years after the first shock waves of the 
financial  crisis  and  two  years  after  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  economic 
recovery is still some way off: euro area real GDP remained unchanged between the first and 
second quarters of this year. Unemployment is still at 11.5%. Prices in September rose by 
only 0.3% – and measures of inflation expectations have gone down. 
To restart growth, we must open financing channels, especially for small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs). And this can best happen when financial markets are fully integrated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the light of these various concerns, the aspiration to complete the single financial market 
has  returned  to  the  top  of  the  agenda  –  and  quite  rightly  so.  The  latest  focus  for  this 
discussion is the creation of a European capital markets union. 
Why a capital markets union? 
Expectations  for  the  project  of  a  capital  markets  union  are  high.  But  to  date,  there  is  no 
common understanding of what it means or what it should look like. For the financial industry, 
it means new business opportunities; for financial stability experts, it means better control of 
shadow banking; and for entrepreneurs, it means better access to funding sources. 
As  central  banker,  I  would  stress  another  major  advantage  of  more  integrated  financial 
markets in the euro area: it would greatly facilitate the implementation of the ECB’s monetary 
policy. 
We are clearly at the beginning of the discussion of a capital markets union. But l believe that 
a broad public discussion is exactly what we need to generate ideas and start the opinion-
forming process. I therefore welcome the fact that Lord Hill has announced his intention to 
consult  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders  and  conduct  analyses  before  presenting  more 
concrete proposals. I too do not have a ready-made blueprint in my bottom drawer. 
It  is  time  to  spell  out  more  clearly  what  we  want  and  what  we  do  not  need,  what  we  can 
achieve and what we should not attempt. This way we can prevent the capital markets union 
from becoming a ‘Jack of all trades, master of none’. 
In my view, the various motivations for a capital markets union can be summarised under two 
main objectives: 
On the one hand, we need to find ways to generate growth. In a way, the euro area economy 
is like a plane flying on only one engine: bank financing. To increase the speed and stability 
of the plane, it would be good to add a second engine: capital market financing. Hence, we 
must  seek  to  deepen  capital  markets  so  that  they  can  play  a  more  important  role  in 
supporting the real economy. And  we must name areas where removing frictions between 
national markets can bring new business. 
On the other hand, we  need to ensure financial stability  in the longer term. An impressive 
amount  of  regulation  has  been  introduced  since  the  crisis  began,  tackling  several 
fundamental problems in our regulatory set-up. Indeed, the crisis showed that our initial rules 
were in some areas too lax and too heterogeneous across countries to ensure the stability 
and singleness of Europe’s financial market. At the same time, we should avoid excesses: 
more regulation does not always mean more stability. 
In  many  instances,  the  two  objectives  of  growth  and  financial  stability  complement  each 
other. I believe that greater integration of markets can be key to both. Fifteen years after the 
financial  services  action  plan,  it  is  time  for  another  big  step  forward  for  Europe’s  single 
financial market. 
How to implement a capital markets union? 
So  what  measures  do  we  need  to  take  to  achieve  these  objectives?  To  my  mind,  a 
comprehensive capital markets union requires thinking along three dimensions. 
The first is the opening of the market itself: in this regard, we have already achieved a great 
deal within the EU. The second is the introduction of common regulatory standards. And the 
third consists of the institutional structures that enforce these regulatory standards. 
I  will  elaborate  on  the  second  dimension  and  also  make  some  remarks  on  the  third 
dimension. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Regulatory dimension 
Let me first address the regulatory dimension. Financial markets are complex systems with 
many different players, products, infrastructures and currencies. As a consequence, financial 
markets are at the intersection of many different fields of legal rules, including contract law, 
corporate governance, capital requirements, insolvency, taxation and consumer protection. 
To ensure that a single financial market delivers growth and stability, all of these fields need 
to be taken into account. Let me illustrate this for the financial market segment that is the 
focus  of  this  high-level  workshop.  To  revive  the  securitisation  market  and  to  ensure  its 
stability,  there  are  three  regulatory  fields  where  I  believe  that  action  is  necessary:  ABS 
regulation;  insolvency  law;  and  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Let  me  discuss  each  in 
turn. 
ABS regulation 
The  first  key  challenge  for  the  securitisation  market  is  the  lack  of  standardisation  at  the 
European  level  and  the  heavy  capital  charges  for  an  asset  class  that  have  been  set 
internationally. Take the ABS market, which we have been looking closely at for some time. 
We believe that it could be an important channel for increased lending to SMEs. 
Because  of  their  size,  SMEs  generally  cannot  issue  bonds.  In  addition,  the  risk  of  non-
payment and the low liquidity of loans to SMEs in difficult times are major hurdles for SMEs 
to get financing, even through the banking channel. In this regard, securitisation can help to 
connect SME financing needs with the funds of bank and non-bank investors. It can do so by 
assisting banks’ ability to fund and distribute risk. Here we believe that having a consistent 
approach  to  securitisation  underpinning  various  pieces  of  legislation  is  key  to  attracting  a 
broader investor base and to de-stigmatising European securitisations. 
Let  me  say  clearly:  no  one  wants  to  have  the  complex,  opaque  products  of  the  pre-crisis 
years. Repackaging the umpteenth tranche of a financial derivative should be a thing of the 
past.  But  the  regulatory  framework  should  be  appropriate  for  the  actual  risk.  And  in  this 
respect  there  are  significant  differences  between  current  and  previous  securitisations  and 
between the US and European experiences. 
Since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  default  rates  of  European  ABS  were  on  average  between 
0.6%  and  1.5%.  In  the  US  over  the  same  period,  they  were  on  average  9.3%  to  18.4%. 
European SME ABS are even further below these default rates, at about 0.1%. It makes little 
sense to calibrate the international rules solely on the basis of US experiences. It would be 
like calibrating the price of flood insurance for Madrid on the experience of New Orleans. 
The  current  rules  lump  all  ABS  together  and  are  much  too  conservative.  They  effectively 
question their existence. 
Under  the  current  regulatory  conditions,  simple,  transparent  ABS  built  on  real  assets  face 
almost  as  many  constraints  as  much  more  complex  financial  products.  The  ECB  has 
therefore, in cooperation with the Bank of England, made a number of proposals for a better 
functioning European securitisation market. We have received positive responses from the 
Commission and the Member States. 
The proposals are derived in part from the quality and transparency requirements that central 
banks  place  on  ABS,  which  can  be  deposited  as  collateral  in  monetary  policy  operations. 
And as a central bank, our demands have always been very high. 
Let me add, that in this regard, the ABS market is a good example of how a capital markets 
union  can  also  benefit  our  monetary  policy,  besides  generating  growth  and  promoting 
financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Insolvency law 
The  second  regulatory  obstacle  for  a  single  market  for  securitised  products  is  the 
heterogeneity  of  insolvency  rules  across  the  EU.  This  applies  to  both  financial  and  non-
financial  companies.  The  Council  Regulation  on  cross-border  insolvency  proceedings 
establishes  a  common  framework  of  basic  rules  regarding  the  competent  courts,  the 
applicable law and the recognition of court decisions. But within this framework, national laws 
differ substantially in how far they protect the different stakeholders in insolvency. 
For example, the rights of preferential creditors differ substantially in some cases. Different 
prescriptions on the filing and verification of claims can also cause frictions. Heterogeneity 
becomes  all  the  more  important  in  dealing  with  the  insolvency  of  multi-national  enterprise 
groups.  All  in  all,  the  heterogeneity  of  insolvency  rules  complicates  the  creation  of 
homogenous asset pools and therefore the securitisation process. The Commission proposal 
to review the Regulation on cross-border insolvency makes suggestions how to improve this 
situation in the right direction. 
Payment and settlement systems 
The third regulatory challenge for the securitisation market is the field of payment systems 
and securities settlement. Despite much progress over the past decade, securities settlement 
in the euro area remains fragmented, inefficient and not very customer-friendly. This is not 
just  a  problem  for  smaller  businesses,  for  which  adapting  to  different  conditions  in  the 
Member  States  often  entails  high  costs,  but  also  for  the  integration  and  functioning  of  the 
single  market  as  a  whole.  A  striking  comparison  is  often  made  with  the  US,  an  economic 
area of comparable size: settling a cross-border securities transaction in Europe has been 
estimated to cost at least ten times as much as in the US! 
This issue can be solved by establishing European market infrastructures for the processing 
of  securities  transactions,  as  well  as  a  coordinated  and  more  harmonised  monitoring  of 
critical  market  infrastructures.  In  all  these  areas,  in  which  the  Eurosystem  is  competent, 
relevant  initiatives  were  launched  several  years  ago  and  have  already  made  significant 
progress. 
For example, Target2Securities is the Eurosystem’s response to the high fragmentation that 
characterises the infrastructure supporting capital markets in Europe. T2S will be a new IT 
platform  performing the real-time  settlement  of  securities transactions  against  central  bank 
money  across  European  borders.  T2S  will  settle  all  securities,  both  debt  securities  and 
equities. The T2S platform is now fully developed. This year is reserved for testing and it is 
set to go live in June 2015. This will be a major event with a strong impact on the financial 
services industry in Europe. 
All  of  this  applies  fully  to  ABS  markets.  Their  settlement  infrastructure  will  become  more 
integrated and overcome obstacles that have so far hindered cross-border trade. 
The standardisation of ABS, further harmonisation of insolvency laws and the integration of 
settlement  systems  are  three  illustrations  from  the  securitisation  market  showing  how  the 
regulatory  dimension  of  a  capital  markets  union  can  achieve  progress  by  accelerating 
existing initiatives and launching additional ones. 
More  generally,  the  regulatory  dimension  implies  both  a  deepening  and  broadening  of  the 
single  rulebook.  Deepening  means  that  prudential  rules  should  converge  further  where 
undue carve outs remain. Broadening means that the single rulebook should be expanded to 
other areas that affect the single financial market. 
Institutional dimension 
Beyond  the  regulatory  dimension  of  a  capital  markets  union,  there  are  a  number  of 
institutional  questions 
to  consistency  across  market  segments,  multi-level 
governance, actors and geographical scope. 
related 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As  regards  consistency,  we  need  to  ask  ourselves:  how  much  integration  do  we  need 
beyond  the  banking  system?  If  banking  supervision  is  becoming  European,  can  payment 
systems  continue  to  be  monitored  nationally?  What  about  new  technologies?  Do  we  wait 
until they are established in the old national frameworks before we try to negotiate mutual 
acceptance, or harmonisation, or should we foster creativity and efficiency by offering from 
the outset a Europe-wide single framework? 
As regards multi-level governance, we must identify the areas in which the EU can take the 
initiative and those in which the Member States can be active. Can we rely on directives with 
national leeway in their implementation or do we need to make use of Regulations that are 
directly applicable? 
As regards actors, there is the question of where we should rely on decentralised application 
of common rules and where we need institutions at EU level to implement common rules? 
What functions  could  be  performed, for  example,  by  the  European  supervisory  authorities, 
whose activities and tasks are currently being reviewed in Brussels? 
As  regards  geographical  scope,  it  is  important  that  we  strive  to  make  the  capital  markets 
union a project of the EU28 to reinforce the single financial market as a whole. Nevertheless, 
it is clear that the euro area has a particular interest in increased financial integration to pave 
the road towards a genuine monetary and economic union. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. Some may argue that the capital markets union is old wine in new bottles. I 
disagree. What is old are the problems that we need to overcome. But for that we need new 
measures that we have not previously been able to implement – either because of a lack of 
political will or because of an insufficiently clear plan on how to implement them. Art. 114 of 
the TFEU gives a clear mandate for this purpose. 
The  capital  markets  union  is  not  so  much  about  a  couple  of  high-profile  actions  but  more 
about a larger series of less visible initiatives. And that is why we need the capital markets 
union  as  connector  and  label.  To  operate  with  this  term  will  help  to  raise  awareness,  to 
define overall objectives, to prioritise resources and to ensure consistency of the individual 
measures. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The overall situation of the European economy makes it abundantly clear that we cannot wait 
for a miracle to end a period of low growth. We are not out of the danger zone. The patient is 
still fragile and unfortunately relapses cannot be ruled out. 
As I have explained, a capital markets union can provide very important impulses for both 
economic  recovery  and  financial  stability.  I  am  aware  that  some  of  the  proposals  are 
ambitious and cannot be implemented overnight. But the fact that the incoming President of 
the  European  Commission  has  already  taken  up  the  idea  makes  me  optimistic.  The 
challenge in the coming months will be to create greater political awareness of the enormous 
importance of this highly technical area for Europe’s economy. 
At the same time, I want to point out that a capital markets union cannot be our only area of 
action. Financial policy, fiscal policy and economic policy are all equally important to keep the 
recovery on track. Governance of the euro area can be thought of like the gearbox of a car. 
The  cogs  do  not  all  need  to  be  of  equal  size  but  they  all  need  to  be  moving  in  the  same 
direction. If only one cog starts going the wrong way, the whole car grinds to a halt. Non-
respect of agreed rules by some is clearly establishing moral hazard risks for the actions of 
others. 
Many  things  in  the  euro  area  need  to  come  together  to  create  an  environment  in  which 
businesses  and  entrepreneurs  can  generate  added  value.  Ernest  Solvay,  after  whom  the 
library  in  which  the  workshop  will  take  place  tomorrow  is  named,  provides  us  with  a  good 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  example. In the early 1860s, he had a brilliant  idea for the industrial production of sodium 
carbonate.  But  it  took  the  perseverance  of  several  financiers  and  ten  years  before  the 
process was ready to be used on an industrial scale. And Solvay relied on a patent to protect 
the intellectual property that ultimately formed the basis of his corporate success. 
Over 150 years later, a capital markets union can help the Ernest Solvays of today. It can 
enable all Europe’s entrepreneurs to obtain the financing they need to turn their innovative 
ideas into successful businesses that will create jobs and promote sustained prosperity. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
