  
 
Frank Elderson: 2014 PIN Agreement – incentive for socially efficient and 
innovative payments 
Speech by Mr Frank Elderson, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, on the occasion 
of the signing of Further Agreement II (“the PIN Agreement 2014”), The Hague, Ministry of 
Finance, 3 September 2014. 
Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, 
 PIN Agreement 2014 crowning glory of cooperation of market parties 
As  chairman  of  the  National  Forum on  the  Payment  System,  I  am  very  pleased  about the 
Further Agreement II that was signed just now. 
This  agreement,  also  known  as  the  PIN  Agreement,  is  an  up-to-date  adaptation  of  the 
objectives stated in the original Covenant dating back to 2005. 
That  meaningful  Covenant  at  the  time  paved  the  way  for  banks  and  joint  retailers  to 
encourage  consumers  to  use  their  debit  cards  in  order  to  reduce  the  social  costs  of  the 
payment system. Because, as we all know, cash is expensive. 
That  said,  I  would  like  to  stress  here  that  banknotes  and  coins  will  continue  to  play  an 
essential role in payment transfers, and will therefore continue to be at everyone’s disposal. 
The 2005 Covenant cleared the air between the market participants. 
This was urgently required following the heated debate about the social costs and revenues 
of payments, and the question where these end up. 
The mutual understanding that cooperation and trust pays off was at the root of a series of 
measures to promote debit card use. 
And  not  without  results.  The  sectors  not  keeping  pace  with  the  introduction  of  payment 
terminals have since also started using them, and smaller amounts can now be paid by debit 
card virtually everywhere. 
Yet more debit card payments 
And today the era of the 2014 PIN Agreement has started. 
One billion extra debit card payments should definitely be feasible by 2018. 
This would bring the total to 3.7 billion, and would surpass the number of cash payments at 
the till.  
The Foundation for the Promotion of Efficient Payments has proved that it is very capable of 
producing tangible plans to achieve this. 
Progress in minimising disturbances in payments systems 
But users of course think that electronic payment systems should always work. That is a bit 
much to ask as it is simply inherently unachievable. 
For that matter, the market participants represented in the National Forum on the Payment 
System have made great efforts to further increase the robustness and safety of payments 
transfers, partly in response to last year’s repeated disturbances of payment systems. 
For instance, almost the entire PIN chain has a fall-back facility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   and  numerous  other  measures  were  implemented  to  guarantee  that  debit  card 
payments go through without fail, and 
the introduction of the Connect reporting system has improved communications and 
guidance among banks, providers, and retailers when payment systems fail. 
 In  addition  to  this,  the  Forum  is  working  hard  on  initiatives  to  reduce  the  dependencies 
between online banking, mobile banking and iDEAL. 
This will definitely be discussed at the Foundation’s autumn meeting. 
PIN Agreement 2014 prelude to European efficiency and innovation 
With the introduction of IBAN, European payment transfers and European direct debits, the 
migration to the Single Euro Payments Area was successfully completed on 1 August 2014. 
In 2012, SEPA had already been brought closer when the magnetic strip on bank cards was 
replaced by the EMV chip. 
You all made an impressive contribution to the successful migration to SEPA, which warrants 
a well-deserved compliment from De Nederlandsche Bank. 
But SEPA is only the start of efficiency in payments transfers. 
We are on the brink of a new payments world in which businesses, retailers and consumers 
will be able to reap the benefits of the European market even more. 
Road clear for innvations 
The  2014  PIN  Agreement  has  provided  an  excellent  stimulus  by  explicitly  promoting 
innovation. 
It  builds  on  the  rapid  technological  innovations  and  the  quickly  changing  consumer 
preferences and market conditions. 
To  my  mind,  the  Dutch  Agreement  is  an  example  that  the  Netherlands  can  convey  to  the 
single European payments market. 
This will not be done overnight. 
Changes to the large European market require great commitment from market participants. 
To streamline these changes, the Euro Retail Payments Board, the ERPB was launched last 
May with a view to SEPA. 
This  new  European  payments governance  body  may  grow  into  a  European  version  of  the 
Forum  on  the  Payment  System  with  users  and  suppliers  working  together  on  the  further 
development of SEPA. 
The ERPB therefore definitely deserves the chance to prove itself in the years ahead. 
Contactless paying may be generally adopted a few years from now 
Currently half of all bank cards and over one tenth of the 280,000 payment terminals have 
been equipped for contactless payment. 
The latest generation of smartphones can also be used for contactless payments. 
Particularly for payments up to EUR 25 – the most frequent ones – this saves a lot of time, 
as they take nine seconds as opposed to 20 seconds for contact payments. 
If we assume that some two billion debit card payment up to EUR 25 will be made by 2018, 
this means that a total of 500,000 hours of queuing up to pay will be saved. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With this enormous advantage, most payment terminals ought to be adapted to contactless 
payment within the next couple of years. 
Contactless  payment  is  already  a  success  in  other  countries  and  may  really  take  off  in 
Europe. 
Also  prompted  by  the  societal  and  political  call  to  up the  speed  of  payment  transfers,  and 
create  the  possibility  to  make  payments  at  all  days  and  hours  of  the  year,  the  Forum  is 
working together with the Covenant parties on a plan to be presented at its autumn meeting 
on 21 November 2014. 
I’m already looking forward to it, as this plan may even spark real-time payment transfers. 
This will in fact also demand comprehensive renewal of the payments infrastructure, which 
will have to be paid for. 
In  fact,  the  call  for  faster  payments  transfers  has  already  led  to  tangible  improvements  in 
Sweden, Denmark, the UK, and Australia. 
So payments transfers are on the brink of numerous innovations. 
The agreement that was just signed is an excellent response to this and is decidedly forward-
looking. On the road to state-of-the art European payments. 
I call on all parties to include the agreement in the ERPB debates to work on new European 
payments 
products. 
DNB will also do this, of course. 
This requires from all representative organisations, and in fact from us all, the willingness to 
take a more European perspective, and work closely together at a European level. 
We will now bring the national representative organisations and the European ones closer 
together. 
I look forward to a near future, in which European retailers, businesses and consumers will 
be  even  more  able  to  reap  the  benefits  of  a  safe,  robust,  socially  efficient  and  innovative 
payments system. 
This is in fact also one of the stated objectives of the Economic and Monetary Union. 
I  sincerely  congratulate  the  signatories,  and  with  them  essentially  all  retailers,  consumers 
and banks, on the start of the innovative European payments era. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
