  
 
S S Mundra: Strong financial services sector – imperative for sustainable 
growth 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
ICAI International Conference “Accountancy Profession: Spearheading Excellence”, Indore, 
9 August 2015. 
Assistance provided by Shri Sanjeev Prakash is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Good Morning to you all! 
1. 
I am pleased to be here this morning to speak to the delegates of this International 
Conference and I thank ICAI for providing me this opportunity. As you all know, the theme of 
this morning’s session is “Financial Services Sector- Agenda for Sustainable Growth” and as 
somebody  who  has  spent  his  entire  professional  life  in  the  banking  sector  –  first  as  a 
commercial banker and now as a Central banker, I would speak with a particular emphasis 
on banking sector. 
Introduction 
2. 
Let me begin by taking you back to South Korea of the year 1997. The “grey-haired” 
amongst you would recall that in the period leading up to 1997, the Korean economy as also 
the other “tiger” economies in the South East Asian Region had expanded by 6% to 10% on 
an  annual  basis.  Buoyed  by  expectations  of  rapid  growth  and  expansion,  the  chaebols 
(family-owned  business  conglomerates)  in  Korea  had  raised  significant amounts  of foreign 
funds for investment in building industrial capacity. However, as the economic growth slowed 
down,  the  debt  problem  started  to  accentuate  and  one  of  the  chaebols,  Hanbo  collapsed 
under  a  $6  billion  debt  load.  The  company  had  decided  in  1993  to  build  the  world’s  fifth 
largest steel plant and there was cost escalation of the project from Won 2,700 bn to Won 
5,700  bn  while  the  steel  demand  had turned  sluggish. The  situation  deteriorated further  in 
July 1997 when Kia, Korea’s third largest car company asked for an emergency bank loan to 
avoid  bankruptcy.  These  events  prompted  international  credit  agencies  to  downgrade  the 
ratings of Korean banks with heavy exposure to the chaebols and thus, began the financial 
meltdown in Korea. 
3. 
Of course what is widely known as the “Asian Financial Crisis” had begun earlier on 
February 5th, 1997 in Thailand when a Thai property developer failed to make a scheduled 
interest  payment  on  its  eurobond  loan.  The  business  model  of  financial  institutions  in 
Thailand was built around issuing eurobonds denominated in US dollars to benefit from the 
interest  rate  differential  between  dollar  denominated  debt  and  Thai  debt  and  using  the 
proceeds  to  fund  property  development.  By  January  1998,  the  stock  markets  in  many  of 
these economies had lost over 70% of their value, currencies also depreciated by a similar 
extent and many had to seek IMF assistance. 
4. 
My  purpose  in  beginning  the  address  by  narrating  these  events  is  to  highlight 
typically  how  problems  unfold  in  a  crisis.  The  problem  often  begins  with  banks  taking 
excessive exposure (concentration) to a particular sector or sectors, the corporate increasing 
their leverage manifold and investing in creating excess capacities. Unraveling of the risks 
could perhaps still be managed if the banks’ capital positions were strong, but if that is not 
the  case,  risk  manifests  itself  in  all  its  dimensions.  Leveraged  positions  created  out  of 
borrowed money from abroad for funding growth in domestic markets add another twist to 
the  tale.  Once  home  currency  depreciates,  debt  servicing  becomes  a  challenge  for 
corporates holding large unhedged positions. If there are large scale borrowings by various 
corporates, this debt crisis could easily degenerate into a full-blown currency crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  5. 
The Financial Crises typically take the form of currency, debt or banking crisis and 
have severe consequences for the economy. A question that begs an answer at this stage is 
why financial crises happen? There are, of course, many reasons – some economic, some 
social  and  some  political.  While  we  would  leave  a  detailed  discussion  on  this  issue  for 
another  day,  suffice  to  say  at  this  stage  that  the  origin  of  all  crises  can  be  traced  to  a 
weakness  in  the  underlying  structure  and  an  all-round failure  to  exercise  self-restraint  and 
lack of adherence to the established framework. In fact, the ground for the 2008 Financial 
Crisis was created by a prolonged period of easy monetary policy, consequent mispricing of 
risks,  a  search  for  yield  by  the  market  intermediaries  and  an  inadequate  supervision  over 
market behavior. 
India today 
6. 
Looking  at  the  Indian  scenario  today,  one  can’t  avoid  some  comparison  with  the 
events in the South East Asian economies of 1997–98, though the degree of severity differs 
widely. Let me take the example of the steel sector. Bank loan to the steel sector in India has 
witnessed a 21% CAGR over the past five years and broadly ranges between 4 to 9 % of 
individual bank’s loan book. Banks’ total exposure to the steel sector stands at Rs. 3 lakh 
crore while the net sales for the companies within the sector also stands at around Rs. 3 lakh 
crore with an EBIDTA of Rs. 37000 crore. The level of stressed assets in the sector exceeds 
27%. Large capacities are lying idle as global/domestic demand conditions have weakened. 
Further  the  capacity  expansion  has  been  done  using  excessive  leverage.  These  pointers 
definitely raise concerns. 
Excessive  leverage  by  the  borrowing  corporates  is  not  limited  to  the  steel  sector 
7. 
alone. The Global Financial Stability Report released by IMF recently has noted that 36.9 per 
cent of India’s total debt is at risk, which is among the highest in the emerging economies, 
while India’s banks have only 7.9 per cent loss absorbing buffer, which is among the lowest. 
An analysis of a sample of 3,700 companies by Credit Suisse has highlighted that 37% of the 
debt held by these companies is with companies having Interest Coverage less than 1.There 
may be valid questions around the assumptions made in deriving these conclusions, but the 
underlying direction cannot be ignored. 
What are the consequences of a weak financial sector? 
8. 
Let  me  answer  it  differently.  Financial  sector  facilitates  risk-sharing  by  reducing 
information  and  transactions  costs.  A  strong  financial  sectors  characterized  by  strong 
financial intermediaries and wider and deeper financial markets. In a strong financial sector, 
the liquidity and maturity transformation amongst the borrowers and savers happens in the 
most efficient manner. In such a market, savers are confident in handing over their surplus 
funds to the financial intermediaries which can then be borrowed and invested for creation of 
productive assets at the least cost. This can create multiplier effect and generate wealth and 
prosperity  for  both  savers  and  borrowers  and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Particularly  in 
case  of  EMEs,  where  credit  market  is  typically  bank-led,  an  efficient  resource  allocation 
framework  is  central  to  Governments’  efforts  towards  employment  generation  and  poverty 
eradication. On the contrary, a weak financial sector consisting of weaker intermediaries and 
shallow  financial  markets  would  invariably  be  prone  to  crisis  resulting  from  inefficient 
resource allocation and disproportionate risk-taking behavior. So, typically, a weak financial 
sector would have highly leveraged corporates and/or over indebted individuals. Absence of 
a  strong  financial  sector  also  drives  individuals  towards  dissaving  or  moving  into  physical 
assets  which  retards  investment  and  consequently  growth  besides  building  up  asset  price 
bubbles. 
9. 
A weak financial system can have deleterious consequences for the economy and 
the country. Dallas Federal Reserve researchers Tyler Atkinson, David Luttrell and Harvey 
Rosenblum in their paper “How Bad Was It? The Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Financial Crisis” observe that the crisis was associated with a huge loss of economic output 
and  financial  wealth,  psychological  consequences  and  skill  atrophy  from  extended 
unemployment,  an  increase  in  government  intervention,  and  other  significant  costs.  Their 
estimate of total loss for the US economy alone is nearly $ 14 trillion, which is nearly 7 times 
India’s GDP. 
10. 
The quarterly  report  of March  2012  of  the  Special  Inspector  General for  Troubled 
Assets  Relief  Program  (TARP)  in  the  US  puts  the  cost  of  Gross  US  Government  Bailout 
Outlays  from  the  2008  Financial  Crisis  at  $4.6  trillion,  while  the  guarantees  from  US 
Treasury,  Federal  Reserve  and  other  US  government  agencies  totalled  $16.9  trillion. 
Likewise figures released by the National Audit Office in the UK, put the cost of bailouts for 
the UK taxpayer due to the 2008 Financial Crisis alone at a peak of £955bn. 
11. 
The above numbers, thus, give a sense of the economic loss arising out of financial 
crisis. These numbers are staggering and hence, scary. As the old adage goes, “prevention 
is  better  than  cure”  and  hence,  it  is  the  endeavor  of  the  regulatory  reform  process  to 
strengthen the financial system and prepare it to withstand the force of any impending crisis. 
12. 
So,  what  all  is  being  done  to  make  the  financial  sector  and  the  banking  sector 
healthy? Before I get into the steps taken to strengthen the banking sector post crisis, I must 
highlight the monetary stimulus infused by various Governments/ Central banks across the 
developed  world.  The  monetary  policy  makers  in  the  US,  Europe,  UK  and  Japan  have  all 
followed  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  to  wriggle  their  way  out  of  recession.  But  the 
efforts have not quite borne fruit as many of these countries have not yet reached anywhere 
close to pre-crisis growth rate. Japan has, in fact, entered its third “lost decade” and is still 
stuttering  to  find  growth.  Moreover,  as  is  being  proven  now,  loose  monetary  policy  is  like 
“Chakravyuha”, the famous battle formation in the epic “Mahabharata” where it was easy to 
enter, but difficult to exit. 
13. 
Let me now turn to the reforms aimed at the banking sector. 
Global reforms 
14.  The  banks  in  Europe  and  the  USA  entered  the  financial  crisis  with  highly  –leveraged 
balance  sheets. They  were  too  thin  on  equity  and  the  balance  sheet  was  too  precariously 
placed  to  withstand  write-down  on  their  investments  in  complex  derivate  instruments.  The 
situation was somewhat better in the developing world, but even the banks in these markets 
got impacted as the pains of the real economy slowly started to inflict the financial economy. 
It  was  in  this  background  that  the  regulatory  reform  process  was  set  in  motion  by  the 
multilateral  Standard  Setting  Bodies to  undo  the  excesses  of  the  pre-crisis  era. The major 
elements of the reform process that have been implemented/ currently under negotiation are 
as under: 
• 
Basel-III  capital  prescriptions  including  capital  conservation  and  countercyclical 
buffers 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 
Leverage Ratio 
Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC),  a  work-in-progress,  which  aims  at  a 
higherloss absorbency requirements and resolution framework for G-SIBs/G-SIIIs/G-
NBNIs 
Regulation of the shadow banking sector 
Reforms of the OTC derivatives market and resolution of CCPs 
A standardized, non-modeled approach for calculating regulatory capital to resolve 
the problem of excessive variability in banks’ regulatory capital ratios (A thought) 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  • 
• 
15. 
taxpayers’ money to bailout financial institutions in the event of stress. 
Compensation– Alignment with prudent risk taking, Claw back provisions 
Transparency in benchmark setting 
The underlying objective of these reform measures is to avoid the dependence on 
Indian position 
16. 
Being a bank dominated economy, a healthy banking sector is imperative for India’s 
economic growth. RBI has been proactively  working towards development of a strong and 
efficient  banking  system  through  its  regulations.  As  member  of  the  international  Standard 
Setting Bodies, we are not only implementing the globally agreed regulatory reforms now, but 
have also been proactive in introducing macro-prudential measures like higher risk weights 
for  real  estate  exposures  of  banks,  measures  for  dealing  with  risks  emanating  from 
derivatives  and  securitization  transactions  and  spiraling  unhedged  forex  exposure  of 
corporates,  much  before  the  global  attention  was  drawn  to  such  risks.  At  RBI,  we  have 
always  been  conscious  of  the  need  for  the  regulation  to  evolve  quickly  for  addressing 
incipient risks and it is in this spirit that many of the recent reform measures have been set in 
motion. 
Recent measures taken by RBI 
17. 
An important pre-condition for banks to be able to meet their lending obligations to 
current  and  prospective  borrowers  is  that  they  remain  profitable  and  solvent.  It  is  in  this 
context that following regulatory actions have been launched in recent past which are a fair 
mix  of  both,  prudent  regulation  and  right  incentives  to  support  growth  with  proper  risk 
management: 
• 
Guidelines on “Early Recognition of Financial Distress, Prompt Steps for Resolution 
and Fair Recovery for Lenders: Framework for Revitalizing Distressed Assets in the 
Economy covering formation of Joint Lenders’ Forum (JLF), Corrective Action Plan 
(CAP), “Refinancing  of Project  Loans”,  “Sale  of  NPAs  by  Banks”  to facilitate  early 
recognition/resolution of financial distress 
Banks permitted to grant an extended debt repayment period to their borrowers in 
long-gestation projects (“5/25” scheme) 
Enabled banks to take steps for Strategic Debt Conversion (SDR) giving them right 
to convert their outstanding loans into a majority equity stake if the borrower fails to 
meet conditions stipulated under the restructuring package 
Enhanced fraud monitoring framework 
Issuance of long term infrastructure bonds to facilitate financing of long term infra 
projects 
Revoking forbearance on restructuring 
• 
Certain other regulatory measures like revision of the single/group borrower exposure limits 
and identification of D-SIBs, etc. have also been initiated. 
   Role of the auditor community in promoting sustainable growth 
18. 
Let me now turn to some messages that I would like to give the auditor community 
present  here.  First  of  all  let  me  compliment  you  for  the  very  critical  role  that  you  play  in 
keeping the banking sector healthy by auditing the balance sheets of banks and that of the 
borrowers to whom the banks lend. I would, however, begin on a light-hearted note. I quote 
former AIG Vice Chairman Jacob Frenkel, who, in the aftermath of the Financial Crisis, once 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
quipped, “The left side of the balance sheet has nothing right and the right side of the 
balance sheet has nothing left. But they are equal to each other. So accounting-wise, 
we are fine.” I am sure we don’t want our accounting system to be fine like this. 
19. 
External  auditors  play  a  vital  role  in  maintaining  market  confidence  in  audited 
financial statements. In the case of the banking industry, this role is particularly relevant to 
financial  stability  given  banks’  financial  intermediation  function  within  the  economy  as  a 
whole.  Core  Principle  27  of  the  Basel  Committee’s  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking 
Supervision (September 2012) states that “the supervisor determines that banks and banking 
groups maintain adequate and reliable records, prepare financial statements in accordance 
with accounting policies and practices that are widely accepted internationally and annually 
publish information that fairly reflects their financial condition and performance and bears an 
independent external auditor’s opinion”. 
20. 
Over the years, we have observed several accounting scandals unfold, latest in line 
being the one at Toshiba. It is understood that Toshiba would have to revise its pre-tax profit 
figures  by  ¥152bn  ($1.2bn)  over  a  seven-year  period  dating  back  to  2008.  The  amount 
involved accounts for nearly 30 per cent of the total pre-tax profit during the period. The initial 
findings  have  showed  top  executives’  involvement  in  accounting  malpractices  where  the 
inflated figures were made possible by delaying the reporting of losses and underestimating 
project  costs.  A  sustained  failure  of  this  kind  most  definitely  points  to  gaps  in  the  audit 
process. 
21. 
Another  piece  of  accounting  manipulation  was  observed  in  case  of  Rosneft,  the 
Russian state controlled energy group, which, in a bid to mitigate the effects of the rouble’s 
fall on its results, changed the way it accounted for foreign currency swings. The company 
shifted  to  recording  the  impact  of  such  fluctuations  when  they  materialized,  rather  than 
calculating the temporary effect every quarter. I am not sure how the audit community views 
this but analysts would definitely find it intriguing and not presenting a true and fair picture of 
the company’s financials. 
22. 
Auditors  are  expected  to  maintain  highest  standards  of  professional  ethics  and 
ensure  that  the  financial  statements  of  the  enterprises  they  audit,  present  a  true  and  fair 
picture  of  the  prevailing  state  of  affairs  on  an  ongoing  basis.  As  professionals,  you  must 
remain rather vigilant when auditing areas that: (a) involve significant management estimates 
and  judgments,  especially  those  measurements  involving  a  wide  range  of  measurement 
uncertainty;  (b)  involve  significant  non-recurring  or  unusual  transactions;  or  (c)  are  more 
susceptible to fraud and errors being perpetuated due to weak internal controls1. 
23. 
As  I  said  earlier,  the  lending  business  and  the  loan  appraisals  depend  almost 
entirely  on  the  balance  sheets  submitted  by  the  borrowers  and  hence,  fabricated  account 
statements  can  lead  to  erroneous  conclusions  and  unwarranted  financing  of  enterprises. 
Banks  increasingly  lean  on  the  auditors  for  undertaking  stock  and  asset  audit,  concurrent 
audit  and  forensic  audit.  While  looking  at  corporate  balance  sheet  and  to  understand  the 
level of leverage, it is important to look through the corporate structure and gearing of capital 
in downstream subsidiaries.If these tasks are accomplished proficiently, that would not only 
strengthen the banks’ financials but also help create a stronger financial sector. 
24. 
Many contend that accounting rules fueled the recent global financial crisis. While 
there  is  broad  consensus  that  accounting  rules  are  an  important  determinant  of  bank 
behavior,  it  would  be  imprudent  to  blame  a  single  factor  for  the  crisis  as  the  specific 
mechanisms and their interaction with regulatory requirements are less well understood. The 
implications  of  the  use  of  fair  value  accounting  and  the  incurred  loss  approach  of  loss 
provisioning  under  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards  (IFRS)  are  cases  in  point. 
                                                
1  BCBS Paper : External audits of banks (March 2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Both  have  been  criticized  as  contributing  to  a  pro-cyclical  behavior  in  banks’  decision 
making,  i.e.  adding  exuberance  and  fueling  investments  in  the  up-turn  and  triggering 
downward spirals and throttling investments in the down-turn of the credit cycle2. Regulation, 
on  the  contrary,  are  framed  to  last  “through  the  cycle.”  I  am,  however,  not  going  to  delve 
deeper  into  this  debate  and  would  only  focus  on  some  of  the  imponderables  which 
implementation of IFRS would throw up, especially in the Indian context. 
As the IFRS implementation date draws near, there are several pressing questions 
IFRS Implementation and the imponderables 
25. 
What  IFRS  implementation  would  entail  for  the  banking  system?  The  question  is 
how  prudential  regulation  would  exist  alongside  IFRS?  Proposed  impairment  calculations 
under IFRS, accounting for interest income on Effective Interest Rate basis and presence of 
multiple  systems  for  operation  and  accounting  of  different  portfolios  would  mean  that  IT 
systems would have to be upgraded/realigned for IFRS migration. Banks would also need to 
overcome challenges around converging policies for financial accounting and tax accounting 
for preparation of financial statements. 
26. 
for which answers would need to be found. 
i) 
How  would  the  consolidation  of  accounts  happen  in  situations  where  the  parent 
entity is covered under Ind AS but the downstream subsidiaries are not? 
What would be the position when an account of one of the subsidiaries has to be 
drawn up under Ind AS but that is not the case for the parent entity (say an NBFC 
holding company)? 
iii) 
How do you deal with equity with a “put” option? 
iv) 
How the firms’ account can be made comparable across periods? 
27. 
It is quite possible that initially adoption of fair value accounting may lead to negative 
implications  for  the  revenue  of  firms  and  consequently,  could  impact  the  balance  sheet  of 
both – firms as well as that of the banks. 
ii) 
Conclusion 
28. 
I am reminded of a quote by Jim Peterson, a former lawyer for Arthur Andersen, the 
now-defunct accounting firm that audited Enron. He said “An auditor’s opinion really says, 
“This financial information is more or less OK, in general, so far as we can tell, most of 
the time”,” I trust the accounting community present here does a much more meaningful and 
methodical job than what Mr. Peterson suggests. 
Let me conclude by reiterating that a strong financial sector is a sine qua non for 
29. 
sustainable growth. Financial Sector and in specific, the banking sector, derives its strength 
from  a  healthy  credit  portfolio,  both  corporate  and  retail  as  well  as  a  healthy  investment 
portfolio. Accounting standards and the auditors have a pivotal role in enabling the banks to 
develop  such  portfolios.  There  are,  of  course,  complex  but  essential  interplay  between 
regulations, accounting standards and credit ratings. 
30. 
I am sure that the Conference would be able to guide the various stakeholders in 
finding appropriate answers to many of the issues which I have just referred to. I once again 
thank ICAI for inviting me to share my thoughts on this occasion and wish the Conference all 
success. 
                                                
2  BCBS Working paper : The interplay of accounting and regulation and its impact on bank behaviour: Literature 
review (January 2015) 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
