  Thomas Jordan: The Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy decision 
and assessment of the economic situation 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the Media News Conference of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 19 March 
2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  news  conference.  Following  the 
discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  we  have  decided  to  hold  an  extraordinary 
news  conference  at  our  quarterly  assessment  in  March,  in  addition  to  the  traditional 
six-monthly  news  conferences  which  will  take  place  in  June  and  December.  In  my 
presentation, I  will explain the Governing Board’s monetary policy decision and outline our 
assessment  of  the  economic  situation.  Afterwards,  my  colleagues  and  I  will  be  at  your 
disposal to answer  questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
I will begin with our monetary policy decision. 
The  SNB  has  decided  to  leave  the  target  range  for  the  three-month  Libor  unchanged  at 
between –1.25% and –0.25%. Interest on sight deposits at the SNB remains at –0.75% and 
the  exemption  thresholds  remain  unchanged.  Negative  interest  helps  to  make  it  less 
attractive  to  hold  investments  in  Swiss  francs.  Overall,  the  Swiss  franc  is  significantly 
overvalued and  should continue to weaken over time. The SNB will continue to take account 
of the exchange  rate  situation,  and  its  impact  on  inflation  and  economic developments,  in 
formulating its  monetary policy. It will therefore remain active in the foreign exchange market, 
as necessary,  in order to influence monetary conditions. 
Since  the  last  monetary policy assessment,  the  exchange  rate  and  interest  rate  conditions 
have  changed substantially. This has considerable repercussions for the inflation and growth 
outlook in Switzerland. 
Global economic outlook 
I  will  now  present  our  assessment  of  the  global  economy.  The  international  economic 
environment  is  developing  largely  in  line  with  our  previous  expectations.  The  global 
economic recovery is continuing. 
In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  growth  in  the  US  remained  above  potential.  The  favourable 
momentum of the economy there is also reflected in the sound growth in employment. The 
economy picked up somewhat in the euro area. This was primarily due to strong quarterly 
growth in Germany. In Japan, too, demand increased. By contrast, economic developments 
in 
the  major  emerging  economies  were  mixed.  Consumer  price  inflation  edged  down 
worldwide  due  to  lower  oil  prices.  In  many  advanced  economies,  inflation  moved  into 
negative territory  at the beginning of 2015. 
During the course of the year, the growth of the global economy is likely to firm gradually. 
Several factors are supporting this growth. First, the significant decline in oil prices is helping 
to  increase  demand.  Second,  monetary  policy  in  the  advanced  economies  remains  very 
expansionary.  The  euro  area,  in  particular,  is  likely  to  benefit  from  the  further  decline  in 
interest  rates  as  well  as  the  marked  depreciation  of  the  euro.  Recently,  an  easing  in 
European  banks’ lending conditions, which were very restrictive, has also been observed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Despite these favourable developments, the outlook for the global economy is still uncertain. 
Overall, substantial risks remain, with the focus on issues relating to the economic outlook for 
Greece and the Ukraine conflict. 
Assessment of the exchange rate situation 
I would now like to look at the exchange rate situation.  In recent quarters, this was mainly 
driven  by  diverging  developments  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area.  The  direction  of  monetary 
policy  in  the  major  currency  areas  is  drifting  ever  further  apart.  While  in  the  US  a  start  to 
monetary  policy  normalisation  is  in  sight,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  now 
launched  a  further  substantial  easing  of  its  monetary  policy  –  its  quantitative  easing 
programme. 
Since the first indications of quantitative easing by the ECB in spring last year, the euro has 
depreciated sharply against the US dollar. In May 2014, a euro still cost almost USD 1.40. At 
our  monetary  policy  assessment  in  December,  the  EUR/USD  exchange  rate  was  at  1.25. 
When  we  discontinued  the  minimum  exchange  rate  on  15  January,  the  euro  had  already 
fallen  to  USD  1.18;  now,  in  March,  it  is  trading  at  USD  1.05.  In  other  words,  in  the  short 
period  since our monetary policy assessment in December, the euro has lost around 15% 
against the  US dollar; and since May 2014, as much as 25%. Given this situation, it is clear 
that a  minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 against the euro was no longer sustainable. In 
the  weeks  before  15  January,  the  level  of  intervention  needed  to  maintain  the  EUR/CHF 
minimum  exchange  rate  on  the  foreign  exchange  markets  was  already  high  and  climbing 
rapidly. 
The  further  depreciation  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar  after  15  January,  and  following  the 
ECB’s decision on quantitative easing shortly afterwards, is an impressive illustration of how 
enormous the additional pressure would have been to maintain the minimum exchange rate. 
Had  we  delayed  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  this  would  only  have 
been  at  the  expense  of  an  uncontrollable  expansion  of  the  SNB  balance  sheet  –  by 
hundreds  of  billions  of  Swiss  francs,  and  potentially  several  times  Swiss  GDP.  Such  an 
expansion would  have severely impaired the SNB’s future ability to conduct monetary policy 
and substantially  jeopardised the fulfilment of its mandate in the long term. Moreover, given 
the  fact  that  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  no  longer  sustainable,  further  intervention 
would have been  pointless, and the magnitude of the associated losses could not have been 
justified. 
Following  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  Swiss  franc  initially 
appreciated  sharply  against  all  currencies,  before  weakening  again  somewhat  in  recent 
weeks.  Overall, the Swiss franc is still significantly overvalued. We expect that this will be 
corrected  with time. 
We  are  aware  that  the  new  situation  presents  the  Swiss  economy  with  great  challenges. 
Nevertheless, it cannot be compared with conditions before the introduction of the minimum 
exchange rate. At that time, the global economy was still dealing with the immediate effects 
of the financial crisis, and the Swiss franc was significantly overvalued against all currencies. 
The international economic environment is now much more positive. 
Inflation and economic outlook for Switzerland 
The  change  in  the  exchange  rate  situation  also  alters  our  assessment  of  the  inflation  and 
economic outlook for Switzerland, which I will outline for you now. 
As  a  result  of  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum exchange  rate,  the  inflation  outlook  has 
again declined significantly. For the current year, we have reduced our inflation forecast from 
–0.1% to –1.1%. Together with the sharp fall in oil prices, the appreciation of the Swiss franc 
since the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate temporarily moves inflation further 
into negative territory. Inflation reaches its low point in the third quarter of 2015, at –1.2%. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Thereafter,  forecast  inflation  rises  more  rapidly than  in  the  December  forecast,  due  to  the 
interest  rate  reductions  since  the  last  monetary policy assessment.  Nevertheless,  in  2016, 
inflation will amount to –0.5%, which is 0.8 percentage points lower than in the December 
forecast.  Not  until  2017  will  inflation  move  into  positive  territory  again,  at  0.4%.  The 
conditional forecast assumes that the three-month Libor remains at –0.75% over the entire 
forecast horizon, and that the Swiss franc weakens. 
The  inflation  forecast  shows  that  the  period  of  negative  inflation  is  temporary.  Sustained 
negative  inflation,  or  even  a  deflationary  spiral,  is  not  to  be  expected.  This  is  in  line  with 
surveys on inflation expectations. Although survey respondents now anticipate that inflation 
will be significantly lower, their expectations remain in positive territory for the medium  term. 
With the new exchange rate situation, conditions for the Swiss economy have become more 
difficult.  In the past, entrepreneurs and employees  have always  found ways  to deal with a 
strong  Swiss 
flexibility. 
Nevertheless,  every appreciation  represents  a  fresh  challenge  with  an  uncertain  outcome. 
Therefore we have great respect for the difficult tasks which the economy now faces. 
In this regard, I would like to say a few words about the economic situation in Switzerland. 
In  the  fourth  quarter,  the  Swiss  economy again  grew  faster  than  expected.  On  the  output 
side,  growth  was  relatively  broad-based,  with  manufacturing  being  the  main  driver.  Value 
added  also rose significantly in the banking industry and the public sector. On the demand 
side,  both  consumption  and  equipment  investment  recorded  favourable  developments.  By 
contrast,  exports of goods and services stagnated. 
In December, the SNB expected annual growth of some 2% for 2015. With the appreciation 
of  the  Swiss  franc  since  mid-January,  this  forecast  has  had  to  be  revised.  A  noticeable 
weakening in the economy may be expected, particularly in the first half of the year. For the 
year as a whole, the SNB now only expects real GDP to increase by just under 1%. Given 
this  weakening, appreciable underutilisation of production capacity may be expected in the 
short  term. Unemployment is likely to increase moderately. The anticipated strengthening in 
the  global recovery will have a supportive effect. 
thereby  demonstrating, 
time  and  again, 
their  great 
franc, 
Negative interest rates 
I would now like to turn to negative interest rates. 
Following  the  interest  rate  reductions  since  the  last  monetary  policy  assessment,  the 
reference 
interest  rate  is  now  negative  for  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  SNB.  This 
situation is new,  and has therefore been discussed in detail in the public arena. I would like 
to emphasise that  lowering the interest on sight deposits at the SNB into negative territory is 
a  necessary  monetary  policy  measure.  Negative  interest  makes  holding  investments  in 
Swiss  francs  less  attractive  for  Swiss  and  foreign  investors.  This  creates  incentives  to 
reduce  inflows  to  the  franc,  and  reinvest  Switzerland’s  traditional  current  account  surplus 
abroad. Negative interest  thus contributes to a weakening of the Swiss franc. 
The  interest  rate  reductions  had  a  rapid  effect.  As  expected,  the  negative  interest  rate 
imposed  on banks by the SNB was transmitted to the entire spectrum of money and capital 
market  interest rates. However, low or negative interest rates are not limited to Switzerland. 
Low 
interest  rates  are  a  global  phenomenon  and  some  other  countries,  especially  in  the 
euro  area,  also  have  negative  rates.  Switzerland  cannot  disassociate  itself  from  such 
developments. With  the interest rate reduction in Switzerland, the interest rate differential to 
the  major  currency  areas,  which  had  declined  to  virtually  zero  in  recent  years,  has  now 
increased again. Clearly,  given that the Swiss franc is significantly overvalued, the earnings 
outlook for Swiss franc  investments compared to those in other currencies is considerably 
reduced. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
There  is  widespread  discussion  on  negative  interest  rates,  in  part  because  institutional 
investors,  and  pension  funds  in  particular,  could  now  incur  costs  for  holding  liquidity. 
However, in the current environment, there are no real alternatives to our measure. Negative 
interest helps to reduce the overvaluation of the Swiss franc. If the Swiss franc were even 
stronger, this would have a direct or indirect effect on everyone in the economy: companies, 
households and the public sector. 
With all the concern about negative interest it is important to remember that when inflation is 
negative, real interest rates are higher than nominal interest rates.  In the past, the inflation 
rate  was  often  higher  than  the  nominal  rate  of  interest.  In  other  words,  in  terms  of  real 
returns,  there have been times when saving was less worthwhile than it is now, indeed, times 
when  savings balances actually lost value in real terms. Moreover, in the current situation, 
efforts to  circumvent negative interest rates by obtaining exemptions or shifting to cash are 
not  in  Switzerland’s  general  interest,  since  they  undermine  monetary  policy  intentions.  It 
should be  remembered, in this respect, that holding cash also entails substantial costs and is 
subject to a  high level of risk. We will retain the current interest rate level for the time being. It 
will  continue to support the weakening of the Swiss franc. 
Concluding remarks 
In closing,  I would like to return to our decision of 15 January. Discontinuing the minimum 
exchange  rate  and  reducing interest  rates  further  are  monetary policy measures  for  which 
there are no better alternatives. 
As I outlined previously, since the introduction of the minimum exchange rate in September 
2011,  the  international  currency  relationships  have  changed  fundamentally.  In  view  of  this 
development, a minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro  was no longer sustainable. 
Over  the  long  term,  adhering  to  the  minimum  exchange  rate  would  have  jeopardised  the 
SNB’s  ability  to  conduct  monetary  policy  and  fulfil  its  mandate  in  future.  This  would  have 
saddled the Swiss economy with longer-term costs that would have been out of all proportion 
to the benefits of continuing to enforce the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro. 
With  the  international  low  interest  rate  environment,  monetary policy faces  big challenges. 
Overall,  the  Swiss  franc  is  significantly  overvalued.  Negative  interest  helps  to  make 
investments in Swiss francs less attractive and thereby correct this overvaluation over time. 
The  SNB  will  continue  to  take  account  of  the  exchange  rate  situation,  and  its  impact  on 
inflation  and  economic  developments,  in  formulating  its  monetary  policy.  It  will  therefore 
remain active in the foreign exchange market, as necessary, in order to influence monetary 
conditions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
