  Rodrigo Vergara: Chile’s March 2015 Monetary Policy Report 
Presentation by Mr Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, of the Monetary 
Policy  Report  before  the  Finance  Committee  of  the  Honorable  Senate  of  the  Republic, 
Santiago de Chile, 30 March 2015. 
 The Monetary Policy Report of March 2015 can be found at http://www.bcentral.cl. 
Accompanying charts can be found on the Central Bank of Chile’ website. 
Introduction 
Mr.  President  of  the  Finance  Committee  of  the  Senate,  senator  Andrés  Zaldívar,  senators 
members of this Committee, ladies, gentlemen, 
I am grateful for your invitation to present the vision of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile 
about  the  recent  macroeconomic  developments,  their  prospects  and  implications  for 
monetary policy. This vision is detailed in our Monetary Policy Report (IPoM) of March 2015. 
But first and foremost, a few words of solidarity towards my fellow citizens that have recently 
suffered Nature’s wrath. The images and stories we have been receiving of the catastrophe 
that has swept across our country’s north are devastating and fill us with concern. 
In  the  past few  months,  inflation  has  exceeded  December’s forecasts,  and  it  is  stubbornly 
above 4 percent. This Report’s baseline scenario also estimates a slower return to the target 
range than foreseen at the end of 2014. The depreciation of the peso continues to be the 
main  factor  behind  the  price  dynamics,  which,  coupled  with  widespread  indexation  and  a 
tighter  than  expected  labor  market,  has  pushed  the  core  measure,  i.e.  the  CPI  excluding 
foodstuffs  and  energy,  CPIEFE,  from  4.3  to  4.7  percent  annually  between  November  and 
February.  However,  the  lower  oil  price  in  international  markets  and  its  pass-through  to 
domestic  prices  helped  to  moderate  annual  growth  in  CPI  inflation,  which  went  from 
5.5 percent in November to 4.4 percent in February (figure 1). 
Recent  inflation  figures  have  taken  the  market  by  surprise,  as  it  had  assumed  a  clearly 
downward position with respect to the behavior of prices, even below our predictions in the 
December  Report.  Thus,  the  market  expectation  for  inflation  at  the  end  of  2015  has  been 
revised to somewhat above 3 percent, as has been inflation one year out. Expectations two 
years out remain anchored in 3 percent (figure 2). 
On the contrary, output and expenditure have evolved as forecast in December. Again this 
time the baseline scenario I will be sharing with you in a moment foresees a gradual recovery 
that will gain strength towards the second half of this year. 
Consistently  with  this  scenario  and  the  Board’s  statement,  market  expectations  for  the 
monetary policy rate (MPR) have ruled out new cuts and, in some cases, point at a cycle of 
increases beginning late this year. 
In what follows I will describe the macroeconomic scenario we believe to be the most likely 
for the coming quarters, and its associated risks. 
Macroeconomic scenario 
The  external  environment  and  related  risks  remain  largely  determined  by  the  impending 
monetary normalization process in the United States. Changes in expectations about when 
and  how  fast  it  will  finally  occur  have  affected  world  financial  markets  significantly.  By 
contrast,  in  the  Eurozone  and  other  developed  and  emerging  economies,  monetary  policy 
has become more expansionary, largely responding to the lower inflation figures and lower 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  medium-term inflation outlook. Such scenario is quite opposite to what we are seeing in Chile 
and Latin America in general. 
The Eurozone showed  a more stable output trajectory towards the end  of 2014, driven by 
Germany.  Preliminary  first-quarter  figures  suggest  that  Germany  will  continue  to  lead  the 
bloc. It is also worth mentioning that in 2014 Spain posted positive GDP figures after three 
years in recession. Meanwhile, Italy and France continue to show meager results. All in all, in 
the past few months the region’s growth prospects have improved. In our baseline scenario, 
we expect the Eurozone to grow 1.5 percent this year, up from 1 percent in December. Still, 
there are some risks relating to the political situation, especially what may happen in Greece. 
About  Latin  America,  there  is  a  marked  deterioration  of  the  region’s  economies,  which  is 
compounded  with  lower  commodity  prices  and  in  some  countries,  public  and  private 
expenditure imbalances. So while the main economies in the region grew on average nearly 
4 percent between 2010 and 2013, in 2014 they barely grew 0.7 percent in 2014 and are 
expected to grow by 0.8 percent this year. By countries, the biggest correction goes to the 
Brazilian forecast, which the market expects to post a GDP drop of 0.7 in 2015, its worst in 
several years. 
The  greater  relative  strength  of  the  United  States,  plus  the  ever  closer  beginning  of  its 
monetary policy normalization, has prompted a substantial appreciation of the dollar in recent 
quarters. For sure, news about the situation of the US economy plus the Fed’s statement has 
caused important swings in the dollar price in the past few weeks. This has reflected in large 
movements in most currencies around the world. As for the Chilean peso, in the middle of 
March it was trading above 640 units to the dollar, to later drop to near 620 pesos per dollar 
at the statistical cutoff of this Report (figure 3). 
The peso depreciation cycle that began in 2013 stands out as the longest in the last decade 
and it occurs in the context of a gradual economic slowdown and not a sharp recession. This 
is one of the main reasons behind inflation remaining above 4 percent. The data indicate that 
the pass-through coefficient from the exchange rate to inflation has been in line with historic 
patterns, although in the upper part of available estimates. 
Besides, the peso depreciation has had different timing than most emerging or commodity 
exporting  economies.  The  earlier  adjustment  of  the  Chilean  economy,  in  terms  of  both 
private expenditure and the monetary policy reaction, meant that for the larger part of 2014 
our  currency  was  one  of  the  most  depreciated  globally.  Subsequently,  as  the  rest  of  the 
emerging economies entered a more marked adjustment cycle, those differences narrowed 
and  the  peso  even  appreciated  in  multilateral  terms  (figure  4).  As  of  March,  the  real 
exchange rate is somewhat above its average for the last two decades (figure 5). 
Domestic  activity  has  behaved  as  foreseen  in  December,  although  last  year  closed  with 
somewhat  higher  growth  than  forecast  in  the  previous  Report:  1.9  percent.  Revisions  to 
earlier figures and a somewhat stronger fourth-quarter growth explain this result. Partial first-
quarter  figures  continue  to  reveal  moderate  growth,  but  definitely  better  than  the  figures  it 
showed since mid- 2014. 
On the demand side, there is no big news either with respect to the end of last year. Aside 
from specific factors, consumption and investment remain weak. Durable consumption and 
investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  continue  to grow  at  low  or  negative  annual  rates, 
albeit with some marginal stability. Anyway, it is worth noting the greater impulse from fiscal 
spending, particularly public investment, and the positive effect of the peso depreciation in 
the productive performance of some tradable sectors. 
The  labor  market  continues  to  show  more  strength  than  previously  foreseen.  The 
unemployment  rate,  despite  a  marginal  increase,  is  still  low.  Annual  growth  in  salaried 
employment has picked up again in recent months, although job creation in the most cycle-
sensitive sectors has remained slow. Meanwhile, nominal wages continue to grow at a strong 
pace, partly because they are generally indexed to past inflation (figure 6). Although the low 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  level of unemployment seems to conflict with the state of the business cycle, there are some 
structural factors that might explain the unemployment rates below historic averages, such 
as changes in the demographic composition of the labor force (figure 7). 
Turning to our projections, in the baseline scenario GDP will grow in 2015 more than it did in 
2014  and  will  stand  between  2.5  and  3.5  percent,  not  very  different  from  the  December 
forecast. In this projection, GDP growth will remain below the medium-term growth estimate, 
which we place between 4 and 4.5 percent. The baseline scenario also assumes that in the 
first half of the year the economy will post a growth rate near the average of the past few 
months, with a recovery process that will become more visible towards year’s end. 
Growth  in  final  domestic  demand  –  without  inventories  –  is  revised  downward  from  the 
December  projection.  This,  because  of  a  slower  than  expected  recovery  of  both  private 
consumption and investment, particularly the imported components. With this, total domestic 
demand growth drops to 2.5 percent annually. In the case of private consumption, there is 
also  a  reduction  in  durable  goods  consumption  due  to  the  peso  depreciation  and  slower 
growth  in  real  wages  associated  to  the  upward  revision  to  the  inflation  forecast.  As  for 
investment,  there  is  the  downward  correction  of  the  survey  from  the  Capital  Goods 
Corporation on investment plans for 2015. Thus, measured in real terms, gross fixed capital 
formation should be 23.7 percent of GDP this year. 
In this projection, gross national savings rises to 21.5 percent of GDP in 2015, reflecting an 
increase in private saving in the past few quarters. This greater national saving has driven a 
further reduction in the current account. Accordingly, we estimate that this year it will be near 
0 percent of GDP (table 1). 
On the external front, this projection assumes that our trading partners will grow more in the 
two-year  period  2015–2016  than  in  previous  years.  The  terms  of  trade  should  improve, 
helped by the drop in oil prices, whose impact will partly outdo the downward adjustment of 
the  copper  price.  The  baseline  scenario  assumes  that  copper  will  trade  at  an  average  of 
280 dollar  cents  per  pound  in  2015–2016.  In  the  same  period,  Brent  oil  should  average 
62 dollars per barrel and WTI oil, 55 dollars per barrel (table 2). 
Another element contributing to domestic output and demand resuming greater growth is that 
monetary policy continues to add significant boost to the economy, helping to keep medium- 
and long-term interest rates at or near record lows (figure 8). Likewise, we foresee that fiscal 
policy will contribute to expenditure growth significantly during this year, especially through 
increased public investment. 
As  usual,  our  projections  rely  on  a  number  of  assumptions,  and  an  important  one  is  that 
consumer and business expectations will recover. Recent data show a slight revision upward 
of  these  indicators,  which  are  still  clearly  pessimistic  nonetheless.  Meanwhile,  information 
gathered in the Business Perceptions Report a quarterly publication by the Bank, points to 
moderate  performance  in  businesses  in  2015,  with  investment  plans  primarily  focused  on 
capital replenishment. 
Turning to inflation, in the baseline scenario the CPI will stay above 4 percent annually for 
some more months, approaching 3 percent over the course of 2016. For the CPIEFE, our 
preferred measure of core inflation, our forecast for 2015 is revised up and is expected to 
approach  3  percent  in  2016  and  stay  in  the  neighborhood  until  the  end  of  the  projection 
horizon (figure 9). 
This trajectory assumes that the pass-through from the peso depreciation of recent months 
to prices will stand in the upper part of historic patterns; that real wages will be adjusted in 
line with productivity; and that capacity gaps will persist over the projection horizon. For the 
real  exchange  rate,  the  forecast  uses  as  a  methodological  assumption  that  it  will  remain 
similar to its current value, considering that it is within the range believed to be consistent 
with  the  state  of  the  business  cycle  and  its  long-term  fundamentals.  About  the  monetary 
policy rate, at the statistical cutoff of this Report market expectations showed differences in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the expected path for 2015. The surveys indicated that the MPR would remain in 3 percent 
throughout this year, to rise during 2016. Meanwhile, the prices of financial assets suggested 
that it should be raised during the second half of 2015. As a working assumption, the MPR is 
assumed  to  follow  a  trajectory  that  is  somewhat  above  what  is  implicit  in  the  surveys 
(figure 10). 
As is usual in our projections, the baseline scenario reflects those events estimated to be the 
most likely to occur with the information at hand at the close of this Report. There are risks, 
however that, if materialized, may reshape the macroeconomic scenario and, therefore, may 
alter the course of monetary policy. 
Abroad,  there  are  several  elements  that  might  trigger  new  episodes  of  volatility  in  world 
financial markets, with significant effects on credit costs, currency parities and the short-term 
inflation outlook. On one hand, important surprises regarding the timing and the speed with 
which the Federal Reserve will raise the benchmark rate may cause significant volatility in 
global financial markets, pushing interest rates up and further appreciating the dollar. In such 
a scenario, one cannot rule out that, additionally, we observe an abrupt portfolio rebalancing, 
given the low level of long-term interest rates and the high stock prices in the United States. 
Although the latest statement by the Federal Reserve has attenuated the possibility of drastic 
changes,  the  risk  is  still  present.  On the  other hand,  there  is  the  situation  some  emerging 
markets  are  enduring,  where  the  macroeconomic  scenario  could  be  further  complicated  if 
their  commodities  continue  to  trade  at  low  prices.  This  risk  is  most  important  for  Latin 
America,  as  it  compounds  with  complex  economic  and  political  factors.  Furthermore,  in 
several  countries  in  the  region,  fiscal  and  current-account  deficits  persist,  making  the 
necessary  adjustments  more  difficult  and  costly.  This  is  not  the  case  of  Chile,  where  the 
policy framework has allowed for a timely macroeconomic adjustment in the last year and a 
half. 
And  let’s  not  forget  the  geopolitical  conflicts  in  the  Middle  East  and  parts  of  Europe,  with 
which we have sadly lived for quite some time. In Europe, there is the Greek situation and 
the quirks that have characterized the agreements to finance the debt. On the positive side of 
risks, it could also happen that the recovery is stronger in the Eurozone, which could mean a 
stronger boost to the world economy and Chile. In addition, it is possible that the effects of 
the  drop  in  the  oil  price  is  larger  than  projected  and  also  that  this  price  remains  low  for 
longer.  Finally,  there  is  still  the  risk  associated  to  lower  growth  in  China  and  its 
consequences  on  the  price  of  copper.  The  state  of  the  Chinese  financial  system  and  real 
estate sector continue to draw the most attention. 
At  home,  the  main  risk  has  to  do  with  the  evolution  of  inflation,  mainly  because  of  the 
unrelenting  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  its  accumulated  effects  on  costs.  This,  in  a 
context  of  margins  that  seem  to  have  narrowed  because  of  the  high  annual  growth  in 
nominal wages and the limited pass-through of lower fuel prices in some sectors. Therefore, 
the  materialization  of  an  external  risk  scenario  that  triggers  a  significant  additional 
depreciation  of  the  peso  may  have  substantial  effects  on  the  short-term  inflation  outlook, 
which will depend on the state of the business cycle. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  possible  that,  despite  a  recent  improvement  in  domestic 
expenditure  and  output  compared  with  previous  quarters,  private  expectations  will  not 
improve  sufficiently  to  stimulate  further  spending,  especially  in  investment.  Conversely,  a 
scenario  where  expectations  recover  more  strongly  than  expected  would  allow  for  more 
dynamic  economic  activity.  The  same  can  happen  if  the  increase  in  national  income  has 
greater effects on expenditure in a context of more comfortable external accounts. 
After evaluating these risks, we estimate that, although local risks have moderated, the risk 
balance is still downward biased for output, while the risk balance for inflation is unbiased. 
Let me share with you some final thoughts now. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Final thoughts 
Lately,  the  Chilean  economy  has  responded  to  the  big  changes  in  the  local  and  external 
environment,  by  making  a  major  adjustment.  Domestic  spending  went  from  an  annual 
average growth of about 8 percent in 2011 and 2012, to 3.7 percent in 2013 and a decline of 
0.6  percent  in  2014,  with  significant  contractions  in  the  last  year  in  spending  in  imported 
goods,  especially  those  for  durable  consumption  and  investment  in  machinery  and 
equipment.  This  helped  the  current  account  deficit,  which  in  mid-2013  was  thought  to  be 
around 5 percent of GDP to drop to 1.2 percent of GDP the past year and is projected to 
nearly  attain  equilibrium  by  2015.  Beyond  the  discussion  about  what  shock  triggered  the 
adjustment, it is clear that the process has been sound, as evidenced, for example, by the 
behavior  of  the  labor  market,  with  an  unemployment  rate  that  for  all  this  time  has  never 
exceeded 6.5 percent. 
I have no doubt that our country’s economic policy framework has played a fundamental role 
on  this.  A  strong,  well  regulated  banking  system  has  permitted  credit  to  continue  to  flow 
dynamically  to  those  activities  where  it  is  needed.  Our  fiscal  policy  based  on  a  rule  that 
determines  public  expenditure  seeing  past  the  cyclical  ups  and  downs,  has  allowed  for  a 
significant spending program to be carried out without jeopardizing public finances. 
From  the  Central  Bank  we  have  contributed  by  smoothing  the  cycle,  aggressively  and 
opportunely  reducing  the  monetary  policy  rate  by  200  basis  points,  thus  helping  to  drive 
medium-  and  long-term  interest  rates  to  or  near  record  lows.  Last  but  not  least,  our  free 
floating  exchange  rate  system  has  permitted  the  exchange  rate  to  depreciate  nearly 
11 percent in real terms with respect to its trough of 2013, helping adjust the current account 
and favoring the competitiveness of our export sector. 
The  saying  goes  that  what  is  obvious  is  not  talked  about,  and  what  is  not  talked  about  is 
forgotten. So I have thought relevant, especially in this environment that at times becomes 
overwhelmingly pessimistic, to stress how well equipped our economy is to deal with adverse 
situations. I think that the comparison with other economies of the continent, which have also 
suffered the brunt of the fall in the prices of our commodities, is revealing: most of them have 
high current account deficits and several show fiscal situations that are worrying to say the 
least. In many of them, high levels of dollarization or currency mismatches in the financial 
sector,  restrict  the  room  for  exchange  rate  adjustment  and  force  authorities  to  use  less 
efficient  instruments  to  achieve  their  goals.  Chile’s  reality  is  different:  our  economy’s 
adjustment  occurred  sooner  than  in  other  countries  and  it  did  so  rapidly  and  deeply.  This 
situation allows us to look into this and the coming years with some peace of mind. 
In  this  context,  and  as  we  projected  in  December,  output  growth  has  tended  to  stabilize 
around  2.5  percent  annually,  which  is  low,  but  in  line  with  our  baseline  scenario  should 
increase gradually through the year. True, our baseline scenario contemplates, among other 
assumptions, that such dynamism will be accompanied by improved agents’ expectations. As 
we have said before, this is a sensitive point that requires us all to cooperate. We must also 
bear in mind that the terrible natural disaster that just hit the north of our country will have 
some effect on the output figures that will be released in the coming months, which at this 
moment we can only guess and which will be able to assess only as time goes by. 
Moreover, as we well know, every adjustment process has its costs. In our case, the main 
associated cost has been higher inflation. In recent months inflation has exceeded forecasts 
and we estimate that it will remain above 4 percent for a longer time, strongly influenced by 
the  depreciation  of  the peso,  which  has  been  greater  and  more  persistent  than  previously 
thought. Thus, although we understand that higher inflation is part of the adjustment process 
I  have  described  above,  I  want  to  be  clear  that  its  current  levels  have  exceeded  our 
estimates, and that inflation being above the upper limit of the tolerance range for several 
months in a row is a situation that does not leave us satisfied. 
This  is  why  I  hereby  reiterate  the  unwavering  commitment  of  the  Central  Bank  Board  to 
safeguard price stability, a commitment that involves introducing any changes to monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  policy  that  we  deem  necessary  for  inflation  to  converge  to  the  target  level  within  the 
projection horizon. 
In  the  baseline  scenario,  we  foresee  that  the  exchange  rate  will  stabilize  so  its  effects  on 
prices  will  decrease,  allowing  inflation  to  slowly  converge  to  its  target  level.  Other  factors 
contributing to inflation’s convergence will be further widening capacity gaps, as the economy 
will continue to grow below potential still for some time, and the price effects of indexation 
and  the  Tax  Reform  will  tend  to  lose  significance.  Additionally,  a  global  environment  of 
reduced inflation and its incidence on the dollar price of imported goods will also contribute to 
a slower growth of prices. 
As a working assumption, our projections assume that to guarantee inflation’s convergence, 
MPR will be slightly above what surveys imply. Accordingly, in the most likely scenario there 
should be no additional cuts. So, toward year’s end we should be debating what is the best 
time to begin normalizing the monetary impulse. Of course, if the present inflationary trends 
end up being deeper and more persistent than expected, this debate could be anticipated. 
The opposite should happen if such trends prove milder than foreseen. 
I  would  like  to  finish  recalling  that  these  years  have  brought  major  changes  in  the  world 
economy. On one hand, in the aftermath of the 2008–2009 crisis the main central banks of 
the world had to adopt unconventional policies to cheer up their ailing economies, flooding 
the  world  with  unprecedented  levels  of  liquidity  and  thus  increasing  the  price  of  financial 
assets. Today, the start of the US monetary policy normalization is around the corner, which 
will  intensify  the  divergence  with  other  developed  economies  whose  cycles  are  behind. 
Meanwhile, after years of seemingly endless increases in commodity prices, we have seen 
the so-called super cycle of commodities wear out, and with it, the boom of investment and 
income that we experienced for the better part of the past decade. 
These two situations pose major challenges to emerging economies and Chile in particular. 
In  the  short  term,  it  is  very  likely  that  we  will  see  increased  financial  volatility,  including 
unusual fluctuations in the exchange rate. This may complicate the inflation outlook, at least 
in the short term, as inflation is closely linked to fluctuations in the nominal exchange rate 
over  short  periods.  The  effects  of  these  situations  of  increased  volatility  on  the  inflation 
trajectory at longer terms, which certainly are more important for monetary policy, are difficult 
to predict, as they depend on many factors, such as the cyclical state of the economy and 
expectations, which we carefully assess when making our decisions. 
Certainly these are not the only challenges that these transitions face us with. We will need a 
flexible economy that allows to redirect resources rapidly and efficiently from those sectors 
that are losing appeal to those that are gaining it; a financial system able to weigh the risks 
and  help  new  ventures  thrive;  and  we  must  double  our  efforts to  improve  our  productivity, 
and so on. The good news is, as I just mentioned, we have an appropriate macroeconomic 
policy  framework  to  confront  changes  in  the  external  environment  and  an  economy  that, 
having  made  significant  adjustments,  is  now  free  of  significant  imbalances.  This  is  why  I 
believe that, never forgetting that we are a small and very open economy and therefore ever 
exposed to external shocks, we can look into the future with confidence. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
