  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Financial rehabilitation and insolvency regime 
in the Philippines – progress and remaining challenges 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the SharePHIL’s Seminar “All You Need to Know About 
Financial Rehabilitation and Insolvency Act”, Manila, 17 March 2015. 
 Good  afternoon  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Let  me  begin  by  thanking  the  organizers  for  this 
privilege to share with you the thoughts of the BSP on an important legislative initiative – the 
Financial Rehabilitation and Insolvency Act (also known as FRIA). 
We all know that FRIA became a law in 2010. What perhaps most of us do not know is: when 
then Senator Juan Edgardo J. Angara sponsored the bill on the Senate floor in 2009, it was 
the 100th year anniversary of the Insolvency Act of 1909, its precursor law. Talk about long 
gestation! 
It was therefore not surprising that the good Senator clamored for its passage, arguing that it 
could no longer be postponed. But more than the length of time since its precursor law, the 
prevailing mood of global financial insecurity then demanded its enactment. 
The  same  mood  of  global  financial  insecurity  still  prevails  today,  albeit  to  a  lesser  extent. 
While  the  rest  of  the  world  continues  to  grapple  with  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its 
aftermath,  the  Philippines  is  in  a  better  place.  Thanks  to  economic  reforms  we  have 
undertaken thus far. However, now is not the time to sit back and rest on our laurels. Indeed, 
we  need  to  remain  proactive  and  adopt  reforms  that  would  allow  us  to  withstand  the 
inevitable challenges that a growing economy such as ours faces. 
When former Senator Angara spoke at the Senate in 2009, he noted that, in our country, the 
chances of a claimant to recover his investments from a failed enterprise are a nightmarish 
4.4%.  In  sharp  contrast,  the  recovery  rate  in  Japan  for  failed  enterprises  is  a  whopping 
92.5%. 
Where we are now? 
With the passage of FRIA and the FR Rules in 2013, however, our recovery rate now stands 
at 21.2%. Furthermore, the World Bank Group in its June 2014 Doing Business report ranked 
the Philippines as #50 in the Resolving Insolvency Index in a pool of 189 countries. Not bad 
you may think, but we clearly still have quite a long way to go. 
Beyond the metrics, ladies and gentlemen, we should focus on the real goal: that of reaping 
the advantages of an effective insolvency regime. The FRIA is a major reform designed to 
promote investor confidence and contribute to financial stability and sustained growth in our 
economy. However, the passage of the FRIA is really just the jump-off point in achieving that 
goal. 
What are the benefits of an effective insolvency regime? 
To say that the presence of an effective insolvency regime is a pillar of market confidence 
seems  contradictory,  doesn’t  it?  Especially  because  we  do  not  expect  real  investors  to 
embark  on  a  business  or  an  economic  endeavor  with  failure  in  mind.  However,  part  of  a 
sound business plan is knowing what you are up against – including what would happen to 
you and your investment, should your business turn sour. Indeed, market exit (even if it is 
“forced upon you”) is an integral part of the business life cycle. 
The  principle  is  this  –  if  investors  (and  banks) know  that  there  are  clear  rules  that  govern 
recovery, they become more willing to take on new ventures and businesses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  broader  macro  point  of  view,  a  clear 
When  you  extend  this  principle  across  the  many  current  and  potential  investors  across 
markets,  it  then  becomes  intuitive  and  easy  to  appreciate  that  a  sound  insolvency  regime 
builds confidence and is economic growth-enhancing. In addition, it also supports financial 
stability. Let me illustrate. 
From the point of view of the investor, an effective insolvency regime provides a framework 
for  the  terms  on  which  they  can  be  willing  or  prepared  to  lend.  More  particularly,  the 
predictability  and  confidence  in  loan  recovery  upon  default  give  the  investors  specific 
parameters,  including  price  points,  for  their  lending.  In  several  cases,  this  has  led  to 
increased credit availability, lower cost of credit, or both at the same time. The experience in 
Brazil shows that the broad bankruptcy reform in 2005 that established greater protection to 
credit  had  led  to  a  significant  increase  in  the  total  amount  of  total  debt  (a  reported 
10-17 percent  increase)  and  in  the  total  amount  of  long-term  debt  (23  to  74  percent 
increase). In other words, there was also a lengthening of debt maturities. The same study 
also reported a 7 to 17 percent reduction in the cost of debt financing for Brazilian firms. 
From 
insolvency  regime  encourages 
entrepreneurship,  when  this  provides  a  safety  net  for  entrepreneurs,  especially  those  who 
commit  personal  assets  to  start  a  business  and  personally  guarantee  loans  to  the  new 
venture. A 2008 study that compared self-employment in 15 countries in Europe and North 
America  between  1990  and  2005  found  that  more  forgiving  personal  bankruptcy  laws 
combined with ready access to limited liability protections, enhance entrepreneurial activity. 
Furthermore, when the laws also provide for a well-managed redeployment of assets to more 
productive firms, jobs are preserved. A corporate reorganization code in Colombia enacted in 
1999 dramatically improved the efficiency of reorganization proceedings, its duration fell from 
an  average  of  34  months  to  12  months.  Effective  reorganization  in  countries  such  as 
Colombia allowed a company’s workforce to remain employed and productive. 
From  a  financial  stability  perspective,  effective  insolvency  laws  help  to  reduce  market 
disruption.  In  Chile,  for  instance,  the  introduction  of  economic  insolvency  advisors  –  who 
were tasked to first determine the viability of firms in financial distress as basis for insolvency 
proceedings  to  commence  –  laid  a  foundation  for  the  smooth  processing  of  insolvency 
proceedings. It allowed Chile to improve the recovery rate of distressed firms’ creditors from 
19 cents on the dollar in 2004 to 30 cents in 2013. 
What is the relevance of FRIA to central banking? 
Some of you may be wondering – why the central bank governor is speaking at a seminar on 
insolvency  and  recovery.  Particularly  given  that,  the  resolution  processes  for  banks  is 
covered  under  another  set  of  laws  and  regulations,  not  the  FRIA.  I  asked  your  president, 
Atty. Lim the same question when he invited me. He reminded me of the ardent support of 
the BSP during the deliberations of the law. I guess, the answer to that question therefore is 
– as both Francis and I agreed – the FRIA is important to the BSP as well, just as it is to you. 
In fact, while deliberations in Congress on the FRIA were on-going, the BSP did parallel work 
on formally adopting financial stability as a policy objective. 
You may ask, how is financial stability related to FRIA? I submit [as I alluded to earlier] that, if 
FRIA is well implemented, it will help promote and advance financial stability in our country. 
There  is  no  textbook  definition  for  financial  stability.  But  in  the  BSP,  we  define  financial 
stability  as  that  desirable  state  that  is  achieved  when  the  governance  framework  of  the 
market  and  its  financial  infrastructure  enable  and  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of  the 
financial system conducive to sustainable and equitable economic growth. 
Effective  insolvency  regimes,  by  saving  struggling  firms  when  possible,  or  by  reallocating 
assets of failing firms more productively, contribute to the smooth functioning of the financial 
system. They help minimize market disruptions. Banks and investors are also more willing to 
lend when they know they can recover at least some of their investment when businesses 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  fail. Entrepreneurs, particularly those involved in small and medium scale enterprises, will be 
more willing to enter the market when they do not have to put their entire personal resources 
at  risk.  Effective  insolvency  regimes  enable  transacting  parties  to  take  calculated  risks  in 
their investment decisions. 
I am sure you will agree with me when I say that such an empowerment to take calculated 
risks  is  what  fuels  innovation.  In  turn,  innovation  is  that  which  is  at  the  heart  of  economic 
growth. The current Philippine growth trajectory is on an uptrend. To sustain this, we need 
more investments, especially from real money funds from abroad that are accompanied by 
new technology for innovation. While it helps that the country is now rated two notches into 
investment grade territory, we should be mindful this alone won’t bring in investors. 
Good growth prospects and higher credit ratings are undoubtedly important contributors to 
improving the investment environment. But they may not be enough to entice the full range of 
investors to come in, build businesses and create jobs for Filipinos. 
We  should  always  recognize  that  investment  decisions  are  highly  influenced  by  investors’ 
confidence  in  our  domestic  legal  system,  the  quality  of  our  laws  governing  private  and 
property  sectors  and  how  effective  our  laws  are  upheld  and  enforced.  Investors  look  for 
consistency and predictability in their commercial affairs. They would want to maximize and 
preserve the value of their assets or ensure that their claims are upheld, prioritized or equally 
treated if they become creditors of insolvent debtors. It is their confidence in our legal system 
that will encourage them to make use of court processes should rehabilitation and insolvency 
issues confront them. 
The FRIA provides us with a menu of remedies for distressed debtors and new approaches 
to rehabilitation and insolvency. And because it expressly adopts the UNCITRAL Model Law 
on Cross-Border Insolvency and accordingly, FRIA gives foreign creditors in liquidations and 
rehabilitation  proceedings  direct  access  to  Philippine  courts.  Thus,  opportunities  for 
cooperation  between  domestic  and  foreign  courts  and  domestic  and  foreign  insolvency 
administrators in cross-border insolvencies and restructurings are available. 
What more needs to be done? 
Over the past 15 minutes or so, I went through a laundry list of the benefits of an effective 
insolvency regime. Clearly, we all appreciate that the FRIA is our take off point for reaping 
these benefits. However, in the 2013 Forum on Asian Insolvency Reform that the Philippine 
Government  hosted  through  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  one  session  exhaustively 
deliberated  on the  proposition  that,  in the  implementation  of  insolvency  regimes, fixing the 
insolvency statute is not sufficient to create a well-functioning insolvency regime. 
I cannot agree more. Recent studies have shown that the critical success factor in effective 
insolvency regimes globally is: the continuation of reforms after laws are enacted. The failure 
of  insolvency  systems  in  countries  that  have  already  modernized  their  laws  is  due  to 
inadequate implementation. 
The implementation of the law is as important as the law itself. Our distinguished audience 
knows  all  too  well  that  the  successful  implementation  of  the  FRIA  can  only  come  about 
through a clear understanding and consistent application of the FRIA and FR Rules by our 
judges and insolvency administrators. Given the special and technical competence required 
in  liquidation  and  rehabilitation  processes,  suitable  and  sufficient  capacity  building  is  a 
necessary component. Thus, we cannot stress enough the benefit of specialized training for 
members of our judiciary, industry practitioners, and other stakeholders. This should include 
basic business and accounting training, especially for those who have neither. 
With the growing internationalization of finance and other businesses, we can anticipate the 
application of insolvency laws and rules on international corporations doing business in the 
country. Our courts are therefore continually called upon to be more dynamic and responsive 
to such economic and financial developments. We are hopeful and confident of the response 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  of  our  judiciary  to  this  call,  so  as  to  give  spirit  to  the  more  expeditious  rehabilitation 
proceedings mandated under the FRIA and FR. This will help in ensuring that no delay will 
derail implementation of rehabilitation plans. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, at the core of it, the challenge to us is to help sustain the business 
confidence in our country and achieve financial stability. This we can do by actively playing 
our role in creating an environment with an adequate and functioning legal framework, where 
laws and rules are clear and well-defined, thereby enabling a consistent application by the 
members of our judiciary. 
It is evident that through FRIA we have the cornerstone for an effective insolvency regime. 
We can build on this foundation to ensure that the advantages of such an insolvency regime 
are achieved. 
As I close, let me congratulate the SHAREPhil let by its President, Atty. Francis Lim, and its 
Chairperson, Ms. Evelyn Singson, for organizing this very important seminar. I urge everyone 
to continue to take full advantage of this learning opportunity, to validate his/her knowledge 
on  rehabilitation  and  insolvency  matters,  to  share  insights  or  experiences,  or  even  to 
challenge  ideas  concerning  financial  rehabilitation  and  insolvency.  Let  us  make  this  forum 
not just a venue to learn but also as a place to think of new ways by which we can effectively 
contribute in moving rapidly to an effective rehabilitation and insolvency regime and a more 
financially stable Philippine economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we know our end-goal. Let’s not wait another century to get there. 
Good afternoon and I wish this seminar great success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
