  Øystein Olsen: Management of the Government Pension Fund Global 
(GPFG) 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway),  before the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic  Affairs  of  the  Storting 
(Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 4 May 2015. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. 
 I would like to thank the Chair of the Committee for the invitation to speak on the management of the Government 
Pension Fund Global. 
is 
to  underpin 
the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global 
The  objective  of 
long-term 
considerations in the spending of government petroleum revenues. Norges Bank manages 
the  GPFG  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  highest  possible  return  subject  to  the  framework 
defined by the Ministry of Finance, including the limitations set for risk-taking. 
The investment strategy is designed with a view to achieving this aim. The proportion of real 
assets  in  relation  to  nominal  assets  is  the  most  important  choice  with  regard  to  the 
investment strategy. Today, the allocation to equities is 60 percent. The proportion invested 
in real estate is likely to reach 5 percent in a few years. 
The Ministry of Finance has started work on assessing the allocation to real estate and the 
possibility  of  investing  a  portion  of  the  GPFG  in  unlisted  infrastructure.  We  have  been 
requested to provide advice to the Ministry on this matter. 
Real  estate  investment,  and  infrastructure  in  the  event,  is  more  resource-intensive  than 
securities investment, both in operational and management terms. Norges Bank is therefore 
in the process of establishing a clear organisational divide between the investment division 
for  real  estate  and  other  investment  divisions.  A  management  team  for  the  real  estate 
division has been established and we will appoint a division head in the course of the year. 
Large real estate investments will be subject to consideration by an investment committee. 
The largest investments will also be subject to approval by Norges Bank’s Executive Board. 
The integrated structure for the management and reporting of GPFG performance and risk 
will be continued. 
Moreover,  the  Ministry  proposes  increasing  the  number  of  central  bank  deputy  governors 
from one to two, and that both function as members of the Executive Board. The Executive 
Board  will  in  that  case  aim  to  establish  a  risk  and  investment  committee  for  investment 
management. The  committee  will  comprise  one  deputy  governor  and two  of  the  Executive 
Board’s  external  members.  The  committee  will  strengthen  and  improve  the  Executive 
Board’s work on overarching risk management of the GPFG, the framework for the GPFG’s 
real estate management and decisions relating to large real estate investments. 
The GPFG is a long-term and responsible owner. Our work on responsible investment is an 
integral  part  of  the  investment  process.  As  of  this  year,  the  Council  on  Ethics  issues 
recommendations on company exclusion directly to Norges Bank. Norges Bank’s Executive 
Board will on the basis of these recommendations assess exclusion against other tools in the 
exercise of ownership. The aim is to establish a unified chain of tools. 
Climate change has been among the focus areas of management since 2006. Our work on 
financial risk as a result of climate change is incorporated in the investment strategy and the 
financial objectives of the GPFG. 
The  Ministry  of  Finance  is  now  working  to  introduce  a  new  behavioural  criterion  for 
companies’  climate  emissions  in  the  guidelines  for  observation  and  exclusion.  Such  a 
criterion must then be managed in line with the highest defined threshold for exclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  It  is  important  that  the  overriding  principle  for  Norges  Bank’s  investment  management 
continues  to  be  that  the  GPFG  is  a  responsible  investor  with  a  financial  objective.  If  the 
GPFG  is  increasingly  used  as  an  instrument  for  pursuing  objectives  other  than  financial 
ones,  it  may  reduce  the  clarity  of  the  GPFG’s  role  as  a  financial  investor.  If  the  GPFG 
investment scope is subject to considerable restrictions, it may entail increased risk or lower 
returns. 
The  management  of  the  GPFG  has  been  successful  to  date.  The  total  return  since  the 
establishment of the GPFG amounts to more than NOK 2 500 billion, or about 40 percent of 
GPFG capital. Through its management, Norges Bank will continue to promote its overriding 
objective: to safeguard the Fund’s assets over time. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
