  William C Dudley: The national and regional economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey, 
6 April 2015. 
 Jason  Bram,  Chelsea  Cruz,  Tony  Davis,  Jonathan  McCarthy,  James  Orr,  Richard  Peach,  Paolo  Pesenti  and 
Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
I am very pleased to be here at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center (NJPAC) and to have 
this  opportunity  to  speak  with  the  members  of  the  Business  Partners  Roundtable.  In  my 
remarks,  I  will  provide  an  update  to  my  national  outlook  for  2015,  as  well  as  discuss 
economic developments in New Jersey. I will also briefly touch on how monetary policy might 
evolve should my economic outlook be largely realized over the next year. 
My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at 
the grassroots level of our economy. We plan these trips so I can meet with a diverse array 
of  stakeholders  in the  region. This  allows  me  to  get  a  comprehensive  picture  of  economic 
conditions in the region and a fuller understanding of the major issues and concerns. This is 
our first regional trip for 2015 and the third time we have visited northern New Jersey in the 
past four years. 
I  begin  my  day  here  at  NJPAC  and  following  this  visit,  I  will  take  a  tour  of  the  Teachers 
Village, which is a new mixed-use community here in downtown Newark, attend a roundtable 
lunch  meeting  with  members  of  the  Statewide  Hispanic  Chamber  of  Commerce  of  New 
Jersey in Union City, and hear about the economic and community development activity in 
Jersey City from Mayor Steven Fulop. I will then meet with nonprofit small business lenders 
to  hear  about  lending  conditions,  and  I’ll  end  the  day  at  Stevens  Institute  of  Technology 
where  I  will  learn  how  they  have  partnered  with  NBC  Universal  to  create  a  new  minor  in 
media engineering to address a skills gap issue in the region. 
These trips are one of the many ways in which we engage with people and businesses in our 
region. We track the health of household balance sheets at the state and local level using 
data from the New York Fed’s Consumer Credit Panel. These data show debt balances and 
delinquency trends across all forms of consumer debt, including mortgages, student loans, 
auto loans and credit cards. Later this month we will release a Regional Household Debt and 
Credit Snapshot that will provide an overview of the household debt trends in metropolitan 
areas within New Jersey. We also conduct a biannual poll of small businesses to understand 
their credit needs and availability. Based on the poll results, we have developed an ongoing 
series of clinics for small businesses to help them take the next step to access capital and 
identify new sources of funding. We also get important input from our Small Business and 
Agricultural  Advisory  Council,  whose  members  help  us  understand  key  economic  and 
financial  issues  affecting  regional  businesses  and  communities.  This  year  we  tapped  two 
New  Jersey  business  leaders  to  join  the  Advisory  Council:  Adenah  Bayoh,  co-founder  of 
Kapwood, LLC, and Ranjini Poddar, founder of Artech Information Systems, LLC. 
Let me now review recent developments in the national and regional economy, and at the 
end  of  my  talk,  I  will  be  happy  to  answer  questions  you  may  have  about  the  economic 
outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 
National economic conditions 
After growing at just a 2 percent annual rate from 2010 through 2012, real GDP expanded 
more  quickly  in  2013  and  2014,  rising  at  a  2.7  percent  annual  rate.  This  was  sufficient  to 
push the unemployment rate down by more than two percentage points over this period. This 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  firming  in  growth  reflected  several  important  developments  that,  in  my  view,  are  likely  to 
continue through 2015. The data we follow suggest that the household deleveraging process 
has  largely  run  its  course  and  the  imbalances  in  the  housing  market  have  been  mostly 
worked  off.  Federal  fiscal  consolidation  appears  to  be  over  for  now,  and  employment  and 
spending are increasing at the state and local government level. 
That said, economic performance in this cycle has been disappointing compared to historical 
patterns.  Even  though  household  wealth  relative  to  disposable  income  is  nearly  at  its  pre-
financial  crisis  level  and  conditions  in  labor  markets  are  substantially  improved,  consumer 
spending growth has been slower and the personal saving rate higher than what we would 
have  expected  based  on  past  historical  relationships.  Similarly,  even  with  low  mortgage 
rates,  single-family  housing  construction  has  been  surprisingly  sluggish.  And,  despite  very 
accommodative  financial  conditions  and  record  corporate  profits,  growth  of  business  fixed 
investment has been tepid. 
Looking forward, my outlook for 2015 is that economic growth will be close to the pace of the 
past  two  years,  supported  by  continued  solid  fundamentals  and  accommodative  financial 
conditions. If I am correct, then this would lead to a further reduction of labor market slack, 
with the unemployment rate approaching 5 percent by the second half of the year. 
An  important  element  of  this  forecast  is  continued  strength  in  household  spending.  This 
strength  is  supported  by  the  restored  health  of  household  balance  sheets,  improved 
household income prospects and the benefit of significantly lower energy prices. The data for 
the second half of 2014 reflect these positive forces: real personal consumption expenditures 
grew at a 3.2 annualized rate in the third quarter and a 4.4 percent rate in the fourth quarter. 
This strength in consumption was accompanied by solid income growth, as real disposable 
income increased at a 3.6 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, reflecting the stronger 
labor market. 
The pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed in recent months from the strong 
pace at the end of last year. Nonfarm payroll employment increased in the first quarter by 
about  200,000  per  month,  well  below  the  pace  of  the  fourth  quarter.  This  slowdown  was 
broad-based, with job growth slowing in both the goods-producing and the service-providing 
sectors. 
The  unemployment  rate  was  5.5  percent  in  March:  analysis  by  my  staff  suggests  that  the 
unemployment rate is nearing the point where we may begin to see a pickup in the pace of 
real wage gains. If this proves correct and unemployment continues to decline as I expect, 
then these stronger wage gains could help support solid income growth even if the pace of 
employment  growth  slows.  However,  it  will  be  important  to  monitor  developments  to 
determine  whether  the  softness  in  the  March  labor  market  report  evident  on  Friday 
foreshadows a more substantial slowing in the labor market than I currently anticipate. 
The March labor market report is another indicator that the first quarter is likely to be quite 
weak. Our current projection is that the economy will grow at about a 1 percent annual rate in 
the  first  quarter  of  2015.  This  softer  performance  is  suggested  by  a  wide  range  of  recent 
indicators that have surprised to the downside over the past couple of months. Examples of 
such indicators include retail sales, the ISM manufacturing index, manufacturing production 
and orders, and single-family housing starts. 
Overall,  I  view  these  downside  surprises  as  reflecting  temporary  factors  to  a  significant 
degree. For example, some of the recent softness is likely due to yet another harsh winter in 
the Northeast and the Midwest. My staff’s analysis of a measure of both the amount of snow 
and  the  population  affected  indicates  that  January  and  February  weather  was  20  to 
25 percent  more  severe  than  the  five-year  average.  Such  large  deviations  appear  to  have 
meaningful negative impacts on a number of economic indicators. 
Even so, there are some downside risks to the growth outlook. In particular, the steep decline 
in  crude  oil  prices  is  likely  to  lead  to  a  further  sharp  drop  in  U.S.  oil  and  gas  investment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Additionally, the significant rise in the value of the dollar is likely to lead to weaker U.S. trade 
performance. 
Let me discuss each of these in more detail. Energy prices have declined sharply since mid-
2014.  In  recent  weeks,  the  benchmark  West  Texas  Intermediate  (WTI)  oil  price  has  been 
hovering in a range of $45 to $50 per barrel, less than half the price in June of last year. This 
creates both positives and negatives for the U.S. economy. Starting with the positives, since 
the  U.S.  is  still  a  net  importer  of  petroleum,  this  development  has  provided  substantial 
benefits, with our oil import bill down by about a ½ percentage point of GDP. As I indicated 
earlier,  that  represents  a  significant  boost  to  real  disposable  income  for  households.  How 
much this  energy  windfall  boosts  consumption will  depend,  though,  on how  much  is  spent 
versus saved. 
Turning to the negatives, the support to growth from rapidly rising U.S. oil production almost 
certainly  will  fade  away.  U.S.  oil  production  has  been  rising  rapidly  for  several  years,  due 
largely to new technology that has expanded the amount of oil that can be recovered from 
existing  wells  and  that  has  facilitated  shale  oil  production  by  fracking.  Now,  with  prices 
dramatically lower, U.S. oil exploration and drilling activity is falling off very sharply. This will 
exert a meaningful drag on economic activity. 
Another significant shock is the nearly 15 percent appreciation of the exchange value of the 
dollar  since  mid-2014.  Such  an  appreciation  makes  U.S.  exports  more  expensive  and 
imports  more  competitive.  My  staff’s  analysis  concludes  that  an  appreciation  of  this 
magnitude would, all else equal, reduce real GDP growth by about 0.6 percentage point over 
this year. 
Turning to inflation, the data continue to come in below the FOMC’s objective of a 2 percent 
annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. The twelve-month 
change of the total PCE deflator was 0.3 percent in February, with the core PCE deflator at 
1.4 percent. Despite this, my expectation is that inflation will begin to firm later this year. In 
particular,  most  of  the  impact  from  the  decline  in  energy  prices  that  has  weighed  down 
overall inflation is likely over. Although the appreciation of the dollar is likely to cause some 
further  softness  in  import  prices,  the  continued  decline  in  resource  slack  as  the  economy 
expands  should  push  in  the  opposite  direction.  In  addition,  longer-term household  inflation 
expectations have been well maintained through this period of very low inflation, as indicated 
by  our  Survey  of  Consumer  Expectations.  The  combination  of  stable  expectations  and 
declining slack should push inflation slowly back towards the FOMC’s objective. 
Monetary policy 
As the FOMC has consistently communicated, the timing of lift-off will depend on how the 
economic outlook evolves. As I have discussed, the labor market has improved substantially 
and  I  expect  to  see  inflation  begin to firm  later this  year.  If this  labor  market  improvement 
continues  and  the  FOMC  is  reasonably  confident  that  inflation  will  move  back  to  our 
2 percent objective over the medium-term, then it would be appropriate to begin to normalize 
interest rates. At the March meeting, the FOMC removed language from the statement that 
indicated that we would be patient in beginning the process of normalizing monetary policy. 
But, as Chair Yellen remarked in her most recent press conference, removal of “patient” from 
the statement does not indicate that we will be  “impatient” to begin to normalize monetary 
policy.  Rather,  the  timing  of  normalization  will  be  data  dependent  and  remains  uncertain 
because the future evolution of the economy cannot be fully anticipated. 
Whenever the data support a decision to lift off, I think it is important to recognize what this 
would signify. It does not mean that monetary policy will be tight. We will simply be moving 
from an extremely accommodative monetary policy to one that is slightly less so. It also will 
be a positive signal about the progress we have made in restoring the economy to health. In 
my view, it would be a cause for celebration, because it would signal that the FOMC believes 
that  slightly  higher  short-term  interest  rates  are  consistent  with  its  objectives  of  maximum 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  employment  and  price  stability.  Near-zero  short-term  interest  rates  and  a  larger  Federal 
Reserve balance sheet were designed to be a temporary extraordinary treatment to help the 
economy regain its vitality, and not a permanent palliative. 
I  remain  confident  that  when  the  FOMC  does  decide  to  begin  to  remove  policy 
accommodation that we have the requisite tools to effectively support this decision. We have 
tested  numerous  tools  including  overnight  reverse  repurchase  operations,  term  reverse 
repurchase operations, and term deposit facilities to ensure that, when the time comes, lift-off 
can be managed smoothly. The primary tool will be interest on excess reserves (IOER), with 
overnight reverse repurchases as a supplemental tool to be used as needed to ensure a firm 
floor under short-term interest rates. 
For financial markets, the likely path of short-term rates after lift-off is just as important as the 
timing of lift-off. Here, I anticipate that the path will be relatively shallow. Headwinds in the 
aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis  are  still  in  evidence,  particularly  the  diminished  availability 
and tougher terms for residential mortgage credit. 
How  fast  the  normalization  process  will  proceed  depends  mainly  on  two  factors:  how  the 
economy evolves and how financial market conditions respond to movements in the federal 
funds rate. If financial market conditions do not tighten much in response to higher short-term 
interest rates, we might have to move more quickly. After all, the point of raising short-term 
interest rates is to exert some restraint on financial market conditions. In contrast, if financial 
conditions tighten unduly, then this will likely cause us to go much more slowly or even to 
pause for a while. At the end of the day, we will move short-term interest rates to generate 
the set of financial market conditions that we deem is most consistent with our employment 
and inflation objectives. 
How high will short-term rates ultimately need to go? I think this issue is very difficult to judge 
for  a  number  of  reasons.  First,  it  depends  on  how  financial  market  conditions  evolve  in 
response to our monetary policy adjustments. Second, it depends on other factors, such as 
real potential GDP growth, which, in turn, depends on the growth rates of the labor force and 
of productivity. My current thinking is that the long-run nominal federal funds rate consistent 
with 2 percent inflation is somewhat lower than in the past. My point estimate is 3½ percent, 
but I wouldn’t bet the farm on this. I have considerable uncertainty about this estimate. 
Regional economic conditions 
Now  let’s  turn  to  the  New  Jersey  economy.  One  feature  of  the  state’s  economy  is  its 
industrial diversity. A sizeable number of jobs in the state are in the healthcare, professional 
and  business  services,  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  and  leisure  and  hospitality  categories. 
When  we  look  at  the  northern  part  of the  state, we  see  a  greater  concentration  of jobs  in 
finance, particularly in Hudson County. Also prominent are goods distribution jobs related to 
the ports, rail lines, trucking and warehousing. Other large sectors include pharmaceuticals 
manufacturing and research and development, as well as private education. 
Looking at recent trends in northern New Jersey, the recovery in the economy in general – 
and in employment in particular – is lagging the nation and is not going as well as we would 
like. The Garden State’s economy lost a quarter of a million jobs during the recession, and 
employment  didn’t  begin  to  recover  until  2011,  and  even  then  it  was  slow  getting  started. 
However, the latest annual employment revisions – released just a few weeks ago – show 
job gains in 2013 and 2014 were a bit stronger than previously reported. Nevertheless, four 
years  into  the  recovery,  employment  has  recovered  less  than  two-thirds  of  the  job  losses 
from the recession. This contrasts notably with both New York State and the U.S. as a whole, 
where  employment  has  far  surpassed  its  earlier  peaks.  Moreover,  here  in  Essex  County, 
there has yet to be any significant upturn in jobs, although neighboring Hudson County has 
seen a fairly strong rebound. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  in  other 
remains  depressed 
industries  such  as 
That’s not to say that there aren’t any strong industry sectors here in New Jersey: job growth 
has been quite robust in health services, transportation and warehousing, construction and a 
number of business service industries. There has also been steady job creation in retail trade 
and leisure and hospitality, though these tend to be low-paying sectors. On the other hand, 
employment 
finance,  publishing, 
telecommunications and manufacturing. 
So why is New Jersey not keeping pace with New York in terms of job growth? Well, much of 
the strength in New York State has been driven by New York City; other parts of the state 
have  seen  similar,  if  not  weaker,  job  growth  than  New  Jersey.  Of  course,  this  raises  the 
question: why has New York City’s economy been so much stronger? In fact, there is a body 
of  research  suggesting  that  the  long-term  drift  of  economic  activity  and  jobs  from  cities  to 
suburbs  has  subsided,  and  that  there  is  a  growing  trend  toward  re-urbanization  –  a 
preference for both people and businesses to locate in cities, like New York. 
Yet there is also a strong tendency for persistent strength in an urban hub to gradually spill 
over  into  nearby  areas.  With  both  commercial  and  residential  rents,  not  to  mention  sales 
prices, high and rising in Manhattan, northern New Jersey has an opportunity to capitalize on 
its  widening  cost  advantage  by  attracting  companies  and  residents  that  value  an  urban 
location, but find New York City to be too pricey. And if preferences are indeed in the midst of 
a long-term shift toward urbanization, this bodes particularly well for New Jersey’s own cities. 
With  a  major  international  airport  and  seaport,  a  20–30  minute  train  ride  from  most  of 
Manhattan  –  but  much  cheaper  rents  –  as  well  as  a  number  of  universities  and  a  solid 
infrastructure,  Newark  has  strong  potential  to  develop  its  prominence  as  a  major  local 
business, economic and cultural hub. 
Concluding thoughts 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  concerning  proposals  to  reform  the  Federal 
Reserve System. First, I concur with Chair Yellen that the Federal Reserve already is very 
transparent and accountable to Congress and to the public. I share her strong belief that the 
independence  of  the  central  bank  to  make  appropriate  policy  decisions  consistent  with  its 
legislated mandates is essential to a nation’s economic well-being. 
With  regard  to  the  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  role  of  the  regional 
banks, including the New York Fed, I also agree with Chair Yellen that the system is working 
well,  and  I  do  not  see  a  need for  any  substantive  changes.  I believe  that  the  System  has 
been designed appropriately so that a wide range of regional views are represented. At the 
same time, I believe that the Federal Reserve System’s monetary policy responsibilities are 
allocated appropriately by the Federal Open  Market Committee, with New York playing an 
important role to ensure that monetary policy is executed effectively even during periods of 
duress.  Of  course,  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  New  York  Fed  are  not  perfect 
institutions.  That  is  why  we  always  must  strive,  in  an  open  and  transparent  manner,  to 
improve what we do and how we do it, for the benefit of the American people. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would now be happy to take some questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
