  William C Dudley: Workforce development and reinvention in the 
Rochester economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, before the Rochester Business Alliance, Rochester, New York, 
12 August 2015. 
 Jaison Abel, Chelsea Cruz, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Eric Pajonk and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these 
remarks. 
Good morning. I am very pleased to be in Rochester and to have the opportunity to speak 
here today. I would like to give a special thanks to the Rochester Business Alliance for their 
part in making this event possible. My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts 
to understand what is going on at the grassroots level of our economy. During these trips I 
meet with a variety of stakeholders, which helps me develop a comprehensive view of local 
conditions and a fuller understanding of any major issues and concerns. This is my third visit 
to Rochester in the past five years. In my remarks, I will provide an overview of the regional 
economy and discuss the importance of workforce development, both for Rochester and the 
broader  economy.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.  
Reinvention in the Rochester economy 
Like  Upstate  New  York  more  generally,  the  Rochester  economy  has  lagged  behind  the 
nation  for  a  number  of  decades.  During  this  time,  Rochester  has  been  going  through  a 
prolonged period of economic transformation and reinvention. While this process has been a 
painful one in many respects, I believe that it is well-advanced and the area is well-positioned 
for the years ahead. Rochester possesses a unique set of assets that are key to a successful 
economic  reinvention,  including  a  highly  skilled  workforce,  world  class  higher  education 
institutions,  a  diverse  economic  base,  and  a  forward-looking  cooperative  engagement 
between  the  public  and  private  sector. There  is  strong  evidence  that  Rochester  is  already 
tapping  into  these  assets  to  great  success.  To  prove  my  point,  I  would  note  that  my 
colleague,  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  is  leaving  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis  at 
the end of the year to become a professor at the University of Rochester. Our loss is your 
gain! 
Consider how  we got to where  we are today. Early in the 20th century, with the explosive 
growth  of  the  “Big  3”  –  Kodak,  Xerox  and  Bausch  &  Lomb  –  came  a  great  demand  for 
innovative  and  skilled  workers,  especially  engineers,  who  helped  make  these  companies 
highly successful. At their peak, these three companies alone employed roughly 20 percent 
of  the  Rochester  workforce.  These  workers  developed  innovative  new  products  and 
processes, which often resulted in patents that remain valuable to this day. In many ways, 
Rochester, and its skilled workforce, was ahead of its time. 
These  companies,  though,  came  under  pressure  in  the  1980s  as  a  result  of  rapid 
technological  changes  and  increased  global  competition.  As  their  employment  began  to 
decline, some workers left the area while others remained. Indeed the legacy of the “Big 3” 
lies not in  what  was  lost, but in  what remains in the skills and entrepreneurial spirit of the 
many talented people that are here today. Some of these talented people started their own 
companies, while others found different ways to contribute their unique talents to the local 
economy. 
As a result, Rochester continues to reinvent itself, and is now much more diverse, with an 
employment base that is no longer concentrated among a few large manufacturers. The top 
employers  in  the  region,  like  the  University  of  Rochester  and  Rochester  Institute  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Technology  (RIT),  Wegmans,  the  Rochester  General  Health  System  and  Paychex,  just  to 
name a few, perform a variety of activities, from health care and education to consumer and 
business services. 
The process of reinvention and economic diversification, in part, allowed the region to better 
weather  the  storm  of  the  Great  Recession  compared  to  past  economic  recessions.  For 
Rochester, the downturn was both shorter and less severe in terms of job loss than for the 
nation as a whole – a situation quite different from what had occurred before. Though it still 
lags  the  nation,  the  Rochester  area  has  continued  to  grow  at  a  solid  pace  through  the 
recovery. This is no small feat, and it certainly is not true for all of Upstate New York. For 
example,  the  recovery  has  been  much  more  sluggish  in  Syracuse  and  Utica,  and 
Binghamton has yet to see any meaningful recovery. 
Despite Rochester’s relatively favorable economic performance in recent years, the region’s 
job base is actually slightly lower today than it was at the start of this century. While at first 
blush it may seem that such a statistic indicates a stagnant economy, that couldn’t be further 
from the truth. When you look deeper, you see an economy that has been very active and 
dynamic  in  a  number  of  respects. While  some  parts  of  the  economy  have  declined,  other 
areas have grown to fill in the gaps. 
The most familiar part of this story is the swift and severe loss of the region’s manufacturing 
jobs. Ongoing technological change has increased worker productivity and has reduced the 
demand for many “middle-skill” workers, while globalization shifted many manufacturing jobs 
to  other  parts  of  the  world.  These  forces  have  reduced  manufacturing  employment 
nationwide, but the effects on Rochester have been particularly potent. Between 2000 and 
2010, the number of manufacturing jobs in Rochester declined by over 40 percent. That’s a 
huge  loss  to  incur  in  just  a  single  decade.  Moreover,  the  loss  was  on  top  of  the  previous 
significant  decline  in  manufacturing  that  the  region  experienced  throughout  the  1980s  and 
1990s. 
However,  what’s  impressive  is  that  in  the  midst  of this  decline,  Rochester’s  manufacturing 
sector  has  been  very  dynamic.  While  once  focused  on  the  “Big  3,”  the  region  is  now 
producing a much more diverse set of products, such as foods, computers and electronics. 
And, the manufacturing companies that remained are leaner and have an even higher-skilled 
workforce than in the past. 
Fortunately,  Rochester  has  also  experienced  significant  job  growth  outside  of  the 
manufacturing  sector.  The  regional  economy  added  over  44,000  non-manufacturing  jobs 
since 2000, keeping its overall employment fairly steady. The vast majority of these jobs are 
in  the  education  and  health  sectors,  which  together  have  grown  by  more  than  40  percent 
over the past 15 years in Rochester. Many of the jobs added in these sectors are high-paying 
jobs. And, importantly, these sectors tend to be less susceptible to cyclical downturns than 
other parts of the economy, which helps make the region more stable. There has also been 
solid growth in business services, leisure and hospitality and even construction. 
The importance of workforce development 
With  today’s  economy  going  through  such  enormous  change,  what  people  do  in  the 
workplace  and  how  they  do  it  is  also  changing  significantly.  It  is  no  longer  the  case  that 
people  can  easily  find  good-paying,  career-oriented  jobs  with  a  high  school  diploma.  The 
jobs  of  today  typically  require  more  knowledge,  skill  and  flexibility.  Often,  this  means  that 
today’s  workers  must  invest  more  in  education  and  training  than  earlier  generations.  In 
addition,  the  depreciation  rate  for  many  skills  is  much  higher  now  than  in  the  past.  This 
requires  workers  to  continuously  reinvest  in  skill  development.  Broadly  speaking,  workers 
who can build skills and remain nimble can do very well in today’s economy, while those who 
can’t are much more likely to fall into lower-paying jobs and get stuck there. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A  skilled  workforce  that  is  matched  to  the  needs  of  employers  is  also  necessary  for  the 
economy to grow and prosper. By pursuing its mandated goals of maximum employment and 
price  stability,  monetary  policy  can  help  labor  markets  recover  by  providing  incentives  for 
firms to invest and grow. However, monetary policy cannot by itself solve skill mismatches 
that may exist in the economy. These frictions must be addressed in other ways, such as by 
workforce  development  policies.  That  is,  monetary  policy  can  complement  workforce 
development policies, but is not a substitute for these policies. 
That is why I believe workforce development is so important for the long-term health of the 
economy.  We  need  to  help  workers  build  the  skills  necessary  to  adapt  to  change.  This 
makes workforce development a top priority for everyone involved: workers, their employers, 
their communities and the public sector, as well as education and job training institutions. We 
all need to share in the responsibility of helping people increase and maintain their skills. 
Successful  workforce  development  needs  to  include  what  I  call  the  3  P’s:  Partnerships, 
Programs  and  Placement.  Partnerships  entail  the  cooperative  endeavors  between  local 
employers  and  educational  institutions  to  determine  the  best  strategies  to  help  workers 
develop  the  skills  that  employers  need.  Programs  must  be  tailored  to  the  current  skills 
required  by  local  employers.  Placement  needs  to  be  a  priority,  and  should  be  considered 
even before people are accepted into these programs. Workers need to know that a job will 
be waiting for them after they go through the effort of building their specific skills. There are 
several examples from Rochester and other parts of the region that illustrate the potential for 
this approach to workforce development. 
In fact,  Rochester  has  a  long  history  of  involvement  in  workforce  development.  In  1885,  a 
group  of  Rochester  businessmen  founded  the  Mechanics  Institute.  The  Institute’s  mission 
was to establish free evening schools in the city for instruction in mechanical drawing and 
other  technical  skills  important  for  industrial  firms.  Funding  was  provided  by  contributions 
from  Rochester  residents.  The  first  class  drew  more  than  400  students.  This  endeavor 
evolved over time into RIT. 
Strong partnerships between Rochester’s higher education institutions and local businesses 
continue  to  this  day.  For  example,  RIT’s  Center  for  Bioscience  Education  and  Training 
provides  local  businesses  and  associations  with  workforce  training  tailor-made  to  specific 
organizational  needs.  And  at  RIT’s  newly  created  Knorr-Bremse  Mechatronics  Laboratory, 
the university works with the companies that employ its graduates to make sure they have 
the technical skills they need to be successful. At the University of Rochester, the Center for 
Emerging & Innovative Sciences as well as the Center for Medical Technology partner with 
local companies to leverage the cutting edge research being done by the university’s faculty 
and students. Forward-looking partnerships such as these create “win-win” opportunities for 
everyone involved, and help the local economy grow and prosper. 
its  significant  workforce 
Monroe  Community  College  (MCC)  also  stands  out  with 
development initiatives. In fact, earlier this year Vice President Joe Biden – who was back in 
Rochester  recently  to  announce  the  creation  of  a  new  manufacturing  photonics  hub  – 
presented the college as a model for developing meaningful collaborations with employers to 
create  job-training  programs  that  align  with  current  employment  opportunities.  MCC  has 
taken a uniquely data driven approach to the development of tools and programs that work to 
address the most pressing workforce development needs in the greater Rochester area, and 
to provide diverse learners with clear paths to sustaining meaningful careers. 
For instance, the MCC  Corporate College program has designed and delivered more than 
100  new  noncredit  courses  and  provided  education  and  training  to  more  than  2,000 
individuals.  Additionally, 
including 
CooperVision  and  Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  to  deliver  customized  training  to  their 
employees.  The  Corporate  College  takes  an  innovative  approach  in  providing  workforce 
learning  and  development  solutions  informed  by  current  labor  market  data  and  expert 
analysis. 
the  college  has  partnered  with  128  employers, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  There  is  increased  awareness,  both  locally  and  nationally,  of  a  growing  skills  gap  within 
industries. Supporting middle-skill occupations has become a critical theme for many in the 
business community and within the workforce development community. In response to this 
issue, MCC announced  a new collaboration  with JPMorgan Chase called the  Middle-Skills 
Bridge Program. This program targets the disadvantaged and underrepresented populations 
within Rochester’s urban center to provide access to skill-based careers. Participants receive 
intensive  developmental  education  to  improve  their  literacy  and  math  skills  before 
transitioning into one of MCC’s accelerated certificate programs. 
There are many other good examples of cooperative workforce development programs in the 
New York Fed’s District. In Buffalo, the Overhead Electric Line Worker training program at 
Erie Community College (ECC) was created in conjunction with National Grid to address the 
critical  shortage  of  overhead  line  workers  and  technicians.  To  date,  the  program  has 
graduated 132 students, including 42 who are currently employed at National Grid. 
Another  example  is  OnForce  Solar,  which  sells  and  installs  solar  energy  packages  for 
commercial and residential customers. In 2010, OnForce Solar CEO Charles Feit moved his 
rapidly growing company to a then unoccupied building in the Port Morris area of the Bronx. 
After  struggling  to  find  skilled  workers,  OnForce  Solar  partnered  with  Bronx  Community 
College  to  create  a  $7 million  technology  hub  which  will  be  paid  for  by  the  company. The 
partnership  was  made  possible  by  the  Governor’s  Start-Up  NY  Program,  which  was 
launched  in  2013  to  spur  job  growth  in  distressed  areas  by  designating  tax-free  zones  at 
various  colleges  and  universities.  OnForce  Solar  also  developed  and  taught  a  newly 
designed technology course at Bronx Community College. 
Another example is Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey. When I visited 
Stevens  in  April,  I  learned  how  they  are  preparing  their  students  to  meet  local  workforce 
needs.  During  discussions  with  university  leaders,  I  heard  about  their  exciting  new 
partnership  with  NBC  Universal.  By  working  together,  a  new  Media/Broadcast  minor  was 
created  to  provide  the  necessary  coursework  to  prepare  students  for  employment  at  NBC 
Universal and similar companies. 
To  better  understand  the  extent  to  which  local  workforce  development  programs  are 
addressing skills gaps throughout Upstate New York, the New York Fed has engaged with 
community leaders from across the region. Our first meeting took place here in Rochester in 
March  2014.  An  important  issue  raised  by  many  participants  was  the  lack  of  information 
about available well-paying middle-skills career opportunities. To help address this concern, 
the New York Fed partnered with the Rochester Community Foundation, MCC, Finger Lakes 
Community College and Genesee Community College to launch a pilot video contest. 
The  purpose  of  the  contest  was  to  increase  awareness  about  specific  middle-skill 
occupations identified as in demand by analysis conducted by the Finger Lakes Economic 
Regional Council. The contest challenged college students to create a 30-second video that 
identifies  the  skills  required,  expected  wages  and  job  demands  for  an  occupational  group 
within a targeted set of industries. At an awards ceremony held in The Little Theatre here in 
downtown  Rochester  a  panel  of  judges  selected  the  winning  video  “Not  Just  a  Geek,” 
submitted by students from Finger Lakes Community College. The video focuses on the field 
of computer science. Local Rochester movie theaters will air the winning video for two weeks 
in September, and we will explore additional outlets for this video throughout the region as a 
public service announcement. 
These  success  stories  that  I’ve  highlighted  today  illustrate  the  potential  for  workforce 
development  to  help  cities  such  as  Rochester  continue  to  reinvent  themselves  for  today’s 
economy. We need to be vigilant in our focus on those in danger of being left behind. Too 
many individuals, especially in our urban centers, lack a high school diploma. For example, 
the Rochester City School District has a dropout rate of 25 percent, and an alarmingly low 
graduation rate of just 50 percent. Without a high school diploma, people are in danger of 
being  left  behind  without  the  skills  they  will  need  to  truly  participate  in  the  economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Succeeding in the international competition for jobs with a 50 percent graduation rate is like 
trying to win a boxing match with one hand tied behind your back. We must do better. While 
there  are  no  easy  answers,  for  the  regional  economy  to  thrive  everyone  needs  to  be  an 
active  participant.  We  need  to  figure  out  ways  to  re-engage  those  who  have  become 
detached from the workforce, or who feel like they don’t have the skills to compete in today’s 
challenging economic environment. 
In closing, Rochester is a metropolitan area in the midst of a process of transformation and 
reinvention. While this process is not easy, Rochester possesses a unique set of assets that 
will help it succeed, and in many ways is on the cutting edge of adapting to these changes. 
Rochester is, in fact, becoming a leader in workforce development. Reinvention like reform 
can  be  difficult,  and  requires  a  degree  of  boldness.  This  sentiment  was  expressed  by 
Rochester’s  social  reformer,  Susan  B.  Anthony,  who  said  that  “Cautious,  careful  people, 
always casting about to preserve their reputation and social standing, can never bring about 
a reform.” Rochester is doing Susan B. Anthony proud, showing spirit and determination. 
Thank you for your attention, I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
