  Philip Lowe: Managing two transitions 
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the 
Corporate Finance Forum, Sydney, 18 May 2015. 
 Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Kevin Lane for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
Thank you very much for the invitation to be part of this year’s Corporate Finance Forum. It is 
a pleasure to be here and to be able to address so many of Australia’s leading CFOs. 
This morning, I would like to talk about two transitions. 
The  first  is  a  domestic  one  –  that  is,  the  transition  in  the  Australian  economy  following  a 
period of extraordinarily strong growth in investment in the resources sector combined with 
record high commodity prices. 
The second is a much more international one – and that is what seems to be a transition to a 
world in which global interest rates are lower, at least for an extended period, than we had 
previously become used to. 
As CFOs, I suspect that you have a keen interest in both of these. 
The transition in the Australian economy 
So, first, the transition in the Australian economy. 
I am sure you are all familiar with the basic story here. 
In the middle of the previous decade, global commodity prices rose sharply, largely on the 
back of strong growth in China. In response, investment in the resources sector in Australia 
picked up considerably to take advantage of these high prices and Australia’s endowment of 
natural  resources,  especially  iron  ore,  coal  and  natural  gas.  These  developments,  which 
were interrupted briefly by the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009, can be seen clearly in this 
first graph (Graph 1). By 2012, mining investment, as a share of GDP, peaked at its highest 
level in at least a century. 
The  good  news  is  that  all  this  investment  has  considerably  expanded  Australia’s  capital 
stock,  and  thus  our  productive  capacity.  This  is  now  flowing  through  into  higher  resource 
production and exports, and it will continue to do so for many years to come (Graph 2). In 
2014,  the  tonnage  of  iron  ore  exported  was  double  that  of  five  years  earlier,  while  the 
tonnage of coal exported was up 40 per cent over this same period. There has also been 
growth in LNG exports, although the really big increases still lie ahead of us. All up, growth in 
resource  exports  has  contributed  around  1  percentage  point  to  annual  GDP  growth  over 
recent  years,  and  this  is  expected  to  continue  into  the  foreseeable  future,  particularly  as 
more LNG projects come on line. 
However,  the  big  lift  in  our  capital  stock  is  now  drawing  to  a  close  and  investment  in  the 
resources sector is declining towards more normal levels. Last year, it fell by 12 per cent and 
similar, or larger, falls are expected in both 2015 and 2016. At the same time, the increase in 
supply made possible by all this investment, both in Australia and elsewhere, has seen the 
prices of a number of our key exports decline significantly. 
Importantly,  when  investment  in  the  resources  sector  was  at  its  peak,  we  avoided  the 
economy  overheating  as  it  had  in  the  past  when  we  had  much  smaller  resources  booms. 
This was a significant achievement. In effect, other parts of the economy made way so that 
we could accommodate the large addition to the capital stock in the resources sector without 
the overall economy overheating. But now we are in a period of transition to the next phase. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In  this  new  phase,  these  other  parts  of  the  economy  could  be  expected  to  grow  more 
strongly than they had during the investment boom. 
In a perfect world, we might expect that this transition would be a perfectly seamless one – 
for non-mining activity to pick up at exactly the right time, and by exactly the right magnitude, 
to perfectly offset the decline in mining investment. In the real world though, things are not so 
simple, and it is perhaps unrealistic to expect that a transition of this magnitude could be fine-
tuned so well as to keep the economy in perfect equilibrium. Over the past three years, GDP 
growth  has  averaged  around  2½  per  cent,  and  the  RBA’s  latest  forecasts,  which  were 
released around 10 days ago, have this type of growth continuing for a while yet (Graph 3). 
While  in  many  other  developed  economies,  growth  of  2½  per  cent  would  be  viewed  fairly 
favourably, it is below what we have become used to in Australia and it is below what we are 
capable of. As a result, there has been a build-up of spare capacity in the overall economy. 
So,  the  transition  that  is  taking  place  is  not  exactly  seamless.  However,  we  should  have 
some  confidence  that  a  successful  transition  can  be  made,  particularly  given  our  flexible 
market-based  economy.  Among  other  things,  this  transition  is  being  assisted  by  three 
developments:  the  lower  exchange  rate;  restraint  in  aggregate  wage  growth;  and  the 
stimulatory setting of monetary policy. 
In terms of the exchange rate, over the past two years the Australian dollar has depreciated 
by around 20 per cent on a trade-weighted basis and by around 25 per cent against the US 
dollar. We are now starting to see signs that this depreciation is boosting activity in various 
parts of the economy. One of these is tourism, with exports of travel services rising again, as 
more people visit Australia and spend more money here (Graph 4).1 Conversely, imports of 
travel services have declined as more Australians holiday domestically. The lower exchange 
rate has also improved prospects in a number of other export-oriented industries, including 
some parts of manufacturing, agriculture and even mining. 
The second factor helping with the transition is modest wage growth. Over the past couple of 
years, aggregate wage growth has slowed noticeably and it is now running at the slowest 
pace  in  many  years  (Graph  5).  While  this  means  that  average  living  standards  are  not 
increasing at the rate they were during the investment boom, the slower growth in wages is 
helping to improve the competitiveness of the Australian economy. Lower wage growth, by 
supporting employment growth, is also helping to share the burden of adjustment across the 
broader community. In this context, it is notable that for the past nine months, employment 
growth has been strong enough to keep the unemployment rate broadly steady, even though 
GDP growth has been below average. 
The third factor assisting with the transition is the low level of interest rates. The effects are 
perhaps clearest in residential construction which increased by 8 per cent in 2014. And with 
building  approvals  continuing  at  very  high  levels  over  recent  months,  particularly  for 
apartments, we can look forward to further increases in construction activity over the months 
ahead (Graph 6). 
Low interest rates are also helping to boost household consumption. They are doing this by 
improving the aggregate cash flow of the household sector and boosting household wealth. 
However, as I have spoken about previously, the overall effect on consumption is probably 
smaller, or at least slower, than it was in the past.2 This is because high debt levels mean 
that  households  are  less  inclined  than  they  once  were  to  respond  to  low  interest  rates  by 
borrowing to increase their spending. Notwithstanding this, there is still a spending response 
                                                
1   Some of this rise is also related to a pick-up in education-related travel following changes to arrangements for 
student visas since 2012. 
2   See Lowe P (2015), “Low Inflation in a World of Monetary Stimulus”, Speech to the Goldman Sachs Annual 
Global Macro Economic Conference, Sydney, 5 March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
to low interest rates and household consumption rose by nearly 3 per cent in 2014. This is 
slower growth than in the period from the mid-1990s to the mid 2000s, but it is faster than 
current growth in real household income. 
The part of the transition that is taking place more slowly than we had earlier expected is the 
lift  in  business  investment  outside  the  resources  sector.  As  a  share  of  GDP,  non-mining 
business  investment  remains  just  above  the  levels  reached  in  the  recession  of  the  early 
1990s (Graph 7). For a few years now, each time we have updated our forecasts, we have 
pushed out the timing of the recovery in this part of the economy. The latest update was no 
different. Many businesses tell us that while conditions are okay at the moment, they are not 
sufficiently strong for them to lift their investment plans. Many feel uncertain about the future 
and  so  are  waiting  until  there  is  a  sustained  pick-up  in  demand  before  committing to  new 
capital expenditure. 
There is no single factor driving this tendency to wait and a similar story seems to be playing 
out  in  many  other  advanced  economies.  Around  the  world,  many  businesses  seem 
concerned  about  the  prospects  for  consumer  demand  given  high  levels  of  debt  and  the 
ageing of the population. There is also uncertainty about what type of capital investment is 
appropriate in a world where new information technologies are reshaping business models. 
Many  firms  also  see  globalisation  of  markets  as  a  challenge,  especially  where  increased 
competition has reduced market power. 
Overall then, a lift in non-mining investment remains the critical ingredient to stronger growth 
in the overall economy and to a successful transition. Many of the preconditions for this to 
occur are in place, although a sustained lift still seems some way off. I will return to this issue 
in a few moments. 
The transition in global interest rates 
But I would now like to turn to the second transition that I mentioned at the outset – that is, to 
a world in which global interest rates are lower than we had previously become used to. 
Perhaps the best way to see this is  with a couple of graphs. The first shows the average 
policy  rate  set  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of 
Japan  (Graph  8). With all  three  central  banks  setting  their  policy  rate  at,  or  very  close  to, 
zero, the average global policy rate is the lowest on record. The next graph shows the yields 
on 10-year government bonds in the United States, Germany and Japan (Graph 9). Again, in 
all  three  cases  these  rates  are  at  extraordinarily  low  levels,  even  after the  increases  over 
recent weeks. 
These very low rates mean that savers investing in risk-free assets earn negative real rates 
of return. They also mean that the time value of money is negative. And they mean that there 
is no compensation for postponing consumption to tomorrow. 
So, how do we find ourselves in this remarkable situation? 
The proximate cause is the decisions taken by world’s major central banks to set their policy 
rates at these historically low levels and to buy unprecedented amounts of assets from the 
private sector. But central banks do not act in a vacuum. They respond to the world in which 
they  find  themselves.  And,  that  world  is  one  in  which  there  is  an  elevated  desire  to  save 
relative to the desire to invest. And when the appetite for saving is high and few people want 
to use those savings to invest in new assets, the return to saving is, unfortunately, inevitably 
low. 
We should all hope that this period of extraordinarily low interest rates does not persist for 
too  much  longer:  that,  over  time,  confidence  lifts  and  once  again  businesses  compete 
strongly  for  the  world’s  available  pool  of  savings  to  fund  investment  in  productive  assets. 
Once this happens, higher returns will again be offered to savers. My own view is that there 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
is a reasonable prospect that, in time, this will indeed take place and that some normalisation 
of interest rates will occur. 
But  it  also  seems  plausible  that  the  average  return  on  savings,  at  least  for  a  protracted 
period, will be lower than it had been previously. The population in many countries is ageing, 
aggregate  household  indebtedness  is  high  and  many  of  the  service  industries  that  are 
growing  relatively  quickly  are  not  particularly  intensive  in  physical  capital.  Taken  together, 
these trends might be expected to boost the desire to save relative to invest and thus lead to 
a structurally lower level of global interest rates than otherwise. 
Of course, we can’t be sure that things will play out like this. Many other factors influence 
global saving and investment decisions, including what happens in the populous developing 
countries in Asia. But what we do know is that even if the current low level of interest rates is 
entirely cyclical – and has no structural element at all – it is proving to be highly persistent 
indeed. 
As  CFOs,  I  suspect  that  for  many  of  you  this  is  complicating  your  job  and  posing  new 
questions and challenges. 
In this context, I would like to touch briefly on three issues. 
The first is the challenge that low interest rates pose to anyone who is seeking to fund future 
liabilities.  Low  interest  rates  mean  that  the  present  discounted  value  of  these  liabilities  is 
higher  than  it  once  was.  In  turn,  this  means  that  more  assets  are  needed  to  cover  these 
liabilities. For anyone managing a long-tail insurance business or a defined benefit pension 
scheme, this is a major challenge. It is also a challenge for retirees and those planning for 
retirement. 
The second issue is the effect of low interest rates on asset prices. Just as low interest rates 
increase  the  value  of  future  liabilities,  they  increase  the  value  of  a  given  stream  of  future 
revenue from any asset. The result is higher asset prices. Another way of looking at this is 
that faced with low returns on risk-free assets, investors have sought other assets, and in so 
doing they have pushed up the prices of these assets. A good example of this is commercial 
property, where investors have been attracted by the relatively high yields, pushing prices up 
even though rents are declining (Graph 10). 
A  rise  in  asset  prices  is,  of  course,  part  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  But 
developments  here  need  to  be  watched  very  carefully.  History  is  littered  with  examples  of 
unsustainable  asset  price  rises  emerging  on  the  back  of  perfectly  justifiable  increases  in 
prices. In a number of cases, this has ended badly, especially if there is leverage involved. 
Also, we should not lose sight of the fact that interest rates and the returns generated from 
assets  are  ultimately  linked  to  one  another.  So,  interest rates may  be  structurally  lower  in 
part because the stream of future income generated from assets is also lower than in the 
past. This would have obvious implications for the sustainable level of many asset prices. 
The third issue is the effect of low interest rates on firms’ investment decisions and hurdle 
rates of return. In today’s environment, it seems that many investors have, reluctantly, come 
to accept that they will earn lower yields on their existing assets. An open question though is 
whether the same acceptance of lower returns is flowing through to firms’ decisions about 
the creation of new assets – that is, their own investment plans. 
The international evidence is that the hurdle rates of return that firms use for new investment 
are quite sticky and that they are not very responsive to movements in interest rates.3 There 
is less evidence of this issue in Australia, but a recent survey of CFOs by Deloitte hints at the 
                                                
3   For example, see Sharpe S and Gustavo Suarez (2013), “Do CFOs Think Investment is Sensitive to Interest 
Rates?”,  FEDS  Notes,  26  September.  Available  at  <http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-
notes/2013/do-cfos-think-investment-is-sensitive-to-interest-rates-20130926.html>. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
same conclusion. The survey results suggest that hurdle rates of return on new investment 
are typically above 10 per cent and sometimes considerably so (Graph 11). The results also 
suggest that the average margin between the hurdle rate of return and the weighted-average 
cost of capital is about 3 percentage points. As part of the survey, firms were also asked how 
often they changed the hurdle rate, with the most frequent answer being “very rarely”. These 
findings are very similar to those reached through the Bank’s own extensive business liaison 
program. 
One  issue  that  this  raises  is  what  is  the  appropriate  hurdle  rate  of  return  in  a  world  of 
persistently low interest rates? Each CFO will no doubt have a different answer to this, but in 
a world of persistently low interest rates, it may well turn out that the average answer is – or 
should be – lower than it used to be. 
Recently, in a number of countries there has been a tendency for firms to return funds to 
shareholders. These firms are effectively saying to their shareholders, “here, you manage the 
money, as we do not have investment opportunities that satisfy our internal rate of return.” In 
many cases, shareholders have welcomed this, seeing it as a disciplined approach to capital 
management.  The  difficulty  is  that  if  the  majority  of  firms  act  in  this  way,  shareholders  in 
aggregate get left holding the cash. And, on that cash, they earn very low rates of return – 
almost certainly lower than the rate of return that would, on average, be earned if that cash 
were invested by businesses in real assets. This is really just another way of saying that if 
the appetite for investment is low, savers, in the end, will get low returns on their savings. 
So, as I said, this world of low interest rates is creating many challenges for you as CFOs – 
whether you are a CFO needing to fund future liabilities, a CFO valuing and managing assets 
or  a  CFO  determining  the  appropriate  hurdle  rate  of  return  for  your  firm’s  investment 
decisions. 
This world is also creating challenges for managing the first transition that I spoke about – 
that in the Australian economy. 
The large monetary expansion abroad and low interest rates of the major central banks have 
meant  that  the  value  of  the  Australian  dollar  has  been  higher  than  would  otherwise  have 
been  the  case.  In  this  context,  it  is  difficult  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  a  further 
depreciation  of  the  Australian  dollar  would  be  helpful  in  the  transition  of  the  Australian 
economy. 
In this challenging global environment, the RBA is seeking to play a constructive role. As I 
said earlier, low interest rates are supporting spending in the economy. The further reduction 
in the cash rate earlier this month will provide a bit more support and it will help reinforce 
some of the recent encouraging signs, particularly in household spending. In time, stronger 
consumption growth and a continuation of the pick-up in residential construction should lead 
to a lift in business investment. 
It  is,  however,  unlikely  to  be  in  Australia’s  long-term  interests  to  engineer  a  consumption 
boom  by  encouraging  people  to  borrow  large  amounts  against  future  income.  This  is 
especially so when debt levels are already high and prospects for future income growth are 
not  as  positive  as  they  once  were.  So, there  is  a fairly fine  line  to tread  here. The  RBA’s 
recent decisions have sought to strike a prudent balance – to help encourage consumption 
growth  and  thus  business  investment,  but  avoid  the  type  of  imbalances  that  could  cause 
problems later on. We will continue to assess that balance carefully. 
Of course, the more enduring solution to the two issues I have talked about – the transition in 
the  Australian  economy  and  low  returns  to  savers  –  is  an  improvement  in  the  underlying 
investment environment. This is a challenge not just in Australia, but in almost all advanced 
economies. Unfortunately, there is no magic lever here, but the good news is that the task is 
not an impossible one! 
Thank you for listening and I would be happy to answer your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
