  Patrick Honohan: Critique of the financial crisis decisions of end-
September 2008 – my views 
Introductory statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at 
the Oireachtas Banking Inquiry, Dublin, 11 March 2015. 
 In  my  letter  of  February  12,  I  sought  to  clarify  parts  of  my  evidence  to  the  Inquiry  on 
January 15.  I  have  prepared  these  short  introductory  remarks  on  the  presumption  that  the 
Inquiry has invited me back on this occasion to amplify my views on the alternative courses 
of action that might have been taken by the Government at the end of September 2008. 
Perhaps I should recall explicitly that I myself had no involvement in the guarantee decision. 
So my views are based on what I learnt from preparing my May 2010 Report on Regulatory 
and Financial Stability Policy, as well as on many conversations with other experts and on 
my general knowledge of banking crises in other countries. 
Critique of the decisions of end-September 2008 
There  are  several  features  of  the  decisions  at  end  September  that  can  be  criticised  even 
allowing for the limited information then available to the decision makers. 
• 
First,  the  guaranteeing  of  some  of  the  subordinated  debt.  Providing  an  explicit 
guarantee to subordinated debt holders is not only potentially costly to the State but 
undermines the rationale for allowing banks to meet part of their regulatory capital 
with  subordinated  debt.  This  was  a  definite  design  flaw.  True,  thanks  to  steps 
subsequently  taken,  the  payout  to  subordinated  debt  holders  of  Anglo  in  the  end 
was a small proportion of the total fiscal cost; however, they were not negligible. 
Second, guaranteeing existing outstanding debt (senior bonds and term deposits). 
This was not necessary to underpin the banks’ continuing access to funds. Nor did 
the  government  guarantees  introduced  by  other  countries  in  2008  offer  any 
significant backward looking protection in this way. It is true that imposing losses on 
such bondholders would have had a damaging reputational effect on Ireland as a 
whole,  as  well  as  impacting  local  holders  of  such  bonds;  but  that  is  a  different 
question. The decision to impose such losses could not have been lightly taken; but 
offering a pre-emptive guarantee on already outstanding (“old”) debt ahead of a full 
assessment of what it might cost was essentially gratuitous. Furthermore, because 
much  of  this  debt  entitled  the  holders  to  immediate  accelerated  repayment  in  “an 
event  of  default”,  the  Government  were  effectively  precluded  from  liquidating  or 
extensively  restructuring  the  guaranteed  institutions  because  they  would  have  to 
repay  the  guaranteed  debt  forthwith  (which  they  would  have  been  unable  to  do). 
This effectively postponed drastic restructuring action until the end of the guarantee 
period,  by  which  time  the  Government’s  entry  into  the  EU-IMF  programme  was 
imminent. 
Third, failure to consult. The Irish decision to provide a blanket guarantee, without 
prior  consultation,  triggered  immense  pressure  for  guarantees  all  over  Europe. 
Other  governments  resented  the  Irish  action  and  this  has  made  it  difficult  for  the 
Government to make its case for burden-sharing with Europe. 
Fourth, failure to seize immediate control over the management of Anglo. It should 
be assumed that the existing management of a bank whose business model has lost 
the  confidence  of  the  market  and  which  has  run  out  of  cash  have  neither  the 
expertise  nor  the  incentive  to  recover  the  situation  safely.  The  public  authorities 
should  have  intervened  immediately  to  take  control  of  the  bank,  for  which 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  nationalisation  was  the  available  tool.  Fortunately  nationalisation  did  follow  in 
January 2009 without evident value destruction having taken place in the intervening 
period. 
How much does this matter? 
Having made those criticisms, it is important to keep the scale in perspective. The decisions 
on  the  night  of  the guarantee  did  of  course  have  consequences for  Ireland.  But  there  has 
been  a  tendency  to  overstate  the  extent  of  the  impact  of  that  night’s  decisions  on  the 
subsequent  welfare  of  the  nation.  It  would  be  hard  to  deny  that  most  –  I  would  hazard  a 
figure of at least 80–90% – of the overall hardship that followed the bursting of the bubble, 
was (albeit unbeknownst to the decision-makers that night) already inescapably embedded in 
the  situation.  The  damage  had  been  made  unavoidable  by  the  unrestrained  credit  and 
property boom. (The fiscal austerity measures that have had to be taken are not just due to 
the €40 billion or so in additional net debt that can be linked to the guarantee, but also reflect 
the  far  larger  impact  of  the  ending  of  the  construction  boom  on  the  Government’s  tax 
revenue and spending needs. And the fiscal costs are only one aspect of the total damage to 
Ireland). 
In  my  letter  to  the  Inquiry  of  February  12,  I  have  distinguished  between  a  hypothetical 
“hindsight” scenario (1), in which the Government would have been convincingly advised of 
the actual likely magnitude of the cost of a guarantee, and the actual scenario (2) with only 
the information available at the time. 
In  the  actual  case  the  Government  had  no  information  at  hand  indicating  that  any  of  the 
banks were about to experience losses far in excess of their capital reserves. What I have 
suggested  as  the  best  course  of  action  (given  the  lack  of  such  information  Scenario  2)  – 
buying  time  for  negotiation  with  partners,  seizing  control  over  the  two  failing  banks,  and 
limiting  the  scope  of  the  guarantee  –  could  hardly  (unless  those  negotiations  had  proved 
remarkably  successful)  have  reduced  the  direct  fiscal  bill  by  more  than  a  few  billion  –  a 
fraction of the actual damage. 
The alternative (under the hindsight Scenario 1) of bailing-in some of the bondholders and 
depositors of Anglo and INBS would have imposed additional disruption to economic activity 
and  capital  formation  which  would  have  offset  a  lot  of  the  savings  to  the  State  from  not 
paying the creditors. 
I conclude that the need for “austerity measures”: the scale of tax increases and expenditure 
reductions that have proved necessary since, could have been reduced somewhat, but not 
all that much, by anything done at the end of September 2008. 
Maintaining perspective 
As I have remarked recently, the boom and the bust both damaged our economy. The boom, 
and the decisions that were taken during it, meant that Ireland had to adjust down from living 
standards that could never have been sustained, with sizeable and capricious shifts in the 
distribution of wealth. 
The  style  of  banking  in  Ireland,  its  regulation  and  broader  economic  policy  were  strongly 
influenced by comparable styles adopted at that time in countries often used as exemplars 
for Irish decision makers, and in particular the US and UK. But the scale of the excesses in 
Ireland put its banking crisis in a different league (though not as bad as Iceland). 
The  extent  and  nature  of  the guarantee  decision frustrated subsequent efforts  to minimise 
the costs and speed the recovery. But the bulk of these costs could not have been avoided 
by a different course of action on the night of the guarantee. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
