Richard W Fisher: Remarks upon acceptance of the Mexican Order of the 
Aztec Eagle 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, upon acceptance of the Mexican Order of the Aztec Eagle, Mexico 
City, 17 February 2015. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
My relationship with Mexico has been a lifetime affair. 
It starts with a little boy who walked every morning in his gray flannel shorts and white shirt, a 
green leather satchel strapped to his back, from his home on Calle Monte Tauro to the Maud 
Crocker School. 
Along the way, tortilleras would treat him to heavily buttered and salted handmade tortillas 
that, by the time he arrived at school, would leave stains on his shirt, incurring the wrath of 
his maestras. 
Those maestras taught him math so well, it formed the basis for his career as an investor 
and banker. And despite the punishment they meted out for the butter-stained shirts, to this 
day  whenever he goes to a Mexican restaurant in Texas, he always asks first for a tortilla 
that he covers in butter and salt. His granddaughters call them “Baba’s tacos.” Over a half-
century later, they carry on a treasured tradition that started here on the streets of D.F. 
It starts with a boy being taught the history of the Olmecs, Mayans, Toltecs and Aztecs; of 
the  Grito  de  Dolores  of Don  Miguel  Hidalgo  –  the  real  “Zorro”;  and  of La  Reforma  of  Don 
Benito Juárez. 
It starts with a boy who spent Saturdays at las charreadas, cruised the then-clean waters of 
Xochimilco, water skied on Lake Tequesquitengo, and whose mother took him on Sundays 
to La Villa to the Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe. It starts with a boy laughing at Cantinflas 
and weeping for Marcelino Pan y Vino. 
It  starts  with  a  boy  playing  Little  League  baseball  for  los  Tigres  and  later,  los  Leones, 
coached by a man named Norman Borlaug. On weekends, Mr. Borlaug would take that wide-
eyed boy on tractor rides through corn and wheat fields, where at the end of the day they 
would eat paletas while the coach analyzed samples from the fields. Those samples became 
the  basis  for  the  Green  Revolution  that  he  started  in  Mexico  and  that  ended  up  feeding 
billions of people around the world. 
Well, I think by now you know that the boy I’m speaking of is me. I may be the only central 
banker on the planet whose Little League baseball coach went on to win the Nobel Peace 
Prize! 
My  fondest  childhood  memories  are  from  Mexico.  Small  wonder  that  I  delighted  when 
President Clinton asked me to become deputy U.S. trade representative and help implement 
NAFTA – even if it meant matching wits with formidable negotiators like Luis de la Calle and 
Herminio Blanco! 
Small wonder that as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, I have delighted in 
working closely with Guillermo Ortiz and Agustín Carstens. Small wonder that at meetings of 
the Federal Open Market Committee or in U.S. banking circles, I have often argued Mexico’s 
case.  Or  taken  sheer  pleasure  in  pointing  out  to  U.S.  congressmen  and  senators,  and  in 
speeches and media interviews, that the Mexican government – unlike my own government 
– actually can agree on a budget, keep deficits under control, bring about structural change 
and resist interfering with the workings of an independent central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
I am full of pride for Mexico. I am full of pride that this country, the country of my happiest 
childhood years, would now choose to honor me with the Order of the Aztec Eagle. 
The  citation  for  this  honor  speaks  of  my  being  a  fierce  defender  of  price  stability.  In  the 
parlance of central banking, I am referred to as a “hawk.” Well, it may not surprise you to 
learn that taxonomists place the eagle and the hawk in the same bird family. So, Secretary 
Meade, Secretary Videgaray and dear friend Agustín, I accept this thoughtful honor from the 
president of the country I love so much with hawkish pride and close kinship to the golden 
eagle that is the symbol of Mexico. 
¡Viva México! 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
