  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in The Irish Times 
Interview  with  Mr Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  The  Irish  Times,  conducted  by  Mr  Arthur  Beesley  on  12  January,  published  on 
16 January 2015. 
 How deep is the recovery in Ireland and to what extent can we be sure that this kind of 
very positive growth is going to continue? 
Ireland has a potential to be the fastest growing euro zone country in 2015. That’s clearly a 
recognition of the success of the adjustment programme...This has been done by the Irish 
people and they have paid the price so it shows that this now comes with a reward, that it 
was worth it. 
Does it mean that everything is done and that Ireland is on the safe side? Well I hope so. I 
wish the best for the Irish economy but there are still some challenging areas, like obviously 
the labour market is still adjusting, youth unemployment is very high, which in most European 
countries  is  an  issue.  That’s  an  issue  that  Ireland  faces.  It’s  being  addressed  but  it’s  not 
done. It’s not over yet. 
I would also flag banking sector issues, in particular the high level of non-performing loans 
which remain to be addressed, I guess what I’m saying is consistent with what the Central 
Bank of Ireland says anyway. But I would certainly encourage banks to be very forthcoming 
in  addressing  non-performing  loans,  in  using  their  buffers  to  accept  losses  when  they 
restructure loans and I would also encourage borrowers and lenders to engage directly, not 
waiting to go to court to settle. The more forthcoming collectively borrowers and the lenders 
can be in addressing non-performing loans, the faster the banking sector will restart and the 
more  they  can  create  room  on  their  balance  sheet  to  extend  new  loans  to  the  economy 
because that is what the economy needs. The economy needs fresh money. For that you 
need to reset the system. 
One last observation to make is on the fiscal side. A lot has been done obviously, but when 
the economy bounces back in any country there is always a risk of being over-optimistic and 
of spending money that is not yet there. I’m not saying that this is what is being done but I 
certainly think the Government should guard against this risk of spending money that has not 
come yet. They should err on the side of caution given the level of debt, which remains high. 
Do  you  have  any  concern  about  the  budget  for  2015  which  was  a  modestly 
expansionary  budget  in  a  scenario  where  the  original  plan  was  to  retrench  by 
€2 billion? 
I  think  all  institutions  in  the  post-programme  monitoring  –  the  ECB  together  with  the 
Commission and the IMF – have advised the Government to be really on the side of caution 
here. 
Were you unhappy with the budget? 
We would like the budget to be as conservative as possible. That’s our advice. 
Was that budget not conservative enough? 
It’s more advice for the future I’m making here... At the moment it is positive but you really 
have to be extremely cautious. 
The plan is to continue decreasing income tax again in the budget for 2016. Is that a 
matter  of  concern  to  you  given  your  expressed  preference  for  as  conservative  a 
budget as possible? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  What really matters most is the fiscal stance in general. I am not in a position and I don’t 
want to pass a detailed judgement on what the Irish finance minister is doing. The ECB is not 
a  fiscal  institution.  We’re  not  managing  the  Irish  budget.  We  give  advice  given  the 
macroeconomic situation. That advice is on the fiscal stance generally. 
The  Government  has  also  indicated  very  clearly  that  it  will  invite  the  public  sector 
trade unions into discussions around the unwinding of emergency laws to cut public 
pay. Is that – to your mind – premature? 
Again, I would have the same answer here. Ireland is out of the programme, right? So we’ve 
moved  out  of  this  close  monitoring  mode  by  the  troika.  Fiscal  policy  is  in  the  hand  of  the 
Government, while remaining in line with the EU requirements. We give advice on what we 
see  fit,  given  the  macroeconomic  situation  and  our  advice  is  to  err  on  the  side  of  caution 
when it comes to the fiscal balance. I’m not going to give advice on the composition of the 
budget. That is certainly for the Irish Government to decide. 
Irish  politics  at  the  moment  is  in  a  mode  where  people  are  increasingly  starting  to 
think about the general election to come... What would your observation be to people 
who will be campaigning to get into government in Ireland? 
I certainly have no advice to give to elected politicians or to incumbents or candidates in a 
political  campaign.  What  matters  for  us  in  a  euro  zone  perspective  is  the  continuity  of 
policies. As we’ve just discussed, Ireland is not out of the woods. A lot has been done. It has 
started  to  yield  benefits.  We  are  seeing  the  benefits.  However,  fiscal  consolidation  is  not 
over.  So  here  we  need  continuity.  Our  best  advice  is  to  ensure  continuity  in  the 
implementation of reforms. Now, it’s certainly not for us to prejudge the content of policies. 
The  different  parties  have  different  policies.  That  is  just  normal.  That’s  democracy,  as 
everywhere in Europe. 
Are you saying that this is the economic reality in which whatever Irish government is 
in  power  after  the  election  must  work?  The  reality  it  must  deal  is  that  the  fiscal 
position is going to remain constrained – is that what you are saying? 
Let me phrase it positively. I would say that these efforts have been successful. Ireland has 
reaped benefits not only in terms of growth but also in terms of restoring market access and 
lowering  the  cost  of  government  funding  and  this  is  about  consolidating  this  success  and 
building on the successes, and for that you need continuity in policies. 
Is  there  any  danger  to  your  mind  that  some  of  the  progress  made  could  be  lost  if 
Ireland gets it wrong? 
There is always this danger. There is always a risk of complacency. There is always a risk of 
things turning wrong. But given everything that we’ve seen in Ireland over the last years... 
We’ve seen so many achievements so much commitment, not only by the political elite but 
by the Irish people themselves, they’ve paid the price, they’ve made the efforts, they’re now 
seeing the first effect of these policies. So I’m extremely confident that this can go on. 
You know what? We at the ECB use Ireland as a model for larger euro zone economies. This 
is a country that has been hit extremely hard by the crisis, has made a lot of efforts and is 
now starting to reap the fruits – or the benefit – of the efforts. Such cannot be said of all euro 
zone countries, in particular not of the large countries so that’s really an example we use in 
the European discussion of how things can work. 
Is there any concern at the level of the ECB – as an institution – about any danger that 
there could be political instability in Ireland? 
Again, we don’t pass judgement on political outcome or political risks. Politics are fragile all 
throughout  Europe  in  all  countries,  large  and  small,  and  this  is  because  of  the  crisis.  The 
crisis has shaken the foundations of our societies, in particular through high unemployment 
everywhere. And politics are now fragile. So the only advice we can give because we are not 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  a political institution is to design and implement reforms that can restore growth and create 
jobs, that’s the only way to make politics more solid. 
You mentioned labour market policies. What specifically would you like to see? 
I’m  just  saying  that  we  need  continued  implementation  of  what  was  agreed  in  the 
memorandum, nothing more. 
Labour market activation policies? That kind of stuff? 
Exactly. 
Turning to the banks, how crucial is for them to bite the bullet and use their capital 
buffers to confront the question of loan losses? 
Banks have to navigate between different constraints. I’m not saying that it’s an easy job to 
do. There are constraints. We ourselves as supervisor of the four largest banks, we would be 
the first to say that they needed some capital. They were right to replenish their capital. In 
one case this has been mandated by the stress test. It is being done. So strong capital is a 
protection in today’s world. It is mandatory, mandated by regulation and it is a protection and 
it is something that allows  you to lend more contrary to what bankers sometimes suggest. 
Strong capital is not money that is divested away from the economy. It’s quite the contrary, 
something  that  makes  it  possible  to  lend  more.  So  they  need  strong  capital  but  they  also 
need  to  be forthcoming in  addressing the  non  performing  loan  issue  and  sometimes  there 
are different ways – depending on the kind of loan we are talking about – sometimes loan 
restructuring involves recognition of loan losses and then they have to be ready to use their 
P& L and their capital to do it, because it’s an investment, it’s an investment into the future, 
it’s not money being lost. It’s an investment to recreate capacity to lend into the economy. It’s 
also for the benefit of all so it has a social purpose. 
Why in your view haven’t they done this? 
Because it is complex. Because in many cases discussions between borrowers and creditors 
are difficult and you don’t have an incentive to be forthcoming. Sometimes you just want to 
wait until it comes to court and wait for the court decision, which is perfectly legal but it just 
postpones the resolution of the issue. So it creates uncertainty which is bad for the economy. 
Is that a concern throughout the banking sector or do you have concerns in respect of 
particular institutions? 
It is a priority throughout the banking system. 
Are we in a space in which you as ECB – as regulator – could set targets for the banks 
in this space? 
From  what  I  can  see,  what  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  done  has  been  effective  in 
accelerating this process so it’s certainly moving in the right direction. 
But you want banks to go further, faster? 
Yes. 
Mario Draghi said the ECB will not be participating in the inquiry but Enda Kenny said 
he approached Mr Draghi at the last European summit and asked him to reconsider. 
Has there been any reconsideration? Is the position of the ECB settled? Will the ECB 
be cooperating in any way with the inquiry? 
The position of the ECB is settled. It is settled for fundamental institutional and legal reasons 
– and I would like to clarify that there is no lack of good faith on our side. What we’re saying 
is that we have clear rules that for good reasons frame the accountability of the ECB and that 
is  accountability  to  the  European  Parliament,  accountability  under  European  law.  So  ECB 
officials – president, board members, staff members, including the former president by the 
way,  if  you  would  ask  the  question  –  are  accountable  to  the  European  Parliament,  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  European citizens. They cannot be bound by parliamentary procedures under national law in 
any EU country. This is not the way it works. 
We’ve said extremely clearly that we are ready to engage with all stakeholders, starting with 
the  Irish  parliament  in  informal  discussions  outside  of  this  inquiry  because  it  is  of  course 
possible to have conversations with any national parliaments. We’ve done it in the past. It is 
just  not  possible  to  bind  the  ECB  through  a  national  procedure,  a  national  parliamentary 
procedure. 
Governor Honohan is absolutely the right person to account not only for the decisions of the 
Central Bank of Ireland but also for the decisions of the Eurosystem because he’s a member 
of the Governing Council. 
You say there’s been an informal engagement with the inquiry? 
I am saying that there can be an informal engagement with the Irish Parliament outside of the 
inquiry. We’re open to that. 
That strikes me as a change? 
I don’t think so. 
And  what  might  such  an  informal  engagement  encompass  –  a  willingness  to  have 
meetings but not necessarily in open session in a committee room in parliament? 
...That’s a discussion to be had with them. I haven’t seen such requests. That’s a discussion 
we should have with the Oireachtas. 
There’s  the  avenue  of  private  meetings  with  the  inquiry  or  officers  of  the  inquiry? 
There’s the question of providing paper records, the account of the ECB? 
Whatever  can  be  useful  provided  that  it’s  consistent  with  our  legal  framework  notably  in 
terms of confidentiality. 
The  inquiry  is  likely  to  look  at  what  happened  in  the  lead  in  to  the  bailout,  which 
remains controversial. Did Jean-Claude Trichet go too far in the letter? 
First  as  you  know  the  letters  have  been  disclosed  on  our  website  with  all  kind  of 
accompanying  documents  which  I  hope  help  inform  the  discussion,  also  in  Ireland. We’ve 
done it also to inform the discussion in Ireland. 
In  substance  what  the  ECB  president  did  at  the  time  was  to  clarify  the  framework  under 
which the ECB operates. The ECB is a rules-based institution. We have to make it clear what 
are the constraints under which we are operating. Some of them are legal, some of them are 
practices  or  long-standing  practices  and  ECB  decisions,  which  altogether  constitute  our 
organisational  framework.  At  the  heart  of  this  organisational  framework,  we  have  the 
principle  under  which  the  ECB  lends  –  under  monetary  policy  –  and  the  national  central 
banks lend – under emergency liquidity assistance when that happens. Both the ECB and 
the NCB can lend only to solvent institutions because lending to an insolvent institution would 
be doing the government’s job to resolve it and circumventing the prohibition on monetary 
financing, which is a treaty requirement. And, when they lend, both have to lend against good 
collateral. What the President of the ECB did was to restate these constraints and to explain 
a number of conditions that would need to be met to fit into these strict criteria. So that was 
about reaffirming the rules. To be clear: the ECB did not take a decision. The ECB did not 
invent  a  new  rule.  That  was  just  about  enforcing  existing  rules  in  that  particular  very  new 
case. In an unforeseen, untested situation, there was a need to clarify how the rules would 
apply. 
You  had  an  ECB  president  saying  emergency  support  for  Ireland’s  banks  could  be 
withdrawn if there’s no bailout. And yet once there was a bailout – and this remains 
very controversial in Ireland – a demand to impose losses on senior bondholders was 
refused on three occasions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That’s a totally different discussion, in terms of size. We are talking of bailing in or not bailing 
in senior bondholders which would have been in the order of €3 billion or €4 billion, when in 
late 2011, the issue of burden sharing of senior debt issued by Anglo Irish Bank was on the 
programme’s  agenda.  You  can  compare  this  figure  to  the  total  ECB  and  Central  Bank  of 
Ireland lending – Eurosystem lending, all in all. 
At the moment when the programme started, in November 2010, this was in the region of 
€140  billion  if  I’m right, which  is  85  per  cent  of Irish GDP  and  which  was  one-fourth  of  all 
Eurosystem lending, given that the capital key of Ireland in the ECB is 1 per cent. 
You should also bear in mind that in late 2011, the Irish government was in the process of 
undertaking a very significant recapitalisation of Irish banks to an amount of around ¤24bn, 
or  approximately  14%  of  GDP.  Had  confidence  been  shaken  by  the  bail-in,  more  money 
could have been required for recapitalisation, ultimately impinging on the Irish taxpayer. So 
these are the numbers. 
So  we  are  talking  of  something  which  would  have  been  limited  in  size  anyway  and  which 
would  have  come  on  top  of  something  which  has  been  decided.  –  The  bailing  in  of  junior 
bondholders, which took place, was also significantly larger, €14 billion I would say. We are 
talking  of  something  which  would  not  have  made  a  difference  in  terms  of  programme 
funding...  I  say  at  the  time  because  you  have  to  judge  the  discussion  based  on  the 
information  and  based  on  the  constraints  that  were  there  at  the  time,  right?  You  cannot 
revisit the past and the environment has changed. 
I’ll  tell  you  why.  At  the  time,  the  situation  was  that  there  was  international  and  European 
consensus that the senior bondholders in a restructuring should not be bailed in at European 
level. This had been said at G20 level, if I’m not wrong, and there were significant – or very 
elevated – financial stability concerns related to contagion, not only within Ireland but also 
throughout the euro zone generally. I was not there. I’m just explaining the arguments. The 
issue  was  to  weigh  the  potential  benefits  of  adding  €3  billion–€4  billion  or  decreasing  the 
burden by €3 billion–€4 billion or shifting €3 billion–€4 billion to one particular stakeholder, 
which  were  the  senior  bondholders,  against  the  fact  that  there  was  no  international 
consensus.  Or  rather, the  international  consensus  was  against  it. There was  no  European 
framework and there were significant financial stability risks. So that was the judgement at 
the time. 
If  the  same  question  were  to  be  asked  today,  the  answer  would  be  extremely  different 
because now we do have international consensus, we have European consensus, and as a 
matter of fact we have European law (i.e. the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive). So 
we’ve  moved  on.  The system  has moved  on from the  bailout  culture to  the  bail-in  culture. 
You can say it is unfortunate, that the question was asked in these terms at the time and I 
would agree but that was the situation at this time in Europe and also at the global level. Now 
we’ve  moved  on  and  these  kind  of  questions  hopefully  will  not  be  asked  any  more, 
anywhere. 
Do you feel, given the intensity of debate on this question in Ireland and the extent of 
ECB support for Ireland’s banks, that the ECB received a bad rap in the debate? 
I can understand why the discussion has taken place and it just highlights the importance of 
this bail-in discussion. In a sense it vindicates everything which has been done since ... at 
the European level and ... at global level, most lately this new G20 decision on the Total Loss 
Absorption  Capacity  which  is  also  about  bailing  in  bondholders.  It  shows  how  careful  we 
have  to  be  when  it  comes  to  sharing  the  burden  in  a  crisis.  It  shows  how  political  the 
discussion can be and it shows the need for a clear framework before the crisis happens. But 
we  didn’t  have  it  then.  It’s  just  unfortunate  that  this  happened  at  that  place  and  at  that 
moment. Now hopefully we have a stronger framework. So we’ve learned. Not just the ECB, 
we collectively as public authorities. Collectively we have learned from this and we now have 
a stronger framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
What people in Ireland or elsewhere who would say that’s all very well but that it’s a 
little bit late now in terms of the cost of Ireland’s rescue? 
We are preparing for the next crisis. We have to learn the lessons. It’s our duty to learn the 
lessons.  As  I  said,  meanwhile,  Ireland  has  been  supported.  It  has  been  supported  by  the 
euro group, by the ESM, the EFSF, it has been supported by the IMF, and it has also been 
supported by the ECB within our own mandate, in numbers, in size… 
In this period you were in Paris. Do you have any observations as someone working in 
the French system about what was going on in Ireland at this time? It’s clear that the 
Irish  government  –  in  the  weeks  after  Lehman  Brothers  failed  –  guaranteed  the 
liabilities or the entire Irish banking system. 
What  I  can  say  is  that  there  was  a  certainly  a  lot  of  proximity  between  the  views  of  the 
French government and the views of the ECB at that time, on several accounts. 
First, that the decision, that the blanket guarantee on deposits was not the right decision to 
take. This was also the ECB’s view because it created issues elsewhere in the euro zone. 
And second, that there was high financial stability risk, that there were contagion risks which 
justified a very careful look at these burden-sharing issues, so I think that the view was not 
different  in  Paris.  And  certainly  that  Ireland  had  to  be  supported,  which  the  French 
government did also by supporting the programme and by being instrumental in the creation 
of the EFSF... 
What  would  have  been  the  preferable  route  for  the  Irish  government  to  take  at  that 
time? 
It’s so difficult to take these kinds of decisions. I certainly would not claim to pass a moral 
judgement here. You have to take decisions based on the information you have. There were 
many  negative  consequences,  and  I  take  it  that  these  consequences  were  not  foreseen 
when the decision was taken... 
That remains the view? 
From a European perspective, many of the interactions and cross border consequences and 
effects were not properly understood initially and that’s one reason why, in a sense, the euro 
zone  authorities  collectively  let  the  crisis  develop  and  deepen.  These  kinds  of  interactions 
and spillovers  were only gradually understood. It was only late down the road for instance 
that the ESM was created, finally, with adequate size. So it has taken quite some time for 
Europe to understand what was going on and that this was a regional crisis. It was not only a 
set  of  local  issues,  but  one  with  the  potential  to  disrupt  the  system  as  a  whole.  That’s  a 
collective responsibility, not only an Irish one. 
On deflation / Greece… 
...The  starting  point  is  not  deflation,  but  inflation  being  low,  far  away  from  our  definition  of 
price stability which is below but close to 2% in the medium term. So the discussion is on the 
risk of inflation being too low for too long and on the available instruments if we have to do 
more. Deflation would be a compounding factor, I would say, because if the euro zone were 
to fall into deflation, which is not the case today, but it certainly is a risk, it is a limited risk but 
it is a risk... 
We don’t need to be in deflation to worry about low inflation, low inflation is bad enough. So 
we have that discussion. An important part of that discussion relates to the impact of the low 
oil price and whether this is a temporary or permanent shock to inflation... 
The usual answer in the ECB would be to see if that’s temporary ... and this is what we’ve 
done, usually faced with commodity price shocks to commodity prices, up or down. This is 
what  we’ve  done  in  2009  for  instance,  the  last  time  we  saw  a  significant  decrease  in 
commodity prices. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This time may be different. It may be different because we are starting from a different place 
which is extremely low inflation, extremely low headline inflation and also decreasing inflation 
expectations  in  the  medium-term,  and  we  see  a  stronger  link  between  medium  term 
expectations  and  short  term  inflation  numbers/outcomes.  So  anything  that  happens  to 
headline inflation rates has potential to feed into long term inflation expectations and that’s 
what we have to be wary of, where we want to be careful. 
And  then  when  it  comes  to  possible  instruments,  the  Governing  Council  has  been  clear 
already that if anything additional had to be done, this would be about changing the pace and 
composition of our asset purchases, meaning that we don’t see scope to cut interest rates 
further. We are at the lower bound in terms of interest rates. 
We therefore have a discussion in terms of how to expand the universe of assets which we 
are  buying  if  needed  and,  as  I  think  I’ve  said  already  publicly,  if  we  want  to  significantly 
expand the universe of assets which we buy, the base-line option is to buy sovereign bonds. 
Then you have all kinds of technical questions which are being discussed by ECB staff and 
the Eurosystem more generally so that’s where we stand. 
Newswires say a programme of €500 billion may be in play? 
I  don’t  really  comment  because  that’s  a  technical  decision  going  on,  we’ll  discuss  it  on 
January 22nd and no decision has been taken in this respect. 
Is it fair to say that the question must be if opening the door to QE the question must 
centre whether you have a programme large enough to achieve what is required but 
which isn’t too large to disrupt the economy and to stoke too high an inflation rate? 
Let me put it extremely simply: for it to be efficient is has to be big. How big is big enough? 
This has to be an informed decision based on what we know are the transmission channels: 
is it more a direct impact on interest rates, is it more on the so-called portfolio rebalancing 
effect,  that  banks  would  buy  other  kinds  of  assets,  etc?  Given  the  persistent  degree  of 
fragmentation that we have in the euro zone, this would also depend on the scope, on the 
universe  of  assets,  on  which  government  bonds  we  buy.  So  you  have  a  set  of  connected 
decisions which are being studied. The only thing I can say is that for it to be efficient it would 
have to be big. 
There  must  be  a  preference  for  unanimity  yet  the  Governing  Council  is  far  from 
unanimity? 
If you would need unanimity all the time, we would not need a Governing Council. That’s a 
serious  answer.  We  have  monetary  policy  committees  all  throughout  the  world,  and  the 
reason we have monetary policy committees is to have diversity of views, an exchange of 
views, because nothing is ever that simple. And that particular decision is probably even less 
simple than usual. It’s a new instrument. 
There  may  be  unintended  consequences,  there  may  be  negative  impacts.  It  might  create 
risks to financial stability because it will drive assets prices up. We want to know precisely. 
So we want to exchange views. We want to make sure we’ve answered all questions, that 
whenever  a  negative  collateral  effect  is  identified  that  we  have  an  answer...  that  we  know 
how to mitigate it... At the end, certainly the larger the number of governors who vote for it 
the better because it shows that we’ve taken all concerns on board and found the answers, 
so certainly it’s preferable to have as many governors on board. 
Mr Weidmann in particular has concerns about this? 
I  will  not  comment  on  Jens  Weidmann  who  sits  in  the  Council  in  a  personal  capacity  but 
throughout  this  crisis  there  have  been  concerns  raised  by  the  Bundesbank,  which  are 
legitimate concerns and which had to be addressed. These are good questions to ask, and 
then it is our duty to try to find answers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  We have the precedent of OMTs, which was also a new instrument designed to face a new 
situation in our monetary union, which was redenomination risk, the risk of countries being 
pushed to exit by financial markets. This instrument raised many questions. 
We’ve  spent  some  time  to  have  a  broad  discussion  in  the  Governing  Council  to  have  the 
right way to design it to have a broad discussion, answer as many questions as possible, and 
at the end it seemed as if we had answered almost all questions and all but one governor 
agreed to it, this is public knowledge. 
How big a decision is this now, is this test faced by the ECB. How big a test is this of 
the  ECB’s  credibility  and  from  the  perspective  of  the  credibility  of  the  European 
authorities that you have it within your capacity to turn the ship around and engineer 
recovery? 
The way you ask the question is exactly the right way. The situation we are facing is a test 
for European authorities, all of them, including but not only the ECB. They have to make the 
case in a convincing way to the European people that they use all available instruments to 
move the European economy out of the situation it’s in today, before it becomes a trap for 
the economy, which is low growth and low inflation. 
So  we  have  to  make  the  case  in  a  convincing  way  that  we  have  the  resolve  and  the 
instrument  to  move  the  European  economy  out  of  the  low  growth,  low  inflation  situation 
before  it  becomes  a  trap...  And  then  all  institutions  have  to  contribute  according  to  their 
mandate. The ECB has a mandate which has to do with inflation. We certainly have to act 
and  show  in  a  convincing  way  that  we  have  instruments  to  act  to  deliver  on  our  mandate 
When it comes to growth, this is really up to governments to answer given their instruments. 
That  has  to  do  with  fiscal  policy  and  with  structural  reforms  but  the  answer  has  to  be 
collective. 
Then there is the matter of Greece. Will the uncertainty surrounding the Greek election 
on January 25th delay any decision on quantitative easing to be taken that day? 
Not at all, not at all. These are two different discussions. 
What’s the position of the bank in respect of Mr Tsipras? He is ahead in opinion polls. 
He is looking to increase the minimum wage, to decrease the burden of the debt. He’s 
looking for a number of things yet there are whispers out of Berlin saying Greece will 
be on its way out of the euro zone if Mr Tsipras doesn’t play ball? 
First,  any  talk  of  Greece  exiting  the  euro  zone  is  unreasonable  and  unrealistic.  There  has 
been an extremely strong commitment by European leaders to maintain the integrity of the 
euro zone, back in June 2012 and ever since this was confirmed. So there is no discussion 
on an exit and nobody in Europe is working on an exit. So that’s really not a discussion. 
Now when it comes to policies the ECB is not a political institution, so we’ll take the outcome 
of the election as it is. This is a matter for the Greek people to decide. We’ll engage with the 
new government whenever it is identified or in place or in charge to know more about their 
policy programme and the continuation of the programme. And certainly different government 
will have different conceptions about what a reform programme should look like, which is just 
democracy. But I don’t want to pass a judgement here. 
What we’ve said is that whatever happens in Greece, the ECB will have to abide by its rule 
but  that’s  nothing  new.  This  has  been  made  public  last  week.  We  have  a  rule  that  any 
government  collateral  can  be  accepted  under  monetary  policy  operations  either  only  if  its 
credit is rated well enough or, if it’s not well rated enough, if the country is under an EU/IMF 
programme. And this is not new. This has been ECB policy since 2010. 
Second  we’ve  made  it  clear  that  the  so-called  Securities  Market  Programme  portfolio  of 
Greek bonds bought by the ECB cannot be restructured because that would be equivalent to 
granting an overdraft to the country and that would be contrary to article 123 of the treaty. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The liabilities are in the order of €25 billion? 
Close to €20 billion. 
We’re not passing judgement, we are not putting pressure on anybody, we are making clear 
what our own constraints are in the discussion. These are constraints on us, not pressure we 
would be putting on others. 
The  current  Greek  programme  ends  in  February.  So  a  new  Greek  programme  is 
required  then  for  the  ECB  –  under  its  own  rules  to  continue  –  supporting  Greek 
banks? 
That’s absolutely right. But it’s not for us to lead the discussion on a new programme. That’s 
between the new Greek government and the euro group and the Commission. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
