  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Philippine history wrought in gold 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the Press Launch of the Asia Society Gold Exhibit, New 
York City, 7 August 2015. 
 The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas is pleased to be part of this pioneering exhibit of Philippine 
pre-colonial gold in New York with the Asia Society and the Ayala Museum. 
For  the  first  time,  we  will  showcase  in  the  United  States  the  exquisite  centuries-old  gold 
ornaments crafted by our ancestors, some pieces of which are over 1,000 years old. If we 
look  at  our  history  books,  we  find  that  one  thousand  years  ago,  the  colonization  of  the 
Americas by Europeans had not even started. 
Ladies and gentlemen. Our pre-colonial collection provides insights into a glorious past we 
Filipinos can be truly proud of: 
• 
first,  that  we  had  a  distinct  culture  and  art  tradition  that  resulted  from  a  fusion  of 
indigenous and diverse foreign influences; 
second, that our ancestors had both the artistry and the technical ingenuity to craft 
these  magnificent  and  complex  gold  pieces  that  remain  much-admired  by 
contemporary artisans; and 
third, that we had a flourishing economy with active domestic and international trade 
conducted through barter and gold payment. 
  Among  the  BSP  gold  pieces  to  be  exhibited  in  New  York  is  a  “piloncito”,  a  gold  nugget 
believed to be part of an early form of coinage system, whose value was determined by its 
weight. In addition, two “kandits” or royal gold belts will be on exhibit, one of which weighs 
more than one kilo. Looking at these gold objects, we can conclude that before Westerners 
came  to  our  shores,  we  already  had  a  thriving  cosmopolitan  trading  center  doing  active 
trading with neighbouring kingdoms and islands. 
Today, the Philippines is on the international radar screen as one of the exciting emerging 
economies  on  the  basis  of  its  remarkable  positive  economic  performance  and  growth 
potential. This  is  therefore  the  most  opportune time for the  world  to  know  more  about  our 
country and our people through our history wrought in gold. 
Thus, the exhibit presents an excellent opportunity to showcase our remarkable heritage in 
that part of the world. 
For your information, part of the BSP’s Gold Collection has been shown in Europe twice: the 
first  was  in  the  1990s  and  the  second  in  2013  at  the  Museé  du  quai  Branly  in  Paris  in 
partnership with the French Government. In Paris, visitors were amazed at the sophistication 
and artistry of our precolonial gold ornaments. 
Indeed, we at the BSP believe that our cultural properties promote better understanding and 
appreciation of our evolution as a nation. 
Among  Filipinos,  this  serves  as  a  powerful  catalyst for  instilling  a  strong  sense  of  national 
identity and love of country, attributes that foster social stability and economic growth. Thus, 
the BSP ensures that outstanding examples of Filipino genius in its gold, art, and numismatic 
collections  are  shared  with  the  people  through  exhibits,  books,  CDs,  social  media,  and 
provincial lectures. 
In the Philippines, it is the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the Ayala Foundation that had the 
vision to acquire and preserve these priceless golden legacy from our ancestors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Thus, while some precolonial gold pieces found by people unaware of their historical value 
have been irretrievably lost to melting, we can take comfort from the fact that we have two 
museums in Metro Manila where our people can visit golden treasures from our past – at the 
Met Museum at the BSP Head office along Roxas Boulevard and the Ayala Museum where 
we are gathered today. 
So please help protect, preserve and promote our cultural heritage. And take the time to visit 
our museums with your family and friends. 
Starting September this year to January next year, the people in New York and its visitors will 
have the same opportunity to experience the golden history of our country. Please invite your 
family and friends to visit and to spread the word about this rare exhibit. 
Once again, I thank the Asia Society and the Ayala Museum for inviting us to be part of this 
exhibit on “Philippine Gold: Treasures of Forgotten Kingdoms.” 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
Maraming salamat at mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
