  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  January  2015  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
27 January 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the briefing held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report of January 
2015. 
We have been pursuing a cautious monetary policy stance for a year. We have witnessed 
some favorable outcomes of this approach. The downward trend in inflation will accelerate 
starting from this month. Therefore, we began cutting policy rates in January. Provided we 
maintain  our  cautious  approach  throughout  these  policy  rate  reductions,  the  end-2015 
inflation  will  likely  be  the  lowest  we  have  seen  in  the  last  45  years.  I  will  now  present  an 
overview of the report, which will be published on our website soon. 
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes seven boxes 
entailing  interesting  and  up-to-date  analyses  on  various  topics.  The  report  presents  boxes 
that analyze the effects of oil prices on consumer prices and the reflection of international 
grain prices on domestic prices. Moreover, there are studies elaborating on the role of base 
effects on consumer inflation in 2015, the debt dollarization of companies in Turkey and their 
growth  performance,  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  international  energy  prices  and  the 
reverberations  of  remuneration  of  required  reserves.  Titles  of  the  boxes  are  shown  on  the 
slide.  All  of  these  analyses  shed  light  on  noteworthy  issues  in  the  Turkish  economy.  I 
strongly recommend that you read these boxes, which will soon be published on our website. 
I  would  like  to  commence  my  speech  by  reviewing  the  global  economic  outlook  given  its 
undeniable  influence  on  our  policies.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  due  to  the  persisting 
divergence  among  global  monetary  policies  besides  uncertainties 
the 
normalization process, we saw aggravated volatility in financial markets. This led the portfolio 
flows towards emerging economies to fluctuate and the volatilities of exchange rates in these 
countries  to  increase  (Chart  1).  The  persisting  deterioration  in  global  economic  activity 
accompanied  by  mainly  supply-side  factors  has  recently  pulled  down  oil  prices  sharply. 
These  developments  caused  considerable  fluctuations  especially  in  energy-exporting 
emerging  countries.  Overall,  the  risk  premia  of  emerging  economies  followed  a  volatile 
course due to the monetary policy uncertainties, the slowdown in economic activity and the 
course of oil prices (Chart 2). 
Effects of this volatility in global markets emerged in the Turkish economy as fluctuations of 
risk  premium  indicators  and  exchange  rates.  The  fall  in  commodity  prices,  chiefly  in  oil,  is 
expected  to  improve  the  economy  especially  in  terms  of  inflation  and  external  balance. 
Additionally, the tight monetary policy stance stands out as a factor that limits the negative 
effects of global volatilities on Turkey in this period. 
Annual  growth  recorded  some  deceleration  following  the  first  quarter  of  2014.  This  was 
mainly led by receding agricultural output amid unfavorable climatic conditions as well as the 
slowdown  of  export  growth  resulting  from  geopolitical  risks.  Indicators  regarding  the  last 
quarter show that annual growth remained moderate due to weak foreign demand. In 2015, 
we expect the growth rate to increase gradually with the increased contribution of domestic 
demand. 
regarding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The  positive  effects  of  the  tight  monetary  policy  stance  and  macroprudential  measures 
continued in the last quarter of 2014 leading the core inflation trends to approach the target. 
Moreover, plummeting oil prices supported the disinflation process and inflation expectations 
have  recently  seen  a  noticeable  improvement.  Due  to  the  fading  cumulative  effects  of  the 
exchange rate, the reverting of food inflation to past years’ averages as well as the falling oil 
prices, we project a notable decline in inflation in 2015. Accordingly, inflation is estimated to 
approach the levels consistent with the target in mid-2015. 
Monetary policy and financial conditions 
1.  
The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (the CBRT) maintained its tight stance in the last 
quarter of 2014 and in consideration of global volatilities, supported the tight monetary policy 
with a tight liquidity policy. As you can see on the slide, the BIST overnight repo rates have 
remained close to the upper bound of the interest rate corridor since October in line with the 
liquidity policy (Chart 3). The CBRT funding has been made mainly through one-week repo 
auctions since early 2014 (Chart 4). Thus, the CBRT average funding rate hovered around 
the 1-week repo rate in this period. 
As we all know, core inflation trends are following a downward trend. Considering the fall in 
oil  prices  and  improved  expectations  that  result  in  favorable  developments  in  the  inflation 
outlook besides this downward trend in the core inflation trend, we decided on a measured 
cut in the 1-week repo rate from 8.25 percent to 7.75 percent in January. On the other hand, 
given  the  elevated  volatility  in  global  markets,  we  kept  overnight  rates  unchanged  and 
announced through the MPC Decision that we would adopt a cautious stance to render the 
decline in inflation permanent. In this context, we emphasized that we would closely monitor 
inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation and maintain 
the tight monetary policy stance by keeping the yield curve flat until the there is a significant 
improvement in the inflation outlook. Owing to this stance, the spread between 5-year market 
rates  and  the  BIST  Interbank  Overnight  Repo  Rates  continues  to  take  negative  values 
(Chart 5). Along with these developments, the yield curve has remained almost flat (Chart 6). 
We  announced  the  outline  of  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  for  2015  through  a 
press  meeting  on  10  December  2014.  We  also  launched  new  macroprudential  policies  to 
limit macro-financial risks and to support prudential borrowing at this meeting. In this scope, 
to  encourage  the  extension  of  maturities  of  external  borrowing,  we  raised  the  required 
reserve ratios applied to non-core foreign exchange (FX) short-term liabilities of banks and 
financing companies. Additionally, we embarked on the remuneration of TL required reserves 
to  encourage  core  liabilities  in  January  2015.  Moreover,  we  implemented  technical 
adjustments  in  reserve  option  tranches  and  coefficients  to  meet  the  FX  liquidity  to  be 
required  due  to  the  changes  in  required  reserve  ratios.  We  envisage  that  the  automatic 
stabilization feature of the Reserve Option Mechanism (ROM) will gain strength with these 
adjustments. Through these policy measures we announced, our final aim is to limit macro-
financial risks and contribute to balanced growth by supporting prudential borrowing. 
The rate of increase in the loans extended to the non-financial sector in the last quarter of the 
year maintains a reasonable course owing to the CBRT’s tight monetary policy stance and 
the  macroprudential  measures.  Supported  also  by  the  actions  of  the  Banking  Regulations 
and  Supervision  Agency  (the  BRSA),  consumer  loans  grew  slower  than  past  years,  while 
commercial  loans  displayed  a  higher  rate  of  increase  (Charts  7  and  8).  According  to  the 
current financial conditions and the results of the Loan Tendency Survey, there has not been 
any noticeable change in demand and supply conditions in commercial and consumer loans 
in  the  first  quarter  of  2015.  Accordingly,  we  envisage  that  credit  growth  will  maintain  its 
current trend in the upcoming period. These reasonable levels in credit growth are expected 
to  continue  to  limit  medium-term  inflation  pressures  on  the  one  hand,  and  support  the 
improvement in the current accounts balance on the other. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Macroeconomic developments and main assumptions 
2.  
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue with the domestic and foreign demand outlook. 
In the fourth quarter of 2014, annual consumer inflation posted a quarter-on-quarter decline 
by  0.7  points  and  stood  at  8.17  percent  remaining  below  the  forecasts  of  the  October 
Inflation  Report  (Charts  9  and  10).  Annual  inflation  decreased  across  sub-groups  in  this 
period,  the  most  remarkable  slowdown  being  in  the  energy  group,  which  was  led  by  the 
plunge  in  international  oil  prices.  The  food  group  remained  as  the  largest  contributor  to 
inflation. Core goods registered a slight fall in annual inflation, while the improvement in the 
underlying  trend,  which  continued  from  the  second  quarter  on,  halted.  Meanwhile,  we 
witnessed the considerable effect of the fall in oil prices on fuel-related services and saw a 
notable improvement in the underlying trend of services. 
The  tight  monetary  policy  stance  coupled  with  the  macroprudential  measures  continues  to 
improve the core inflation trend (Chart 11). As of the end of 2014, the core inflation trend has 
receded to 5 percent. The leading recent development, which affected inflation dynamics at 
most, has been the plunge in oil prices (Chart 12). Amid this decline, annual inflation in the 
energy  group  fell  remarkably  and  stood  below  zero  at  the  year-end.  Favorable  cost 
developments driven by plummeting oil prices also contribute to the improvement in the core 
inflation trend. 
Briefly, the last quarter of the year was marked by evident effects of the falling oil prices on 
inflation.  A  remarkable  improvement  was  witnessed  in  inflation  expectations  after  a  long 
period and the positive effect of oil prices on the headline inflation spilled over into many sub-
groups,  chiefly  the  services  group.  Besides  the  international  price  developments  that 
contribute  to  falling  inflation,  we  envisage  that  the  gradual  elimination  of  cumulative 
exchange  rate  effects,  the  decline  in  food  inflation  to  past  years’  averages  and  our  tight 
monetary policy stance will support the disinflation process in the upcoming period. Against 
this  background,  we  project  that  consumer  inflation  will  register  a  notable  improvement 
particularly in the first quarter, and inflation will recede to levels consistent with the target in 
mid-2015. 
Now, I would like to give a brief account of developments in economic activity and the short-
term outlook on which the inflation forecasts are based. According to the GDP data of the 
third  quarter  of  2014,  economic  activity  was  relatively  weaker  compared  to  the  outlook 
presented in the October Inflation Report. In the third quarter, the GDP rose by 1.7 percent 
on  an  annual  basis,  while  growth  remained  limited  compared  to  the  previous  quarter  with 
0.4 percent  (Chart  13).  Analysis  of  national  income  components  on  the  production  side 
indicates that the contraction in agricultural value-added led by adverse weather conditions is 
an  important  factor  in  the  low  growth  of  the  national  income  (Chart  14).  Data  on  the 
expenditures side reveal that in the third quarter, final domestic demand compensated for the 
fall in the first half and stood slightly above its level in the last quarter of 2013 (Chart 13). 
Following  an  interval  of  two  quarters,  private  consumption  expenditures  recorded  a  robust 
recovery.  In  addition,  the  languishing  trend  in  private  investments,  which  lasted  for  a  long 
time,  reversed  due  to  the  increase  in  machinery  and  equipment  investments.  These  two 
factors  supported  quarterly  growth.  However,  the  relatively  weak  course  of  exports  limited 
the growth in this period. 
We  expect  industrial  production,  which  fell  below  its  previous-quarter  average  during 
October-November 2014, to decrease on a quarterly basis in the fourth quarter in line with 
the decline in December’s PMI and BTS survey indicators. Yet, data for the fourth quarter of 
2014  point  to  a  quarter-on-quarter  pickup  in  consumer  demand,  a  moderate  course  in 
machinery-equipment  investments  and  some  recovery  in  construction  investments.  Hence, 
we believe that domestic demand will remain on a modest upward track in the final quarter. 
External demand, on the other hand, remains weak due to Europe’s slowing economy and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  geopolitical tensions in neighboring countries. The weak external demand puts pressure on 
export  growth,  but  the  fact  that  export  growth  exceeds  import  growth  supports  the 
rebalancing of the economy (Chart 15). Moreover, falling oil prices contribute positively to the 
current account balance by reducing import expenditures (Chart 16). 
We expect domestic demand to recover moderately and external demand to remain weak in 
2015.  Depending  on  weather  and  precipitation  conditions,  the  projected  correction  in  the 
agricultural  value-added  will  be  a  factor  to  support  growth.  However,  there  are  external 
demand-driven downside risks to growth. Thus, in 2015, demand conditions will contribute to 
the  disinflation  process.  Although  we  expect  the  growth  composition  to  change  in  favor  of 
domestic final demand, we believe that the current account deficit will continue to improve on 
the back of the macroprudential measures and the improved terms of trade. 
As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
In the fourth quarter of 2014, oil and import prices remained well below the projections of the 
October Inflation Report (Chart 17). Accordingly, we revised our medium-term assumptions 
of oil and import prices significantly downwards. In view of the direct and indirect effects of 
these  developments,  we  revised  the  end-2015  inflation  forecast  down  by  0.6  percentage 
points  compared  to  the  previous  reporting  period.  In  food  prices,  we  left  the  end-2015 
inflation forecast unchanged at 9 percent. 
Our  medium-term  projections  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  tax  adjustments  and 
administered prices are consistent with inflation targets and automatic pricing mechanisms. 
The  medium-term  fiscal  policy  stance  is  based  on  the  Medium  Term  Program  projections 
covering  the  2015–2017  period.  Accordingly,  we  assume  that  a  tight  fiscal  stance  will  be 
implemented and the primary expenditures to the GDP ratio will decrease gradually. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook 
3.  
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our inflation  and  output  gap  forecasts based  on  the  outlook I 
have described so far. 
Our  medium-term  forecasts  are  based  on  a  framework  that  we  will  adopt  a  cautious 
approach  to  make  the  improvement  in  inflation  outlook  permanent  and  maintain  the  tight 
monetary policy stance by keeping the yield curve flat. Moreover, we assess that the annual 
loan  growth  rate  will  stabilize  around  the  recent  reasonable  levels,  also  thanks  to  the 
macroprudential  measures.  Accordingly,  we  expect  inflation  to  be,  with  70  percent 
probability,  between  4.1  percent  and  6.9  percent  (with  a  mid-point  of  5.5  percent)  at  end-
2015 and between 3.2 percent and 6.8 percent (with a mid-point of 5 percent) at end-2016. 
We project inflation to stabilize around 5 percent in the medium term (Chart 18). 
In sum, we revised our end-2015 inflation forecast down by 0.6 points to 5.5 percent from 
6.1 percent in the October Inflation Report. This revision is driven by falling oil prices. The 
projected noticeable decline in inflation compared to 2014 is largely due to falling oil prices 
as well as our projections that cumulative exchange rate effects will continue to taper off and 
food price inflation will recede to past years’ averages. The course of inflation in 2015 will be 
determined by base effects. We expect base effects to pull annual inflation down until August 
and push it up the rest of the year. Thus, we project that annual inflation will remain on a 
downward track until the third quarter and increase slightly to 5.5 percent due to base effects 
in the fourth quarter (Chart 18). 
In addition to these forecasts, we discuss alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and 
the global economy in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the Report 
for details. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 