  William C Dudley: Importance of the state and local public sector for the 
US economy 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  for  the  Chapter  9  and  Alternatives  for  Distressed 
Municipalities and States Workshop, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 14 
April 2015. 
 Andrew Haughwout and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Good  morning  and  welcome  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  I  am  especially 
happy to welcome this group, with its focus on the finances of state and local governments. 
We  at  the  New  York  Fed  are  committed  to  playing  a  role  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  this 
important  sector.  To  this  end,  we  supported  the  outstanding  work  of  the  Volcker-Ravitch 
state  fiscal  crisis  taskforce.  In  addition,  we  conduct  ongoing  outreach  activities  with  local 
officials and produce research on the subject of local fiscal conditions. We do these things 
because we recognize the critical role of state and local governments and their fiscal health 
to the overall well-being of the economy and its citizens. 
In my remarks today I will touch on the importance of the state and local public sector for the 
economy, its fiscal health and the need for proactive efforts to address the emerging fiscal 
stresses  in  the  sector.  As  always,  what  I  have  to  say  represents  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.  
The importance of state and local governments manifests itself in different ways, which are 
really different sides of the same coin. First, the sector directly produces a very large amount 
of economic activity. In 2014, state and local governments generated output valued at about 
$2 trillion. This represents over 11 percent of total U.S. GDP and is more than 50 percent 
higher  than  the  federal  government’s  contribution.  And,  even  after  years  of  retrenchment 
following  the  financial  crisis,  state  and  local  governments  employ  almost  20  million 
individuals – nearly one in seven American workers. Clearly, a successful and stable state 
and local government sector is a vital contributor to overall output and employment. 
On the other side of the coin, we find the real effects of this activity: the provision of public 
safety, education, and health; as well as water, sewer and transportation services. These are 
the  core  public  services  that  our  citizens  need,  and  which  are  absolutely  fundamental  to 
support private sector economic activity. So, as a central banker, I recognize the essential 
role that state and local governments play in the economy. Without successful state and local 
governments,  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  with  stable 
prices would be much more difficult to attain. 
A final important dimension of the state and local sector – and the one that is perhaps most 
obviously front and center for today’s discussion – is its debt. The municipal bond market is 
very large, with outstanding issues totaling over $3.5 trillion. Now this large dollar amount in 
and of itself is not a problem. When governments invest in long-lived capital goods like water 
and sewer systems, as well as roads and bridges, it makes sense to finance these assets 
with debt. Debt financing ensures that future residents, who benefit from the services these 
investments  produce,  are  also  required  to  help  pay  for  them.  This  principle  supports  the 
efficient provision of these long-lived assets. 
Unfortunately,  as  the  Volcker-Ravitch  task  force  emphasized,  issuing  debt  to  finance 
infrastructure  investments  is  not  the  only  reason  that  states  and  localities  borrow from  the 
future. Governments have also borrowed to cover operating deficits, and this kind of debt has 
a very different character than debt issued to finance infrastructure. Let me take a moment to 
explain what I mean and why I think this distinction is important. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  When a jurisdiction borrows to invest in infrastructure, the cost of the debt to local residents – 
and those considering locating in the jurisdiction – is offset by the value of the services that 
the infrastructure provides. This tradeoff is part of the “fiscal surplus” that a jurisdiction offers: 
the value of the services minus the tax price that residents have to pay. A well-run capital 
budget  will  match these  costs  and  benefits  over  the  life  of  each  project to  ensure that  the 
jurisdiction remains attractive to current and future residents. That is, both current and future 
residents  are  willing  to pay  the  tax  cost  of  servicing this  debt  because of the  benefits that 
they receive from the services supported by that debt. 
Now  consider  a  different  scenario  –  one  in  which  the  jurisdiction  is  borrowing  to  pay for  a 
current year operating deficit. This kind of borrowing is inconsistent with running a balanced 
budget, which is in principle required in all but one state. But, as people in this room are well 
aware,  states  and  localities  can  often  find  ways  to  “get  around”  balanced  budget 
requirements if they are determined to do so. One example of this was New York City in the 
1960s and early 1970s, where annual operating deficits were repeatedly financed with short-
term debt, until the fiscal crisis exploded in 1974–1975. 
The key distinction between these two types of borrowing is that in the former case an asset 
is producing services that help to offset the cost of the debt, but this is not so in the latter 
case. Indeed, using debt to finance current operating deficits is equivalent to asking future 
taxpayers to help finance today’s public services. When this occurs, it means that the fiscal 
surplus  offered  by  the  jurisdiction  in  the  future  will  be  diminished  by  the  value  of  these 
additional  debts.  That  is,  in  the  future,  the  cost  of  servicing  this  debt  will  drive  a  wedge 
between the taxes paid by households and businesses, and the current services provided to 
them.  Of  course,  within  the  U.S.,  households  and  businesses  can  react  to  this  wedge  by 
choosing to locate elsewhere. And because the tax base of any jurisdiction depends on the 
level of local economic activity, this out-migration can lead to ever-higher tax rates or ever-
diminished  services  for  those  who  still  remain  –  typically  those  with  fewer  opportunities  or 
resources to relocate. 
Today,  there  are  several  ways  that  states  and  localities  can  borrow  to  cover  operating 
deficits;  and  the  relatively  slow  economic  growth  since  the  financial  crisis  has  increased 
pressure  on  their  budgets,  making  such  measures  more  appealing.  One  mechanism  for 
doing this is to treat borrowed funds as revenues that can be used to balance the budget. 
Another  form  is  asset  sales.  Here  the  jurisdiction  receives  cash  today  in  exchange  for  a 
reduction in its future assets – sometimes physical like an office building, sometimes financial 
like tobacco settlement funds – and an increase in its future costs. Finally, and perhaps most 
importantly, is the practice of pushing the cost of current employment services into the future. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  this  last  method.  Here  I’m  referring  to  the  underfunding  of  public 
employee pensions and other post-retirement benefits for current employees. Both of these 
practices  add  to  the  indebtedness  of  the  state  and  local  governments  with  the  employees 
playing  the  role  of  creditors.  To  be  clear,  while  unfunded  promises  to  cover  retiree  health 
insurance  are  very  common,  unfunded  pension  liabilities  are  probably  much  larger  in 
aggregate  magnitude.  Estimates  of  unfunded  pension  liabilities  range  up  to  several  trillion 
dollars.  While  widespread,  underfunding  of  public  pensions  is  not  universal.  Many  states 
have found ways to keep their public pensions reasonably well funded, demonstrating that 
pushing  today’s  costs  into  the  future  is  not  an  inevitable  outcome  of  a  democratic 
government. 
Nonetheless,  we  have  seen  evidence  that  high  debt  levels  combined  with  diminished 
services  provision  can,  in  cases  such  as  Detroit  and  Stockton,  make  the  public  sector 
finances unsustainable. At a certain point, the debt service burden clashes with maintaining a 
sufficient  ongoing  provision  of  services  to  forestall  people  from  voting  with  their  feet.  This 
may occur well before the point that debt service capacity appears to be fully exhausted. In 
other words, the prioritization of cash flows to debt service may not be sustainable beyond a 
certain point. While these particular bankruptcy filings have captured a considerable amount 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of attention, and rightly so, they may foreshadow more widespread problems than what might 
be implied by current bond ratings. We need to focus our attention today on addressing the 
underlying issues before any problems grow to the point where bankruptcy becomes the only 
viable option. So, I am especially pleased to see that your agenda today focuses, in part, on 
helping cities and states avoid such levels of fiscal stress, where the risks of going past such 
a tipping point become significant. 
In  summary,  state  and  local  governments  have  enormous  financial  obligations,  as  well  as 
critical service delivery responsibilities. Managing their liabilities in such a way as to ensure 
that  these  vital  services  continue  to  be  provided,  and  citizens  view  that  they  are  getting 
appropriate value in exchange for their taxes is a daunting challenge. I am happy to see such 
a distinguished group assembled here at the Bank to address this challenge. Good luck in 
your work and I look forward to learning of the results of today’s discussions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
