  Gent Sejko: Safeguarding Albania’s monetary and financial stability – 
challenges and objectives 
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, presenting the Annual Report 
2014 to the Parliamentary Committee on Economy and Finance, Tirana, 29 April 2015. 
 Honourable Chair of the Committee, 
Honourable Members of the Committee, 
In  my  first  presentation  as  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  I  avail  myself  of  this 
opportunity to assure You of my highest consideration for the work of this Committee. The 
Bank  of  Albania  and  I  are  fully  committed  to  creating  and  maintaining  a  climate  of 
cooperation for sustainable and long-term development. 
Allow  me  now  to  present  a  general  overview  of  our  work.  The  Bank  of  Albania  has 
successfully fulfilled its legal duties and institutional commitments during 2014, and has been 
a decisive actor in safeguarding the country’s monetary and financial stability. Moreover, it 
has  contributed  to  further  develop  and  consolidate  financial  markets,  amid  a  challenging 
economic and financial markets environment. 
 addressing low inflationary pressures; 
safeguarding financial stability, especially with regard to credit risk management. 
At the beginning of my address, I would like to focus on Bank of Albania’s main objectives 
and the economic and financial situation in Albania. 
During 2014, the Bank of Albania focused on two main aspects: 
i.  
ii.  
With  regard  to  these  two  main  objectives,  the  results  have  been  positive,  as  noted  in  the 
reports of our international partners. 
Positive assessments on the work of the Bank of Albania were also confirmed during the IMF 
and  World  Bank  Group  Spring  Meetings  with  governors  and  ministers  of  finance,  in 
Washington D.C. 
In parallel, during 2014, the Bank of Albania successfully fulfilled its legal duties related to 
maintaining  and  improving  the  payment  system,  managing  the  foreign  exchange  reserve, 
and  compiling  and  publishing  monetary  and  balance  of  payment  statistics.  Moreover,  the 
Bank  of  Albania  worked  to  support  the  European  integration  process  and  the  legal  and 
regulatory approximation with the acquis communautaire, enhance communication, improve 
financial literacy, and strengthen research, analyses and forecasting capacities. 
A  detailed  description  of  the  activities  is  provided  in  the  Annual  Report  that  has  been 
submitted to the Assembly of the Republic of Albania conform to the determined timeframe. I 
will therefore focus first on some aspects of our work and achievements for 2014, and will 
then  continue  with  the  challenges  facing  the  Albanian  economy  and  highlights  of  Bank  of 
Albania’s work in the period ahead. 
Monetary policy and price stability 
1.  
Bank  of  Albania’s  legal  objective  is  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  stability.  Achieving  this 
objective  implies  keeping  inflation  at  3.0%.  Our  monetary  policy  employs  the  inflation 
targeting strategy, whereas the exchange rate employs a free floating regime. The monetary 
policy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  forward  looking;  it  aims  to  be  a  flexible,  balanced  and 
transparent policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The Albanian economy has been facing, for some time, a sluggish economic environment. 
During  2014,  our  monetary  policy  was  drafted  and  implemented  amid  low  inflationary 
pressures and below-potential economic growth. Annual inflation, in 2014, averaged 1.6%, 
standing lower than the 1.9% average rate recorded a  year earlier. The low inflation rates 
were dictated mainly by low pressures generated in the domestic economy, as well as by the 
low inflation rates in our trading partners and low inflation expectations by economic agents. 
According to the Albanian Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) data, the Albanian economy grew 
1.9% in 2014, against the 1.5% growth in the previous  year. Economic growth  was driven 
mainly  by  the  domestic  demand  and  –  excluding  construction  –  it  was  reflected  in  activity 
expansion across all the sectors of the economy. Economic activity grew, benefitting from the 
eased  financing  conditions  as  well  as  the  improved  confidence  and  balance  sheets  of  the 
real and financial sectors of the economy. These factors contributed to the increase in private 
consumption and investments. 
Excluding the payment of arrears, the fiscal policy has been consolidating during 2014. On 
the  other  hand,  trade  exchanges  with  abroad  did  not  generate  positive  impulses  for 
economic growth. Regardless of the higher growth rate, the Albanian economy continued to 
operate below its potential. As a result, production capacities were not fully utilised and the 
situation  has  dictated  unemployment  rates,  which  go  beyond  the  equilibrium  level.  As  we 
have  mentioned  earlier,  the  spare  capacities  in  the  labour  market  lead  to  low  increase  in 
wages,  production  costs  and  final  prices  in  the  economy.  These  phenomena  have  been 
present in Albania during 2014. 
In  Bank  of  Albania’s  opinion,  aggregate  demand  is  the  main  problem  facing  the  Albanian 
economy;  thus,  addressing  it  requires  the  increase  of  macroeconomic  stimulus.  Reflecting 
the above, our monetary policy has been increasingly accommodative. The Bank of Albania 
lowered the key interest rate three times in 2014, bringing it down from 3.0% to 2.25%, and 
further down to 2.0% in the first quarter of 2015. 
Our monetary operations consisted in continuous liquidity injection in the banking system, up 
to  the  three-month  maximum  legal  timeframe.  On  average,  in  2014,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
injected  ALL  24.52  billion  (in  liquidity)  against  ALL  17.31  billion  in  2013.  In  addition  to 
lowering the key rate, the Bank of Albania has constantly signalled that the monetary policy 
will  remain  accommodative  in  the  period  ahead.  This  verbal  communication  is  a  non-
traditional  instrument  of  the  monetary  policy.  It  has  aimed  at  enhancing  the  certainty  of 
economic  agents  on  the  expected  direction  of  the  monetary  policy  and  enabling  them  to 
extend the time horizon of their decisions for loans and investments. 
The  transmission  mechanism  of  the  monetary  policy  has  continued  to  show  signs  of 
weakness,  especially  with  regard  to  the  growth  of  lending.  For  this  reason,  the  Bank  of 
Albania has combined its monetary stimulus with macroprudential easing policies. In parallel 
with  the  above-listed  monetary  policy  instruments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  continued  to 
apply  eased  regulatory  requirements  during  2014.  These  measures  widened  the  space  in 
banks’  balance  sheets  for  loans,  reduced  intermediation  costs,  and  encouraged  credit 
restructuring. 
The  accommodative  policies  of the  Bank  of  Albania  have  been  relatively  successful.  They 
have been reflected in the overall lowering of interest rates, downward risk premiums in the 
markets, improved liquidity indicators both in the banking system and the private sector, as 
well as in improved lending in the national currency. The interest rate on lek loans fell to the 
historic minimum levels and favoured the growth of credit denominated in lek. The Bank of 
Albania  deems  that  these  developments  have  contributed  to  stimulating  domestic  demand 
and have been reflected in the upward trend of core inflation during the year. 
However, the transmission of the monetary stimulus in the economy continues to suffer from 
low  risk-appetite,  structural  weaknesses  in  the  Albanian  economy  and  unfavourable 
developments in the external economy. I will dwell on these factors, which are beyond the 
impact of the monetary policy, in more detail in the third point of my address. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  development  of 
Financial stability and banking supervision 
2.  
The law on the Bank of Albania tasks the Bank of Albania with duties to support the country’s 
financial stability. To fulfil them, the Bank of Albania regulates and supervises the activity of 
the  banking  system,  oversees  and  stimulates 
the  payments 
infrastructure, and functions as the lender of last resort. 
The banking system showed ample liquidity and well-capitalised levels, during the past year, 
and improved profitability. The volume of assets in the banking system was up, due to the 
slight  expansion  of  the  loan  portfolio  and  the  investment  portfolio  in  government  debt 
securities.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  system  has  low  liquidity  and  market  risk 
exposure,  and  our  analyses  and  stress  tests  show  that  the  financial  system  is  overall 
resilient. 
On  the  other  hand,  credit  risk  is  the  main  risk  to  which  the  banks  are  exposed.  As  at 
December  2014,  the  non-performing  loans  stood  at  22.8%  of  the  loan  portfolio.  While 
improved from the previous year, it remains high. As a result, our macroprudential measures 
have  sustained  and  encouraged  constantly  the  credit  growth  and  recovery,  urging  banks, 
however, to keep prudentiality high, with the aim to decelerate non-performing loans. 
In  2014,  the  work  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  towards  safeguarding  financial  stability  and 
strengthening banking supervision focused on four main aspects: 
- Addressing credit risk 
Credit risk was monitored through rigorous examinations of individual banks’ credit portfolios, 
aimed  at  identifying  factors  contributing  to  the  deterioration  of  credit  quality  and  taking 
respective measures. 
In  May  2013,  some  countercyclical/macroprudential  measures  entered  into  force,  which 
provide regulatory stimuli to orient the use of banks’ financial resources in the economy and 
encourage credit restructuring at an early stage of its cycle. Moreover, the Bank of Albania 
has  been  actively  identifying  proposals  for  amendments  to  the  Civil  Procedure  Code,  as 
necessary,  with  a  view  to  improving  the  collateral  execution  process.  Such  amendments 
entered into force in September 2013. 
In addition, in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance, the tax treatment in the case of loan 
loss  write  offs  was  clarified  through  the  approval  of  the  respective  legal  amendments. 
Following  the  clarification,  the  Bank  of  Albania  approved  regulatory  amendments,  which 
encourage  and  support  the  procedure  for  cleaning  banks’  balance  sheets  from  non-
performing loans. 
In cooperation with the World Bank, particular attention has been paid to the solution of large 
exposures of clients, in cases when they are to more than one bank. With the support of the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  we  are  working  to  establish  a  common  strategy  for  fully 
addressing non-performing loans. 
Lastly, with a  view to upholding factors that boost lending, the Bank of Albania decided to 
extend the effect of macroprudential stimulating measures in 2015. Our analyses show that, 
overall,  these  measures,  which  have  addressed  both  the  stock  and  the  flow  of  non-
performing loans, have yielded positive effects both on reducing non-performing loans and 
on lending levels. 
- Improvement of the regulatory framework and approximation to Basel II regulatory 
standards 
Improvements to the supervision and regulatory framework are set out in detail in the Annual 
Report. However, in this presentation I would like to highlight two important amendments: 
i.  
approval  of  the  Regulation  “On  the  capital  adequacy  ratio”,  which  marks  the 
transition from Basel I to the new Capital Accord, known as Basel II; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 ii.  
drafting  of  the  new  Supervision  Policy  document,  which  ensures  a  more  efficient 
monitoring and management of risks facing the banking system. 
 - Fulfilment of FSAP recommendations 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Progam  (FSAP)  recommendations  served  as  guidelines  for 
improving  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  of  the  banking  system.  Their 
implementation  focused  on  the  improvement  of  monitoring  the  risks  facing  the  banking 
system  and  their  treatment.  Some  of  the  recommendations  have  been  incorporated  in 
institutional  obligations  in  the  framework  of  the  implementation  of  the  development  policy 
loans (DPL) of the World Bank. In the first quarter of 2014, the Bank of Albania fulfilled all the 
obligations for which it was responsible. 
- Cooperation with other institutions 
Considering the safeguarding of financial stability as a shared responsibility among several 
supervisory  institutions,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  closely  cooperated  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (FSA)  and  Deposit  Insurance  Agency  to  prevent 
and  manage  extraordinary  situations 
is 
institutionalised in the framework of the Financial Stability Advisory Group. Cooperation with 
the  FSA  consisted  also  in  joint  inspections  in  banks  or  associations  managing  common 
funds. 
We have been and remain committed to adopt best international practices and standards, in 
close cooperation with both local and strategic international partners such as the IMF, ECB, 
EU central banks, WB, FSVC and other renowned organisations. 
financial  system.  This  cooperation 
the 
in 
Economic development perspective and problems 
3.  
The Bank of Albania deems that the cycle of economic growth marked a turning point during 
2014. In the next years, the Albanian economy is expected to pursue an upward trajectory, 
which may enable the return of the economy to equilibrium and of inflation to target in the 
medium term. Some fundamental factors that will drive this growth, such as eased lending 
conditions and monetary and financial stability in the country, are present. 
Economic stability and downward financing costs should be supported through maintaining 
the actual framework of macroeconomic policies. Other factors, such as economic activity in 
the euro area and businesses and financial system’s risk appetite are expected to improve. 
The  last  group  of  factors  underlying  growth,  such  as  business  climate  across  all  its 
dimensions  and  structural  reforms  that  broaden  development  horizons  and  approximate 
labour productivity to that of advanced economies, should be further improved through our 
common endeavours. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  this  landscape  describes  the  expected  direction  of  the 
country’s development in the next two-three year period. In the meantime, under the current 
situation,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  following  developments  attentively  and  is  assessing  the 
effects arising from the components of this scenario: 
Lending highlights in Albania. At present, lending suffers from both the weak and low-quality 
demand and the conservative lending policy applied by banks. In our judgment, lending will 
grow  at  modest  rates  in  2015.  Concerning  the  above,  I  would  like  to  share  the  two 
considerations with you as follows. 
First, a part of the banking system’s conservative approach arises from developments in the 
European financial market and, eliminating it, will take its time. However, another part of this 
conservative approach arises from the real or perceived risk of lending, at home. The Bank 
of Albania alone may not offer solutions to all the issues that hinder lending. For that reason, 
we deem that the systematic reduction of credit risk should be treated as an issue of national 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interest, which should become the scope of coordinated work between public authorities in 
Albania. 
Second, the European experience, along with our experience, has shown that the country’s 
economic  growth  is  not  conditioned  by  the  performance  of  lending  in  short-term  horizons. 
However,  in  longer-term  horizons,  the  sustainability  of  economic  growth  will  undoubtedly 
depend  on  the  performance  of  lending.  For  this  reason,  we  should  primarily  focus  on 
maintaining  and  strengthening  the  soundness  of  our  banking  system,  for  it  to  be  able  to 
respond to future needs of the economy for financing. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  undertaking  a  comprehensive  review  of  lending-related  problems. 
Issues that, in our opinion, are yet to be solved and require cooperation from all policymakers 
include the treatment of non-performing loans and conceptualisation of stimulating factors in 
banks for healthy lending. The Bank of Albania will organise two work platforms for each of 
them, trying to draw in the cooperation of all stakeholders and interested parties. 
Structural developments in parent bank groups. As I mentioned earlier, these arise from both 
new  regulatory  requirements  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  at  European  level,  an 
economic/financial developments in the countries where parent bank groups operate. 
Requirements  for  more  qualitative  and  higher  capital  levels,  which  underlie  the  new 
European directives on banking activity, have triggered European banks to revise the model 
and expansion of their activity. In more practical terms, it implies that the presence of foreign 
bank  subsidiaries  in  the  countries  of  our  region  is  subject  to  a  careful  assessment,  to 
determine  their  effectiveness  and  business  continuation.  This  process  is  not  necessarily 
restrictive for the economies of our region, as it may generate processes related to banking 
consolidation or lead to new investors entering the market. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  closely  monitoring  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the 
countries where parent bank groups operate. We have undertaken over time measures that 
ensure the strengthening of capital and liquidity indicators and improve the resilience of both 
individual  banks  and  the  whole  sector.  At  a  more  operational  level,  periodic  analyses  and 
other processes are under way, with a view to realising: 
i.  
a  professional  assessment  of  the  financial  situation  and  operational  risks  for 
individual banks and the whole sector 
a comprehensive framework for addressing and mitigating risks facing the financial 
system stability. 
ii.  
Main objectives for 2015 
4.  
This was an overview of Bank of Albania’s activity in 2014 and of the first months under my 
governance. In conclusion, I would like to focus briefly on our main objectives for 2015 that 
stem from both legal obligations and the medium-term development of the Bank of Albania. 
First, monetary policy decisions will aim at anchoring inflation expectations close to the 3.0% 
inflation target. Our projections suggest that the monetary policy will remain accommodative 
side in the period ahead. In our judgement, the current monetary conditions are adequate for 
the return of the economy to equilibrium and of inflation to target. However, within the legal 
framework  that  regulates  the  work  of  our  institution,  we  are  ready  to  undertake  all  the 
necessary measures for compliance with our inflation target. 
Second,  supervisory  policies  aimed  at  strengthening  the  banking  system  stability.  Main 
challenges facing the Albanian banking sector are as follows: 
i.  
ii.  
ensuring the return of a steady growth of lending; 
improving indicators of bank asset quality, in the framework of measures taken for 
cleaning their balance sheets, which are expected to have a positive effect on the 
operational efficiency and intermediation capacity of banks; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 iii.  
mitigating effects arising from structural regulations imposed to EU-based banking 
groups in the context of reducing their exposure to subsidiaries outside the EU; 
 To safeguard the financial stability, the aim will be to further strengthen the inter-institutional 
cooperation with other financial supervisory institutions and international financial institutions. 
Third,  strengthening  the  system  of  management  and  internal  audit,  and  institutional 
capacities, in accordance with EU standards will be among other objectives of the Bank of 
Albania.  In  parallel,  the  Bank  of  Albania  aims  at  enhancing  transparency  with  groups  of 
interest and the general public, as regards communication about its activities. In the light of 
the  independence  provided  in  the  organic  law  of  the  institution,  enhanced  transparency 
implies more accountability and responsibility. 
I would like to conclude reiterating that the Bank of Albania is confident that the unconditional 
reliance on these principles, and the effectiveness of its policies on the economy will boost 
the  public  confidence  in  the  institutional  integrity  of  the  central  bank  and  will  contribute 
positively to achieving successfully all the objectives of the institution. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
