  Ignazio Visco: Launch of the OECD Business and Finance Outlook 
Special  address  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Launch  of  the 
OECD Business and Finance Outlook, Paris, 24 June 2015. 
 I first wish to thank the Secretary General for kindly inviting me here today. 
The  OECD  Business  and  Finance  Outlook  is  a  welcome  newcomer  that  complements 
available  analyses  on 
the  global  economy’s  macro-financial  outlook  published  by 
international  organizations.  It  adds,  in  this  first  issue,  a  distinct  perspective  by  bringing 
together a number of topical issues that define the current situation of very low interest rates. 
I  also  like  the  focus  on  business  investment  and  its  financing  channels  in  the  post-crisis 
environment, and I agree on the relevance of the report’s key findings. 
Before learning more details from Adrian Blundell-Wignall’s presentation, I would like to offer 
just a few remarks, not least because the report’s starting point – record-low interest rates – 
is  also  very  much  affecting  central  banks’  actions  in  response to the global  financial  crisis 
and especially, in the euro area, the sovereign debt crisis. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  been  confronted  with  the  risks  stemming  from  a 
prolonged  period  of  exceptionally  low  inflation,  if  not  outright  deflation.  These  risks  are 
considered  particularly  high  in  the  current  conditions  of  policy  rates  at  historical  lows, 
possibly marked disanchoring of inflation expectations, and high levels of public and private 
debt. The response has been to launch an expanded asset purchase programme designed 
to  bring  about  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  the  return  to 
price stability, that is an annual growth in consumer prices of below but close to 2 per cent in 
the medium term. 
Potential  repercussions  for  specific  sectors,  such  as  those  considered  in  the  new  OECD 
Outlook, are not being ignored. There are no signs, for the time being, that low interest rates 
are  provoking  generalized  imbalances,  or  that  asset  and  property  prices  are  subject  to 
particular speculative pressures. Local and sectoral tensions may occur, but they should be 
controlled  with  well-designed  macro-prudential  measures.  Moreover,  the  exposure  of 
institutional investors to a prolonged period of very low interest rates may be significant in 
some  euro-area  countries,  but  it  should  be  limited  through  better  matching  between  yields 
and  duration  of  balance  sheet  assets  and  liabilities,  improved  operating  results  through 
portfolio  diversification,  augmented  technical  reserves,  and  the  adjustment  of  contractual 
obligations to policyholders. 
In short, the risks, both real and financial, would have been far greater had we not taken the 
nonconventional measures in 2014 and early this year. The greatest threat to the euro area’s 
financial stability comes from the prospect of a combination of excessively low inflation and 
stagnating activity that the ECB programme aims to overcome. 
Indeed,  there  is,  and  not  limited  to  the  euro  area  as  clearly  observed  in  the  Outlook,  a 
substantial  disconnect  –  the  “greatest  puzzle”  of  today’s  global  macro-financial  setting  – 
between  a  reluctance  to  take  economic  risk,  resulting  in  the  still  subdued  recovery  of 
business investment, first and foremost in advanced countries, and a high propensity to take 
financial risk, as epitomized by high asset price valuations and compressed spreads. A better 
balance between financial and economic risk taking is the key to faster growth but it is itself 
fraught with risk. It rests mostly on complementary policies, including monetary and macro-
prudential  ones,  and  especially  on  structural  reforms that respond  to the  many  challenges 
coming from a globalized environment and substantial changes in technology. 
The Outlook helps to shed light on a question we are all asking: how is it that today’s very 
favourable financing conditions have been little able thus far to foster a substantial recovery 
of  business  investment  (which  we  all  know  is  a  precondition  for  growth  and  job  creation). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Uncertainty  has  long  been  identified  as  the  main  culprit,  but  the  report  adds  value  by 
highlighting  the  role  played  by  such  factors  as  strategies  of  multinational  enterprises, 
participation in global value chains, and incentives to short-termism not only for companies 
but also for institutional investors. 
Here is where I find one of the report’s distinguishing features, a methodological one, namely 
that the analysis of the recent evolution of business investment is conducted using data on a 
large  number  of the  world’s  biggest  corporations,  thus  complementing  other  analyses  of  a 
more macroeconomic nature. Also interesting is the contrast noted between the still subdued 
recovery of business investment in advanced economies and the signs of over-investment in 
the general industrial sector of many EMEs (not only China). 
By taking the current levels of low interest rates as a starting point, the report links this short-
to  medium-term feature with  important  longer-term  themes  such  as  population  ageing  and 
the  sustainability  of  (public  and  private)  pension  and  healthcare  systems.  New  and  old 
financial risks are appropriately discussed, risks generated by such key developments as the 
growing  size  and  importance  of  institutional  investors,  their  potential  engagement  in 
excessive  search-for-yield,  and  the  challenges  to  their  longer-term  financial  soundness, 
including from longevity risk. 
Besides,  the  Outlook  places  a  premium  on  the  analysis  of  the  impact  of  recent  structural 
changes in the banking sector on the cost and availability of finance for growth. The analysis 
confirms  that  these  changes,  along  with  the  more  stringent  international  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework  for  banks,  are  set  to  open  up  “bank  lending  gaps”  outside  the  US, 
most notably for SMEs, while at the same time working as key drivers of regulatory arbitrage 
and the expansion of the “shadow” banking sector. 
This is an area where policymakers face a new trade-off: on the one hand, there is a need to 
develop  alternative  non-bank  financing  sources,  chiefly  for  European  SMEs;  on  the  other, 
one should contain the distinct risks to financial stability posed by a growing shadow banking 
system,  whose  funding  mechanisms  are  more  prone  to  create  leverage  and  counterparty 
exposures. These are issues on which there is substantial regulatory and policy attention, not 
least by the Financial Stability Board. It should lead to principles and practices that increase 
transparency and allow, especially in Europe, new direct and indirect ways for capital to flow 
towards promising investment projects. 
The  Outlook  calls  for  a  two-pronged  strategy  of  restoring  banks’  health  and  developing 
alternative  market-based  sources  of  financing  for  investment,  a  prescription  clearly  in  line 
with  recent  European  initiatives.  The  challenge  is  to  make  it  work,  and  we  should  all  be 
engaged  in  this  effort.  In  the  European  Union  this  means  unifying,  rapidly  and  wisely,  our 
capital  markets  as  well  as  helping  sound  and  profitable  cross-border  financing  to  flow 
smoothly  to  the  common  benefit,  without  short-sighted  barriers.  But  I  also  share  the 
emphasis  on  the  need  to  consider  country-specific  features  when  it  comes  to  identifying 
approaches and instruments most appropriate to improve SME financing. 
The interdependence and counterparty risks in the financial sector are still being regarded in 
the Outlook as the greatest threat to financial stability. That this is still believed to be so is a 
sad conclusion, as it seems to imply that not much has been achieved since the eruption of 
the global financial crisis in terms of the regulatory set-up and the practice of policymaking. I 
only  partly  share  this  conclusion,  as  I  believe  that  in  many  fields  solid  progress  has  been 
obtained. 
The report seems to link these risks mainly to the lack of a strong separation of regular retail 
banking  from  such  activities  as  prime  broking  and  custody  and  collateral  management 
services. It goes as far as stating that “in this respect, the Volcker rule, Vickers and European 
legislation did not go far enough”. I am sure that more could be done in this field, and I look 
forward to it, but I would also like to warn against an excessively formal approach. The real 
challenge  is  to  avoid  conditions  such  as  “too-big-to-fail”  and  “too-interconnected-to-fail”.  I 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  observe,  in  this  respect,  that  the  awareness  and  the  strength  of  supervision  (not  only 
regulation) have much risen in recent years. 
Finally,  I  certainly  subscribe  to  another  of  the  report’s  policy  prescriptions  for  encouraging 
“compensating investment”, such as in R&D and social infrastructure, to offset the tendency 
of  multinational  enterprises  to  shift  production,  notably  in  the  manufacturing  sector,  away 
from advanced economies, even if some reversal is currently occurring. And I cannot help 
but share the point made by Angel Gurría in his Editorial, that addressing the multifaceted 
long-term  challenges  posed  by  population  ageing  ultimately  requires  business  investment, 
notably 
that  supports  productivity  and  economic  growth. 
Policymakers  therefore  need  to  ensure  framework  conditions  that  are  most  conducive  to 
stronger capital formation. 
To  conclude,  identifying  and  monitoring  old  and  new  risks  is  a  key  ingredient  for  effective 
crisis  prevention.  The  Business  and  Finance  Outlook  that  the  OECD  is  launching  today 
promises to provide analysts and policymakers with an additional tool that offers distinctive 
but complementary perspectives with respect to other established, useful and time-honoured 
outlooks and reports, such as the OECD Economic Outlook, on which I spent so many hours 
over the years in this very location, with colleagues I will always remember with nostalgia and 
affection. 
in  R&D  and 
innovation, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
