  Karnit Flug: The credit market and its supervision in the Israeli economy 
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  Knesset  Economics 
Committee on the Gray Market, Tel Aviv, 15 July 2015. 
 Main points: 
• 
The forces of supply and demand create the gray market (a financing system that is 
an  alternative  to  the  institutional  system)  in  Israel,  some  parts  of  which  are  a 
legitimate market that provides services that are complementary to the institutional 
system. This market can also contribute in certain aspects of competition. 
The  main  problem  in  the  gray  market  starts  with  the  lack  of  regulation  and 
supervision  over  activity  in  this  market.  The  entities  that  are  active  in  this  market 
provide credit without any regulatory supervision in relation to this activity or at all. 
The lack of supervision has a negative impact on borrowers in the gray market, first 
of all from a basic consumer standpoint. In contrast to the banking market, there is 
no consumer protection system for borrowers in this market. 
The  risks  in  the  gray  market  may  spill  over  to  the  financial  market,  both  due  to 
regulatory arbitrage (gaps in regulatory requirements) that will lead to a decline in 
standards in the financial system, and from a prudential standpoint, particularly if the 
entities in the gray market grow and become a significant part of the credit market. 
One of the reasons for the recent global financial crisis was the development of a 
nonbank financial system, mainly in the US, which was not sufficiently supervised. 
These  systems  grew  rapidly  while  taking  significant  risks  that  in  the  end  were 
realized in the form of a financial crisis. 
It is preferable to act in this area in two directions: First, to reduce the gray market 
by developing alternative institutional sources of financing, and second, to regulate 
the  legitimate  activity  in  the  gray  market  through  legislation  and  regulation  and  to 
supervise activity in this market. 
The  Bank  of Israel  and the  Banking  Supervision  Department  are  acting to  ensure 
accessibility and competition that will improve the situation for households and small 
businesses.  As  part  of  this,  we  are  acting  to  increase  competition  both  within  the 
banking system and through entities outside the system, including other legitimate 
noninstitutional entities. 
Supervisory  regulation  of  the  gray  market  will  make  it  possible  to  expand  the 
sources of financing of the entities active in it. The proposal to enable certain entities 
to issue bonds and to provide credit without arranging the appropriate controls may 
led to serious harm to the economy. 
I am aware of the desire for everything to be here and now. But we need to deal with 
these issues properly, with the proper regulation, even if that takes time, since the 
damage of promoting unregulated financial activity will exceed the benefit, and the 
victim, as always, will be the public. 
       Good morning, 
In my remarks here today, I will present a general outline of the credit market in the Israeli 
economy, and relate to parts of it that are supervised by various regulators such as the Bank 
of Israel, and to parts that are not supervised as of today, including the gray market. 
I  will  begin  with  a  description  of  the  market  and  the  various  players  in  it,  continue  with  a 
description of the gray market within the financial system and the risks that exist in the gray 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  market in its current structure, and finish with a presentation of my position in relation to how 
we must handle the main failures in this market. 
So what is the gray market, and who are the players in it? 
In order to understand this and to connect it to possible solutions, I would like to start with a 
short  description  of  the  financial  intermediation  framework  in  Israel.  By  this  I  refer  to  the 
intermediation  between  the  supply  of  sources  of  savings  and  demand  for  investment 
financing  and  consumption,  between  the  supply  of  credit  and  the  demand  for  credit.  This 
framework can be divided into three main groups: the banking system, the nonbank financial 
institutions  system,  and  the  alternative  financing  market,  which  we  refer  to  as  the  gray 
market. 
Traditionally,  financial  intermediation  between  savers  and  borrowers  takes  place  in  the 
banking  system  through  the  provision  of  loans  that  are  financed  through  deposits  from 
savers.  Even  now,  despite  the  development  of  additional  sources  of  credit,  the  banking 
system  is  the  dominant  system  in  Israel  among  the  various  financial  institutions  for 
everything to do with financial intermediation activity. 
By  way  of  explanation,  as  of  December  2014,  total  household  debt  was  about  NIS  433 
billion. About 94 percent of that debt is to the banking system and credit card companies. 
Over  time,  and  following  the  adoption  of  technological  improvements  and  alternative 
instruments,  additional  entities  began  operating  and  specializing  in  various  components  of 
financial intermediation. These entities include the nonbank financial system, which provides 
credit through financial entities such as pension funds and insurance companies. Despite the 
fact that these entities are part of the institutional system and are subject to a regulatory and 
supervisory  system,  they  still  differ  from  the  banks  mainly  in  their  access  to  liquid 
government sources. 
If we can see these first two groups – the banking system and the nonbank financial system 
– as institutional systems, the third group, which is the focus of this meeting today, offers an 
alternative financing system to the institutional system. 
This type of financing is referred to in Israel as the gray market. The term “gray market” has 
negative  connotations,  although  it  should  be  noted  that  in  and  of  itself,  credit  provision 
activity  is not necessarily contrary to the law. There are legitimate – although insufficiently 
supervised – actors within the gray market, and in contrast, there are also criminal elements. 
The  way  in  which  this  market  has  developed  in  Israel  is  fraught  with  risks,  including 
compliance risks, which I will discuss more later on. 
In  Israel,  the  alternative  financing  system  is  mainly  offered  by  currency  service  providers, 
private  and  public  companies  providing  credit  services,  and  charitable  organizations.  In 
addition, another industry is developing, thanks to technological developments, that offers a 
financing model that brings borrowers and lenders into direct peer-2-peer contact. 
When  we  look  at  this  phenomenon  globally,  we  look  at  the  banking  system  and  at  the 
nonbank system opposite it, referred to by the term “shadow banking”. Perhaps this name is 
not  so  complimentary,  but  the  vast  majority  of  this  system  in  the  world  is  comprised  of 
nonbank financial entities that are subject to various levels of supervision. There is a marked 
increase  globally  in  shadow  banking  activity,  which  is  made  possible  due  to  technological 
developments in the field, the high level of liquidity that currently exists in the markets, and 
against the background of increased regulatory restrictions imposed on the banks. 
Regarding the gray market, there are no complete data on the volume of its operations or on 
its customers, which is one of the problems it presents. 
A  survey  conducted  for  the  Small  and  Medium  Business  Agency  in  the  Ministry  of  the 
Economy  in  2010  shows  that  many  small  businesses  have  difficulty  financing  their 
operations, but that only 0.4 percent gave a positive answer to the question of whether they 
use  the  gray  market.  It  seems  that  this  number  is  downward  biased,  since  there  is  no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  complete information on credit provision or check clearance by currency service providers or 
charitable  organizations.  Current  estimates  talk  about  a  credit  market  of  about  NIS  10–20 
billion. In relation to the existing numbers in the banking system, the rates are very low. 
Up to now, I have outlined the financial environment in which the gray  market operates in 
Israel. Now I will try to answer the question of who the customers are in this market. 
There is apparently a wide variety of customers that use the financial services of the gray 
market. These are mainly households and small businesses, to whom the banking system or 
the nonbank institutional system are inaccessible from the outset, or those that have used up 
their  banking  credit  facilities.  Examples  of  those  who  use  the  services  of  the  gray  market 
include  restricted  customers,  those  in  bankruptcy,  customers  without  sufficient  collateral, 
borrowers in need of rapid and liquid money, and borrowers wishing to take out a loan under 
complete discretion for reasons both legitimate and illegitimate. 
The situation thus far is something that we recognize well from Economics 101. There are 
forces of supply and demand that create the gray market, and some of that market may be a 
legitimate  market  that  provides  services  complementary  to  the  institutional  system  that 
cannot  or  does  not  want  to  be  part  of  this  market.  There  are  also  advantages,  including 
increased  public  access  to  credit.  In  addition,  the  fact  that  the  gray  market  exists  and  is 
developing shows to a certain extent that it is necessary. 
However, there are also problems and failures in how this market has developed in Israel. 
The main problem in the gray market begins with the lack of regulation and supervision over 
activity  in  this  market.  The  entities  active  in  this  market  provide  credit  without  regulatory 
supervision in relation to this activity or in general. The lack of supervision has a negative 
impact  on  borrowers  in  the  gray  market,  first  of  all  from  a  basic  consumer  standpoint.  In 
contrast to the banking market, there is no consumer protection system for borrowers in this 
market. For instance, the banks have due disclosure obligations in relation to the terms of 
credit.  For  the  most  part,  they  are  cautious  in  the  provision  of  credit  beyond  customers’ 
needs  and  repayment  abilities,  and  there  are  fixed  and  regulated  dispute  settlement 
mechanisms. The Banking Supervision Department also enforces consumer directives, and 
serves as the decider of disputes in many cases where customers have claims of improper 
activity  on  the  part  of  the  banks.  Just  this  week,  we  published  the  activity  report  of  the 
Banking  Supervision  Department’s  Public  Enquiries  Unit.  The  Unit  worked  to  clarify 
thousands  of  enquiries,  brought  about  the  repayment  of  more  than  NIS  3  million  to 
customers, and was able to provide systemic handling of a number of complaints where it 
turned  out  that  the  complaints  did  not  only  concern  those  customers  who  enquired  about 
them. 
None of this exists in the gray market. Advertisements about the terms for providing credit in 
the gray market often lack basic information the borrower requires, and sometimes contain 
misleading information. For instance, a simple search on the Internet regarding the possibility 
of taking out a loan results in the following information: “Immediate loans, within half an hour, 
for any purpose, at low interest, without guarantors.” 
Another aspect of the lack of regulation and supervision is the fact that there are no entry 
barriers to the gray market, and criminal elements working through illegitimate means – from 
exaggerated  interest  that  is  prohibited  by  the  Nonbank  Loan  Regulation  Law,  to  means of 
debt  collection  –  are  entering  it.  Of  course  the  existence  of  criminal  elements  leads  to 
additional damage in terms of the war against money laundering, the personal security of the 
borrowers, and the social strength of the public as a whole. 
In  addition,  since  many  entities  in  the  gray  market  work  with  and  within  the  institutional 
financial system, the problems and risks may also spill over into the financial system. This 
may be reflected in regulatory arbitrage (the gap in regulatory requirements) that may in the 
end lead to a decline in standards in the financial system. Should these entities grow and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  become a significant part of the credit market, any failure that may occur could develop into a 
prudential problem. 
One of the reasons for the recent global financial crisis was the development of a nonbank 
financial  system,  mainly  in  the  US,  which  was  not  sufficiently  supervised.  These  systems 
grew  rapidly  while  taking  significant  risks  that  in  the  end  were  realized  in  the  form  of  a 
financial  crisis.  Therefore,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  its  most  recent  financial 
stability  report  warned  of  the  existing  risks  in  nonbank  credit.  The  Federal  Reserve  also 
shone a light on these risks as part of a department that was established after the crisis and 
is  responsible  for  identifying  and  analyzing  risks  in  the  various  financial  systems  –  not 
necessarily the banking systems – with a systemic, rather than individual, view. 
In this context, it is important to note an additional point. As I have already mentioned, there 
is insufficient data and information on the gray market. It is therefore difficult to estimate the 
prudential risks in this market. Regulation of this market will ensure proper information and 
data on the size and development of the market, the level of risk in the activity of the various 
entities in the market, and their effect on the overall financial system. For example, in view of 
the  high growth  of  consumer credit  in  recent  years,  and  the  understand  that  the  risks  that 
may  derive  from  this  growth  must  be  monitored,  the  Banking  Supervision  Department 
released a new reporting directive on consumer credit risk just a few days ago. 
How can we handle the problems created by the gray market in Israel? 
I  think  it  is  worthwhile  acting  in  two  directions  in  this  area:  first,  to  try  to  reduce  the  gray 
market by developing alternative institutional sources of financing, and second, to regulate 
the legitimate activity in the gray market through legislation and regulation to the point where 
it no longer justifies the term “gray market”, and to supervise activity in this market. 
When we talk about increasing the legitimate sources of financing for households and small 
businesses, first of all there is the institutional system. 
The  banks:  In  recent  years,  bank  credit  to  households  and  small  business  has  constantly 
been  increasing,  and  the  banks  have  identified  the  advantages,  from  their  standpoint,  in 
operations vis-à-vis these customers. By the way, I note that the growth in this activity is not 
coming at the expense of proper risk management, and it is good that there is a regulator 
supervising this. 
The second group that could be a major factor both in terms of availability of and access to 
credit  and  in  terms  of  price  through  competition  with  the  banking  system,  is  institutional 
investors. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  Banking  Supervision  Department  are  acting  to  ensure 
accessibility  and  competition  that  will  improve  the  situation  for  households  and  small 
businesses. I would like to mention here the recommendations of the Interministerial Team to 
Examine How to Increase Competitiveness in the Banking System, led by the Supervisor of 
Banks,  a  large  part  of  which  are  already  in  advanced  stages  of  implementation.  The 
recommendations related to increasing competitiveness within the banking system itself, and 
to increasing competitiveness through entities outside the system. Among other things, the 
Team saw many advantages in providing credit to households and to small businesses by 
nonbank  financial  institutions.  These  institutions  provide  a  tangible  potential  for  increasing 
competitiveness in the households and small businesses segments. They lead to a greater 
variety of credit instruments offered to the public, to an increased supply of credit to these 
segments,  and  to  lower  costs  of  such  credit.  Another  advantage  is  from  the  standpoint  of 
managing  long-term  savings,  since  credit  to  households  and  small  businesses  has 
characteristics  that  are  appropriate  for  the  public’s  pension  savings  portfolio.  It  is  an 
investment  that  is  characterized  by  significant  diversification  and  by  a  suitable  return.  The 
Team’s work reviewed the obstructions preventing the expansion of such activity or delaying 
the entry of these entities into the retail credit market, mainly the ability and cost inherent in 
establishing  an  underwriting,  management  and  collection  array  for  retail  credit.  The  Team 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  presented initial directions for removing these obstructions, and I hope that we will succeed 
through joint effort with the Ministry of Finance to help the entry of institutional investors into 
this field take form. 
Another measure for increasing households and small businesses’ access to credit is in line 
with the Team’s recommendation to increase the number of players in the banking system 
itself, by creating a regulatory framework for the establishment of Internet banks and credit 
unions. 
In  addition,  other  legitimate  noninstitutional  entities  should  be  able  to  take  part  in  various 
parts of financial intermediation, such as mass financing platforms, state guaranteed credit 
funds for small businesses, the securitization of bank loans to these segments and their sale 
to institutional investors, and more. Many of these measures are already on the table, and 
their expansion should be considered. Some of the issues are also being discussed today by 
the  Team  to  Increase  Competitiveness  that  was  recently  established  by  myself  and  the 
Minister of Finance. 
To sum up this point, increasing the supply of credit by the banking and institutional systems, 
and increasing the availability of credit on other supervised tracks will make it less worthwhile 
for households and small businesses to turn to the gray market. 
One  necessary  complementary  measure  is  the  regulation  of  legitimate  entities  within  the 
market  that  is  currently  called  the  gray  market, and  removing  illegitimate  entities  from this 
market. Such entities should be put under a regulatory framework with all that that entails – 
in other words, a regulatory, a system of laws and directives, supervisory and enforcement 
authorities, and so forth. When this market is under regulatory supervision, it will be possible 
to talk about the sources of financing of the entities operating in it, including the proposal to 
enable  certain  entities  to  issue  bonds  and  to  provide  credit.  Expansion  of  such  activity 
without the proper controls may lead to serious damage to the economy. As such, we are 
opposed  to  it.  We  must  not  be  tempted  by  quick  solutions  that  offer  the  unsupervised 
development  of  additional  financial  systems. We  need  a  long-term  vision  in  order  to  know 
how to deal with the risks that exist in the activities of the various actors in this market. A 
report  by  the  Ministry  of  Justice  has  already  recommended regulating  the  activity  of  these 
entities, and there is now a discussion on how to implement those recommendations. 
Beyond that, enforcement authorities must obviously deal with contraventions of the law and 
of public order, should any take place, and they must be given the proper tools for this both 
through the required legislative changes – for example, there is a proposed Fair Credit Law 
that sets out criminal penalties for collecting interest beyond a rate set by the law – and by 
making resources available. 
In summation, the gray market in Israel is an existing fact. There is place for a credit market 
beyond the banking system, mainly concerning increased access to credit. The market can 
also contribute in terms of competition. It is important to establish a regulatory framework to 
regulate,  supervise  and  enforce  the  law  and  regulations  for  activity  of  the  noninstitutional 
market. 
There are currently many processes in various committees relating to some of the problems. 
There is a committee in the Ministry of Finance to establish a dedicated regulator, there is a 
committee  to  increase  competitiveness  in  the  financial  services,  and  the  government  is 
leading various efforts to assist small businesses. 
I am aware of the desire for everything to be here and now. But we need to deal with these 
issues  properly,  with  the  proper  regulation,  even  if  it  takes  time,  since  the  damage  of 
promoting unregulated financial activity will exceed the benefit, and the victim, as always, will 
be the public. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
