  Glenn Stevens: Overview of economic developments affecting Australia 
Opening statement by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 13 February 2015. 
 Chair 
Members of the Committee 
Since the hearing in August last year, the economy has continued to grow at a moderate, but 
below-trend  pace.  Inflation  as  measured  by  the  CPI  has  been  affected  by  movements  in 
energy prices and government policy changes, but even aside from these effects, inflation is 
low and appears likely to remain so. 
The  international  context  is  one  in  which  the  global  economy  likewise  is  growing,  but 
according to most observers at a pace a little below its longer-run average. There are some 
notable differences in performance by region. The US economy has picked up momentum, 
growing  above  trend  with  a  falling  unemployment  rate.  China’s  economy  met  its  growth 
target in 2014. A slightly lower target seems likely to be set for 2015, perhaps something like 
7 per cent. But that would still be robust growth for an economy of China’s size. On the other 
hand, the euro area and Japan have recorded lower growth rates than expected a year ago. 
Commodity prices have fallen, in some cases quite sharply. These trends appear to reflect 
primarily  major  increases  in  supply,  with  some  moderation  in  demand  playing  a  role.  That 
would appear to be the case for iron ore and oil prices (and, prospectively, liquefied natural 
gas prices, which are typically tied to oil prices). Base metals prices, where few significant 
supply changes have occurred, have fallen by much less. 
So there has been what economists refer to as a “positive supply shock”: more of the product 
is available with lower prices. The effect of this on individual countries will vary, depending on 
whether  they  are  a  producer  or  a  consumer  of  such  raw  materials.  On  the  whole  for  the 
global economy, however, this is a positive development. 
Inflation  is quite  low  in  a  range  of  countries,  and  very  low  in  some. The  decline  in  energy 
prices is temporarily pushing headline CPI inflation rates even lower. 
The  very  low  interest  rates  in  evidence  around  the  world  when  we  last  met  have  fallen 
further.  This  has  been  most  pronounced  in  Europe,  where  yields  on  long-term  German 
sovereign debt have fallen to be about the same as those in Japan. German sovereign debt 
has recently traded at negative yields for terms as long as 5 years. Official deposit rates are 
negative  in  the  euro  area,  and  the  European  Central  Bank  has  announced  a  large-scale 
asset  purchase  program  –  colloquially  referred  to  as  “quantitative  easing”.  The  euro  has 
depreciated. Some surrounding countries to which funds tend to flow in anticipation of further 
depreciation – such as Switzerland – have reduced interest rates to significantly below zero 
and  indeed  10-year  Swiss  government  debt  has  traded  at  a  negative  yield.  The  Swiss 
National Bank took the decision to remove the cap on the Swiss franc, as it assessed that 
the size of the intervention likely to be required to hold it was becoming just too large. This 
move occasioned considerable turbulence in foreign exchange markets. 
Meanwhile,  the  US  Federal  Reserve,  faced  with  a  strengthening  US  economy  and  having 
ended its asset purchase program last year, is expected to begin a gradual process of lifting 
its policy rate in a few months from now. So the monetary policies of the major jurisdictions 
look like they will be heading in differing directions. This means there is ample potential for 
further turbulence in financial markets this year. 
The  falls  in  prices  for  key  export  commodities  are  lowering  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  and 
hence the purchasing power of our national income. This is a  well-understood mechanism 
and has been the subject of much discussion. It will continue to constrain income growth for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  households  and  mining companies,  and revenues for  both  state  and federal  governments, 
over the period ahead. 
Resource export shipments are increasing strongly, as the capacity put in place by the period 
of high investment is put to use. At the same time, the high levels of capital spending by the 
resources  sector,  which  had  been  a  strong  driver  of  domestic  demand  for  several  years, 
peaked  during  mid  2012  and  turned  down.  All  indications  are  that  this  downswing  will 
accelerate this year. That has always been our forecast. The recent declines in commodity 
prices don’t change it, though they do reinforce that this trend is well and truly under way. 
The  various  areas  of  domestic  demand  outside  mining  investment  are  mixed.  Dwelling 
construction is rising strongly and commencements of new dwellings will reach a new high 
over the coming 12 months. Consumer spending is responding both to income trends and 
financial incentives, which are pulling in different directions. Growth in wages, by historical 
standards,  is  quite  subdued.  This  and  the  fall  in  the  terms  of  trade  is  working  to  restrain 
growth in disposable incomes. Working the other way, the fall in petrol prices, assuming it 
persists,  is  adding  noticeably  to  the  real  incomes  of  consumers.  Increased  asset  values, 
which  push  up gross measures  of  wealth,  and  low  interest  rates  are  also  working  to  push 
consumption  up  relative  to  income.  The  net  effect  of  these  opposing  forces  is  producing 
moderate, though not strong, consumption growth. 
Meanwhile,  at  this  point  non-mining  business  investment  spending  is  still  very  subdued. 
While several key fundamentals are in place for stronger performance, clear signs of a near-
term strengthening remain unconvincing at this stage. This is a weaker outcome than we had 
expected six months ago. Public sector final spending – about one-fifth of aggregate demand 
–  is  fairly  subdued,  and  the  intent  of  governments,  as  you  know,  is  to  restrain  their  own 
spending over the period ahead. The lower exchange rate is likely to help export volumes 
outside the resources sector, and of late better trends have been observed in some services 
export categories including tourism and education. 
Overall,  growth  in  non-mining  economic  activity  has  picked  up,  but  is  still  a  little  below 
average.  Our  expectation  had  been  that  a  further  pick-up  would  occur  in  2015.  When  we 
reviewed our forecasts in late January, we didn’t feel that growth in the recent past had been 
materially different from what we had estimated a few months ago. But when we tried to look 
ahead, we concluded that there were fewer signs of a further pick-up in non-mining activity 
than we had hoped to see by now. As a result, the revised forecasts we took to the February 
Board  meeting  embodied  a  longer  period  of  below-trend  growth,  and  a  higher  peak  in  the 
rate of unemployment, than earlier forecasts. They also suggested that inflation was likely to 
remain pretty low over the forecast horizon. The inflation outlook was revised slightly lower, 
in part reflecting the effect of declining oil prices as well as the weaker outlook for economic 
activity. 
At  its  meeting  in  February  the  Board  considered  that  this  revised  assessment  –  that  is, 
sub-trend growth for longer, a higher peak in the unemployment rate, slightly lower inflation – 
warranted  consideration  of  some  further  adjustment  to  monetary  policy,  after  a  fairly  long 
period during which the cash rate had remained steady. These were incremental changes to 
the outlook but all in a consistent direction. 
Another factor in our consideration was dwelling prices, which have continued to increase. 
Price rises in Sydney are very strong, and they are pretty solid in Melbourne. On the other 
hand  they  are  much  more  mixed  elsewhere.  Excluding  Sydney,  the  rise  for  Australia  as  a 
whole over the past year was about 5 per cent. That is a healthy pace but not alarming, and 
some cities have seen price falls. Developments in the Sydney market remain concerning, 
but in the end we did not see these trends as overwhelming a case for a further easing in 
monetary policy that was made on more general grounds. 
I  note  that,  on  the  regulatory  front,  APRA  has  announced  its  supervisory  approach  to 
managing  the  potential  risks  posed  by  the  rise  in  lending  to  investors  in  housing.  This 
involves  more  intense  scrutiny  of  investor  loan  portfolios  growing  at  over  10  per  cent  per 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  year,  with  the  possibility,  ultimately,  of  additional  capital  being  required  if  APRA  deems  it 
necessary. APRA has also reiterated its expectations for other elements of lending standards 
such  as  interest  rate  buffers  and  floors.  And  ASIC  has  begun  a  review  of  interest-only 
lending  in  the  context  of  consumer  protection  legislation. The  Bank  welcomes  these  steps 
and will keep working with other regulators in these areas. 
The Board is also very conscious of the possibility that monetary policy’s power to summon 
up additional growth in demand could, at these levels of interest rates, be less than it was in 
the  past.  A  decade  ago,  when  there  was,  it  seems,  an  underlying  latent  desire  among 
households to borrow and spend, it was perhaps easier for a reduction in interest rates to 
spark  additional  demand  in  the  economy.  Today,  such  a  channel  may  be  less  effective. 
Nonetheless  we  do  not  think  that  monetary  policy  has  reached  the  point  where  it  has  no 
ability  at  all  to  give  additional  support  to  demand.  Our  judgement  is  that  it  still  has  some 
ability to assist the transition the economy is making, and we regarded it as appropriate to 
provide that support. 
The forecasts published last week in the Statement on Monetary Policy assume a lower path 
for  interest  rates  and  a  lower  exchange  rate  than  both  earlier  forecasts  and  the  ones  the 
Board responded to at the February meeting. These are assumptions rather than forecasts 
or commitments to a course of action. 
It is worth noting that, despite concerns at various times about whether the exchange rate 
would  adjust  appropriately  to  our  changing  circumstances,  it  has  been  doing  so  over  the 
period since we last met with the Committee. Against the US dollar it has fallen by around 17 
per cent since our last hearing. The US dollar itself has been rising against all currencies, of 
course,  so  much  of  this  movement  is  an  American  story  rather  than  an  Australian  one. 
Against  a  basket  of  relevant  currencies  the  Australian  dollar  has  fallen  by  less,  but  the 
decline is still about 11 per cent since August. Further adjustment is probably going to occur. 
One other development since our last meeting with the Committee was the final report of the 
Financial  System  Inquiry.  This  was  quite  a  wide-ranging  report  and  there  is  now  a  further 
period  of  consultation.  I  simply  note  that  the  Inquiry  did  not  find  major  problems  in  the 
financial system, but did make recommendations about capital, to enhance the resilience of 
the  banking  system,  and  about  loss-absorbency  more  broadly  in  the  context  of  resolution. 
These  will  be  mostly  in  the  province  of  APRA  to  consider.  The  Inquiry  also  made  some 
observations about payments matters, generally supporting the steps the Payments System 
Board has taken since its inception in 1998, and pointing to some areas where further steps 
may  be  appropriate.  The  Payments  System  Board  will  be  considering  these  matters  at  its 
meeting next week. 
We now await your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
