  Fernando Restoy: Monetary policy and financial stability 
Closing address by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the UIMP 
(Menéndez Pelayo International University) seminar “The new economic model”, Santander, 
19 June 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Bank Spain’s website. 
Thank  you  for  your  introduction,  Miguel  Ángel.  Once  again,  it  really  is  a  pleasure  to 
participate in the closure of this seminar organised by APIE at UIMP. 
This  is  the  third  time  I  have  attended  this  forum  as  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Banco  de 
España. Since the last occasion, you will agree with me that one of the key developments in 
the euro area, in addition to the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Greek 
crisis, has been the continuous easing of monetary policy. Interest rates have fallen to levels 
not  previously  seen  and  the  ECB  has  resorted  to  relatively  unconventional  instruments, 
although these had already been used in other jurisdictions. 
These measures must be understood against the background of the weak economic growth 
and the significant risks that inflation would hold at levels not consistent with price stability. 
Indeed, the ECB’s actions are already proving effective in sustaining growth and shoring up 
the stabilising nature of its policy. 
At the same time, it is true that the indefinite maintenance of interest rates at very low levels 
– even with negative figures in certain financial transactions – might ultimately prompt certain 
undesirable effects on the functioning of the economy and, potentially, generate certain risks 
to financial stability. Accordingly, against a backdrop of extreme monetary looseness, close 
monitoring is required as regards the effects on both the real economy and on the financial 
system. 
I should like to develop this idea further today. To do so, I shall review the monetary policy of 
the main central banks in response to the financial crisis, with particular attention to the ECB; 
I shall then analyse the attendant effects on the economic and financial outlook; and finally, I 
shall discuss some of the challenges this policy entails for the Spanish financial system. 
The emergence of non-standard monetary policies 
1. 
During the early stages of the global financial crisis that brought the “Great Moderation” to an 
end,  making  way  for  the  “Great  Recession”,  the  reaction  by  the  leading  advanced 
economies’  central  banks  was  substantially  uniform.  The  initial  bouts  of  tension  translated 
into a rapid and widespread loss of confidence in the soundness of banks, making the proper 
functioning of interbank markets impossible. A vital channel in the redistribution of liquidity 
among banks was thus blocked. 
The central banks of the main developed economies had to adopt extraordinary measures to 
combat  the  clogging-up  of  this  channel.  The  ECB  was  a  pioneer  in  its  response  to  these 
dysfunctions and many of its initiatives were later followed by other monetary authorities. Its 
measures initially took the form of massive liquidity injections, fully meeting as from October 
2008 the demand for funds by banks in its regular operations, extending the term of loans 
over progressively longer horizons (they were extended up to one year in summer 2009) and 
providing  readier  access  to  Eurosystem  loans  through  the  easing  of  collateral  eligibility 
requirements. 
As a result, central banks ultimately met not the net liquidity needs of the system as a whole, 
as they do in normal circumstances, but rather – largely – the gross funding requirements of 
each individual bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As  the  crisis  progressed,  the  drastic  contraction  in  global  demand  brought  about  by  the 
financial turbulence, the freezing of financing flows and the emergence of the first signs of 
deflationary  risks  made  it  necessary  for  the  monetary  authorities  to  undertake  further 
measures. 
As  regards  conventional  monetary  policy,  the  main  central  banks  opted  for  official  interest 
rate cuts, taking them to historical lows. In the case of the euro area, interest rates fell by 
over 300 basis points to 1% in scarcely seven months from October 2008 to May 2009. 
But  as  official  interest  rates  drew  closer  to  zero,  central  banks  had  to  resort  to  other  less 
conventional  types  of  tools  to  provide  the  monetary  boost  that  the  seriousness  of  the 
situation required. 
Central  banks  thus  resorted  to  large-scale  asset  purchase  programmes,  which  were 
successively  amplified  until  the  economic  recovery  showed  signs  of  firming.  Such 
quantitative easing, as it is known, seeks – once the scope for reducing short-term interest 
rates has been exhausted – to influence more directly the yield on government and private 
instruments  in  the  medium  and  long  term,  these  being  relevant  for  agents’  spending 
decisions. 
The non-standard measures also extended to the communications area. Pursuing a policy 
dubbed  “forward  guidance”,  central  banks  began,  on  a  regular  basis,  to  emit  explicit 
indications  about  the  future  course  of  official  interest  rates  or  about  other  non-standard 
measures. The aim of such guidance is to entrench agents’ expectations and enhance the 
pass-through of the measures adopted to the interest rates prevailing on other markets. 
In the specific case of the ECB, its asset purchase programmes had, until mid-2014, been 
more  restrictive  in  nature  than  those  of  other  central  banks,  regarding  both  scale  and  the 
classes  of  assets  acquired.  Indeed,  its  purchases  were  chiefly  aimed  at  private  securities, 
often issued by banks themselves or by bank asset securitisation vehicles. 
In the second half of 2014, however, weakening demand and a series of negative surprises 
concerning the evolution of prices in the area began to pass through to medium-term inflation 
expectations,  which  showed  growing  risks  of  disanchoring.  In  this  scenario,  one  clearly 
diverging from that in the United States or the United Kingdom, the ECB had to deepen its 
expansionary monetary policy stance which, in this way, differed from that pursued by the US 
and UK central banks. 
In this connection, the ECB once again cut its official interest rates, lowering its MRO rate to 
its effective lower bound and actually taking that on the deposit facility into negative territory. 
Further, in June 2014, it introduced a new longer-term refinancing operation (up to 4 years) 
tied  to  the  granting  of  loans  to  the  private  sector,  and  it  stepped  up  its  forward  guidance 
strategy,  announcing  in  November  that  same  year  its  intention  to  expand  the  size  of  its 
balance sheet to the maximum levels attained in March 2012. 
To achieve this, the ECB’s extended its asset purchase programmes to include acquisitions 
of securities issued by the public sector, a measure that was announced on 22 January this 
year. Since March, the ECB has been acquiring public- and private-sector assets for a value 
of around €60 billion per month. The Governing Council intends to prolong these purchases 
at least until September 2016 and, in any event, until inflation has resumed a path consistent 
with the medium-term inflation objectives. 
The macroeconomic effects of the ECB’s non-standard measures 
2. 
The  effects  of  the  measures  adopted  by  the  ECB  operate  through  different  channels. 
Although the latest measures have not yet had time to deploy their full potential, the evidence 
available suggests that several of these effects may already be beginning to arise. 
Firstly,  the  asset  purchase  programmes  are  exerting  a  direct  effect  on  the  prices  of  the 
securities acquired. One of the first signs of the ECB’s quantitative easing programme was 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the reduction in long-term government bond yields, and this despite the fact that, unlike in 
other areas, the application of quantitative easing in the euro area came about when these 
yields were already very low in some of the Member States. 
German government  bond  yields,  for  instance,  turned  down  with  an  intensity  that  few  had 
anticipated, posting negative figures for all terms shorter than 6 years. In fact, 10-year Bund 
yields reached levels below 0.10%. In recent weeks, long-term interest rates have risen to 
higher levels, which is more in keeping with the foreseeable course of growth and inflation in 
the euro area (see Chart 1). 
In  addition  to  the  direct effect  on  long-term government  bond  yields,  the  large-scale  asset 
purchase programmes trigger a private-sector portfolio reallocation, whereby the cuts in rates 
favour an appreciation of other instruments, such as corporate bonds and listed shares, and 
the depreciation of the exchange rate. These effects are also already visible in the euro area 
(see Chart 2). 
When  the  rate  cuts  become  extensive  to  bank  financing  conditions,  they  activate  a  credit 
channel which, in short, makes for less burdensome financing conditions for households and 
firms. The latest wave of the Bank Lending Survey regularly conducted by the Eurosystem 
central banks to monitor credit supply and demand conditions in the area shows that, both in 
terms of prices and amounts, these conditions are already responding positively to the ECB’s 
asset purchase programme (see Chart 3). 
All these effects on the prices of financial assets and agents’ financing conditions stimulate 
economic activity and inflation expectations, although the degree of uncertainty associated 
with  the  calibration  of  these  stimuli  is  considerable  according  to  the  empirical  literature 
available. 
Since  the  programme  was  announced  in  the  euro  area,  most  international  agencies  and 
private analysts have significantly revised their growth forecasts upwards (see Chart 4) and 
the  declining  trend  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations  has  been  checked;  indeed,  they 
have begun to turn upwards (see Chart 5). Though still some distance off the 2% reference, 
this  change  in  trend  is  essential  for  moderating  long-term  real  interest  rates  and,  thereby, 
contributing to a greater expansion in private spending. 
Implications for financial stability 
3. 
Like any other economic policy action, monetary policy actions also have effects on variables 
other than those that policymakers wish to influence. 
Recent  papers  have  analysed,  for  example,  the  potential  effects  of  the  asset  purchase 
programmes on the distribution of income. They warn that by favouring the appreciation of 
such assets, these programmes tend to improve the financial situation of agents who have 
larger holdings of these instruments, who generally are those with higher incomes. 
However,  I  think  it  is  difficult  to  draw  conclusions  on  such  a  complex  question  without 
adopting a sufficiently broad perspective. The direct effects on individuals’ portfolios cannot 
be assessed without also considering the eventual effects of the programmes on growth and 
inflation and their different consequences for each group of households and companies. By 
way of example, higher inflation will tend to benefit more indebted agents to a greater extent. 
In the case of Spanish households, it has been precisely the lower-income ones that have 
been affected to a large extent by problems of over-indebtedness. 
Here,  however,  I  wish  to  focus  on  the  possible  effects  of  central  banks’  expansionary 
measures on financial stability. First, it should be noted that economic stability and financial 
stability are, in the medium term, inseparable objectives, and it is not possible to have one 
without the other. Indeed, price-stability-oriented central bank policies are conducive to the 
sustained growth that is essential to ensure the stability of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  undesired  effects  that  may  arise  in  the  short  term  are  another  matter.  These  are 
associated  with  the  instruments  deployed  to  pursue  the  fundamental  monetary  policy 
objective, such as interest rate changes. 
In fact, there is evidence in the literature that extremely low interest rates, like those currently 
prevailing, tend to encourage investors and financial intermediaries to search for yield, which, 
in  this  context,  may  lead  to  excessive  risk  assumption  and  an  inefficient  allocation  of 
resources. 
It has also been argued that low interest rates tend to delay the deleveraging and clean-up of 
the balance sheets of over-indebted businesses, households and financial institutions. 
A prolonged period of very loose monetary and financial conditions may, on the other hand, 
generate asset price bubbles, affecting both financial and real assets and, in particular, real 
estate. 
Continuing down the list, a low interest rate environment also poses challenges for certain 
specific financial sectors, such as life assurance companies and pension funds. For example, 
as  the  stress  tests  recently  conducted  by  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational 
Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA)  have  illustrated,  low  interest  rates  may  generate  imbalances 
between the yield of the assets, which depends on the level of interest rates, and the cost of 
the liabilities, when the latter is determined by pre-defined benefits. 
Finally, when interest rates are no longer merely low, but actually in negative territory, new 
challenges emerge as a result of changes in agents’ payment customs and in the very nature 
of banking business. In the limit, cash, which offers a zero nominal yield (without taking into 
account mobilisation and storage costs) would eventually dominate other alternative financial 
instruments, if the latter persistently offer yields significantly below zero. 
All these potential risks to financial stability require attention. At the moment, however, there 
is  no  evidence  that  they  could  be  reaching  significant  levels  in  the  euro  area.  That  is  the 
conclusion to be drawn, for example, from a review of the early warning indicators regularly 
compiled by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the IMF. Property prices, credit 
growth  and,  even  less  so,  investment  show  no  signs  of  imbalance.  Nor  do  the  cyclically 
adjusted  price-earnings  ratios  in  stock  markets  show  any  significant  deviation  from  their 
historical averages. 
The  risk  warning  is  especially  low  in  the  case  of  Spain.  The  long  recession  and  the 
adjustments in real-estate prices, in private indebtedness and in banking solvency have very 
significantly  reduced  the  risk  of  macro-financial  imbalances  that  could  disturb  financial 
stability in the short term. 
The actions required 
4. 
All told, the expectations that interest rates will stay low for some time make it advisable not 
only  to  remain  vigilant  to  the  evolution  of these  risks,  but,  as  a  precautionary  measure, to 
reflect on the actions needed to mitigate them and minimise their impact if they do arise. 
From this perspective, it is important to remember, first, that we cannot immediately deduce 
from  the  fact  that  low  interest  rates  stem  from  monetary  policy  that  the  response  to  the 
emergence  of  any  of  these  risks  to  financial  stability  must  necessarily  be  an  immediate 
change  in  the  central  bank’s  policy.  The  ECB  has  a  mandate,  which  is  to  achieve  and 
maintain price stability, and this mandate is not conditional. 
In an environment like the present one in the euro area, the low level of inflation expectations 
and the limited buoyancy of aggregate demand justify the maintenance, over the foreseeable 
horizon, of an expansionary monetary policy. 
Accordingly, the prevention of risks arising from the looseness of financial conditions requires 
the use of other economic policy  instruments, such as those in the macro-prudential area. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These  policies  aim  to  affect  the  decisions  of  agents  (households,  firms  and  financial 
intermediaries) in order to prevent the emergence or growth of macroeconomic imbalances 
that may damage the stability of the financial system as a whole. 
The availability of macro-prudential policy tools at the national level is especially important in 
currency  areas,  like  the  euro  area,  in  which  monetary  policy  measures  aiming  to  achieve 
price stability in the area as a whole may generate macro-financial imbalances in particular 
jurisdictions. 
However, the task is not an easy one. Macro-prudential policy has a broad and less clearly 
defined  objective  than  that  of  other  economic  policy  areas.  Thus,  while  micro-prudential 
policy  clearly  seeks  to  ensure  the  solvency  of  financial  institutions,  the  aim  of  macro-
prudential policy is twofold: first, it seeks to strengthen banks’ capacity to withstand specific 
macro-financial imbalances, such as the generation of asset price bubbles; further, it aims 
precisely  to  mitigate  the  build-up  of  these  imbalances.  Identifying  the  end-objective  is 
essential when it comes to determining the instruments to be used and correctly evaluating 
their  effectiveness.  Also,  as  they  are  of  recent  standing,  work  has  still  to  be  done  to  fully 
understand  the  interactions  between  macro-prudential  policy  and  the  other  economic 
policies, whether monetary, fiscal or micro-prudential. 
The prudential regulations in force encompass a significant range of instruments that may be 
used with a macro-prudential approach by both the national and European authorities. I refer 
here to the countercyclical capital buffer or to that established to withstand systemic risks. 
The European Regulation also offers the possibility of making the risk weightings of specific 
exposures  more  stringent  for  reasons  of  financial  stability,  along  with  the  introduction  of 
specific quantitative limits to avoid excessive risk concentrations. 
In  Spain,  the  competent  authority  for  activating  the  available  macro-prudential  policy 
instruments  in the  banking  area  is,  under  the  pertinent regulations, the Banco  de  España. 
Following  the  experience  of  other  central  banks,  it  is  currently  designing  an  analytical 
framework for the regular assessment of potential risks to financial stability that might give 
rise to the activation of one or more of the instruments mentioned. 
In any event, the creation of a Macro-Prudential Board – in line with the recommendations of 
the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) – has yet to be finalised. This Board, on which 
the  ministries  and  supervisory  agencies  involved  would  sit,  along  with  the  central  bank, 
would assess, from a broader perspective, the outlook for the maintaining of financial stability 
and would formulate the appropriate recommendations to those responsible for activating the 
measures deemed suitable. 
A challenge for the short term: banking industry profitability 
5. 
That  said,  one  of  the  key  challenges  arising  in  the  short  term  from  continued  low  interest 
rates is the direct effect these have on profitability in the banking industry and, therefore, on 
banks’ ability to pursue their business of intermediation of financial flows in the economy in 
an appropriate manner. 
In view of the asymmetry existing in the ability to pass lower market interest rates through to 
banks’ loans or deposits, banks’ financial margins tend to narrow considerably when market 
rates fall as sharply as they have in recent years. This effect exacerbates the adverse effect 
of weak credit demand on banking sector profits, in a setting characterised by the relative 
sluggishness of the main economies, despite the recent improvement observed, and by the 
necessary process of deleveraging by households and firms. 
In  effect,  the  average  return  on  equity  in  the  banking  sector  in  the  euro  area,  which  was 
negative  in  2011  and  2012,  barely  rose  above  zero  in  2013.  As  a  result  of  the  moderate 
recovery in net interest income and lower impairment losses arising from the cyclical upturn, 
in 2014 the average ROE rose slightly, although not enough to end above 3%. This is still 
well  short  of  the  pre-crisis  rates,  which  were  generally  in  double  digits,  when  profits  were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  more  than  double  their  current  figures  and  capital  was  30%  lower.  Given  that  the  cost  of 
capital could reach around 10% it is clear that profitability must improve, to allow banks to 
attract the funds that the growth in lending and the new regulatory requirements demand. 
The  Spanish  banking  industry’s  results  were  admittedly  somewhat  better  than  average  in 
2014,  with  return  on  equity  at  around  6.5%. This  is  partly  a  consequence  of the  improved 
efficiency indicators associated with the consolidation and restructuring efforts made in the 
sector in recent years. But there is no room for complacency at Spanish banks. Indeed, a 
large part of the industry’s profits in 2014 came from non-regular financial operations. 
Naturally, as indicated, the low rates of return are largely owing to cyclical factors which are, 
by their very nature, temporary. Moreover, although low interest rates have a direct adverse 
impact  on  profitability,  this  effect  is  offset  by  their  expansionary  influence  on  the  real 
economy, the demand for funding and credit quality. However, in addition to cyclical factors, 
there  appear  to  be  a  number  of  more  permanent  factors  that  could  result  in  net  interest 
income remaining low for some time. 
For  example,  interest  rate  levels  could  be  affected  by  secular  trends  such  as  population 
ageing, the slowdown in productivity and the necessary correction of high indebtedness that 
tends  to  encourage  saving  and  depress  investment,  exerting  downward  pressure  on  the 
expected path of real interest rates in the medium and long term. 
Further factors are the tightening of prudential regulations and the effects of the introduction 
of  new  legislation  aiming  to  ensure  high  loss-absorbing  capacity  for  banks  in  the  event  of 
resolution. All this will doubtless make institutions safer and will clearly reduce the likelihood 
of systemic crises and their associated costs. It is also evident that it will tend to penalise 
activities that entail higher risk, which are often more profitable, and to increase wholesale 
funding  costs  for  banks,  insofar  as  it  reduces  the  implicit  public  subsidy  traditionally 
associated with banks’ liabilities at systemically important institutions. 
Accordingly, restoring sustainable profit levels that will ensure the viability of the business in 
the medium term may require, depending on each case, significant strategic adjustments at 
some banks. In this respect, the following three areas at least should be reviewed. 
First,  a  reflection  is  in  order  as  to  whether  the commercial  banking  sector can  continue  to 
base  the  bulk  of  its  income  generation  on  the  loan-deposit  gap.  In  the  present  setting,  it 
seems reasonable to expect greater value generation from the provision of transactional or 
management  services  that  can  be  directly  remunerated  through  the  relevant  fees  and 
commissions. 
Second, the cost-cutting efforts must continue. In particular, despite the cutbacks in recent 
years,  office  density  in  the  Spanish  banking  sector  is  still  much  higher  than  the  European 
average,  as  the  result  of  a  business  model  that  traditionally  placed  great  emphasis  on 
proximity  to  the  customer.  The  introduction  of  new  technologies  should  permit  efficiency 
gains by further cutbacks in the number of points of sale, without substantially altering the 
existing proximity model. 
Lastly,  and  in  view  of  the  current  competitive  environment,  it  seems  logical  that  banks’ 
corporate  strategies  envisage  the  possibility  of  operations  being  undertaken  that  will  allow 
them to take more advantage of the economies of scale that can be seen at the national or 
European level. In this respect, the introduction of a common European banking framework, 
with  the  start-up  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  and  the  gradual  disappearance  of 
barriers to banking integration at the European level, entail a new operational framework for 
banks to consider when defining their strategies. 
At  the  same  time,  although  the  degree  of  consolidation  in  the  industry  has  increased 
significantly  in  recent  years,  there  could  still  be  some  margin  in  Spain  for  mergers  and 
acquisitions  that  would  generate  value  for  the  shareholders  of  the  banks  concerned  and 
enhance the efficiency of the banking sector in general. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions 
6. 
To conclude, I believe the recent ECB measures have been effective in containing the risks 
of  the  euro  area  becoming  mired  in  a  situation  of  prolonged  and  potentially  deflationary 
economic slackness. 
Undoubtedly,  monetary  policy,  in  acting  to  help  preserve  economic  stability,  has  also 
contributed  to  maintaining  financial  stability,  as  the  former  is  essential  for  ensuring  that 
household, business and banking finances remain sound. 
Admittedly, extremely low interest rates over a long period of time may give rise to certain 
adverse effects. Although these effects are still far from being a cause for concern for our 
economy, we should make sure we have the appropriate economic policy tools – such as 
macro-prudential  policy  –  at  the  ready  should  they  prove  necessary.  Likewise,  the  agents 
most directly affected by low interest rates, such as financial institutions, should duly adjust 
their business strategies to adapt to the new economic environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
