  Thomas Jordan: The rationale for discontinuing the minimum exchange 
rate and lowering interest rates 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the press conference of the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 15 January 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  for  once  again  accepting  our  invitation  to  this  press  conference  at  such  short 
notice. Let me begin by explaining the rationale for discontinuing the minimum exchange rate 
and lowering interest rates. Afterwards, I shall be happy to answer your questions. 
Discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate 
The Swiss National Bank (SNB) has decided to discontinue the minimum exchange rate of 
CHF  1.20  per  euro  with  immediate  effect  and  to  cease  foreign  currency  purchases 
associated with enforcing it. 
The minimum exchange rate was introduced during a period of exceptional overvaluation of 
the  Swiss  franc  and  an  extremely  high  level  of  uncertainty  on  the  financial  markets.  This 
exceptional and temporary measure protected the Swiss economy from serious harm. While 
the  Swiss  franc  is  still  high,  the  overvaluation  has  decreased  as  a  whole  since  the 
introduction of the minimum exchange rate. The economy was able to take advantage of this 
phase to adjust to the new situation. 
Recently,  divergences  between  the  monetary  policies  of  the  major  currency  areas  have 
increased significantly – a trend that is likely to become even more pronounced. The euro 
has depreciated substantially against the US dollar and this, in turn, has caused the Swiss 
franc to weaken against the US dollar. In these circumstances, the SNB has concluded that 
enforcing and maintaining the minimum exchange rate for the Swiss franc against the euro is 
no longer justified. 
Interest rate lowered 
At the same time as discontinuing the minimum exchange rate, the SNB will be lowering the 
interest rate for  balances  held  on  sight  deposit accounts  to  –0.75% from  22  January. The 
exemption  thresholds  remain  unchanged.  Further  lowering  the  interest  rate  makes  Swiss-
franc investments considerably less attractive and will mitigate the effects of the decision to 
discontinue the minimum exchange rate. The target range for the three-month Libor is being 
lowered by 0.5 percentage points to between –1.25% and –0.25%. 
Outlook for inflation and the economy 
The inflation outlook for Switzerland is low. In December we presented a conditional inflation 
forecast, which predicts inflation of –0.1% for this year. Since this forecast was published, the 
oil price has once again fallen significantly, which will further dampen the inflation outlook for 
a  time.  However,  lower  oil  prices  will  stimulate  growth  globally,  and  this  will  influence 
economic  developments  in  Switzerland  positively.  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate  movements 
also impact inflation and the economic situation. 
The  SNB  remains  committed  to  its  mandate  of  ensuring  medium-term  price  stability  while 
taking account of economic developments. In concluding, let me emphasise that the SNB will 
continue to take account of the exchange rate situation in formulating its monetary policy in 
future. If necessary, it will therefore remain active in the foreign exchange market to influence 
monetary conditions. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I will now be happy to answer your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
