  N S Vishwanathan: Basel III implementation – challenges for Indian 
banking system 
Inaugural  address  delivered  by  Mr  N  S  Vishwanathan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve 
Bank  of  India,  on  the  occasion  of  the  National  Conference  on  “BASEL  III  Implementation: 
Challenges  for  Indian  banking  system”,  organised  by  The  Associated  Chambers  of 
Commerce  &  Industry  of  India  with  support  of  National  Institute  of  Bank  Management 
(NIBM), Mumbai, 31 August 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Mr. Ajay Kumar Choudhary and Mr Rajnish Kumar in preparing this speech is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
1.  I  am  indeed  privileged  to  be  sharing  the  dais  with  stalwarts  and  thank  ASSOCHAM  for 
giving me this opportunity to speak on challenges in implementing Basel III in India. 
2. Basel III framework  was basically the response of the global banking regulators to deal 
with the factors, more specifically those relating to the banking system that led to the global 
economic crisis or the great recession. In the advanced economies, there was a huge fiscal 
cost for protecting the financial system, which those governments did not want a repeat of. 
The  framework  therefore  sought  to  increase  the  capital  and  improve  the  quality  thereof  to 
enhance the loss absorption capacity and resilience of the banks, brought in a leverage ratio 
to  contain  balance  sheet  expansion  in  relation  to  capital,  introduced  measures  to  ensure 
sound liquidity risk management framework in the form of liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and 
net  stable  funding  ratio  (NSFR),  modified  provisioning  norms  and  of  course  enhanced 
disclosure requirements. 
3. In India, Basel III capital regulation has been implemented from April 1, 2013 in phases 
and  it  will  be  fully  implemented  as  on  March  31,  2019.  Further,  we  have  also  introduced 
Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) to be implemented by banks in India from January 
1, 2015 with full implementation being effective from January 1, 2019. We have issued draft 
guidelines on implementation of Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). We are also working on 
other  areas  of  evolving  regulations,  especially  those  which  are  of  critical  importance  from 
Indian perspective. 
4. As this event is on challenges in implementing Basel III let me begin with the assumption 
that  there  are  challenges.  Any  change,  big  or  small,  of  whatever  nature  brings  with  it 
challenges.  The  issue  one  must  look  at  is  whether  the  challenges  are  as  onerous  as  one 
would think them to be and whether the challenges are worth facing up to. 
5. The first element in this debate was whether we needed Basel III at all for a country like 
India.  On  this,  Dr.  Subba  Rao,  the  then  Governor  of  RBI1  made  an  interesting  point  and  I 
quote him: 
“One  view,  although  not  explicitly  spelt  out  in  that  form,  is  that  India  need  not 
adopt Basel III, or should adopt only a diluted version of it, so as to balance the 
benefits against the putative costs. To buttress this view, it is argued that Basel III 
is designed as a corrective for advanced economy banks which had gone astray, 
oftentimes  taking  advantage  of  regulatory  gaps  and  regulatory  looseness,  and 
that  Indian  banks  which  remained  sound  through  the  crisis  should  not  be 
burdened with the “onerous” obligations of Basel III. 
                                                 
1   Basel III in International and Indian Contexts Ten Questions We Should Know the Answers For– Inaugural 
Address  by  Dr.  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  at  the  Annual  FICCI  –  IBA  Banking 
Conference at Mumbai on September 04, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  The Reserve Bank does not agree with this view. Our position is that India should 
transit to Basel III because of several reasons. By far the most important reason 
is that as India integrates with the rest of the world, as increasingly Indian banks 
go abroad and foreign banks come on to our shores, we cannot afford to have a 
regulatory deviation from global standards. Any deviation will hurt us both by way 
of perception and also in actual practice. 
The “perception” of a lower standard regulatory regime will put Indian banks at a 
disadvantage  in  global  competition,  especially  because  the  implementation  of 
Basel III is subject to a “peer group” review whose findings will be in the public 
domain. 
Deviation from Basel III will also hurt us in actual practice. We have to recognize 
that  Basel  III  provides  for  improved  risk  management  systems  in  banks.  It  is 
important that Indian banks have the cushion afforded by these risk management 
systems to withstand shocks from external systems, especially as they deepen 
their links with the global financial system going forward.” 
6. Once we take this postulate for granted, and in fact it needs to be, let us see what the 
challenges are: 
Capital 
What are the factors that lead to higher capital? 
7. The first set of Basel III reforms agreed in later part of 2010 tackled the issue of numerator 
part  of  regulatory  capital  ratio.  While  minimum  total  capital  requirements  were  kept 
unchanged  at  8%  of  the  RWA,  the  definition  of  various  components  of  capital  and  its 
composition were thoroughly revised to ensure that capital performs its intended role of loss 
absorption. The minimum common equity requirement was raised from 2% level, before the 
application  of  regulatory  adjustments,  to  4.5%  after  the  application  of  stricter  adjustments. 
This  meant  that  common  equity  requirement  was  effectively  raised  from  1%  to  4.5%.  The 
Tier  1  capital,  which  includes  common  equity  and  other  qualifying  financial  instruments 
based on stricter criteria, was increased from 4% to 6%. It has also been agreed that there 
would be a capital conservation buffer of 2.5% above the regulatory minimum requirement to 
be  met  with  common  equity.  This  effectively  increases  the  total  capital  requirements  from 
present 8% to 10.5%. In our case, the level of capital increases from 9% to 11.5%, if capital 
conservation buffer is taken into account. In this context, it may be pertinent to note that post-
crisis,  major  banks  in  advanced  economies  have  raised  their  capital  adequacy  level 
significantly.  In  general,  globally  banks  have  raised  their  CET1  ratio  by  almost  400  bps 
during  last  four  years.  And  importantly,  this  is  mainly  by  way  of  fresh  infusion  of  equity 
capital. A comparative capital position of major Indian banks vis-à-vis major global banks as 
indicated in graph 1. 
As may be appreciated, capital levels of our banking system need to go up significantly if our 
major  banks  have  to  compete  globally.  During  recent  years,  the  capacity  of  banks 
specifically, for the PSBs to generate capital internally have adversely affected mainly due to 
sharp deterioration in the asset quality. At the same time, banks have not made concerted 
efforts  to  shore  up  their  capital  level  outside  of  the  usual  budgetary  support.  After  the 
phased-in implementation of Basel III, the RBI apprised the Government of India on the need 
to initiate appropriate measures to ensure that PSBs have plans and a well-defined strategy 
for  meeting  the  capital  requirements  from  a  medium-term  perspective.  In  this  context,  it  is 
heartening to note that Government has initiated several measures such as allowing PSBs to 
access market to raise capital subject to ensuring minimum shareholding of the Government 
of 52% and recent unleashing of a plan for revamping PSBs called “Indra dhanush” These 
measures show the intent and commitment of Government to provide additional budgetary 
support  to  these  banks  to  ensure  that  PSBs  remain  adequately  capitalized  to  support 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  economic  growth.  The  improvement  in  the  equity  capital  and  all  other  measures  taken 
together  may  also  facilitate  raising  non-equity  capital  (AT1  and  Tier  2),  as  the  markets  / 
investors would be more receptive to those banks holding a higher level of common equity. 
8. The second element in the capital framework is the leverage ratio. We have advised banks 
that  they  would  be  monitored  on  a  leverage  ratio  of  4.5%.  We  are  watching  this  closely. 
Leverage ratio generally does not adjust the assets for risk weights and therefore would need 
the required capital for a given balance sheet. We have seen on the basis of the RW profile 
of banks that the leverage ratio is not acting as the binding factor for most banks in India. 
The graph 2 shows the interaction between Tier 1 leverage ratios (horizontal axis) and Tier 1 
risk-based capital ratios (vertical axis) of domestic banks. The diagonal line represents the 
points  where  the  Tier  1  capital  requirements  would  remain  the  same  for  meeting  both  the 
ratios. Therefore, for banks above the diagonal line, the leverage ratio requires more capital 
than risk-based capital ratio and vice-versa. 
To ensure that the leverage ratio acts as a credible back-stop measure, the Reserve Bank 
would  continue  to  monitor  the  leverage  ratio  behaviour  of  Indian  banks  and  also  the 
developments of other related regulatory framework before finalizing the appropriate level of 
leverage ratio for Indian banks. 
9.  Another  element  that  could  lead  to  higher  capital  is  the  changes  in  the  Risk  Weighted 
Assets, more specifically, on account of proposed revisions to the standardised approaches 
for risk measurements. The BCBS intends to avoid reliance on credit ratings for determining 
risk weights for credit risk given the lessons learnt from the crisis. Although this is work in 
progress, under the proposed revised framework, banks would be required to utilise a set of 
risk drivers like leverage of the entity, NPAs, etc. to determine the appropriate risk weight. 
Similarly,  for  market  risk,  there  would  be  a  requirement  to  compute  sensitivities  (delta, 
gamma,  etc.)  on  a  deal  level  for  computing  RWAs.  For  measuring  counterparty  credit  risk 
(CCR)  in  the  derivatives,  both  in  the  OTC  and  exchange-traded  derivatives,  the  existing 
current exposure method (CEM) will be replaced with a revised method called standardised 
approach  for  CCR  (SA-CCR).  Besides,  talks  are  already  underway  to  review  the  existing 
treatment  of  sovereign  assets  under  Basel  framework  wherein  exposure  to  sovereign 
requires zero or very little capital charge. These proposals will alter the way banks compute 
RWAs. Besides, a new explicit capital charge for interest rate risk for banking book positions 
is  also  proposed  to  be  introduced.  Further,  specific  to  the  advanced  approaches  for  risk 
measurement, the Basel Committee is undertaking a strategic framework review with a view 
to  enhancing  simplicity,  reducing  complexity  and  at  the  same  time  ensuring  that  the 
framework  remains  risk  sensitive.  The  Committee  would  also  examine  the  potential  for 
interaction  amongst  various  policy  prescriptions  amongst  themselves  as  well  as  with  the 
monetary  policy  objectives  to  assess  whether  there  is  any  potential  room  for  material 
inconsistency which may severely undermine the overall objectives. 
10.  The  fourth  element  impacting  capital  requirements  is  provisioning.  IFRS  9  requires 
provisioning based on expected loss provisions. The BCBS only recently put out a discussion 
paper on accounting issues in estimating expected loss. 
11.  No  doubt  the  new  framework  will  need  additional  capital.  Specific  to  the  PSBs, 
Government has announced the infusion of Rs 70000 crore over the next four years. But the 
need  of  the  hour  is  as  much  for  the  PSBs  to  improve  their  internal  processes  to enhance 
efficiency,  optimise  the  capital  allocation  and  deal  with  the  asset  quality  issue.  There  are 
several measures internal to banks and they must look at them than just look at the external 
factors.  A  lot  can  be  done  to  improve  credit  underwriting,  manage  the  credit  post 
disbursement and recoveries. There is thus scope for improvement of internal accruals as a 
source  of  capital,  and  improving  efficiency,  risk  management  system  and  asset  quality 
management are one of the most important parts of that effort so that external capital is not 
required for cleaning up balancer sheets unlike what would be happening now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  12.  When  capital  requirement  increases,  there  is  impact  on  growth.  There  are  varying 
estimates  of  this  impact.  The  Macroeconomic  Assessment  Group  (MAG)  established  in 
February 2010 by Financial Stability Board and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to 
coordinate  an  assessment  of  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  the  Basel  Committee’s 
proposed reforms, estimates that bringing the global common equity capital ratio to a level 
that would meet the agreed minimum requirement and the capital conservation buffer would 
result in a maximum decline in GDP, relative to baseline forecasts, of 0.22%, which would 
occur after 35 quarters. In terms of growth rates, annual growth would be 0.03 percentage 
points (or 3 basis points) below its baseline level during this time. This is then followed by a 
recovery  in  GDP  towards  the  baseline.  Banks  can  also  respond  to  the  higher  capital 
requirements  by  reducing  costs  or  becoming  more  efficient.  In  fact  a  less  stable  financial 
system could have more deleterious consequences. The extent to which the great recession 
put global economic growth back is proof enough of this. 
Liquidity 
13. The second Challenge comes from Liquidity Framework. The global crisis underscored 
the  importance  of  liquidity  management  by  banks.  The  apparently  strong  banks  ran  into 
difficulties when the interbank wholesale funding market witnessed a seizure. In fact I have 
mentioned  elsewhere  too  that  for  me  it  is  only  a  matter  of  time  before  a  liquidity  risk 
degenerates into a solvency risk for a bank and therefore needs to be avoided. The crisis 
proved  that  and  had  it  not  been  for  central  bank  support,  the  crisis  toll  could  have  gone 
beyond what we saw. The LCR and the NSFR Frameworks basically address this problem. 
14. In the Indian context, any discussion on the LCR issue brings to the fore the fact that it 
runs parallel to SLR requirement. We have over a period of time reduced SLR and of the 
current  level  of  21.5%,  a  portion  i.e.7  %  is  available  for  LCR  as  well.  There  is  always  the 
contention that the parallel need to maintain SLR and LCR poses an additional burden on the 
banks  in  India.  We  are  aware  of  this  concern  and  already  communicated  our  intention  to 
reduce the SLR requirements in a phased manner. However, there are several factors that 
would have to be addressed before we can move further to address the potential overlap. 
15. The NSFR framework is draft for consultation. We are looking at the comments received 
and  will  come  out  with  the  final  guidelines  taking  into  consideration  the  responses  to  the 
extent we can accommodate them. 
Technology 
16.  The  Third  challenge  is  technology.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  BCBS  is  in  the  process  of 
making significant changes in standardised approach for computing RWAs for all three risk 
areas. These revised standardised approaches them selves will be quite risk sensitive and 
will be dependent on a number of computational requirements. Further, BCBS has proposed 
that for those banks which are under advanced approaches, RWAs based on standardised 
approaches may work as some kind of floor. BCBS is working on calibration of these floors. 
Banks  may  need  to  upgrade  their  systems  and  processes  to  be  able  to  compute  capital 
requirements based on revised standardised approach. 
Skill development 
17.  The  fourth  challenge  is  skill  development.  I  see  this  as  a  requirement  both  in  the 
supervised entities and within the Reserve Bank. Implementation of the new capital accord 
requires  higher  specialised  skills  in  banks.  In  fact  it  requires  a  paradigm  shift  in  risk 
management. The governance process should recognise this need and make sure that the 
supervised  entity  gears  up  to  it.  Risk  awareness  has  to  spread  bank-wide,  the  manner  of 
doing  business  that  measures  risk  adjusted  returns  needs  to  permeate  the  system.  Top 
management and the Human Resource Development Policy of banks thus need to get tuned 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  to this requirement. We in the Reserve Bank also need to hone up our skills in regulating and 
supervising  banks  under  the  new  system.  We  see  this  as  an  ongoing  process  and  are 
continuously working towards skill improvement. 
Governance 
18.  One  can  have  the  capital,  the  liquid  assets  and  the  infrastructure.  But  corporate 
governance will be the deciding factor in the ability of a bank to meet the challenges. BCBS 
has added a separate principle on corporate governance in its core principles for effective 
banking supervision  which  were  revised  in  2012.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  before  2012, 
there  was  no  separate  principle  on  corporate  governance.  I  think  global  community  is 
recognising  the  importance  of  corporate  governance  and  is  trying  to  fix  the  issues.  Thus 
while  strong  capital  gives  financial  strength,  it  cannot  assure  good  performance  unless 
backed by good corporate governance. 
Element of conservatism in minimum standards 
19. Several speakers mentioned about the super equivalence issue. Let me add my bit to 
that discussion before I conclude. There is a general feeling that we have put in place a more 
stringent framework than what Basel Norms require. Of course one would point out to the 
9 percent CRAR, the 4.5 leverage ratio, the SLR running parallel with LCR, the higher CCF 
for OTC derivatives and the like. We need to see this in a context. I have already dealt with 
the SLR-LCR issue. On capital, all I can say is that in the ultimate analysis, on an aggregate 
basis, it does not make much difference. We must also appreciate that relatively much longer 
recovery process of defaulted loans, shorter history of ratings assigned by rating agencies in 
Indian conditions putting certain constraint on benchmarking them against the international 
standards,  relatively  large  population  of  unrated  borrowers  especially  in  mid  and  SME 
corporate  sectors,  market  risk  factors  exhibiting  more  volatilities,  etc.  add  challenges. 
Besides,  Pillar  2  process  and  related  add-on  capital  requirements  is  also  yet  to  be  fully 
stabilised.  The  higher  prescription  of  9%  minimum  requirements  in  comparison  to  Basel 
minimum of 8% may be seen in the above context. Moreover, in an economy whose financial 
system is dominated by banks, one has to build more resilience than if it were not the case. 
We  have  also  announced 
the  criteria  of  size, 
interconnectedness, complexity and substitutability. 
20. I must add here that the recent Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme of the 
BCBS did find our regulations to be fully compliant on all issues relating to capital. Such an 
affirmation  that  the  banks  are  working  in  a  regulatory  environment  consistent  with  global 
standards  is  an  assurance  to  the  international  financial  system  that  they  can  do  business 
with Indian banks like with any other. It would be instructive to quote the BCBS Chairman2 
here 
two  banks  as  DSIBs  based  on 
“I would like to remind you that the Basel framework is a minimum standard and 
members are free to go beyond the minimum. We actually encourage that, and 
most  jurisdictions  have  adopted  minimum  requirements  that  exceed  the  global 
standard.  Super-equivalences  are  often  found  in  developing  and  emerging 
market economies, where banks have a higher risk profile. The local regulators 
therefore set higher minimum requirements”. 
                                                 
2   Basel III implementation: Progress, pitfalls, and prospects: Keynote speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Chairman, 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and Governor, Sveriges Riksbank at the High-Level Meeting for the 
Americas, Lima, Peru, 3–5 November 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Incidentally, it may also be appreciated that we are not the only jurisdiction having prescribed 
a higher minimum capital standards. Several other jurisdictions, particularly Asian countries, 
have proposed higher capital adequacy ratios under Basel III as may be seen from Table. 
21. Let me conclude now. I began by saying why it is necessary to implement Basel III in 
India.  I  looked  at  the  various  challenges  that  it  brings  but  argued  that  we  cannot  see  any 
challenge  in  isolation.  The  Basel  rules  seek  to  make  banks  more  resilient  and  risk  aware. 
Such a banking system is always better than an unstable one. We cannot overlook the fact 
that a crisis is better prevented than faced because the aftermath of the crisis is costlier than 
the incremental cost that one incurs to prevent it. I suppose the deliberations in today’s meet 
would not be oblivious to this reality. 
Let me thank you for your attention. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
