  Claudia Buch: Evaluation and macroprudential policy 
Speech by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Annual 
meeting of the Verein für Socialpolitik, Münster, 7 September 2015. 
 to 
I  wish 
illustrate 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  theme  of  this  year’s  annual  meeting  of  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik  is  “Economic 
development  –  theory  and  policy”.  The  evaluation  of  development  aid  projects  has  a 
relatively long tradition – from which many other policy areas may benefit. Much greater use 
could still be made of research findings on the evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness 
of  public  projects  and  economic  policy  measures. 
this  using 
macroprudential policy as an example. 
Why  are  development  aid  projects  frequently  evaluated?  For  one  thing,  financiers  expect 
accountability on the impact of their financial assistance. For another, researchers can often 
contribute  to the  project  design. That  lets  them incorporate the features  needed for  an  ex 
post impact analysis while the project is still on the drawing board. Ex ante planning allows 
evaluation  data  to  be  collected  in  a  manner  conducive  to  maximising  the  reliability  of 
econometric  identification.  Tackling  a  stimulating  research  topic  without  nagging  questions 
about the identification strategy boosts the likelihood of being published. That’s an incentive 
for researchers to get involved in evaluation and the key to putting evidence-based economic 
policymaking into practice. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is what I think we need to see 
more of in other policy fields. 
But  the  actual  impact  of  measures  is  often  just  as  uncertain  outside  the  realm  of 
development aid. In many cases, the projects in question are much larger still and relate to 
entire  countries  –  tax  policy,  education  policy,  health  policy  –  and  not  forgetting  financial 
market regulation. The question for me is this: how can we make sure that these areas, too, 
are subject to greater and, above all, scientifically proven evaluation? 
There are two hurdles to overcome, in my view, but neither of them are insurmountable. The 
first  is  the  inadequate  data  pool,  the  second  a  frequent  absence  of  a  need  for  the 
scientifically-based evaluation of policy measures. 
As  Deputy  President  of  the  Bundesbank,  one  of  my  areas  of  responsibility  is  financial 
stability.  This  includes  macroprudential  policy.  We  still  don’t  know  all  that  much  about  the 
impact of macroprudential policy measures right now. The available evidence is very sparse; 
it is often no more than cross-sectional analyses across different countries derived from short 
time series. We are therefore working to create the conditions for superior policy evaluation. 
What is financial stability? 
1. 
Macroprudential  policy  is  a  relative  newcomer  to  the  policy  space.  In  some  respects,  the 
level of knowledge and experience in this area is roughly on a par with that in the field of 
monetary  policy  some  years  ago.  The  specific  policy  goals  are  difficult  to  quantify, 
transmission channels are often unknown, and the data sets and analytical methods need to 
be developed. 
Why do we need macroprudential policy? The world of traditional banking regulation offers 
little  scope  for  curbing  the  systemic  repercussions  of  financial  crises  because  it  focuses 
primarily on the economic health of individual market participants. 
For  the  most  part,  microprudential  analysis  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  financial 
system  as  a  whole  is  stable,  that markets  are  liquid  and  that  market  players  that  run  into 
difficulties  will  not  have  a  significant  detrimental  impact  on  the  financial  system  or  the 
economy as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
But  that  view  is  a  short-sighted  one,  because  past  episodes  in  which  seemingly  isolated 
microprudential risks were either misinterpreted or underestimated have taught us that our 
work needs to take a broader perspective. Risks to the stability of the financial system can 
arise if large institutions create negative externalities (too big to fail), if institutions are highly 
interconnected  (too  connected  to  fail),  or  also  if  many  smaller  institutions  are  exposed  to 
similar types of risk (too many to fail). 
This  key  takeaway  from  the  recent  financial  crisis  prompted  the  establishment  of 
macroprudential  authorities  around  the  world  that  focus  on  risks  that  might  threaten  the 
financial system as a whole. Let’s begin with the mandate and the objective. The objective of 
macroprudential policy is to safeguard financial stability. Financial stability is the term used to 
denote the financial system’s ability to perform its key macroeconomic functions – particularly 
so in the event of unforeseen events, periods of stress or structural upheaval. 
For  the  costs  of  financial  crisis  can  be  heavy  –  not  only  with  regard  to  the  amount  and 
duration of real economic losses but also concerning the often considerable fiscal costs. It is 
not about completely curbing risks and fluctuations in the financial markets but instead about 
reducing  negative  externalities  caused  by  the  distress  of  individual  institutions  or  market 
segments. 
Here,  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  how  “financial  stability”  can  be  measured  and  concrete 
indicators formulated. After all, even though the situation appears to be stable, the creation of 
systemic  risk  through  moral  hazard  can  jeopardise  financial  stability.  That’s  why  reducing 
misguided  incentives  and  increasing  the  size  of  risk  buffers  in  the  system  are  key  to 
maximising  financial  system  stability.  From  this  general  definition,  indicators  –  such  as 
property prices, risk premiums or credit growth – are derived in the policymaking process and 
used to assess financial stability. 
Macroprudential policy in Germany 
2. 
Main responsibility for financial stability in Europe rests at the national level. In Germany, the 
Financial Stability Committee (FSC) was created in 2013 as a national macroprudential body. 
It  comprises  representatives  of  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Federal  Financial 
Supervisory  Authority  (BaFin),  the  Bundesbank  and  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation 
Agency (FMSA), which has observer status. 
The  Bundesbank  plays  a  special  role  in  the  FSC,  by  injecting  its  experience  of 
macroeconomic analyses and of banking supervision. In a nutshell, the Bundesbank is the 
FSC’s “analytical arm”. What is more, besides preparing the  Committee’s annual report to 
the German Bundestag on the status of financial stability in Germany, the Bundesbank also 
drafts warnings and recommendations by the FSC and assesses their implementation. 
Of  course,  merely  establishing  macroprudential  institutions  does  nothing  to  boost  financial 
stability  –  rather,  what  are  needed  are  a  strategy  for  macroprudential  policy  and  the 
appropriate instruments. 
The  internationally  agreed  Basel  III  regime  that  is  currently  in  force  already  contains  a 
number  of  instruments  designed  with  macroprudential  matters  in  mind.  For  instance, 
systemically important banks have to hold more capital than other institutions, primarily as a 
way of countering the moral hazard (“too big to fail”) caused by their size. 
Another instrument is the countercyclical capital buffer, or CCB, which is designed to boost 
financial system resilience by tightening capital requirements in times of increased lending. 
The CCB is scheduled to become legally effective in Germany on 1 January 2016, though no 
decision has been taken hitherto as to its exact level. 
However, these instruments are no more than a rudimentary toolkit for combatting systemic 
risk  emanating  from  real  estate  markets.  And  yet  the  recent  financial  crisis  clearly 
demonstrated  just  how  important  the  residential property  market  is for financial  stability.  A 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
number of other countries are already using dedicated macroprudential instruments for the 
real estate market; Germany, by contrast, does not have the requisite legal basis as yet. To 
close this gap, the FSC submitted a recommendation to the Federal Government on 30 June 
2015  proposing  the  creation  of  new  macroprudential  instruments  for  the  residential  real 
estate market. I would expressly point out, however, that this step does not mean that these 
instruments will be deployed or activated. 
The FSC is recommending four instruments: a cap on the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio, a cap on 
the debt-to-income ratio/debt-service-to-income ratio as well as an amortisation requirement. 
An LTV ratio, for instance, specifies a minimum amount of equity capital which a debtor must 
contribute  to  a  residential  real  estate  financing  transaction.  These  instruments  have  two 
objectives. One is to reduce the likelihood of overindebtedness and thus of crises. The other 
is to stem the effects of crises, should they occur anyway, by means of larger risk buffers. 
If these instruments are activated in the future, an ex post impact analysis should be carried 
out. That calls for sound data, which is why the Committee’s recommendation asked for the 
creation of a legal basis for the collection of granular data and a mandatory ex post impact 
analysis. 
How do data fit into the equation? 
3. 
But  what  are  “sound  data”?  The  lessons  learned  from  the  US  experience  tell  us  that  a 
loosening of credit standards for subprime households can be one of the major root causes 
of financial crises. A development of that kind can only be identified if granular data are to 
hand. 
The Bundesbank has responded to the need for higher-quality and above all granular data by 
establishing  its  Research  Data  and  Service  Centre  (RDSC).1  A  new  project  has  been 
launched  to  administer and  link  microdata  and macrodata,  and to  make  them  available  to 
both  Bundesbank  and  external  researchers.  At  present,  ten  members  of  staff  are  busy 
capturing, compiling and maintaining these data, which are being used in 120 projects. 
Internationally, too, a host of initiatives have been kick-started in an effort to close data gaps. 
For  instance,  Europe’s central  banks  will,  in  the  coming  years,  be  setting  up  AnaCredit,  a 
comprehensive  database  which  will  help  them  to  link  loan-level  data  and  banks’  balance 
sheet data. That kind of data pool would open up a wealth of analytical opportunities that we 
could use in a great many areas. 
The Bundesbank’s RSDC is specifically looking to establish close ties between research and 
policy guidance. The idea is for researchers to be given access, free of charge and with a 
minimum  of  red  tape,  to  the  data  –  subject,  of  course,  to  the  appropriate  data  protection 
requirements.  So  by  increasing  the  availability  of  sound  data,  we  are  going  a  long  way 
towards dismantling the first of the two hurdles we face in this field. 
However, data alone are insufficient to tell us how effective an economic policy measure has 
been. This measure, rather, needs to be embedded in a structured impact study. Applying a 
set  of  objective  and  structured  procedures  specified  upfront  can  yield  information  on 
effectiveness and potentially increase the likelihood that a policy measure will be accepted. 
They  prevent  situations  in  which  inconvenient  findings  go  unpublished  or  access  to  the 
necessary data is obstructed. 
The guidelines adopted by the Verein für Socialpolitik are an important and a necessary step. 
At their heart are the general principles of methodological quality, transparency, objectivity 
and independence. But to make sure data shortages do not scupper evaluations, the data 
capture process should be planned well ahead of introduction and be enshrined in law. This 
                                                
1   http://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Bundesbank/Research/RDSC/rdsc.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
modus operandi not only cuts the cost of policy evaluation, but also diminishes the risk that 
the necessary data cannot be provided at all ex post. 
And last but not least, making evaluation mandatory would be a step in the right direction. 
This  procedure  is  widely  followed  internationally,  one  example  being  the  Office  of 
Management  and  Budget  in  the  United  States,  which  is  required  by  law  to  evaluate 
legislation with a substantial financial impact, while in Switzerland, policy evaluation is even 
enshrined  in  the  national  constitution.  In  this  connection,  let  me  revisit  the  FSC 
recommendation I referred to earlier. It contains a regular impact analysis which can also be 
verified by third parties. 
Ladies and gentlemen, impact analyses are an important tool for finding out more about the 
efficacy  of  policy  measures,  quantifying  costs  and  benefits,  and flagging  unexpected  side-
effects.  They  require  guidelines  for  decision-makers  and  researchers.  However,  they  can 
also  only  work  in  a  forward-looking  policy  environment  which  aims  to  enshrine  policy 
evaluation in law and which provides the necessary financial and data resources. 
It is important for researchers to contribute their expertise and ideas, and play a part in this 
process. More often than not, bright ideas are the “by-products” of stimulating debate with 
peers.  That’s  the  reason  why  we’re  all  here  today,  so  without  further  ado,  I  will  bring  my 
speech to a close. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
