DeLisle Worrell: Increasing labour productivity in Barbados 
Welcome remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
National Productivity Council’s Annual Week of Excellence, Bridgetown, 23 February 2015. 
 It is because Barbados is a relatively prosperous and competitive economy, by international 
comparison, that the focus of national economic policy must be squarely on increasing labour 
productivity. Barbados' prosperity has been achieved by selling tourist services, international 
business  services,  and  other  exports  of  goods  and  services  in  a  competitive  international 
market.  With  the  foreign  exchange  we  have  earned,  we  have  imported  the  products  and 
services that support our modern lifestyles. Going forward, that is what we must continue to 
do.  
Barbados has established a reputation for the quality of its tourism and other export products 
and  services,  and  we  have  enhanced  their  quality  and  appeal,  with  the  addition  of  yacht 
marinas, first class golf and polo facilities, the new Kensington Oval, the Olympic Swimming 
facility, Bushy Park, St Nicholas Abbey, the Atlantis submarine, Harrison Cave, Lime Grove, 
our acclaimed rums, Oistins, our various culinary offerings, our festivals, and in many other 
ways. What  makes  our  business  and  financial  services  special  is  our  legal  and  regulatory 
framework,  and  the  growing  levels  of  knowledge  and  expertise  that  we  offer  to  the 
international investor.  
If  you  are  successful  in  any  business  you  will  attract  competitors,  and  as  we  all  know, 
Barbados has always had competition from within the Caribbean and beyond. It's a dynamic 
world, and to stay ahead of the competition, you need to keep getting better. Barbados has 
been getting better, in terms of the quality and variety of its products and services. The most 
comprehensive report on global competitiveness is the Global Competitive Report, published 
by  the  World  Economic  Forum.  In  its  2014-15  Report  Barbados  ranks  Number  55  in  the 
world, and highest in the English speaking Caribbean.  
However, Barbados has not made commensurate progress in terms of labour productivity. 
We have seen increases in output for each unit of labour, in the past decade. But they have 
only been sufficient to enable us to maintain our standing in the late forties to early fifties in 
the competitive ranking. In today's world you cannot prosper by standing still. Faster growth 
in the productivity of our labour force is necessary, if we are to further improve our relative 
competitiveness.  
Increasing  labour  productivity  is  also  essential  to  improving  the  living  standards  of  our 
workforce. Barbados is a prosperous economy, ranked Number 59 in the world in terms of 
human development by the United Nations Development Programme's Human Development 
Report.  Our  continuing  prosperity  depends  on  our  ability  to  import  the  things  we  need  to 
enable our lifestyles. If workers are to improve their lot, each one of us must contribute more 
to the production of goods and services, so that our gain is not at the expense of others.  
Increasing labour productivity is therefore at the heart of Barbados' development strategy. It 
will enable us to become even more successful in an increasingly competitive international 
market, it will also allow workers to share in the fruits of that increased competitiveness. This 
increase  in  labour  productivity  will  be  difficult  to  achieve,  because  it  is  about  quality, 
engagement and commitment. Some time ago a NISE survey told us that only 30 percent of 
the Barbadian workforce feels fully committed to their jobs. There is no evidence to suggest 
that the situation has improved since that survey was done. The problem is especially acute 
in  the  public  service.  In  the  Global  Competitiveness  Report  previously  alluded  to,  the 
inefficiency  of  our  Government  bureaucracy  is  identified  as  the  most  damaging  factor  for 
doing business in Barbados. Each and every public servant should resolve to play their part 
in improving that statistic.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Ultimately,  we  are  in  a  good  place.  The  future  of  our  economy  looks  promising,  and  that 
future is firmly in the hands of all Barbadians. What is required is that we each commit to 
doing the very best of which we are capable, each and every day. National productivity week 
is an occasion for us to remind ourselves of this responsibility to our country, our community, 
our  families  and  ourselves.  Let  us  go  forward  with  confidence,  to  seize  the  time,  and  the 
opportunity.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
