  Lars Rohde: Monetary policy, foreign exchange intervention and GDP 
growth seen rising 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 25 March 2015. 
 Let me first talk about monetary policy. This is an area where the beginning of the year was 
unusually  eventful.  The  main  background  factor  was  the  announcement  by  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  on  15  January  that  it  would  no  longer  limit  the  strength  of  the  Swiss  franc 
against the euro. And one week later, on 22 January, the European Central Bank announced 
an expansion of its programme to purchase government bonds. 
Already on the afternoon of the announcement from the Swiss National Bank we began to 
see  a  considerable  inflow  of  capital  into  Denmark.  The  Swiss  decision  seems  to  have  led 
some foreign investors to purchase Danish kroner. In that way they would make a substantial 
profit if the fixed exchange rate policy were abandoned and the krone appreciated. 
However,  nearly  two  thirds  of  the  increased  demand  for  kroner  in  January  and  February 
came  from  domestic  market  players,  including  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds. 
They have to some extent wished to insure themselves against losses in the event that the 
krone appreciated like the Swiss franc. This was done by way of hedging. You might say that 
the pension funds bought insurance policies of no value as abandoning the fixed exchange 
rate policy has never been on the agenda. Obviously it is entirely up to the pension funds 
and  life  insurance  companies  how  they  wish  to  place  their  funds.  But  nevertheless  it  is  a 
shame if individual pension savers are forced to bear unnecessary costs. 
In  order  to  stem  the  capital  inflow,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  intervened  in  the  foreign 
exchange market for very large amounts, and we also reduced our monetary policy interest 
rates on several occasions. The interest rate on certificates of deposit is now –0.75 per cent 
– a level not seen previously. The monetary policy interest rates were reduced in increments. 
This is because we initially did not know the width and depth of the capital inflows and hence 
we had to assess the situation on a current basis. In order to further halt the capital inflows, 
the Ministry of Finance also decided to suspend issuance of Danish government bonds on 
30 January. This was done at the recommendation of Danmarks Nationalbank. 
Since the most recent interest rate reduction, which took effect on 6 February, the krone has 
been kept stable purely via intervention in the foreign exchange market. And compared with 
previous episodes of pressure against the krone, intervention has played a greater role this 
time. 
But it also makes a great difference whether there is upward or downward pressure on the 
krone. When there is upward pressure, Danmarks Nationalbank sells kroner. We have plenty 
of those. So in a situation with upward pressure on the krone, Danmarks Nationalbank can 
sell  unlimited  amounts  of  kroner.  The  possibility  of  unlimited  intervention  also  means  that 
assistance from the  ECB  is  not  relevant  in the defence  of the krone  when  the  pressure  is 
towards a strengthening. 
Despite  the  unusual  volume  of  intervention,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  has  applied  a  well-
known  reaction  function  by  first  intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  then 
adjusting interest rates in response to the capital inflows. It has been important for us to stick 
to this reaction function, one reason being that in a normal situation it is the banks that carry 
out  “stabilising  speculation”.  When  kroner  are  inexpensive,  the  banks  build  up  stocks  of 
kroner,  and  when  kroner  are  ex-  pensive  they  do  the  opposite  –  they  sell  kroner  and 
purchase foreign exchange. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  When the situation is not normal, the banks’ position is typically around zero, and Danmarks 
Nationalbank  absorbs  the  net  shocks  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  So  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  has  applied  its  usual  reaction  function.  This  gives  the  banks  a  basis  for 
gradually  resuming  their  self-stabilising  speculation  as  the  situation  normalises.  Since  the 
second half of February, the foreign exchange market has been relatively calm. 
The very low level of interest rates in Denmark means that Danmarks Nationalbank profits 
from  the  foreign  exchange  reserve:  the  amounts  in  euro  included  in  the  reserve  accrue 
interest at a higher rate than that at which the banks’ deposits in kroner are remunerated. So 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  strongly  positioned  in  a  situation  with  upward  pressure  on  the 
krone.  Our  patience  knows  no  limits.  At  the  same  time,  we  make  sure  that  it  is  costly  for 
investors to speculate against the fixed exchange rate policy. 
Denmark has posted current account surpluses for some years and has built up substantial 
net  foreign  assets.  This  makes  it  necessary  to  export  private  capital  on  a  current  basis. 
Viewed in isolation, this points to a lower yield spread to the euro area in future compared 
with  what  we  have  previously  seen,  but  also  to  the  possibility  that  situations  with  upward 
pressure  on  the  krone  can  emerge.  However,  situations  can  easily  arise  in  which  capital 
flows  out  of  Denmark  and  Danmarks  Nationalbank  must  purchase  kroner.  In  2014,  we 
intervened both in order to strengthen the krone and in order to weaken it. Intervention and 
interest rate adjustments will continue to reflect cur- rent developments in the exchange rate, 
as they have done until now. 
The fixed exchange rate policy  is a cornerstone of Danish economic policy. Over the past 
30 years, it has been the basis for stable economic development in Denmark – although we 
have had to navigate through choppy waters at times. The fixed exchange rate policy means 
that monetary policy is reserved for keeping the krone stable against the euro. 
Therefore  monetary  policy  does  not  take  factors  such  as  growth,  employment  and  house 
prices  into  account. These  considerations  are  addressed  by  other  economic  policies  –  not 
least fiscal policy, which plays an important role in relation to ensuring stable growth. 
*** 
The reductions of monetary policy interest rates and the suspension of sales of government 
bonds have led to negative market rates, even for longer maturities. This is not the first time 
we  see  negative  interest  rates  in  Denmark.  But  this  time  around  the  interest  rate  on 
certificates of deposit is even lower, and so are market rates. 
Apart from certain technical difficulties, negative interest rates are, basically, not so different 
for the financial sector to handle than persistent low interest rates. 
The  debate  has  focused  on  the  direct  effect  on  monetary  policy  counterparties  of  the 
negative interest rate on certificates of deposit; the fact that they must pay to deposit money 
at Danmarks Nationalbank. However, it is rarely the credit institutions that ultimately foot the 
bill.  The  demand  for  kroner  has  this  time  often  been  triggered  by  a  forward  transaction  in 
which the bank’s income matches the negative interest rate on certificates of deposit. At the 
same time, the current environment of low or even negative interest rates seems to have led 
to a wave of remortgaging. That will also help to fill the credit institutions’ coffers. 
Negative  interest  rates  must  be  considered  as  something  extraordinary,  not  a  new 
permanent state of affairs. In other words, there is no foundation for easing credit standards, 
not even if competition intensifies. Special caution should be exercised when granting loans 
at  variable  rates  of  interest.  The  assessment  of  the  finances  of  each  borrower  should  be 
based on good practice and take into account whether the borrower would be able to service 
a 30-year fixed rate loan with amortisation. But if the assessment is based on a fixed long-
term rate of 2 per cent, it does not constitute much of a stress test. A variable rate of interest 
could  soon  rise  above  that  level.  Either  the  credit  institution  should  apply  a  more  severe 
stress test, or it should actually grant a fixed rate mortgage loan. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  *** 
The  Danish  economy  is  in  an  upswing.  Growth  has  not  been  impressive,  but  it  has  been 
clearly  visible  if  we  adopt  a  slightly  broader  perspective  than  merely  GDP  growth. 
Employment is picking up, house prices are rising and there is solid growth in real GDP net 
of oil extraction and in the gross national product, which includes the net return on external 
assets. 
We  are  seeing  growth  because  the  foundations  are  in  place.  Denmark  is  competitive,  so 
exports  can  begin  to  fuel  the  economy.  And  household  finances  have  become  more 
balanced after the housing bubble in the 2000s. 
In addition, three other factors are boosting growth strongly. 
Firstly, interest rates have fallen by more than we had expected. At the current very low level 
of  interest  rates,  monetary  policy  provides  a  strong  growth  impulse  –  globally  and  in 
Denmark. 
Secondly,  the  effective  krone  rate  has  weakened  since  the  autumn  in  step  with  the 
weakening  of  the  euro  against  the  dollar.  Combined  with  the  prospect  of  stronger  growth 
abroad, this provides good opportunities for increasing exports. 
Thirdly, the low oil prices entail large cost savings for firms and households. This will further 
stimulate growth, both in Denmark and among our major trading partners. 
The fall in oil prices has pushed inflation down towards zero. But many prices are still rising, 
wage growth is accelerating and the lower effective krone rate will exert upward pressure on 
import prices, so we are not heading towards deflation. The oil price fall is in fact good for the 
economy. 
Against that background, Danmarks Nationalbank’s new projection operates with growth at a 
higher level this year and in the coming years. GDP growth is expected to rise from 1 per 
cent last year to around 2 per cent this year and the next couple of years. 
With this growth outlook, all spare resources in the economy will have been absorbed within 
a few years. If we are not to face capacity problems, both the labour market and fiscal policy 
must be geared for this development. 
Firstly,  fiscal  policy  should  take  into  account  the  strong  expansionary  forces  currently  at 
work. In this situation is it not expedient to continue to conduct fiscal policy very close to the 
limits, as has been the case in the weak economic climate in recent years. Fiscal policy must 
be restored to a neutral level. This means that the structural government balance must be 
brought close to balance over the next couple of years. 
Secondly,  it  is  essential  that  recent  years’  reforms  of  e.g.  the  unemployment  benefit  and 
pension  systems  boost  the  supply  of  labour  sufficiently.  If  not,  there  could  soon  be  a 
shortage  of  labour.  So  far  there  are  only  few  indications  of  this,  but  the  strength  of  the 
predicted recovery could soon change that. 
Finally, we are increasingly concerned about developments in the housing market. Parts of 
the market are moving fast at the moment. This applies especially to owner-occupied flats in 
the  Copenhagen  area,  for  which  supply,  turnover,  time  on  market  and  real  prices  are 
approaching  the  levels  seen  in  2004–05,  just  before  the  most  recent  housing  bubble. We 
want  to  avoid  a  situation  where  a  sustained  period  of  very  low  interest  rates  sparks  an 
unhealthy  development  with  self-  reinforcing  price  rises  for  owner-occupied  dwellings,  as 
seen in the period 2005–07. 
The  absence  of  sufficient  automatic  stabilisers  –  or  brakes  –  in  the  housing  market  is  a 
problem. In their present form, housing taxes are procyclical and amplify fluctuations in the 
housing market. The most effective way to strengthen macroeconomic stability is by restoring 
the link between property value and property taxation which existed before 2002. This cannot 
wait until 2020. I would like to make it clear that Danmarks Nationalbank has no position on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  the overall level of housing taxes, but it would contribute to economic and financial stability if 
taxation is not destabilising. 
Denmark has a long tradition of stability-oriented economic policy, and now  is the time for 
action  if  we  are  not  to  see  a  runaway  upswing.  In  relation  to  stability-oriented  economic 
policy, it is just as important to tighten during an expansion as to ease during a slowdown. In 
other  words,  financial  easing  should  be  rolled  back  when  the  economy  begins  to  pick  up 
again. 
*** 
Now I will turn to the new rules on crisis management of credit institutions. These rules are 
expected to enter into force in Denmark on 1 June 2015. Basically, we will have the same 
rules  throughout  the  EU,  which  will  enable  crisis  management  of  all  credit  institutions, 
irrespective  of  size,  without  the  use  of  public  funds  and  without  substantial  negative 
implications for financial stability. I see the new rules as one of the most important foundation 
stones in the construction of a bulwark against a new financial crisis. 
The  rules  cover  both  possible  recovery  measures  when  a  bank  is  ailing  and  resolution 
measures when it is actually failing. In the latter situation, steps will be taken to ensure that 
the  bank’s  critical  functions  –  for  its  customers  and  for  the  financial  system  –  can  be 
continued so that the effects on the economy are not unnecessarily adverse. And all this will 
be effected without the use of taxpayer money. The banks will, as it were, be tidying up after 
themselves. Basically, the principles for crisis management of banks are similar to those we 
already know in Denmark; those who have invested in the bank – i.e. owners and investors – 
will bear the losses. It will be a bail-in, not a bailout. 
It  is  essential  that  a  failing  bank  has  the  capacity  to  absorb  losses  so  that  a  bail-in  can 
actually be carried out to the extent that this is necessary in order to restructure the bank. So 
in future EU credit institutions must meet an individual requirement to hold sufficient eligible 
liabilities. 
An equally important aspect is the preventive element of the new rules. I am thinking of the 
credit  institutions’  own  recovery  plans  and  the  authorities’  resolution  plans.  The  task  of 
preparing recovery and resolution plans should not be limited to an exercise in “ticking” the 
formal requirements. Well-prepared and realistic plans are not only a contingency measure, 
they will also have a strong impact on the activities and the organization of each institution in 
normal times. 
The Danish mortgage banks are fully comprised by the new rules, except that they need not 
com-  ply  with  the  requirement  to  hold  eligible  liabilities.  Consequently,  bail-in  cannot  be 
applied  to  a  failing  mortgage  bank.  This  means  that  when  handling  mortgage  banks,  the 
resolution authorities do not have the same tools at their disposal as when handling banks. 
Instead, the bill presented includes a national requirement for mortgage banks to hold a “debt 
buffer” corresponding to 2 per cent of their lending. So the Danish mortgage credit model will 
have  yet  another  element  that  is  not  in  conformity  with  the  EU,  and  at  the  same  time  the 
buffer requirement seems to be on the low side. It might be a challenge to explain this to the 
outside world. 
In Danmarks Nationalbank’s view, Denmark has hereby missed a golden opportunity for the 
mortgage  credit  sector  to  benefit  from  developments  in  international  standards.  Credit 
institutions  in  the  rest  of  Europe  must  sell  uniform  debt  instruments that  qualify  as  eligible 
liabilities, while Danish mortgage banks must sell another variant for a special Danish debt 
buffer. It would have been preferable if the mortgage banks would have had to use eligible 
liabilities  in  the  same  way  as  other  credit  institutions  in  Europe.  This  would  also  have 
eliminated the need to use Junior Covered Bonds for financing top-up collateral in the event 
of future house price falls. 
*** 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally,  if  anyone  is  waiting  for  me  to  talk  about  the  Banking  Union,  let  me  reveal  that 
Danmarks Nationalbank still believes that the interests of Danish households and firms, as 
well  as  the  Danish  mortgage  credit  system,  will  be  best  served  if  we  join  soon.  We  look 
forward to the forthcoming debate about this issue. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
