  Raghuram Rajan: Sustainable growth in the financial sector – 2015 C K 
Prahalad Lecture 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  4th  D  K 
Prahalad Memorial Lecture, Mumbai, 18 September 2015. 
 Coimbatore Krishnarao Prahalad was born in Tamil Nadu. One of nine children, he obtained 
an undergraduate degree in physics from the University of Madras and went on to a diploma 
at IIM, Ahmedabad as a member of the first graduating batch. He followed that with a DBA 
from  Harvard  Business  School  in  1975.  Prahalad  started  his  academic  career  at  the 
University of Michigan in 1977, and in 1990, he and Gary Hamel co-authored an article in the 
Harvard Business Review titled, “The Core Competence of the Corporation.” In this influential 
article, building on the work of Edith Penrose who first stressed the importance of the unique 
capabilities  of  a  firm,  Prahalad  and  Hamel  encouraged  corporate  executives  to  “identify, 
cultivate, and exploit the core competencies that make growth possible.” 
In their 1994 book, Competing for the Future, Prahalad and Hamel analyzed how established 
market leaders like IBM tend to lose ground to innovative upstarts like Apple – IBM failed to 
see  the  future  of  the  personal  computer  because  it  was  too  focused  on  maintaining  its 
leadership  in  the  mainframe  business.  Perhaps  most  important  to  India,  Prahalad’s  2005 
book,  The  Fortune  at  the  Bottom  of  the  Pyramid:  Eradicating  Poverty  Through  Profits, 
explored how businesses might pursue sustainable growth while catering to the poorest of 
the poor. Indeed, much as the term “core competence”, the term “the bottom of the pyramid” 
has entered the common lexicon. He received many awards and honors during his life time, 
but perhaps the greatest honor is the continuing influence of his work. 
I  met  C.K.  Prahalad  when  I  was  at  the  University  of  Chicago.  Despite  his  enormous 
reputation and the exalted circles he moved in, he was always down to earth, and immensely 
insightful.  He cared  deeply  about  India,  and gave freely  of  his time  and money  to make  a 
difference  here.  Many  of  you  have  attended  the  seminars  he  organized  to  improve  Indian 
business  practice.  He  believed  we  Indians  could  be  second  to  none;  some  of  the 
businessmen  here  have  taken  his  message  to  heart  and  delivered.  He  and  I  never  got  a 
chance to do research together, but we did write a joint letter to the then Prime Minister in 
2009, together with Abhijit Banerjee, advocating, among other steps, accelerated efforts to 
bring  out  a  unique  ID  in  India.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  all  had  a  small  role  in  the  Prime 
Minister setting up the Unique ID Authority, headed by Nandan Nilekani. 
As an aside, given how far Nandan’s UIDAI has taken us towards a universal unique identity 
for India, it would be sad if its use were severely restricted. Other countries like the United 
States have used unique IDs, such as social security numbers, without serious allegations of 
violations  of  privacy.  Learning  from  worldwide  experience,  we  need  to  see  how  we  can 
satisfy the concerns of the Supreme Court without undermining the value of the unique ID. 
The unique ID can enable a variety of economically valuable activities that particularly benefit 
the bottom of the pyramid. For instance, not only can UIDs expand the access of the poor 
and young to credit as they borrow against the collateral of their future good name, it will also 
allow the regulator to detect and curb over-lending to individuals by asking lenders to report 
the  IDs  of  borrowers  to  credit  bureaus.  Today,  unscrupulous  lenders  can  avoid  current 
regulations  against  over-lending  by  simply  misreporting  the  borrower’s  name  or  address. 
Similarly,  the  Government  has  used  UIDs  to  weed  out  duplicate  beneficiaries  for  various 
welfare  schemes,  allowing  better  targeting  of  scarce  funds  to  the  very  poor.  I  think  C.K. 
would want us to find a way to move forward with UIDs. I do believe, as C.K. did, that India 
can  be  far  more  successful  and  influential  than  it  is  today.  What  do  we  need  to  do  to 
succeed? How can we compete effectively against the best? Do we need to identify our core 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  competencies as a nation? Rather than attempt to speak from the perspective of business, 
let me speak from the vantage point of a central banker. 
Let  me  also  quickly  offer  my  standard  disclaimer:  For  any  hints  on  what  we  will  do  in  the 
upcoming policy statement, please read the guidance in our last policy statement. I quote: 
“Significant uncertainty will be resolved in the coming months, including the likely persistence 
of  recent  inflationary  pressures,  the  full  monsoon  outturn,  as  well  as  possible  Federal 
Reserve actions. As the Reserve Bank awaits greater transmission of its front-loaded past 
actions, it will monitor developments for emerging room for more accommodation.” Nothing I 
say in what follows is meant to offer further guidance, and please don’t read veiled meaning 
where none is intended. 
If we look around the world today, it does not present a pretty picture. Industrial countries are 
still  struggling,  with  a  few  exceptions,  to  grow.  Our  fellow  BRICS  all  have  deep  problems. 
Indeed, India appears to be an island of relative calm in an ocean of turmoil. What is different 
and how can we be assured that it will continue? 
A lesson from Brazil? 
Perhaps Brazil offers a salutary lesson. Only a few years ago, the world was applauding the 
country’s thriving democracy, its robust economic growth, and the enormous strides it was 
making in reducing inequality. It grew at 7.6 percent in 2010, and had discovered huge oil 
reserves which the then President Lula likened to “winning a lottery ticket”. Yet the country is 
expected  to  shrink  by  3  percent  this  year,  and  its  debt  just got  downgraded  to junk. What 
went wrong? 
Paradoxical as it may seem, Brazil tried to grow too fast. The 7.6 percent growth came on 
the back of substantial stimulus after the global financial crisis. In an attempt to keep growth 
high,  the  New  York  Times  says  the  central  bank  was  pressed  to  reduce  interest  rates, 
fuelling  a  credit  spree  that  overburdened  customers  are  now  struggling  to  repay.1  Further, 
Brazil’s  government  funded  development  bank  hugely  increased  subsidized  loans  to 
corporations.  Certain  industries  were  favored  with  tax  breaks  while  price  controls  were 
imposed on gasoline and electricity, causing huge losses in public sector firms. Petrobras, 
the national oil company, which was supposed to make enormous investments in oil drilling, 
instead became embroiled in a corruption scandal. Even as government pensions burned an 
ever larger hole, budget deficits expanded, and the political consensus to narrow them has 
become elusive. 
Towards sustainable growth 
While the Brazilian authorities are working hard to rectify the situation, let us not ignore the 
lessons their experience suggests. Growth has to be obtained in the right way. It is possible 
to grow too fast with substantial stimulus, as we did in 2010 and 2011, only to pay the price 
in higher inflation, higher deficits, and lower growth in 2013 and 2014. Of course, India is not 
in the same situation today. But with the world being an inhospitable place, we have to work 
hard to strengthen our current recovery and put it on a more sustainable footing. And while 
monetary  policy  will  accommodate to the  extent  there  is room,  we  will  expand  sustainable 
growth  potential  only  by  continuing  to  implement  reforms  the  government  and  regulators 
have announced. These are intended to strengthen the environment for doing business and 
to expand access to financing, and these will then in turn allow our companies to find and 
exploit their core competencies. 
                                                
1   “As  a  Boom  Fades,  Brazilians  Wonder  How  it  all  Went  Wrong”,  Simon  Romero,  New  York  Times, 
September 11, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For the RBI, the key tasks are to keep inflation low not just today but well into the future so 
that we get moderate nominal interest rates that satisfy not just the vocal borrowers but also 
the silent savers. We also need to clean up the banking system of distressed assets so that it 
is in a position to fund growth again. While we understand the difficulties industry has and will 
work  as  hard  as  we  can  on  improving  the  environment,  India  must  resist  special  interest 
pleas  for  targeted  stimulus,  additional  tax  breaks  and  protections,  directed  credit, 
subventions  and  subsidies,  all  of  which  have  historically  rendered  industry  uncompetitive, 
government  over-extended,  and  the  country  incapable  of  regaining  its  rightful  position 
amongst nations. 
Belief 
What will be critical in success, as the Prime Minister said earlier this month while meeting 
industrialists and bankers, is that business has to believe in the tremendous possibilities and 
opportunities  the  nation  has,  and  be  willing  to  take  the  investment  risks  that  will  generate 
returns.  No  country  succeeds  without  believing  in  itself  –  I  do  not  mean  the  unwarranted 
belief  that  we  are  intrinsically  better  than  everyone  else  but  the  confidence  that  given  our 
population, our demographics, our massive infrastructure investment opportunities, and the 
wide range of capabilities in our people, the arc of history is turning towards us. While Indian 
business has been hurt by public authorities’ acts of omission and commission in the past, it 
has  to  look  forward.  And  I  have  no  doubt  that  as  business  presses  people  in  positions  of 
public responsibility to make the changes needed to ease doing business, we will respond. 
What specifically are we doing on the environment in the financial sector and what more do 
we need to do? Let me turn to that, dwelling specifically on the need to foster competition 
and  innovation,  on  creating  an  environment  hospitable  to  those  who  do  not  belong  to  the 
club, on improving the structures we have to deal with distress, and on strengthening human 
capital in the financial system. 
Fostering competition and Innovation 
In order to get sustained growth, we need more competition, especially from new entrants 
who are in a better position to reach hitherto excluded parts of our economy. After a decade 
of no new entry, we will see two new private banks this year, and a large number of payment 
banks and small finance banks next year. Licensing is likely to go on tap. 
Incumbents have expressed fears about unfair competition. Competition is only unfair if it is 
not on the same playing field. In fact, new entrants have no privileges that incumbents do not 
already  enjoy.  We  hope,  though,  that  the  new  entrants  will  find  innovative  ways  of  giving 
customers better services at lower prices, thus shaking up and changing the banking sector 
for the better. 
Regulators are naturally a conservative lot. It is good we are that way else there would be no 
speed breakers in the economy to slow its propensity to get into trouble. But we also should 
not stand in the way of innovation. There is a Chinese saying: “Cross the river by feeling the 
stones”. We have tried to follow that path of experimentation and incremental liberalization. 
So, for example, as increasingly innovative new services want their customers to have the 
ability to make payments quickly, we have allowed small value card payments without two-
factor  authentication.  As  we  and  financial  institutions  gain  experience,  and  as  new 
technologies  ensuring  security  emerge,  we  can  liberalize  further.  More  generally,  our 
philosophy is to allow innovation in institutions, instruments and practices so long as they do 
not present a clear and present danger. Once we understand them better, and they grow to a 
material size, we can do a deeper analysis on how they should be regulated. 
Similarly, we have been allowing more and more participation in derivative markets by what 
are  typically  known  as  speculators  –  those  without  an  underlying  risk  they  are  hedging. 
Speculators are much maligned in India and often confused with market manipulators. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  two are different. Speculators take positions in an instrument and thus take risks, much as an 
investor  in  a  stock  takes  risk.  They  typically  take  the  necessary  other  side  to  hedgers. 
Without  speculators,  there  would  be  little  depth  in  most  markets  and  prices  would  be 
distorted. The market manipulator moves thin markets in a preferred direction so as to make 
a  quick  profit,  in  contrast  to  the  speculator  who  simply  takes  a  side  she  thinks  will  make 
money.  In  the  securities  we  regulate,  we  intend  to  encourage  broader  participation  while 
discouraging manipulation. 
More  generally,  we  would  like  to  improve  regulation  by  focusing  on  what  is  absolutely 
necessary to create a sound business environment – focusing on enabling regulation rather 
than paternalistic regulation – while increasing enforcement of what is on the books. We will 
trust but we will also verify. To this end we are streamlining all our regulations by the end of 
the year into new Master Documents which will be placed on the Internet and updated on a 
real time basis, so that any regulated entity can know quickly the gamut of what is required 
when undertaking an action. 
Including outsiders 
As  India  grows,  financial  sector  participants  will  grow  beyond  the  insiders  who  typically 
dominate economic activity in the early stages of growth in every country. Outsiders and new 
entrants will want access, arm’s length contracts that they can trust, and a dispute settlement 
system that is transparent and predictable. 
Start first with access. We need to bring more of the hitherto excluded to participate in the 
financial system. The Prime Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana has created accounts for much of 
the  excluded  population.  Government  has  taken  the  next  step  of  attaching  a  variety  of 
financial services such as accident and life insurance to these accounts, and sending Direct 
Benefits such as scholarships, pensions, and subsidies to these accounts. We also have to 
ease access to bank accounts through Business Correspondents, payment banks, and point-
of-sales machines so that they are used frequently. Easy payments, access to cash-in and 
cash-out  facilities,  and  widespread  availability  of  safe  savings  instruments  have  to  be  our 
next objectives in the financial inclusion of households. 
We  also  need  to  ease  lending  to  small  producers,  whether  they  are  farmers,  Self  Help 
Groups,  or  businesses.  For  this,  we  need  to  improve  the  structure  and  working  of  credit 
information bureaus, collateral registries, and debt recovery tribunals – ironically, credit flows 
easily only when the lender is persuaded that he will get his money back, so easier access to 
credit necessitates harsher consequences of default. Perhaps the most important source of 
collateral value is land. We need better digital mapping and clean records of land ownership 
across the country so that land can be used more effectively as collateral. 
Newcomers and outsiders rely, not on relationships to get things done, but on arm’s length 
auctions  and  contracts,  enforced  quickly  by  an  impartial  bureaucracy  and  judiciary.  The 
clean-up that is taking place in methods of allocating resources like mines and spectrum, and 
the attempts to improve the speed of bureaucratic and judicial decision making are all much 
needed to increase participation, though much more has to be done over time. Any reforms 
have to be institutionalized, so that they outlive the reformer’s passing. 
Finally, newcomers and outsiders need protection against unfair practices. As one example 
of  what  we  are  doing,  RBI  has  developed  a  Charter  of  Consumer  Rights  following  public 
consultation.  Bank  boards  have  been  asked  to  put  in  place  frameworks  that  ensure  those 
rights are protected. After those frameworks have been in operation for some time, RBI will 
take a view on best practices, and regulation, if any is needed. In the meantime, field visits 
by RBI, to check mis-selling as well as the proper functioning of bank infrastructure such as 
branches and ATMs, will be expanded. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Resolution of distress 
Failure is inevitable in a free enterprise system. An effective resolution system is needed to 
preserve residual enterprise value after financial failure. Two critical elements are the speed 
of resolution and the predictability of how losses are shared amongst contracts. For instance, 
few outsiders will want to lend if they believe they will be subordinated to promoter interests 
in bad times. So we need a speedy bankruptcy code to resolve distress while maintaining the 
priority structure of claims, and I am glad the Finance Ministry intends to bring one in soon. 
The bankruptcy code will give creditors more ability to resolve distress, and help strengthen 
the corporate bond market, which is so essential to infrastructure financing. 
In  the  meantime,  we  have  to  find  ways  to  deal  with  the  distress  in  the  banking  system. 
Regulatory forbearance, where RBI softens its rules on classifying bad loans, only makes it 
easy  for  banks to “extend  and  pretend”.  It  is  not  a  solution.  Since  no other  stake-holder – 
such  as  the  promoter,  tariff  authorities, tax  authorities,  etc.  –  contributes  to  resolution,  the 
real  project  limps  along,  becoming  increasingly  unviable.  Meanwhile,  analysts  grow 
increasingly  suspicious  of  bank  balance  sheets  and  the  growing  volume  of  “restructured” 
assets.  Also,  some  large  promoters  take  advantage  of  banker  fears  about  assets  turning 
non-performing to extract unwarranted concessions, without any sacrifice in the value of their 
stake.  Regulatory  forbearance  therefore  ensures  that  problems  grow  until  the  size  of  the 
provisioning  required  to  deal  with  the  problem  properly  becomes  alarmingly  large  –  which 
then prompts calls for yet more forbearance. 
Forbearance is also a disservice to the bank’s owners (which may include the Government) 
who, instead of being faced with a small problem early and being given the opportunity to 
apply corrective action, are faced with large problems suddenly when they cannot be pushed 
into the future any more. 
RBI  ended  the  forbearance  accorded  to  restructured  loans.  Henceforth,  restructured  loans 
will be classified as non-performing loans. However, RBI has made it easier to recognize and 
deal with distressed projects. In other words, while ending forbearance, we have introduced 
flexibility  for  those  who  recognize  and  deal  with  stressed  assets  early  –  the  early  warning 
database of large loans, the Joint Lenders’ Forum, the Strategic Debt Restructuring process, 
the 5/25 mechanism, and so on should all be seen as RBI’s way of giving banks the flexibility 
to  deal  with  the  stressed  asset  problem  in  the  absence  of  a  functioning  bankruptcy  code, 
even while bringing more urgency and discipline to dealing with the problem. 
Naturally, some criticise our easing the way for restructuring. One gentleman accosted me 
the other day and asked why, when he was paying his debt regularly, his competitor who had 
siphoned  money  out  of  the  firm  through  over-invoicing  was  getting  his  debt  written  down 
because  it  was  unpayable.  The  reality  is  that  firms  have  got  into  trouble  for  a  variety  of 
reasons, only one of which is over-invoicing. Wherever possible, of course, promoters should 
share fully  in  the  costs of  restructuring.  But the  restructuring  process  is  not  meant  to  deal 
with criminality. Siphoning money out of a business is a crime against lenders and investors, 
and should be dealt with as such by the investigative authorities. However, the original sin of 
over-invoicing should not be a reason to keep idle a spanking new plant and to let its workers 
go. 
Developing human capital 
The  country  needs  many  more  finance  professionals  with  specific  skills  for  the  enormous 
financing  needs  that  lie ahead. Today, for  example,  too many  of  our  project  decisions  are 
made  by  banks  listening  to  the  same  set  of  consultants,  which  means  that  too  few 
independent views get embedded in the evaluation decision. Ironically, the same consultants 
who  advised  on  the  project  initiation  are  also  called  in  when  the  project  goes  bad.  Banks 
need to have these skills in-house so they are not forced to follow the herd. This problem is 
most apparent in public sector banks, though private banks are not immune. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The quick way is for our public sector banks to recruit the needed talent in the short run from 
the market. While the challenges of making a mark in the public sector may attract some to 
the top public sector bank positions, for subordinate positions it may be essential to pay a 
market  wage.  That  cost  will  be  small  when  set  against  the  enormous  national  benefit  of 
banks making better decisions. 
Of course, the bulk of public sector promotions will continue to come from in-house talent. 
Also, poaching talent from other banks is a zero sum game for the system. Therefore, our 
banks will have to develop skills in-house by training staff – not so much in soft skills such as 
leadership but hard skills such as risk management capabilities. 
In our development role, the RBI has to help strengthen the human capital in the financial 
system. Some of our teaching units such as the College of Agriculture and Banking and the 
Staff College have been training bankers in important areas such as agricultural lending and 
MSME  lending.  Increasingly,  our  Center  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and  Learning 
(CAFRAL)  will  provide  courses  in  state  of  the  art  financial  techniques  such  as  project 
evaluation,  structuring  and  resolution  of  distress  as  well  as  risk  management.  Banks  may 
want  to  pool  resources  to  set  up  other  such  facilities,  or  press  CAFRAL  to  expand  its 
offerings. 
Conclusion 
These are some of the ways I think we can position the financial system towards sustainable 
growth. Before I end, let me try to answer one last question. In the same way as firms have 
core competencies, do countries have core competencies? 
Perhaps they do. But it is very hard for public authorities to determine what they are in the 
face  of  massive  lobbying  and  disinformation  from  interested  parties.  If  we  say  we  want  to 
focus on national core competencies, every industry will be out to show why it thoroughly fits 
the  bill  –  in  the  same  way  as  every  industry  today  wants  to  tell  us  why  they  especially 
deserve  special  tax  benefits  or  interest  subventions.  Remember,  the  License  Permit  Raj 
persisted  precisely  because  some  industries  were  favoured  over  others  in  the  so-called 
national interest. So even if nations have core competencies, it will be very hard to determine 
what they are, and very easy to succumb to vested interests in supporting the wrong ones. 
Better to focus on creating an enabling environment, and let the core competencies emerge 
from the fillip given by the environment – much as the IT sector emerged as a result of the 
investment the country made in technical education, but without specific encouragement by 
the government. 
Let  me  conclude.  CK  Prahalad  believed  Indian  business  was  capable  of  scaling  world 
heights  and  so  do  I.  But  there  are  no  easy  paths  to  the  top.  Jugaad  or  “working  around” 
difficulties by hook or by crook is a thoroughly Indian way of coping but it is predicated on a 
difficult or impossible business environment. And it encourages an attitude of short cuts and 
evasions, none of which help final product quality or sustainable economic growth. While we 
should respect the entrepreneurial abilities of our business people in difficult environments, it 
is better for us to change the environment for the better. That is indeed what we are trying to 
do. 
All  this  requires  patience.  The  current  difficulties  of  emerging  markets  stem  from  a 
complicated  set  of  reasons,  but  an  important  one  is  impatience  to  regain  growth  by 
overemphasizing old and ineffective methods of stimulus. Brazil may have overspent, China 
may have overinvested. The world is a difficult place. Let us recognize we are doing quite 
well in comparison – indeed, many industries in difficulty have a problem because exports 
are low or imports are very competitive, and not because domestic demand is inordinately 
weak. We cannot compensate entirely for what is happening across our borders, else we will 
risk  acquiring  the  problems  our  fellow  emerging  markets  have.  We  have  to  have  the 
discipline  to  stick  to  our  strategy  of  building  the  necessary  institutions  and  creating  a  new 
path  of  sustainable  growth  where  Jugaad  is  no  longer  needed.  For  this,  we  need  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  understanding  and  cooperation  of  business,  not  impatience  and  pressure  for  quick 
impossible fixes. Only then can we realize our true potential as a nation. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
