  Andrew Bailey: The state of the building society sector and the 
Prudential Regulation Authority’s approach to governance 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Building 
Societies Association Annual Conference, Harrogate, 21 May 2015. 
 It’s a great pleasure to be at the BSA annual conference again, and in Harrogate again. I 
note that Harrogate is confirmed as “the happiest place in England!”, so I feel a certain sense 
of expectation by inviting the prudential regulator to speak at the happiest place. My plan this 
morning  is  to  cover  two  areas  in  my  remarks: first,  an  overview  of  our  impressions  of the 
state  of  the  building  societies  as  a  whole;  and,  second,  some  comments  on  the  PRA’s 
approach to the governance of firms, to coincide with the publication today of consultation of 
our supervisory statement on board responsibilities. 
So, since we are in the happiest place in England, let me start in what I hope you will regard 
as an appropriate spirit, namely that even though the environment remains one of continuing 
low  interest  rates  –  and,  as  I  always  do  at  this  point,  let  me  stress  that  I  am  making  no 
judgement  on  monetary  policy  whatsoever  –  the  aggregate  net  interest  margin  for  the 
building societies has picked up, arrears rates on loans remain low and net new lending has 
been strong over the last two years. Looking at the sector beyond Nationwide – and I do this 
not to ignore Nationwide but because its size means that it has a large impact on averages – 
the  average  Core  Tier  One  Capital  ratio  at  the  end  of  last  year  was  over  17%,  and  the 
average leverage ratio was around 6%. The overall quality of capital is in our view in a good 
place and you have taken the implementation of Basel 3/EU CRD4 in your stride. 
In  the four  quarters  to  the  end  of  last  year,  the  societies  (again  not  including  Nationwide) 
contributed 22% of net new mortgage lending in the UK, which compares with a 9% share of 
the stock of lending. Arrears on first charge mortgages continue on a downward trend that 
we have seen for at least the last five years, and the building society arrears rate on average 
is lower than the average for all mortgage loans. 
All societies are meeting their liquidity requirements and quite a few of you choose to hold 
higher liquid asset buffers than our requirements, which is perfectly acceptable as a choice. 
Access to Bank of England liquidity facilities, which is an important form of insurance, has 
increased in terms of the number of societies having reserve accounts and preparing for the 
use of lending facilities should that be needed at some point in the future. 
Unsurprisingly, therefore, the overall position on ratings for those societies that have them 
has improved. So, it’s true, Harrogate really is the happiest place in England. Of course, I am 
now going to go on to talk about risks, but before I do let me say that this sort of performance 
doesn’t happen by accident. But it does show that there is a role for mutuals and one that 
can succeed. Of course, a lot of hard work goes into achieving these results. On our side, I 
can also say that Martin Stewart and his colleagues put a lot of hard work into our role, which 
is founded on sensible forward-looking judgement consistent with our objectives in statute. 
So, what can go wrong – the risks? The first area that I would highlight is the potential for 
margin pressure. Most forecasters see continued growth in the mortgage market as the most 
likely development, but at a lesser pace than in recent years, which is consistent with actions 
taken by the Bank of England last summer to limit the growth of borrowing by highly indebted 
households. Competition in the mortgage market is growing, and for instance rates on two 
year fixed rate mortgages are at a record low. On the liability side, wholesale funding costs 
are low, and on much of the evidence they are below retail funding costs on average, and 
that  tends  to  benefit  lenders  with  greater  access  to  wholesale  funding.  Therefore, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
notwithstanding the news on interest margins over the last two years, we are watching this 
story carefully to see what happens next. 
The  second  risk  unfortunately  follows  from  the  first,  namely  that  increasing  pressure  on 
interest margins can tempt lenders to seek higher returns on assets through riskier loans, 
and  to  concentrate  more  on  short-term funding  thereby  increasing  the  mismatch. We  saw 
this before the financial crisis broke in 2007 as lenders ventured into higher LTV, sub-prime 
and  commercial  property  lending  without  having  adequate  risk  management  in  place.  We 
also  saw  this  in  the  late  1980s  and  early  1990s.  This  diversification  was  generally  not 
successful, and in some cases fatal. Since the height of the crisis societies have generally 
reduced their commercial property loans, and non-prime has declined too. The main area of 
growth  has  been  buy-to-let  lending,  which  is  true  not  just  for  societies  but  for  lenders  in 
general. Now, I don’t want to demonise buy-to-let lending. We are watching carefully, and for 
the  societies  we  see  no  evidence  today  that  BTL  loans  are  of  poorer  quality  than  prime 
owner-occupier,  and  we  see  a  fair  amount  of  stability  over  time  in  maximum  LTV  and 
minimum rental cover. But, we are watching carefully, and of course applying stress testing 
across all loans. 
Looked at more broadly, we are not seeing an upward surge in high LTV lending of the sort 
that was so damaging in the past, but there is an upward direction to the – admittedly small – 
share of lending at high LTV and high loan-to-income (ie the two together). We are, again, 
watching  this  carefully,  and  it  is  why  in  2010  we  implemented  the  Building  Societies 
Sourcebook  to  encourage  appropriate  risk management  of  lending  and funding. The  latter 
will  be  supported  in  future  when  we  implement  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  which  is  the 
international standard to discourage reliance on short-term funding. 
We  are  also  increasingly  focussed  on  operational  risks  and  the  prudential  implications  of 
conduct risk, as I know are societies. I want to pick out one area of operational risk which is 
important, namely IT systems risk. One aspect of this is the cost and complexity of updating 
legacy  IT  systems  in  the  face  of  growing  demands  on  those  systems  from  innovation  in 
products. Cyber risk is also very high on our list of priorities. I recognise that not all societies 
have an internet presence, though I do know, of course, that you all use the internet. We will 
be seeking to ensure that cyber risk is properly tackled by societies as appropriate. In saying 
this, I am not seeking to pick out societies from other firms that we supervise, but we do think 
that these risks are in important respects common to all firms. 
Societies  have  generally  been  less  affected  than  the  large  banks  by  conduct  mis-selling 
costs, though not fully immune. We are watching again very carefully, and I can assure you 
that as prudential regulator we want to see sensible outcomes that balance the objectives of 
all parties and ensure that we maintain a stable financial system that can support the activity 
of today’s customers. Nobody wants to see a world where ex-post enforcement weakens the 
capacity to support economic activity, and that means we must return as soon as possible to 
a world where the emphasis is on strong risk management, governance and forward-looking 
supervision. 
This  review  of  risks  covers  much  of our  work  programme for  the  year. Two  other  points  I 
would note. First, we are reviewing the Sourcebook which since the beginning of April has 
been  called  a  Supervisory  Statement.  The  Sourcebook  was  first  introduced  in  2010  as  a 
response to the crisis. We will consult on changes later this year and have already had two 
very useful pre-consultation meetings with the BSA and a number of societies. Let me assure 
you  that  this  review  is  not  the  beginning  of  a  major  agenda  to  change  how  we  supervise 
societies.  Rather,  a  lot  has  happened  since  2010,  and  we  think  a  stocktake  is  in  order. 
Second, recovery and resolution is an important focus of activity following the enactment of 
the EU Directive (the BRRD). Our objective is to ensure that orderly resolution is possible 
should it be needed, and thus to support our general approach that we are not a regulator 
that adopts a policy of no failures. We work closely with the resolution function of the Bank of 
England to develop and put into effect workable resolution plans. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I said that I would also comment on the PRA’s approach to the governance of firms, so let 
me now turn to that. I will start with an observation based on experience of the crisis, namely 
that is uncommon and rare to find a problem in the capital or funding or business model of a 
firm  which  cannot  be traced  back  to  a failure  of  governance. I  don’t think this  is  a  radical 
statement by any means. But it does mean that fixing capital, liquidity, and other areas of risk 
do not on their own deal with all of the problem. Put another way, it would be unwise to do all 
of these things and ignore governance. Good governance is critical to delivering a sound and 
well-run business. At the instigation of the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards, 
we are this year implementing the new Senior Managers Regime. The key principle of that 
regime is to establish clearly appropriate responsibility for the governance of firms. Put like 
that, it is not meant to be radical or life-changing, despite whatever you may hear and read. 
We  do  want  to  avoid  what  the  PCBS  described  as  the  Murder  on  the  Orient  Express 
outcome  when  firms  get  into  trouble,  which  is  akin  to  the  “everyone  and  no-one”  is 
responsible  but  everyone  is  connected  to  the  event.  Clarity  of  responsibility  is  I  hope 
unobjectionable. But this is not clarity in the sense of facilitating witch hunts. Rather, I see 
clarity  as  an  appropriate  allocation  of  responsibility,  as  important  to  creating  the  right 
incentives for behaviour and leadership, and of course in areas like remuneration. 
In the  Senior  Managers  Regime,  responsibility  at the  highest  level  covers  both  executives 
and  non-executives.  But,  of  course,  they  are  different  and  always  will  be.  There  is  much 
commentary, that the response to the crisis has muddied the responsibilities of executives 
and non-executives, with the burden on the latter increasing. I think there is no doubt that a 
greater formality is emerging around roles and responsibilities, and I’m afraid the burden of 
work for non-executives has risen, we can’t hide from that. An effective board is at the heart 
of good governance, ensuring that the appropriate policies are in place in respect of safety 
and soundness and good conduct. We at the PRA have a strong interest in supporting good 
governance and the  work of board members to deliver it. An effective board is one  which 
understands  the  business,  establishes  a  clear  strategy,  articulates  a  clear  risk  appetite  to 
support that strategy, oversees an effective risk control framework, and collectively has the 
skills,  the  experience  and  the  confidence  to  hold  executive  management  rigorously  to 
account for delivering that strategy and managing within that risk appetite. 
In view of the important role of boards, and the work on governance under way, today we 
have  published  for  consultation  a  Supervisory  Statement  on  the responsibilities  of  boards. 
We recognise that this is a hugely important issue, and so we thought it was sensible to set 
out  our  thinking  for  comment  as  a  precursor  to  a  statement  of  our  expectations.  The 
statement clarifies our expectations of boards and indicates some of the elements of good 
governance to which we expect to pay particular attention in assessing how well firms are 
run. It draws on our regulatory experience and the lessons of past firm failures – including 
building society ones – and will help boards to understand how we reach our judgments on 
governance.  The  statement  is  not  intended  to  be  a  comprehensive  statement  of  good 
practice.  Boards  have  other  sources  for  that,  such  as  the  Corporate  Governance  Code 
produced by the Financial Reporting Council or the Basel Corporate Governance Principles 
for banks. 
The statement underscores the collective responsibilities shared by board members. As such 
it complements the individual accountabilities  which we are introducing through the Senior 
Managers  and  Senior  Insurance  Managers  Regimes.  Under  these  regimes  all  senior 
managers,  including  certain  non-executive  directors,  will  be  held  to  a  clear  standard  of 
behaviour. But the primary role of all NEDs is independent oversight and challenge of the 
Executive and the PRA recognises that the actual responsibilities of NEDs within the scope 
of the regimes differ from those of executive Senior Managers and they should be clarified 
and limited accordingly. 
Key messages from the statement are: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
            it is a responsibility of boards to establish strategy, set the risk appetite and monitor 
risk across the business and hold management to account; 
the risk appetite must be clearly owned by the Board, integral to the strategy and 
actively used to monitor and control risks and inform key business decisions; 
boards  should  articulate  and  maintain  a  culture  of  risk  awareness  and  ethical 
behaviour; 
boards should include individuals with a mix of skills and experience that are up-to-
date and cover the major business areas in order to make informed decisions and 
provide effective oversight of the risks; 
but this does not mean expertise in every aspect of a broad and complex financial 
business – the point is to have the diversity of experience and capacity to provide 
effective challenge across the full range of business; 
boards  should  act  in  a  co-operative  and  collegiate  manner  whereby  the  non-
executives support and encourage executive management and vice versa; 
but  this  should  not  inhibit  the  non-executive  directors  from  challenging  executive 
management and holding them effectively to account; 
non-executive directors should ensure they have the time and resources and access 
to the business they need to fulfil their duties; 
executive management have a responsibility to ensure the Board can exercise its 
role  and  should  exercise  their  judgement  in  bringing  key  issues  to  the  Board’s 
attention at an early stage; and 
the principle of good governance, including independence of the Chairman, should 
also apply to material subsidiaries. Boards of regulated subsidiaries need to be able 
to  take  decisions  where  required  to  meet  their  own  legal  and  governance 
responsibilities or in the interests of the safety and soundness of the subsidiary. But, 
that  does  not  mean  they  should  operate  outside  the  general  governance  and 
objectives  of  the  group  to  which  they  belong.  Independence  in  this  context  is 
carefully defined and limited. 
As  you  will  all  be  aware,  we  have  undertaken  significant  engagement  with  the  boards  of 
banks and building societies on governance. Through our supervisory work, we are seeing 
improvement but in our view there is more to do. Board effectiveness will therefore remain a 
key priority. To conclude, governance matters a lot, I can’t understate that. Effective boards 
are central to the success of firms and the financial sector, and central to the delivery of our 
objectives. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
