  Harun R Khan: Taking on risk – the sensible way 
Keynote address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
CII  “Confederation  of  Indian  Industry”  National  Risk  Management  Summit  2015  on 
“De-risking the Future of India Inc.”, Mumbai, 10 February 2015. 
 The speaker deeply acknowledges the contributions of Shri. R Gurumurthy of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Shri  Suresh  Senapaty,  Shri  Richard  Rekhy,  Shri  Deepak  Parekh,  Smt.  Greeta  Varughese 
other  distinguished  guests  &  invitees  on  and  across  the  dais.  This  invitation  to  give  an 
address at this important CII event gives me a great pleasure. CII seems to have chosen a 
very interesting theme for this national risk summit – “De-risking the future of India Inc.” – I 
am, of course, wondering why CII is thinking of de-risking the future of India Inc. though the 
participants here would appreciate the fact that de-risking would also mean that they have no 
business to be in “business”. 
Risk-return-retribution in a VUCAP world 
All human enterprise, more so business activities essentially involve risk taking, in a bid to 
earn  the  “reward”  or  “return”  according  to  the  risk-return  trade-off.  This  relationship  is, 
however, far from simple as the reckless chasing of returns may result in unimaginable levels 
of risks not only for the individual enterprise but also for the whole system. The risks posing a 
threat to the financial and economic balance of the world today are far from being properly 
managed  and  controlled.  I  understand  that  the  prevailing  evidence  of  continuing,  if  not 
increasing, appetite, for fast returns is one of the major motivations behind the broad theme 
for this seminar. 
While developing my thoughts on the much used idea of the risk-return trade-off, I was led to 
think of a missing “R” – Requital – in the risk-return conundrum. The tremendously forceful 
human fascination for reward and the almost irresistible tendency to take or overlook risks in 
that pursuit has, more often than not, resulted in inevitable retribution or requital, in the long 
term. 
In  the  present  context,  probably  it  is  the  zeitgeist  that  drives  us  crazy.  Having  seen  the 
massive  impact  of  the global  financial  crisis,  we  may  want  to  take  a  pledge  to  de-risk  the 
future.  Peter  Bernstein,  the  American  financial  historian,  had  an  interesting  perspective; 
according to him, “Risk and time are opposite sides of the same coin, for if there were no 
tomorrow there would be no risk. Time transforms risk, and the nature of risk is shaped by 
the time horizon: the future is the playing field”.1 Hence, our approach should be to ensure 
risk  compatibility  over  time  rather  than  trying  to  de-risk  the  future.  In  fact,  a  fanatic 
commitment  to  risk  aversion  could  itself  be  a  risk  that  businesses  might  face  in  any  post-
crisis period. 
May  be  that  we  need  to  strategize  to  meet  the  challenges  of  a  VUCA  world.  Part  of  the 
military vocabulary, it is an acronym for volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity, now 
widely used to explain the vagaries of global economy and the financial markets. I would like 
to add a P to this, which stands for perversity, making it VUCAP. That wouldn’t be a misfit 
given  the  nature  of  the  contemporary  global  economy,  financial  markets  and  the  army 
interventions across the globe!! 
We used to scorn high volatility in the past, but are now wary of low volatilities. We do worry 
about uncertainties, but certainty brings complacency and makes us vulnerable. Are we all 
                                                
1   Against the Gods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  really uncomfortable with complexity? Not sure. For some, complexity pays. And there is this 
ambiguity in all these. The latest financial stability report released by the Reserve Bank of 
India (December 2014) talked about “an ambience wherein weak growth prospects are still 
considered benign for financial markets” for that would lend strength to the expectations that 
ultra-easy monetary policies would continue; that, in a way is perversity. But then, that’s the 
world that we have to deal with. 
I think it might be in Nature. Let’s for instance take a look at the ancient Egyptian religious 
thought, where the themes – viz., order, chaos and renewal – appear repeatedly. Every year 
the Nile flooded, but then it renewed the fertility of the soil and helped a highly productive 
farming industry that sustained the Egyptian civilisation. The global financial crisis, like every 
other crisis, has provided us new lessons as also opportunities. 
Having added a P here and an R there to put the broad theme of this seminar in perspective, 
let me now turn to some specifics. 
Business risk and regulatory dialectics 
Being  a  regulator,  I  will  start  with  the  business  community’s  concerns  over  legal  and 
regulatory risks. As I could see from your flyer, there is a slot to discuss this and a brief is 
given  thereunder.  While  it  talked  about  increasing  risks  faced  by  companies  arising  from 
complex regulatory enforcement and new legislation, it also pointed out, rightly, that, these 
were  brought  upon  due  to  the  corporate  scandals  and  breakdowns  in  the  past  few  years. 
This is also because organizations have been doing more business across boundaries than 
ever;  thus,  adding  global  regulatory  concerns  to  their  local  regulatory  risks.  So,  we  all 
understand and appreciate the concerns here – both of the law enforcers and of those who 
are subjected to these laws and regulations. 
Oftentimes,  we  get to  hear  how  difficult  it  is  to do  business  in  India.  But  multinationals,  at 
various points of time, have had similar concerns over doing business elsewhere too. At the 
DLD  technology  conference  in  Munich  recently,  Nicolas  Brusson,  the  co-founder  of 
BlaBlaCar, the French ride-sharing start-up, when questioned about the rationale in starting 
his venture out of France with its 28 sets of laws and regulations, replied: “when you start 
from France, everything looks simple”. I am sure Indian companies that ventured overseas in 
the last one decade or so may now vouch for these sentiments. In the current context, it may 
make  immense  sense  to  seriously  look  at  the  “Make  in  India”  pitch  with  the  government 
trying to do what it can. 
We must understand that most of the times regulatory stance follows, rather than precede, 
the  excesses  committed  by  the  regulated  entities  or  the  overreach  of  the  so  called  self-
regulatory  mechanism.  Their  actions  in  fact  emanate  from  the  very  nature  of  the  wider 
mandate  that  the  regulators  carry  on  their  shoulders.  In  what  is  called  as  “regulatory 
dialectics”, financial market regulation is an endless process with both the regulator and the 
regulated making alternative moves in terms of regulation, avoidance and re-regulation.2 This 
must be true of other markets, too. 
What guides the actions of regulators is the need to ensure smooth functioning and stability 
of  the  markets  that  they  regulate  and  not  populism.  In  other  words,  as  John  Kay,  the 
Financial Times columnist, often says, crowd-pleasing is no substitute for wise judgement. 
“That’s why we prefer to entrust the navigation of a plane to a skilled pilot instead of using 
the average of the opinions of the passengers”, were his words of wisdom. 
                                                
2   Edward  Kane  –  “Loose  Ends  in  Capital  Regulation:  Facing  Up  to  the  Regulatory  Dialectic”,  presentation at 
International Banking Conference Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, November 11, 2011, Chicago. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Use and misuse of credit 
That  brings  me  to  a  widespread  concern  of  the  regulators  like  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
(RBI)  over  corporate  leverage  and  the  prevailing  credit  culture.  One  challenge  that  some 
corporates might face, going ahead, is in terms of raising resources – not because of non-
availability of resources, nor for lack of creditworthy business opportunities but because of 
how  the  debtors  respect  their  commitments  as  also  an  evolving  thinking  on  “efficiency 
imperative”  in  credit  dispensation.  It  is  very  likely  that  the  days  ahead  will  experience 
enhanced  scrutiny  of  credit  decisions  of  banks  by  depositors  and  tax  payers,  besides 
shareholders. Is it all because of the deteriorating credit culture? We need to examine. 
Banks form the  backbone  of  our financial  system  and  carry  out  an  important function,  viz. 
reaching  financial  savings  to  those  in  need  of  it.  Thus,  credit  is  the  other  end  of  this 
intermediation process and we all must understand the etymology of the word “credit” and 
respect the semantics. The only way we address the situation is responsible use of credit. 
As  Governor  Rajan  has  warned,3  there  is  an  “uneven  sharing  of  risk  and  returns  in 
enterprise, against all contractual norms established the world over – where promoters have 
a  class  of  “super”  equity  which  retains  all  the  upside  in  good  times  and  very  little  of  the 
downside  in  bad  times,  while  creditors,  typically  public  sector  banks  in  our  context,  hold 
“junior” debt and get none of the fat returns in good times while absorbing much of the losses 
in bad times”. 
Let us now look at the way “leverage” is assuming negative connotations. Leverage per se is 
a necessary evil for businesses to grow. Why then corporate leverage is being quoted of late 
as a concern for financial stability? Indian companies, no doubt, have come of age in terms 
of  building  world  class  infrastructure  projects,  withstanding  tough  competition  from  global 
players, and expanding their wings beyond national borders. While some have succeeded, 
the ambitions of others have proved to be hubris. Their actions needed enormous resources, 
which  came  from  domestic  and  overseas  financial  markets  though  the  ensued  global 
financial  crisis  (GFC),  demand  slump  and  currency  volatility  exposed  them  to  unexpected 
risks. Could they have seen all this ex-ante? Probably going ahead non-financial companies 
may think of some kind of stress tests to assess their resilience to emerging risks, similar to 
the approach adopted by financial sector industry, subsequent to the GFC. 
Risks of unhedged forex exposures 
Large scale unhedged foreign currency exposures are not only a threat for individual entities 
but also a concern to the economic and financial system stability. While regulators certainly 
will not like to micro manage what otherwise is a commercial decision, corporates need to 
take care of the potential risks embedded in their unhedged currency exposures since they 
might incur significant costs due to unexpected and sudden exchange rate movements. You 
all  might  be  aware  of  the  recent  decision  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  that  claimed  a  few 
scalps while the victims cried foul. 
On the other hand, as Governor Rajan had indicated some time back,4 borrowers get into a 
trap at times of exchange rate appreciation which gives them a false sense of complacency 
in  terms  of  having  higher  equity  due  to  rising  asset  prices. While  we  do  have  comfortable 
foreign  exchange  reserves,  there  is  a  strong  view  that  no  amount  of  such  reserves  can 
cushion  extreme  external  shocks.  That  too  here  we  are  talking  about  nations.  You  can 
                                                
3   Saving Credit – Talk by Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan at the Third Dr. Verghese Kurien Memorial Lecture at IRMA, 
Anand on November 25, 2004. 
4   Competitive  Monetary  Easing:  Is  it  yesterday  once  more?  –  Remarks  by  Dr.  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  at  the 
Brookings Institution, April 10, 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  imagine how vulnerable corporates can become if they have too much of foreign currency 
exposures. 
For those business entities that do not have a natural hedge, mere cost advantage in terms 
of pure interest rate differential (without the hedge costs) should not be the guiding factor for 
overseas  borrowing.  On  the  other  hand,  we  also  had  this  unpleasant  experience,  in  the 
aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008, when many Indian exporters who had entered into 
complex  derivative  structures  with  banks  suffering  severe  losses  arising  out  of  marking  to 
market of their derivative positions. This is why I said earlier that complexity benefits some 
and hurts others. Hence corporates need to understand not only the risks they are assuming 
but also the risks arising out of faulty “risk mitigation” processes. People in business should 
therefore  realise  that  adoption  of  risk  management  strategies  is  not  meant  for  generating 
additional earnings but is needed for protection of the projected income flows. 
Last year when the US Fed indicated its intentions of tapering of quantitative easing (QE), 
India, like many emerging market economies, particularly those with current account deficit 
(CAD) came under severe pressure due to capital outflows. Several measures were taken to 
address volatility in the foreign exchange market that included, among others, reduction in 
limit for overseas direct investment (ODI) under automatic route from 400 per cent to 100 per 
cent of the net-worth of an Indian entity as a macro-prudential measure though in genuine 
cases  requirements  above  the  revised  limits  were  considered  under  the  approval  route 
besides  many  administrative  measures  aimed  at  curbing  the  opportunities  for  excessive 
financial market activities. The Reserve Bank and the Government had to take a number of 
measures to de-risk the national balance sheet; just to illustrate , the curbs imposed on gold 
imports  and  opening  of  concessional  swap  windows  for  mopping  up  longer  term  foreign 
currency resources through foreign currency deposits and borrowings by the banks. 
With  return  of  stability  in  the  Rupee-Dollar  exchange  rate,  restrictions  with  respect  to 
remittances  under  ODIs  were  largely  withdrawn  on  July  01,  2014  and  the  limits  under 
automatic route for overseas investment were restored to 400 per cent of the net worth of the 
Indian  entity.  In  other  words,  the  job  of  de-risking  the  corporate  world  sometimes  is  upon 
macro prudential regulators like the RBI for the larger concerns that I had explained to you 
earlier. Yet, I must also tell you that the dividing line between prudential regulation and micro 
management is often thin. 
Dealing with disruptive ideas and technologies 
Let me now turn to another theme of discussion in this summit. This relates to the threats 
posed  by  disruptive  ideas  and  technologies  and  the  risks  in  not  being  able  to  swiftly 
appreciate  the  emerging  challenges  posed  by  the  digital  world.  There  is  a  perceptible 
discomfort  amongst  a  section  of  the  business  community  with  the  rapidity  with  which  the 
world is changing as a result of disruptive ideas and technologies. 
As  per  a  PwC  survey,5  60  per  cent  of  the  firms  surveyed  indicated  “the  speed  of 
technological  change”  as  a  threat  to  their  growth  prospects.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
manufacturing industry may be particularly worried about the fact that more and more talent 
and  resources  are  shifting  their  preferences  to  virtual  platforms  than  to  brick  and  mortar 
manufacturing. The valuations seem skewed towards such initiatives, but let’s not for a while 
forget the fact that these disruptive initiatives do face their own set of risks and challenges, 
what is more important, however, is that they are inevitable. 
The  attitude  of  de-risking  doesn’t  go  well  with  disruptive  ideas  and  this  gets  clearer  by 
looking at the start-up culture that the US is known for and why that country stands apart and 
enjoys leadership position amidst fast changing economic cycles and consumer preferences. 
                                                
5   PwC 2014 Annual Global CEO Survey. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The recipe for success lies in transforming the businesses to be relevant in a post-industrial 
digital world. For countries like ours we need to reassure that technologies would ultimately 
improve  job  opportunities  by  augmenting  inclusive  growth  –  both  quantitatively  and 
qualitatively  –  rather  than  taking  them  away  and  that  they  enhance  the  standard  of  living 
rather than destroy it. 
Coping with cyber threats 
For the financial sector specifically, there is a need to look into the extant IT environment, 
since  there  is  a  feeling  that  the  IT  infrastructure  at  most  financial  firms  is  fragmented  and 
inconsistent.6  The  financial  sector  industry  rests  on  trust  and  credibility,  and  increasing 
cybercrime is threatening this basic premise. According to a report7 released by the British 
Bankers’  Association  (BBA)  in  association  with  PwC,  “defending  and  countering  cyber-
attacks  whilst  keeping  up-to-date  with  evolving  regulations  and  policy  is  a  complex 
challenge”. 
As you know, cybercrimes are getting sophisticated and nuanced. Their perpetrators could 
be  broadly  categorised  as  “organised  cyber  criminals”  and  “enemy  state  agents”.  Motives 
could  be  anything  ranging  from  corporate  espionage  to  intellectual  property  rights  to 
siphoning off funds. In all these, if we look at it seriously, the primary weapon is exploiting 
vulnerabilities. While they cannot be easily wished away, the only way corporates can tackle 
this is to be “proactive” about their “cyber resilience”. 
In the case of a data theft last year at one of the global investment bank, what was disturbing 
was not the security breach per se but the fact that the hackers were inside their systems for 
close to two months before being noticed! Corporates need to put in place a robust business 
continuity  management  (BCM)  plan  (which  is  the  broad  theme  of  the  last  session  of  this 
summit) and perform business impact analysis. No corporate can afford to brush these off as 
trivial non-operating activities since the potential risks involve not only monetary loss but also 
reputation and legal risk which can simply demolish established businesses. 
A  survey8  indicates  that  41%  of  economic  crime  was  committed  by  employees  within  an 
organisation. How do we address this? Can we seriously think of examining the incentive-
compatibility  structures  at  our  companies?  Since  risk  is  inherent  in  every  business,  in  the 
absence  of  appropriate  incentive  compatibility  structures,  we  may  encounter  behavioural 
patterns leading to decision making processes that de-risk the individual rather than taking 
the  optimal  decisions  that  would  benefit  the  organisation.  Such  behavioural  patterns  may 
lead  to  functional  paralysis  and  at  times,  to  explosive  business  disruptions  within  the 
organisation. 
We can even think of gender balance in decision making, the mostly ignored aspect of the 
“inclusiveness” discussions. I am reminded of the famous response of Christine Lagarde to a 
journalists’ question. She said “had Lehman Brothers been Lehman Sisters today’s economic 
crisis  would  look  quite  different”.  That  might  be  a  quip,  but  we  have  seen  the  success  of 
Mohammed  Younus  who  turned  to  women  to  make  “micro  finance”  what  it  is  today. 
According to some research in behavioural finance, excessive risk taking in men has to do 
with their body chemistry. 
                                                
6   Managing complexity – the state of the financial services industry 2015, Oliver Wyman. 
7   The Cyber Threat to Banking – A Global Industry Challenge. 
8   PwC 2014 Global Economic Crime Survey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Optimism with caution 
India is on the cusp of a great upsurge and business entities must ride the wave but they 
should be mindful of the risks that they are assuming for themselves and for the system as a 
whole. Macro-economic vulnerabilities facing our economy have significantly receded, thanks 
to improvement in growth outlook, fall in inflation, sharp reduction in oil prices, recovery in the 
external sector coupled with a bigger war chest of forex reserves, and a strong commitment 
from  the  Government  to  contain  fiscal  deficit.  This  implies  we  are  much  better  positioned 
among our peer countries to cope with future uncertainties and vulnerabilities. Having said 
that,  we  cannot  afford  to  be  complacent  and  that  is  why  we  want  to  be  cautious  in  our 
approach and want to be more certain than everyone else that our economy and financial 
system do not have to repeatedly face many of these vulnerabilities. 
In  other  words,  at  this  juncture,  India  cannot  afford  to  lose  the  greatest  opportunity  that  it 
possibly  got  over  the  last  so  many  years,  given  its  relatively  strong  position  amongst 
emerging  market  economies.  On  the  other  hand,  with  a  political  set  up  so  attuned  to  the 
concerns of the industry, the “Make in India” perspective offers a paradigm shift in terms of 
Government-industry interaction. 
Yet,  a  successful  implementation  of  this  paradigm  requires  asking  some  basic  but 
fundamental  questions for  each  industry  in  terms  of  “What  do  I  offer?”,  “What  are  my  key 
competencies?”  and  “What  are  my  weaknesses?”  Is  it  the  cost  control  centric  rather  than 
value addition centric approach of Indian industry that is to be addressed first? The term “de-
risking”  should  mean 
the  sustainable  USPs.  A 
manufacturing industry driven by cost minimization philosophy compromising on quality can 
only be fleeting source of comfort. 
finding  one’s  own  moorings, 
i.e., 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with a  few thoughts. The sustainable solution for risk mitigation lies, to a 
great extent, in knowledge leadership. To progress from “me too” business models which are 
all  too  vulnerable  to  disruptive  onslaught  from  ever  nimbler  start-ups  to  “knowledge 
leadership”  is  a  significant  leap.  But  India  as  a  country  has  to  make  that  leap  in  order  to 
develop  sustainable  source  of  leadership.  And  such  leaps  will  have  to  be  enabled  at  our 
educational  institutions,  vocational  or  otherwise.  More  and  more  institutions  of  excellence 
must be encouraged to serve as incubators for legions of technology breakthroughs. 
The  question  we  require  to  pose  is  what  stops  us  from  replicating  such  innovation  centric 
knowledge hubs. Knowledge leadership doesn’t imply that Indian industry as a whole will be 
insulated  from  churning.  After  all  there  is  only  one  company  common  between  the  Dow 
Jones index of the early twentieth century and twenty first century. It rather means that such 
leadership will entail that for every loser in such an enterprise, there are multiple winners. 
I wish you all the very best and hope you will have fruitful discussions on a broad range of 
themes starting from “risk analytics” to “regulatory risks” to “digital forensics” to “risks from 
work place of the future” and finally to “climate change and sustainability risks”. I am sure 
that at the end of the summit you will all arrive at a few workable strategies to manage your 
business risks more efficiently. 
Thank you all. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
