  Mario Draghi: The European Central Bank’s recent monetary policy 
measures – effectiveness and challenges 
Text of the Camdessus lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, 
International Monetary Fund, Washington DC, 14 May 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Over  the  past  year  the  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of  major  monetary  policy  measures, 
culminating  in  our  decision  in  January  this  year  to  expand  our  asset  purchases  towards 
public sector securities. While the aim of these measures is the same as it has always been 
–  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium-term  –  their  form  is  unprecedented  for  our 
central bank. And as such our policy decisions have become more complex in two key ways. 
First, as interest rates have reached their effective lower bound in the euro area, we have 
become  more  constrained  in  our  ability  to  deploy  conventional  monetary  policy  tools.  This 
has required us to develop new instruments to achieve the same results. 
Second, because the use of these new instruments can have different consequences than 
conventional monetary policy, in particular with respect to the distribution of wealth and the 
allocation  of  resources,  it  has  become  more  important  that  those  consequences  are 
identified, weighed and where necessary mitigated. 
In my remarks today I would like to discuss how our monetary policy has evolved within this 
new environment – both in terms of how we have deployed our instruments and how we are 
managing their consequences. 
Monetary policy in an uncertain environment 
1.  
At the start of 2014, the macroeconomic landscape in the euro area was characterised by a 
high degree of uncertainty. 
On the one hand, we were confronted with a consistent and broad-based downward trend in 
past inflation, falling from 3% at the end of 2011 to less than 1% at the beginning of 2014. 
But  on  the  other,  sentiment  on  the  economic  outlook  was  relatively  upbeat  for  2014,  with 
nearly  all  forecasters  expecting  the  recovery  to  firm  over  the  course  of  the  year.  In  this 
context,  while  we  felt  relatively  comfortable  that  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook  was 
secure,  the  risks  surrounding  that  outlook  were  clearly  elevated.  It  hinged  crucially  on  the 
benign macroeconomic scenario materialising and no further shocks emerging (Chart 1). 
Given that uncertainty and its impact on expectations of future monetary policy, it became 
much more important for us to communicate clearly how we would respond should different 
risks to the outlook emerge. In this context, in a speech in Amsterdam in April I laid out our 
reaction function to what we saw as the three most likely contingencies.1 
These  were,  first,  an  unwarranted  tightening  of  the  policy  stance  emanating  from  external 
developments,  which  would  warrant  a  more  conventional  response.  Second,  a  persistent 
impairment of the bank lending channel to which we would react with targeted credit easing 
measures  –  that  is,  measures  to  provide  longer-term  refinancing  for  banks  and  free  up 
capacity for new lending on their balance sheets. And third, a worsening of the medium-term 
outlook for inflation and/or a loosening in the anchoring of inflation expectations, which would 
                                                
1   See  speech  by  Mario  Draghi,  Monetary  policy  communication  in  turbulent  times,  at  the  Conference  De 
Nederlandsche Bank 200 years: Central banking in the next two decades, Amsterdam, 24 April 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  justify overcoming the lower bound constraint on interest rates by engaging in a broad-based 
asset purchase programme. 
Through 2014 each of these contingencies materialised. 
As the discussion of exit from accommodative monetary policy  in the  US gathered pace it 
became increasingly important for us to distinguish the diverging paths of monetary policy on 
either side of the Atlantic. From June onwards we therefore entered the first contingency and 
brought  our  main  refinancing  rate  to  its  effective  lower  bound,  while  also  introducing 
measures to strengthen the propagation of short-term rates to the medium-term curve. This 
included strengthening our forward guidance and introducing a negative interest rate on our 
deposit facility, which combined to measurably increase the traction of our policy rates over 
the shape of the yield curve. 
But crucially, by the middle of the year we were still not seeing movements in the yield curve 
being reflected in the actual borrowing conditions faced by firms and households across the 
euro  area,  which  meant  this  considerable  easing  was  not  having  the  impact  we  would 
normally expect (Chart 2). It was in this context that we moved into the second contingency 
and  launched  our  credit  easing  measures.  This  took  the  form  of  targeted  long-term 
refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  which  provide  cheap  long-term  funding  to  banks  on  the 
condition  that  they  expand  loans  to  the  real  economy,  and  thereby  help  restore  a  more 
normal supply and pricing of credit. 
When we introduced these measures there were some doubts among outside observers as 
to how powerful a boost to credit supply could be, given uncertainty over the health of the 
euro  area  banking  sector  and  signs  that  credit  demand  was  also  weak.  It  was  therefore 
crucial  that  at  this  time  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  was  also  reaching  its  conclusion, 
which  had  encouraged  banks  to  frontload  their  deleveraging  and  strengthen  their  balance 
sheets – by over €200 billion in advance of the outcome. This put the sector in a stronger 
position to transmit this new monetary impulse. 
Moreover,  in  our  view  there  was  a  large  degree  of  endogeneity  in  credit  developments: 
banks were attaching higher margins to new loans to reflect their elevated risk perceptions; 
those higher interest rates were then taxing borrowers with outstanding credit and limiting the 
demand for new credit; this was in turn weighing on the economic recovery and contributing 
to  higher  loan  delinquencies  for  banks;  and  then  banks  were  justified  in  charging  those 
higher  risk  premia  ex  post.  If  our  measures  could  therefore  incentivise  banks  to  start 
competing  again  for  good  credit,  rates  would  start  to  fall  and  this  cycle  could  be  put  into 
reverse. 
As the credit easing programme has gathered steam, this is indeed what we have seen. Our 
bank lending survey confirms that competition for good credit among banks has increased. 
This has squeezed margins and caused bank lending rates to fall. Lower rates have in turn 
created more net demand for borrowing. And banks have then begun to search for the “next 
tier” of borrowers, leading to a gradual easing of credit standards and – we expect – a further 
strengthening of competitive pressures (Chart 3). 
Importantly,  this  process  has  been  driven  predominantly  by  banks  that have  drawn  on  the 
TLTROs and has been operative in both stressed and non-stressed countries. As a result, it 
has led to a convergence in the cost of borrowing across euro area countries, with measures 
of  dispersion  in  average  lending  rates  approaching  levels  unseen  since  the  start  of  the 
sovereign debt crisis (Chart 4). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moving into the third contingency 
2.  
In  the  latter  part  of  last  year,  however,  the  inflation  outlook  for  the  euro  area  began  to 
materially deteriorate, as I acknowledged in a speech I delivered in Jackson Hole.2 
The  macroeconomic  situation  worsened  unexpectedly  over  the  summer  as  the  underlying 
impetus that we saw earlier in the year faded (Chart 5, rhs). This removed an important force 
behind the reflation scenario we had expected. The sharp fall-off in oil prices that began in 
late  summer  then  added  further  disinflationary  pressures,  feeding  also  into  core  inflation 
(Chart  5,  lhs).  The  result  was  that,  by  January  2015,  the  euro  area  was  experiencing 
negative  headline  inflation  rates  and  a  generalised  decline  in  measures  of  actual  and 
expected  inflation.  And  while  the  medium-term  orientation  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy 
allows us to “look through” such price developments if they are temporary in nature, there 
were two reasons why we feared this would not be the case. 
First, while the fluctuations in inflation in the second half of the year were clearly being driven 
by supply factors, there were strong signs that the trend was being driven by weak aggregate 
demand. This was visible both at the macro level in a still wide output gap and a declining 
rate  of  core  inflation;  and  at  the  micro  level  in  subdued  negotiated  wages  and  low  pricing 
power among firms. In other words, we were not facing merely a downward shock to prices, 
but also a downward shock to inflation dynamics – a sustained adverse development. 
Second, because of this weak underlying trend in inflation, there was a higher risk that the oil 
price  fall  could  feed  into  second  round  effects.  Indeed,  several  factors  suggested  that  the 
situation  was  more  worrying  than  past  episodes  of  oil-induced  disinflation,  particularly  the 
most recent case in 2009 following the collapse of Lehman brothers. Our analysis showed 
that the persistence of low inflation across a range of statistical metrics was higher than in 
2009.  Inflation  expectations  had  also  become,  at  all  horizons,  less  well  anchored  to  our 
objective  and  more  sensitive  to  that  low  realised  inflation,  whereas  in  2009  they  hardly 
moved at all. And measures of core inflation had become less sticky, implying a higher risk 
that  this  low  realised  and  expected  inflation  would  become  entrenched  in  wage  setting 
behaviour (Chart 6). 
Also relevant was the fact that this loosening of inflation expectations occurred while policy 
rates  were  already  at  the  effective  lower  bound.  At  the  lower  bound  a  fall  in  inflation 
expectations  implies  a  rise  in  real  interest  rates,  so  this  development  risked  generating  a 
contractionary  effect  that  would  offset,  at  least  in  part, the  benefits  of  the  fall  in  oil  prices. 
Moreover, given high debt levels in parts of the euro area, this would be amplified if second 
round  effects  set  in  and  real  debt  burdens  increased,  as  borrowers  tend  to  have  higher 
propensities to consume and invest than lenders. 
It was in this context that we moved into the third contingency by engaging into outright asset 
purchases. This began in September 2014 with our announcement that we would purchase 
asset-backed securities and covered bonds. And it was then scaled up in January 2015 with 
the addition of public sector securities to our purchase programme. These asset purchases 
work in two main ways. 
First, they  have  a  signalling  effect,  which  contributes  to re-anchoring  inflation  expectations 
more in line with our medium-term objective. This has been instrumental in reversing the rise 
in real interest rates that we observed at the start of this year. The euro area spot 5-year real 
interest rate had increased by around 60 basis points between September 2014 and January 
2015; it then fell by 85 basis points between mid-January and April. The signal that liquidity 
will keep expanding is also supporting a flattening of the term structure, thus further reducing 
                                                
2   See  speech  by  Mario  Draghi,  Unemployment  in the  euro  area,  annual  central  bank  symposium in  Jackson 
Hole, 22 August 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  real  rates  out  along  yield  curve.  In  addition,  as  this  contributed  to  the  diverging  paths  of 
monetary policy across jurisdictions, it also put downward pressure on the exchange rate. 
Second,  even  though  we  purchase  only  a  comparatively  narrow  range  of  high-quality 
securities, our purchases have a direct and indirect effect across the whole financial system, 
through a portfolio balance effect. They not only alter the price of risk-free securities, which 
forms the basis for the pricing of all financial instruments. They also generate scarcity in the 
market  in  which  we  buy,  which  encourages  investors  to  shift  holdings  into  other  asset 
classes  –  e.g.  from  sovereign  to  corporate  bonds,  from  debt  to  equity,  and  across 
jurisdictions, reflected in a falling of the exchange rate (Chart 7). In combination, a lower cost 
of  debt finance, a  lower  cost  of  equity  and  a  lower  exchange  rate  all  contribute  to  making 
investment projects profitable that were previously deemed unattractive. 
As  a  result  of the  comprehensive  easing  cycle  from  June  2014 to  January  2015,  both  the 
inflation and growth outlook have improved considerably and consumer confidence is now on 
the rise (Chart 8). And this may indeed have come as a surprise to some observers: one of 
the key objections to our programme was that it would be ineffective in a low interest rate 
environment and/or following a balance sheet recession. 
An  important  reason  why  this  objection  has  proven  questionable,  in  my  view,  is  that  it 
concentrated  exclusively  on  the  interest  rate  channel  of  transmission.  What  we  can  see, 
however,  is  that  the  other  transmission  channels  of  large-scale  asset  purchases  are 
meaningful. The portfolio balance effect is still powerful in a bank-based economy and when 
interest  rates  are  low  or  even  negative  –  indeed,  it  is  perhaps  even  more  powerful  in  this 
environment as investors are displaced into more risky asset classes, such as equity. And 
when  there  is  high  uncertainty,  signalling  effects  can  become  commensurately  stronger  if 
well-timed and clearly communicated. 
While  we  have  already  seen  a  substantial  effect  of  our  measures  on  asset  prices  and 
economic  confidence,  what  ultimately  matters  is  that  we  see  an  equivalent  effect  on 
investment, consumption and inflation. To that effect, we will implement in full our purchase 
programme as announced and, in any case, until we see a sustained adjustment in the path 
of inflation. After almost 7 years of a debilitating sequence of crises, firms and households 
are very hesitant to take on economic risk. For this reason quite some time is needed before 
we  can  declare  success,  and  our  monetary  policy  stimulus  will  stay  in  place  as  long  as 
needed for its objective to be fully achieved on a truly sustained basis. 
Collateral consequences of monetary policy 
3.  
A prolonged period of accommodative monetary policy can, however, come with side effects. 
And the fact that our policy has so far proven effective should not blind us to them. 
This  is  not  a  question  of  trade-offs. We  cannot  shy  away  from  implementing  a  policy  that 
ensures  price  stability  on  account  of  potential  collateral  effects.  Nor  can  we  extend  the 
medium-term to horizons that compromise our objective. Yet at the same time we need to 
understand and manage those collateral effects – and in pursuing our mandate we should 
attempt, to the extent possible, to minimise them. Where this is not possible, we have a duty 
to  raise  awareness  so  that  mitigating  or  corrective  action  can  be  taken  by  other  relevant 
authorities. 
So in this context, I would like to address specifically two concerns that have arisen about the 
possible  collateral  effects  of  our  actions.  These  are  the  consequences  for  allocation  and 
distribution. 
In  terms  of  allocation,  a  key  concern  at  the  present  time  is  that  very  loose  financing 
conditions  could  result  in  a  misallocation  of  resources,  which  would  ultimately  undermine 
financial stability. In particular, it has been suggested that a prolonged low rate environment 
can  lead  to  excessive  financial  risk-taking,  delayed  balance  sheet  repair  and,  ultimately,  a 
form of financial dominance as the pressure on the central bank to delay a normalisation of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  monetary policy increases. I can of course see the logic to these arguments: a long period of 
very low interest rates is potentially conducive to imbalances. But it is important to underline 
two points. 
First,  one  has  to  analyse  carefully  the  balance  of  effects  between  monetary  policy  and 
financial  stability.  For  example,  in  a  debt  overhang  environment  it  is  not  clear  that 
accommodative  monetary  policy  is  inimical  to  balance  sheet  repair. In  many  countries  low 
interest rates have in fact helped stabilise debt dynamics via reduced interest rate burdens, 
and thereby facilitated balance sheet adjustment. The interest spending-to-GDP ratio of euro 
area  governments  has  declined  on  average  by  0.4  p.p.  of  GDP  between  2012  and  2014. 
Similarly,  the  debt  burden  of  households  and  firms  has  fallen  and  reduced  bank  funding 
costs have contributed positively to retained earnings, which accelerates the deleveraging of 
bank  balance  sheets.  All  this  makes  it  easier  for  monetary  policy  to  normalise  over  the 
medium-term. 
Second, our monetary policy decisions have not been taken in a vacuum – they have been 
taken in the context of a broader policy framework that helps mitigate some financial stability 
concerns.  For  instance,  our  recent  measures  were  launched  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets, which included an asset quality review 
of  unprecedented  depth  and  breadth.  Our  monetary  policy  has  therefore  been  associated 
with both de-risking and de-leveraging of bank balance sheets, not the opposite.3 Moreover, 
we  are  now  operating  in  a  new  regulatory  and  supervisory  environment,  including  the 
creation of a European banking supervisor in the SSM, which has been specifically designed 
to reduce capture and temper pro-cyclicality. And remember it is banks that historically have 
been at the centre of the most serious financial crises. 
While we are monitoring developments closely,  at the moment there is little indication that 
generalised financial imbalances are emerging. As a matter of fact, the two most important 
indicators of growing financial imbalances – real estate prices and credit growth – show only 
tentative  signs  of  turning  upwards. What  this  underlines  is  that  following  a  major  financial 
crisis  accommodative  monetary  policy  does  not  necessarily  blur  a  prudent  assessment  of 
risk.  On  the  contrary,  it  can  help  produce  a  more  regular  pricing  of  risk,  which  may  have 
become too high and adverse to productive risk-taking. 
In sum, while a period of low interest rates will inevitably result in some local misallocation of 
resources,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  has  to  threaten  overall  financial  stability.  This  hinges 
crucially  on  monetary  policy  being  embedded  in  a  complementary  set  of  supervisory  and 
regulatory  policies  that  create  incentives  for  balance  sheet  adjustment  and  responsible 
financial behaviour. 
Another  concern,  which  has  accompanied  the  fall  of  interest  rates  to  their  effective  lower 
bound and the introduction of unconventional measures, is the distributional consequences 
of  monetary  policy.  In  particular,  there  have  been  concerns  that  very  low  rates  for  a 
prolonged period might penalise savers to the benefit of debtors; or that rising asset prices 
as a consequence of our purchases might benefit the wealthy disproportionately and thereby 
increase inequality. 
Distributional  matters  are  complex,  and  even  more  so  in  the  context  of  a  heterogeneous 
monetary union. I will therefore limit myself to a few remarks on the matter. 
First  of  all,  it  is  important  to  make  clear  that  there  are  also  distributional  effects  from 
monetary policy inaction – from the central bank not meeting its mandate or, in other words, 
                                                
3   More  generally,  Homar  and  Van  Wijnbergen  (2014)  find  that  recapitalisation  and  liquidity  provision  are 
complementary  in  speeding  up  the  recovery  after  financial  crises.  See  Homar,  Timotej  and  Sweder  van 
Wijnbergen  (2014),  “On  Zombie  Banks  and  Recessions  after  Systemic  Banking  Crises:  Government 
Intervention Matters”, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 13–039/IV/DSF54. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  from realised inflation persistently deviating from the central bank’s objective. In the case of 
an  unexpected  undershooting  of  inflation,  data  for  the  euro  area  suggest  that  younger 
households (from 16 to 44 years old) would be most affected. They tend to be net debtors, 
with debt denominated in nominal terms, and are therefore most exposed to rising real debt 
burdens. In contrast, older households tend to have positive net wealth, some of it held in 
nominal  assets.  Inflation  undershooting  therefore  results  in  redistribution  from  younger  to 
older households. This empirical observation applies not only to the euro area as a whole, 
but also to most individual countries.4 
Secondly, there are always distributional consequences to monetary policy decisions. When 
monetary policy acts to stave off disinflation by lowering interest rates, this has inevitably a 
distributional effect by reducing the interest income of savers and lowering the debt burden of 
borrowers.  But  such  interest  rate  cuts  are  necessary  to  raise  aggregate  demand  by 
encouraging  firms  and  households  to  bring  forward  spending  decisions  –  that  is,  they 
discourage  excessive  savings  and  incentivise  investment  by  lowering  the  cost  of  finance. 
Moreover,  to  the  extent  that  borrowers  tend  to  have  higher  propensities  to  consume  and 
invest than lenders, such distributional effects may be helpful for the recovery. 
I would look at the question of rising asset prices from the same perspective. It is true that 
our low policy rates, forward guidance and asset purchases raise the current market value of 
financial assets and thereby benefit the holders of those assets. But what matters more is the 
exact  mirror  effect  of  this  rise  in  asset  prices,  which  is  a  lower  cost  of  equity  for 
entrepreneurs,  a  lower  cost  of  finance  for  investors  in  real  projects,  and  a  lower  cost  of 
borrowing for consumers. 
That being said, we have to be mindful that too prolonged a period of very low real rates can 
have undesirable consequences in the context of ageing societies, where many households 
save not just to smooth consumption over the cycle, but to smooth consumption over their 
lifetime. For pensioners, and for those saving ahead of retirement, low interest rates may not 
be  an  inducement  to  bring  consumption  forward.  They  may  on  the  contrary  become  an 
inducement  to  save  more,  to  compensate  for  a  slower  rate  of  accumulation  of  pension 
assets. 
However, I would submit that it would not be in the genuine interest of those savers if the 
central bank gave up on its mandate. On the contrary, the interest of long-term savers is that 
output be raised to potential without undue delay. This is because their financial assets are 
always, in the final analysis, a claim on the wealth generated by the productive part of the 
economy.  So  it  is  in  their  interest  that  output  growth  remains  on  a  robust  path  as  this 
maximises the likelihood that their claims are honoured in full. At the same time, the more 
monetary policy is able to encourage investment, the faster interest rates will return into more 
normal territory. 
Conclusion 
4.  
Let me conclude. 
Faced  with  an  environment  of  unprecedented  complexity,  the  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of 
unconventional  measures  to  prevent  a too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation  and  deliver  its 
mandate. Those measures have proven so far to be potent, more so than many observers 
anticipated.  But their  potency  is  also  because  they  have  interacted  with  other  policies  that 
have put the economy and the financial sector in a better position to respond to our monetary 
impulses. 
                                                
4   See  Adam,  Klaus  and  Junyi  Zhu  (2014),  “Price  Level  Changes  and  the  Redistribution  of  Nominal  Wealth 
Across the Euro Area”, Working Papers, No. 14(11), University of Mannheim. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This includes the Comprehensive Assessment of euro area banks. And it includes structural 
reforms  where  they  have  been  implemented.  By  the  same  token,  structural  reforms  that 
increase  confidence  in  economic  prospects  and  encourage  entrepreneurs  to  capitalise  on 
today’s extremely accommodative financing conditions will make our policy commensurately 
more powerful. 
Policymakers  in  the  euro  area  are  independent,  but  the  effects  of  their  policies  are 
interdependent.  This  is  why  it  is  ultimately  only  a  combination  of  policies,  that  are 
complementary and mutually consistent, that will allow our policy to reap its full effects – and 
to bring about a lasting return of both prosperity and stability for the whole euro area. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Chart 1: Macro and inflation landscape in early 2014 
Chart 2: Impairments in transmission 
  8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 3: Effect of TLTROs on determinants of credit supply and demand 
Chart 4: Overall impact of credit easing package 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
 Chart 5: Macro and inflation landscape in early 2015 
Chart 6: Inflation landscape in 2009 and 2015 
  10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 7: Portfolio rebalancing effects 
Chart 8: Macro and inflation landscape in early 2015 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
