Manuel Sánchez: Mexico’s reforms progress and economic outlook 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the 2015 Institute 
of  International  Finance  (IIF)  Latin  America  Economic  Forum,  Busan,  Republic  of  Korea, 
28 March 2015. 
 I would like to thank the Institute of International Finance for the invitation to participate in this 
conference.  It  is  an  honor  to  share  the  panel  with  such  distinguished  speakers  and  to  be  in 
South  Korea,  an  economy  that  has  shown  extraordinarily  rapid  development  in  the  last  few 
decades, achieving the level of an industrialized nation in an amazingly short lapse of time. 
Mexico has benefited greatly from economic ties with South Korea. In particular, this country is 
the  second  most  important  source  of  investment  from  Asia  to  Mexico,  especially  in 
manufacturing, commerce and mining, and it is also a significant trading partner. 
In this talk, I would like to touch first on structural reforms recently undertaken in Mexico and, 
second, comment on Mexico’s economic outlook. As usual, my views are entirely my own and 
do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Mexico’s progress on structural reforms 
Mexico has embraced an ample program of structural reforms encompassing labor, education, 
the financial system, telecommunications, and energy, among other areas. The general aim is 
to  promote  greater  market  flexibility,  investment  in  both  human  and  physical  capital,  and 
competition,  thereby  boosting  total  factor  productivity  growth,  the  stagnation  of  which  has 
inhibited long-term overall economic expansion. 
Legislative changes necessary for the reforms have been passed by Congress, and the country 
is currently in the process of implementing them. Challenges are inherent in this task. As all of 
us know, the effectiveness of reforms anywhere in the world rests heavily on the details. 
Today, I would like to bring you up to date specifically on the telecommunications and energy 
reforms,  given  the  essential  role  these  sectors  play  in  the  overall  economy  and  consumer 
wellbeing. 
The telecommunications sector has been characterized by limited access and high cost. In both 
telecoms and broadcasting services competition has been scant, with each sector dominated 
by one company. 
In  particular,  the  privatization  of  the  government  telephone  operator  more  than  two  decades 
ago  transferred  exclusive  fixed-line  rights  to  one  buyer,  without  adequate  regulation  favoring 
serious competition. In the following years, new providers of telecoms services encountered a 
playing field that was not at all level. While some price reductions occurred thanks to incipient 
competition, services remained expensive and their quality low by international standards. 
The  telecommunications  reform  seeks  to  remedy  these  problems  by  facilitating  greater 
competition  and,  until  an  acceptably  competitive  environment  is  achieved,  by  clamping 
restrictions especially on dominant players, defined as those companies with a market share 
greater than 50 percent in telecoms or broadcasting, or those judged by the regulatory authority 
to have significant power in specific market segments. 
To promote competition, barriers to the entry of new players were reduced. Now, 100 percent 
foreign  ownership  is  permitted  in  telecoms  and  49  percent  in  broadcasting.  Also,  licenses 
generally  allow  operators  to  offer  a  broad  basket  of  services,  provided  that  certain  non-
concentration  requirements  are  met.  In  broadcasting,  two  new  national  digital  television 
networks have recently been granted through a public bidding process. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the case of telecoms, the new law eases customer mobility across operators. For example, 
they have to unblock handsets when contracts expire or the consumer pays for the equipment. 
Also,  operators  must  implement  portability  for  fixed  and  mobile  telephone  numbers  within 
24 hours of receiving the request and free of charge. 
To  regulate  market  power  in  the  overall  industry,  several  measures  have  been  undertaken. 
First, the new Federal Telecommunications Institute has authority that includes the sphere of 
competition. It will be helped by the fact that some legal recourses previously used by operators 
to circumvent the former authority’s resolutions indefinitely are no longer allowed. 
Second,  a  price  restriction  has  been  imposed  on  all  telephony  operators  in  the  form  of  the 
elimination of national long distance fees, which in a world of digital networks and the internet 
were increasingly obsolete. 
Third, an asymmetric regime containing price and activity caps applies to dominant players, as 
long  as  they  continue  to  be  deemed  as  such.  Notably,  the  main  fixed  and  mobile  telecoms 
provider cannot charge other operators for calls and text messages terminating in its network. 
This mobile operator is not allowed to charge fees to customers when they receive calls while 
outside  their  local  service  areas,  nor  can  it  price  discriminate  when  customers  call  other 
companies’ phone numbers. The dominant player must also allow the sale and resale of mobile 
services to other concessionaries and the leasing of the last-mile network. It cannot offer TV 
services. 
In  broadcasting,  the  dominant  firm  must  allow  competitors  the  lease  of  its  infrastructure  and 
cannot  buy  exclusivity  for  audiovisual  content  considered  significant.  This  broadcaster  is  not 
permitted to own capital in the dominant telecoms provider. 
This  reform  has  already  yielded  benefits.  A  declining  trend  in  relative  telecoms  prices  has 
deepened,  and  service  providers  have  increased  the  variety  of  packages  offered.  In  fact, 
competition between operators focuses increasingly on the speed and quality of data services 
provided  through  both  fixed  and  mobile  means.  Another  encouraging  sign  is  the  interest  of 
international players in the Mexican market.1 
To  turn  to  our  second  focus,  the  energy  sector  has  also  suffered  from  high  prices  and 
frequently, insufficient supply. Crude oil production has been declining continuously since 2004. 
Inadequate  pipeline  infrastructure  has  limited  lower-price  gas  imports,  as  well  as  lower-cost, 
more efficient distribution. Electricity prices in Mexico remain well above those in its key trading 
partners.2 
Behind  these  problems  lie  decades  of  state  control,  with  little  or  no  benefit  from  outside 
participation. The energy reform seeks to confront this reality by allowing private participation in 
virtually all aspects of the sector. This includes public bidding for oil and gas exploration and 
production contracts, and permits for production of oil products and petrochemicals, transport, 
storage, distribution, and sale of hydrocarbons and hydrocarbon products. Also, permits are to 
be  granted  to  generate  and  sell  electric  power,  as  well  as  import  electricity  using  Mexico’s 
National Electric System.3 
The reform contemplates a wholesale market for the purchase and sale of electricity, with retail 
operations  also  possible.  Electricity  transmission  and  distribution  remain  in  the  hands  of  the 
state, with the outsourcing of private contractors permitted. 
                                                
1  For  an  analysis  of  recent  price  developments  in  the  telecom  services  sector,  see  Banco  de  México  (2015), 
Informe Trimestral, Octubre-Diciembre 2014, Box 1, February. 
2  The negative impact of the inadequate infrastructure of the gas pipeline system is illustrated in Banco de México 
(2013), Inflation Report, July – September 2013, Box 2, November. 
3  The National Electric System is mainly composed of the national transmission and general distribution networks, 
the power plants that deliver electricity to the national networks, and the equipment and facilities used to control 
the system itself. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As to oil and gas exploration and extraction, four different types of contract are on offer, namely 
licenses, profit-sharing, production-sharing, and services. In the first three, private companies 
can register the value of the expected profits backed by the contracts on their books. 
In  the  wake  of  the  so-called  round  zero  in  which  Pemex  applied  for  certain  fields  and  was 
allocated some of them, the first round of public bidding has begun. Two auctions have been 
announced,  one  for  exploration  and  production,  and  another  for  production  only,  both  in 
shallow-water  oil  fields  under  production-sharing  contracts.  The  auction  allocations  are 
expected  in  a  matter  of  months.  Fiscal  and  economic  conditions  in  the  contracts  have  been 
revised  according  to  suggestions  by  auction  participants,  and  in  accordance  with  recent 
developments in oil markets. Three additional phases of this round will ensue, with the types of 
extraction increasing in level of difficulty or cost. 
Additionally,  contracts  have  been  auctioned  and  awarded  to  deliver  gas  in  private  pipelines, 
including a pipe from Texas to Chihuahua and another from Chihuahua to Durango. The first 
permit  granted  to  a  private  agent  to  import  electricity  from  a  power  station  connected 
exclusively to the National Electric System has also been conceded. 
Significant  foreign  and  domestic  private  investment  could  potentially  materialize  in  this  new 
environment. The changes should eventually allow more efficient energy-sector production and 
lower domestic gasoline and electricity prices through competitive markets. 
The economic outlook 
The Mexican economy shows signs of moderate recovery after a slowdown in 2012. The upturn 
is driven by industrial production, with manufacturing taking the lead, fueled by exports to the 
United States. Construction has recently picked up as well,  while mining is still faltering, due 
mainly to oil production, on the decline since 2004. 
Domestic  spending  has  also  improved  somewhat,  with  private  investment  showing  more 
strength,  and  consumption  gains  unable  to  obtain  traction.  Analysts’  consensus forecasts for 
this  year  and  next  call  for  the  economy  to  gradually  pick  up  steam,  pulled  by  positive 
U.S.  performance.4
Downside  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  include  continued  stagnant  consumer  confidence,  the 
potential impact of social unrest, and possible further reductions in the oil production platform. 
Mexican financial markets face two challenges. First, the sharp fall in crude oil prices since last 
summer has made the country’s fiscal position weaker, since oil still accounts for approximately 
one-third of budgeted public-sector revenue. In view of the most likely scenario that oil prices 
remain  low  for  some  time  to  come  and  the  decreasing  oil  production  trend,  the  federal 
government recently sent investors a sign of fiscal responsibility by announcing cuts to 2015 
budgeted spending, amounting to 0.7 percent of GDP, despite the fact that oil revenue for the 
year is almost fully hedged.5 
Second,  the  U.S.  Fed  is  widely  expected  to  begin  normalizing  monetary  policy  this  year. 
Volatility has hit the Mexican foreign exchange market, with the peso depreciating significantly, 
along with most other world currencies. However, the adjustment in Mexico has been orderly, 
with abundant liquidity prevailing in market operations. 
Furthermore, during 2015, holdings of peso-denominated government bonds by nonresidents 
have  remained  stable.  While  somewhat  higher  than  last  year,  interest  rates  continue  to  be 
relatively low for all terms. Nevertheless, as U.S. monetary policy normalization is around the 
4  See  Blue  Chip  Economic  Indicators,  March  2015,  and  Banco  de  México  (2014),  Quarterly  Report,  October-
December 2014, Summary, February. 
5  See SHCP (2015), “La SHCP Anuncia Medidas de Responsabilidad Fiscal para Mantener la Estabilidad.” Press 
Release 007/2015, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
3 
corner, some portfolio adjustment and further bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out. Therefore, 
financial authorities must remain on watch. 
So  far  in  2015,  inflation  has  returned  to  a  path  of  convergence  with  the  Bank  of  Mexico’s 
3 percent permanent target, after a year of straying due to temporary factors such as tax hikes 
and  agricultural  price  pressures.  The  recent  decline  in  inflation  has  been  supported  by  the 
disappearance  of  the  effect  from  last  year’s  tax  increases  and  fading  pressures  from 
agricultural prices, along with lower key telecoms and electricity prices. 
The  better  inflation  performance  must  be  maintained.  Upside  risks  include  more  significant 
pass-through  from  a  weaker  peso  down  the  road,  as  well  as  the  resurgence  of  spikes  in 
noncore inflation prices and eventual aggregate demand pressures. Close monitoring of these 
risks  is  all-important  in  view  of  the  fact  that  analysts’  long-term  inflation  expectations  remain 
above the 3 percent target. Sustained convergence with the target must be consolidated. 
Final remarks 
Mexico is on a path that should help take it to the resolution of fundamental issues obstructing 
productivity  and  long-term  growth.  In  particular, recent  telecoms  and  energy  reforms  seek  to 
foment  investment  and  competition  in  these  sectors,  which  may  boost  the  efficiency  of  the 
economy.  The  degree  of  success  of  these  and  other  reforms  should  be  defined  in  terms  of 
enhancing the economy’s potential. This will depend heavily on the quality of implementation, in 
the  sense  that  these  reforms  actually  lead  to  greater  market  flexibility  and  investment,  and 
generate substantially effective competition. 
Moderate  cyclical  economic  recovery  in  Mexico  is  underway  on  the  back  of  stronger  U.S. 
performance.  Persistently  lower  oil  prices  and  upcoming  U.S.  monetary  policy  normalization 
pose  challenges  to  both  Mexico’s  economic  upturn  and  markets.  Further  volatility  cannot  be 
excluded, and thus the authorities must remain on alert. 
Finally,  inflation  has  recently  fallen  to the  Bank of  Mexico’s  target.  However,  convergence  to 
this objective must be consolidated so that it becomes a permanent phenomenon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
