  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Effective regulation will further enable 
ICTs to promote financial inclusion 
Speech  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Digital Impact Awards Africa, Kampala, 13 August 2015. 
 Management and Staff of Cyberplc and HiPipo (U) Ltd.  
Invited Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
It gives me great pleasure to address you today on the topic of “Effective Regulation will 
further  enable  ICTs  to  promote  Financial  Inclusion”.  Let  me  once  again  express  my 
gratitude to Cyberplc and Hipipo (U) Limited for organizing the Digital Impact Awards event, 
and for giving me the opportunity to make remarks at this event for the second year running.  
Last  year,  I  dwelt  on  mobile  money  transfer  and  banking  services  as  an  ICT-driven 
development that had had a positive impact on financial inclusion, and the approach that the 
Bank  of  Uganda  has  taken  from  a  regulatory  stand-point.  My  remarks  then  may  be 
summarised as follows:  
1. 
Mobile  money  transfer  and  banking  services  have  had  a  transformative  effect  on 
access to financial services since they were first introduced in Uganda in 2009. The 
number of citizens with mobile money accounts far outstrips those that have bank 
accounts.  
Financial  regulation  has  two  objectives  –  the  mitigation  of  systemic  risk  in  the 
financial sector, and the protection of consumers of financial services.  
The  stock  of  mobile  money  deposits  and  the  value  of  mobile  money  transactions 
remain  a  small  percentage  of  total  deposits  and  transactions  respectively,  and  as 
such they do not pose any systemic risk to the financial system. There is therefore 
no  basis,  at  this  time  for  the  introduction  of  special  regulations  for  mobile  money 
transfer and banking services to mitigate systemic risks.  
On the other hand, consumer protection concerns are valid, and motivated the Bank 
of  Uganda  to  adopt  the  regulatory  model  in  which  mobile  money  operators  are 
required to collaborate with supervised financial institutions and maintain an escrow 
account  with  sufficient  deposits  to  cover  the  mobile  money  that  has  been  sold  to 
their customers.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
today.  Nevertheless, 
the  Bank  recognises 
that 
These  conclusions  remain  relevant 
developments in the industry must be monitored to ensure that emerging risks are identified 
and mitigated before they are realised. Because mobile money transfer and banking services 
straddle two regulated sectors – that is the financial and communications sectors, the Bank 
of  Uganda  and  the  Uganda  Communications  Commission  agreed  a  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  and  established  the  Joint  Working  Group  for  Mobile  Financial  Services  
(JWG-MFS).  This  MOU  formalises  the  relationship  between  the  two  regulators  on  matters 
regarding the approval, regulation and supervision of mobile money services in Uganda.  
The Bank of Uganda also recognises the potential for technological innovation to contribute 
positively to financial inclusion. Thus “Financial Innovation” is one of the four focus areas 
under the Bank’s Financial Inclusion Project. Under this Project:  
• 
The  Bank  of  Uganda  developed  Mobile  Money  Guidelines  to  provide  clarity  to 
stakeholders in this sector. These Guidelines were issued in October 2013 and are 
available on the Bank of Uganda Website.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The  Bank  of  Uganda  has  proposed  amendments  to  the  Financial  Institutions  Act, 
2004  to  facilitate  the  introduction  of  Agent  Banking.  Agent  Banking  is  the 
mechanism under which banking services are provided by a third party (the agent) 
on behalf of a licensed financial institution. Because of their relatively low costs of 
operation, the agents are able to serve sections of the public that cannot be viably 
served  by  traditional  financial  institutions.  Licensed  financial  institutions  typically 
exploit information and communication technologies to extend their services through 
their agents. It is expected that the percentage of the population that is “financially 
excluded” will be further reduced when Agent Banking is widely adopted.  
Mobile  money  transfer  and  banking  services  have  continued to grow.  In the  year  between 
June  2014  and  June  2015,  the  number  of  registered  mobile  money  customers  increased 
from 17.6 million to 19.5 million. The number of agents that served them grew from 64,000 to 
94,000.  The  monthly  average  value  of  mobile  money  transactions  for  the  quarter  ending 
30 June  2015  was  about  UGX  2.5  trillion,  up  from  a  monthly  average  of  about 
UGX 2.0 trillion  for  the  corresponding  period  last  year.  Mobile  money  operators  have 
introduced new products, for example in the area of international remittances and integration 
with customer bank accounts. This is evidence that the current regulatory regime encourages 
growth and innovation.  
In  summary, the  Bank  has,  as  one  of  its key  objectives,  the  establishment  of  a regulatory 
environment that enables financial services providers to utilise new technologies to increase 
access to financial services, while at the same time protecting consumers.  
I  wish  to  congratulate  all  the  recipients  of  the  Digital  Impact  Awards  today,  and  wish  you 
success in commercialising your innovations. We particularly look forward to innovations that 
will promote financial inclusion, as well as the efficiency and safety of financial transactions. I 
once again, thank Cyberplc and Hipipo (U) Limited for making the arrangements for these 
awards.  
Thank you for listening to me.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
