  Ravi Menon: ASEAN financial integration – where are we, where next? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the ASEAN Banking Council Meeting, Singapore, 12 June 2015. 
 Dr In Channy, Chairman, ASEAN Bankers Association 
Mr Samuel Tsien, Chairman, Association of Banks in Singapore 
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
ASEAN  banks  have  performed  well  over  the  last  two  decades  since  the  Asian  Financial 
Crisis. Asia’s economies and financial systems, including those in ASEAN, generally held up 
well during the Global Financial Crisis. 
The  near  term  economic  outlook  for  ASEAN  will  be  shaped  by  two  themes:  the  ongoing 
recovery in the G3 economies and the slowdown in the Chinese economy. Barring shocks, 
overall growth in ASEAN should remain firm this year, at about 5%, not spectacular but very 
respectable considering the state of the global economy. 
Macroeconomic conditions are therefore supportive of banks in ASEAN. There are, however, 
downside risks they need to watch. 
• 
The  divergence  in  monetary  policy  settings  among  the  G3  economies  could  pose 
risks to financial stability that could also potentially hurt growth. 
The  anticipated  normalisation  of  interest  rates  in  the  US  against  continuing 
quantitative easing in the Eurozone and Japan is already causing sharp movements 
in exchange rates and bond yields. 
 The scenario of a “double whammy” posed by a rise in US interest rates and a strong US 
Dollar could expose vulnerabilities among some ASEAN borrowers. 
• 
Banks in the region could face higher non-performing loans. They could also face 
reduced US Dollar funding if there are large capital outflows from ASEAN. 
But their liquidity and capital positions are generally sound and they should be able 
to weather this. 
  ASEAN growth story still good 
Over  the  medium  to  long  term,  ASEAN  is  expected  to  remain  among  the  fastest  growing 
regions in the world. 
Last year, the combined GDP of ASEAN was close to US$2.5 trillion – larger than India. 
• 
The ASEAN-4 – Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines – are projected 
to grow by at least 4% per annum on average over the next five years. 
It could be as high as 6% if ASEAN becomes more integrated and these countries 
successfully implement structural reforms to raise productivity and competitiveness. 
For banks in ASEAN, it is not just the size and growth of the economies that matter. It is the 
composition of that growth and demand. 
Rising  incomes  and  the  agglomeration  effects  of  urbanisation  will  significantly  expand  the 
ranks of the middle class in ASEAN. 
• 
In 2010, ASEAN had a population of 600 million, with around a quarter making up 
the middle class. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   In 2030, ASEAN will have a population of 700 million, with about two-thirds attaining 
middle class status. 
In other words, the size of the middle class will swell by as much as three times over 
two decades. 
 This  rapid  expansion  of  the  middle  class  in  ASEAN  will  spur  demand  for  a  wide  range  of 
goods and services. 
• 
Services  such  as  telecommunications,  education,  healthcare,  and  banking  and 
finance, have a high income elasticity of demand. 
This means that as incomes rise and wealth accumulates, the demand for financial 
services – be it consumer credit, wealth management, or insurance – will rise more 
than proportionately. 
 This phenomenon is being demonstrated right now, as it has been over the last few years, 
and will continue to play out in the next few decades as ASEAN continues to grow. 
Economic and financial integration to sustain growth 
Besides domestic structural reforms, a key factor to sustain ASEAN’s rate of growth closer to 
6% than 4% is economic integration. 
• 
• 
A key vehicle to achieve this is the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC). 
The AEC, as you know, was adopted in 2007 by ASEAN Leaders as a blueprint to 
achieve  a  free  flow  of  goods,  services,  investments,  and  skilled  people  within  the 
region by 2015. 
We have achieved substantial progress in implementing the AEC Blueprint. 
• 
More than 90% of the key deliverables targeted for completion by 2015 have been 
implemented. 
Virtually all goods traded within ASEAN are at zero tariff. 
There are agreements in place to enhance protection for investors, liberalise sectors 
for investment, and provide greater transparency on investment rules. 
 Financial integration is a strong complement to trade integration and a critical component of 
the overall AEC project. Deeper financial integration will yield substantial benefits for ASEAN 
economies. 
• 
It  will  support  economic  growth  by  helping  to  mobilise  surplus  savings  more 
efficiently and channelling them to productive investment opportunities in the region. 
It  will  strengthen  resilience  to  external  shocks  by  helping  to  deepen  and  broaden 
capital markets. 
It will promote financial inclusion by helping to expand the reach of financial services 
to a wider community that is currently under-banked and under-insured. 
  The  ASEAN  Financial  Integration  Framework  (AFIF),  adopted  by  ASEAN  Central  Bank 
Governors and endorsed by ASEAN Finance Ministers in 2011, envisages a more integrated 
financial region by 2020. 
AFIF sets out the following key thrusts: 
• 
remove  restrictions  to  the  intra-ASEAN  provision  of  financial  services  by  ASEAN 
financial institutions; 
build  capacity  and  infrastructure  to  develop  and  integrate  the  ASEAN  capital 
markets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
   liberalise the flow of capital across the ASEAN region 
harmonise payments and settlements systems 
strengthen  capacity  building,  regional 
surveillance 
financing  arrangements,  and  regional 
 The pace of financial integration has, however, lagged behind trade integration. In part, this 
is deliberate. In part, this is disappointing. 
The  slower  pace  is  deliberate  in  the  sense that  financial  integration  is  more  complex  than 
trade integration and requires more time. 
• 
Liberalising  access  to  financial  services  is  not  as  straightforward  as  reducing 
numerical tariff rates on particular categories of merchandise. 
Financial  liberalisation  involves  addressing  issues  of  harmonising  regulatory 
standards,  market  conduct  practices,  disclosure  requirements,  and  conditions  of 
licensing. 
 More  so  than  in  trade  integration,  financial  integration  requires  a  certain  degree  of 
convergence  in  the  development  of  financial  markets  in  the  respective  economies.  The 
financial  systems  across  ASEAN  are  at  very  different  stages  of  development  and 
sophistication. 
Unlike the goods market and most services, financial liberalisation and integration must pay 
close  heed  to  issues  of  systemic  stability.  A  key  lesson  from  past  financial  crises  is  that 
premature opening up of financial markets without strengthening domestic financial systems 
and establishing credible safety nets can have painful consequences. 
While  there  are  good  reasons  why  financial  integration  has  been  slower  than  trade 
integration,  one  cannot  help  but  think  that  progress  could  have  been  faster  than  what  we 
have seen to-date. In that sense, the pace of financial integration is disappointing. ASEAN 
Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors are therefore determined to make up for lost 
time and press ahead with liberalisation in the post-AEC phase leading up to 2020. 
While  the  pace  of  financial  integration  has  not  been  as  fast  as  we  would  have  liked,  it  is 
important  that  we  recognise  the  progress  that  has  been  made  and  the  opportunities  that 
have  been  created.  Let  me  now  touch  on  the  progress  and  prospects  for  integration  in 
banking, insurance, and the capital markets respectively. 
Banking integration 
In  banking,  the  key  achievement  is  the  establishment  of  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration 
Framework (ABIF). 
• 
ABIF provides a platform for Qualified ASEAN Banks to enjoy greater market access 
and operational flexibility. 
Banking  liberalisation  under  the  ABIF  can  be  done  on  a  bilateral  basis  and 
customised accordingly. 
Two ASEAN countries can agree on specific areas to be liberalised based on the 
Qualified ASEAN Banks’ commercial interests. 
  ABIF will complement the broader economic integration of ASEAN. 
• 
As ASEAN economies develop further, their corporates will expand their operations 
into the region. 
The banks who have been servicing these corporates in their home markets are well 
placed to follow their customers and support them as they regionalise. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ABIF will provide them an enhanced vehicle to do so. 
• 
More importantly, ABIF will be a vehicle to help grow a group of strong pan-ASEAN regional 
banks with the scale and the capability to compete alongside the global banks. As ASEAN 
becomes an economic powerhouse, so must our ASEAN banks. 
Looking  ahead,  a  key  priority  for  banking  integration  will  be  to  help  banking  groups  with 
operations in several ASEAN countries to share and transmit information across borders. 
• 
For  banks  with  pan-ASEAN  operations,  the  segregation  of  data  and  systems  in 
multiple countries due to data on-shoring requirements may hinder effective group 
risk management and raise data security concerns. 
We should harness technology to support the pooling of data in regional and global 
data centres. 
Data  aggregation  will  help  enhance  consolidated  risk  management  and  ensure 
better protection of customer data. 
  Insurance integration 
In  insurance,  ASEAN  member  states  have  agreed  on  an  ASEAN  Insurance  Integration 
Framework. 
• 
ASEAN  members  have  agreed  in-principle  to  liberalise  the  cross-border  supply  of 
Marine, Aviation and Goods in International Transit (MAT) insurance in the seventh 
package of financial sector commitments of the AFAS. 
When  this  agreement  is  signed  and  ratified  in  2016,  insurance  companies  will  be 
able to offer MAT insurance across ASEAN’s borders. 
This  move  will  help  to  lower  the  cost  of  insuring  cross-border  business  risks  and 
help to spur intra-ASEAN trade. 
  The next key steps will be to liberalise the catastrophe insurance and reinsurance markets. 
• 
ASEAN’s insurance penetration rate is barely half the global average, even as the 
incidence and severity of natural catastrophes in ASEAN continue to increase. 
This  large  and  widening  gap  in  insurance  coverage  leaves  ASEAN  countries 
vulnerable to economic loss and production disruptions from natural catastrophes. 
As risk exposures grow in scale, size and complexity, they will exceed the capacity 
of  individual  states  to  underwrite  the  risks  confronting  their  communities  and 
economies. 
  Liberalising  ASEAN’s  insurance  markets  will  reduce  the  cost  of  insurance  protection  to 
governments, to businesses as well as to consumers. 
• 
The insurance business is premised on the law of large numbers and risk pooling – 
the wider the distribution of risks, the more cost-effective the cover. 
It is therefore important to allow cross-border provision of insurance services. 
 Capital market integration 
In  capital  markets,  ASEAN  has  made  good  progress  in  integration,  starting  with  Thailand, 
Malaysia and Singapore. Concrete measures have been put in place to harmonise disclosure 
requirements and broaden market linkages. 
For investors, the ASEAN Trading Link among Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore provides a 
single gateway to all three exchanges. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  means  an  investor  in  one  country  can  buy  shares  in  the  other  two  markets 
through his local stockbroker. 
 For  issuers,  Thailand,  Malaysia  and  Singapore  have  adopted  fully  harmonised  prospectus 
disclosure requirements, known as the ASEAN Disclosure Standards. 
• 
This  means  an  issuer  can  tap  all  three  markets  with  a  single  set  of  prospectus, 
yielding greater efficiency and cost savings. 
A  Streamlined  Review  Framework  for  such  prospectuses  is  targeted  to  be 
implemented later this year. This will shorten the time taken for the issuer to obtain 
approval for a multi-jurisdictional offering and provide greater certainty on the time-
to-market. 
 For fund managers, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore have launched the ASEAN Collective 
Investment  Scheme  Framework,  which  is  a  mutual  recognition  framework  providing  fund 
managers with a streamlined authorisation process for the cross-border offering of funds. 
• 
This means that a fund manager authorised to manage a fund in one country can 
market the same fund in the other ASEAN countries. 
These are significant steps towards achieving an integrated ASEAN capital market. But they 
are not enough. In fact, it is like a bridge three-quarters completed. It marks good progress 
but is not quite useful until it is end-to-end. And end-to-end integration is what we need to 
fully realise the benefits of our efforts on the capital market front. 
ASEAN needs to continue enhancing linkages across its markets. 
• 
We  should  build  on  the  ASEAN  Trading  Link  among  Thailand,  Malaysia  and 
Singapore by further broadening and deepening post-trade linkages. 
Establishing  clearing,  settlement,  and  custody  links  will  make  the  ASEAN  Trading 
Link a full-fledged end-to-end platform across the three ASEAN markets. 
 And  with  the  progressive  participation  of  the  other  ASEAN  exchanges,  we  would  have 
created a truly integrated ASEAN capital market – one that will: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
enhance trading volumes; 
lower the cost of corporate fund raising; 
provide investors with more choice and ease of access; and 
enhance liquidity and stability in the market. 
Conclusion 
To achieve its potential, ASEAN must integrate further. 
Economic integration is a win-win proposition. By exploiting economies of scale and strategic 
complementarities, every country in ASEAN stands to gain. 
Economic  and  financial  integration  in  ASEAN  owes  at  least  as  much,  if  not  more,  to  the 
natural functioning of market forces as it does to official initiatives like free trade agreements. 
Integration  in  ASEAN,  more  so  than  it  has  been  in  the  European  context,  is  a  bottom-up, 
organic process driven by: 
• 
trade  and  investment  flows  arising  from  the  production  networks  of  global  MNCs 
spanning the ASEAN region; and 
cross-border capital flows arising from the operations of global and regional banks. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The success of ASEAN financial integration therefore requires active industry collaboration 
and participation. The industry has an important role to play in working with regulators and 
governments to identify and clear roadblocks to growing their business across borders. 
The ASEAN Bankers Association, representing the banking associations across all ASEAN 
members, is well placed to play this role. 
• 
Coming  from  the  industry,  you  know  what  makes  commercial  sense,  where  the 
specific  obstacles  are,  and  you  know  how  to  persuade  your  governments  and 
regulators to press on with economic and financial integration. 
I wish you fruitful discussions and look forward to your ideas. 
• 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
