  Stephen S Poloz: Central bank credibility and policy normalization 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canada-United 
Kingdom Chamber of Commerce, London, United Kingdom, 26 March 2015. 
 I would like to thank Don Coletti, Stephen Murchison, Eric Santor, Scott Kinnear and Jing Yang for their help in 
preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
I am happy to be in the City and to have the opportunity to speak with you this afternoon. 
You can feel the pulse of the global financial system here, and it feels a bit like an irregular 
heartbeat to me. 
The  recovery  from  the  Great  Recession  has  been  a  long,  drawn-out  affair,  with  some 
countries emerging faster than others. Long-term interest rates are extremely low, well below 
central banks’ inflation targets. Financial market volatility has gone up across the board, as 
economies and policies diverge and the prospect of policy normalization becomes more real. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  consider  what  this  all  means  for  central  bank  credibility,  which  is 
something  we  should  all  care  about.  Do  very  low  long-term  interest  rates  and  recent 
increases  in  financial  market  volatility  represent  an  erosion  of  central  bank  credibility?  It 
probably won’t come as a surprise to you that I would say no. Central banks are doing their 
jobs in a very challenging setting. In my time today, I will talk about what we can learn from 
low interest rates and increasing financial market volatility, as well as what we can expect as 
we go through the process of normalizing monetary policy. 
Long-term interest rates and credibility 
Let’s  begin  by  looking  at  the  extremely  low  borrowing  costs  we  see  in  many  economies. 
Consider, for example, the return that one would receive on a 10-year bond issued by any 
G-7 government and held until it matured. Investors would be accepting an annual return that 
would be below the central bank’s inflation target – in some cases, well below. 
What  is  it  telling  us  when  investors  are  willing  to  receive  such  low  returns?  Central  bank 
policy frameworks may differ, but the concept of inflation control is at the heart of monetary 
policy in most economies. Are low yields an indication that investors think we will be unable 
to bring inflation back up to its target? 
To  help  answer  this  question,  let’s  look  at  the Canadian  data.  In  a  recent  paper,  Bank  of 
Canada  economists  Bruno  Feunou  and  Jean-Sébastien  Fontaine  used  a  term  structure 
model  to  decompose  the  yield  on  a  10-year  Government  of  Canada  bond  into  three 
components: long-term inflation expectations, expectations of real short-term interest rates 
and the term premium. 
Our analysis shows that Canadian long-term inflation expectations have stayed quite close to 
our 2 per cent target since the onset of the financial crisis. This message is corroborated by 
other  methods  we  have  of  measuring  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  These  include 
surveys  of  professional  forecasters  and  the  break-even  inflation  rate  that  is  based  on 
comparing nominal and Real Return Bonds. 
Let  me  pause  here  to  stress  a  point.  Why  are  inflation  expectations  so  important?  It’s 
because well-anchored expectations help promote stability in inflation and output as well as 
the  financial  system.  Solid  inflation  expectations  also  give  central  banks  more  leeway  in 
responding  to  temporary  shocks,  such  as  changes  in  energy  prices  or  movements  in  the 
exchange rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Evidence  shows  that,  for  the  most  part,  central  banks  have  been  doing  well  at  keeping 
expectations anchored in a very challenging environment. Measured in this way, it is clear to 
me  that  our  credibility  is  intact.  But  we  won’t  take  false  comfort.  Vigilance  is  required, 
because  if  long-term  expectations  shift  away  from  the  target,  it  can  be  very  difficult  to  re-
anchor them. 
So, to understand why long-term interest rates are so low, we need to look at the two other 
components – expectations for real short-term interest rates, and the term premium. These 
components account for the drop in long-term bond yields that we have seen since the crisis. 
This is relevant to our topic because these components have also been heavily influenced by 
central banks as they worked to meet their inflation goals in the aftermath of the crisis. 
Let me make four points here. First, expectations for real short-term interest rates depend on 
the level of the real neutral rate of interest – the rate that will generate just enough savings to 
finance investment in the long run. The Bank of Canada’s Senior Deputy Governor, Carolyn 
Wilkins, gave a speech last year in which she outlined why we should expect to see a lower 
real  neutral  interest  rate  globally.  The  reasons  include  slowing  labour  force  growth  and 
productivity growth in developed economies, suggesting a drop in demand for investment, 
and  a  very  strong  supply  of  savings  from  many  emerging  economies.  So  we  must  start 
thinking about equilibrium interest rates from a lower starting point. 
Second,  on  top  of  these  structural factors,  we’ve  seen  central  banks react to the financial 
crisis and subsequent Great Recession by aggressively lowering policy rates. Several central 
banks,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  also  found  themselves  constrained  by  the  effective 
lower bound on interest rates. By issuing forward guidance in various forms, we were able to 
reduce  expectations  for  the  future  level  of  the  policy  rate.  This  added  to  the  pressure  on 
expectations for real short-term rates. 
Third, central bank actions and forward guidance have served to reduce uncertainty about 
short-term policy interest rates, thus reducing the term premium. 
Fourth,  the  quantitative  easing  programs  employed  by  some  central  banks  included 
purchases  of  long-dated  bonds,  reducing  the  yields  on  those  bonds.  There  is  strong 
evidence that those purchases have even pulled down yields in markets that did not have 
quantitative easing, such as Canada. 
To sum up, there are very good reasons why long-term interest rates are unusually low, but 
the  de-anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  is  not  the  central  driver.  Rather,  low  long-term 
interest  rates  reflect  a  combination  of  a  declining  neutral  rate  of  interest  and  the  actions 
being  taken  by  central  banks  to  foster  stronger  growth  in  pursuit  of  their  inflation  targets. 
Ultimately,  inflation  expectations,  and  the  inflation  outcomes that  support  them,  are  how  a 
central bank’s performance should be judged. 
Financial market volatility and credibility 
But some would judge a central bank’s credibility against a wider range of criteria, including 
the level of financial market volatility. In recent months, measures of volatility have risen in a 
wide  variety  of  asset  classes  and  across  a  number  of  countries,  in  U.S.  Treasuries,  in 
exchange rates, and in the Standard & Poor’s 500, just to give a few examples. There are 
many factors contributing to this increase, and I won’t try to list them all. But I will mention 
four. 
First, the forces acting on the global economy are powerful and affecting many economies 
differently.  The  post-crisis  headwinds  to  growth,  including  widespread  deleveraging  and 
lingering uncertainty about the future, have proved highly persistent. Furthermore, the sharp 
drop in oil prices is having a significant effect, positive for some economies and negative for 
others.  This  shock  surprised  everyone,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  so  large  and  happened  so 
quickly means that many of us have had to work hard to fully grasp all of its implications. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Several  central  banks  around  the  world,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  reacted  to  this 
environment with policy announcements that weren’t fully anticipated by investors. 
Second, these forces are leading to a divergence in monetary policy paths among the big 
three central banks. The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are implementing 
quantitative  easing  while  the  Federal  Reserve  is  beginning  the  process  of  normalizing  its 
policy.  This  divergence  is  naturally  leading  to  a  significant  adjustment  in  the  outlook  for 
interest  rates  and  currencies,  as  well  as  higher  volatility  in  bond  and  foreign  exchange 
markets. 
A  third  contributor  to  financial  market  volatility  is  related  to  global  regulatory  reform.  The 
Basel III and other reforms are clearly making the global financial system safer, and that is 
job one. But they have also reduced incentives for banks and some dealers to hold inventory, 
act as market-makers and provide a shock-absorber function in times when volatility is high. 
Fourth,  financial  market  volatility  has  been  compressed  in  recent  years  by  the  one-sided 
nature  of  our  economic  outlook.  With  many  economies  operating  with  excess  capacity, 
economic  growth  remaining  weak  and  deflation  a  real  threat  in  some  economies,  interest 
rates  have  been  expected  to  stay  very  low  for  a  very  long  time.  This  expectation  was 
reinforced by forward guidance and other unconventional policies of central banks. But those 
expectations  are  starting  to  shift.  The  global  recovery,  although  uneven  and  fragile,  is 
progressing, and we are approaching a transition phase  – taking the first steps on a path 
toward normalization, if you will. 
Eventually,  the  global  headwinds  will  dissipate  and  central  banks  will  be  able  to  transition 
away  from  unconventional  policies  and  return  to  more  conventional  ways  of  conducting 
monetary policy. This will mean a return to two-sided risks, where interest rates could rise or 
fall depending on how economies evolve. During this transition toward normal, more financial 
volatility is to be expected. 
To me, these seem to be legitimate reasons to expect higher financial market volatility today. 
And is the volatility we’re seeing now abnormally high? No. While market volatility has risen 
recently,  it  has  done  so  from  historically  very  low  levels.  It  has  begun  to  return  closer  to 
historical averages, not abnormal levels. 
So,  is  this  increase  in  volatility  actually  a  negative  development?  No.  Above  all,  volatility 
relates  to  unexpected  economic  developments  to  which  central  banks  will  necessarily 
respond  in  order  to  fulfill  their  mandates.  When  shocks  to  the  economy  occur,  whether 
positive or negative, higher financial market volatility is a natural consequence, an integral 
part of the economy’s equilibration process. Such financial volatility is neither inherently bad 
nor  good.  And  if  it  reflects  the  emerging  possibility  that  the  one-sided  outlook  we  have 
experienced for several years is finally becoming more balanced, then that is unambiguously 
good news. 
Getting back to normal 
Still,  as  we  begin  to  work  through  the  process  of  getting  back  to  normal,  the  question 
remains: if explicit forward guidance can suppress financial market volatility, why not keep 
using it? 
In this context, what I mean by forward guidance is explicit statements around the future path 
of interest rates. Central banks inevitably talk about the future, and any such statement can 
be construed as a form of guidance for markets. All such forms have their uses, in the right 
context. But I reserve the term “forward guidance” to mean specific comments, or conditional 
commitments, around interest rates. 
There’s absolutely no question that forward guidance is a valuable part of the central bank 
tool  kit.  It  has  clearly  been  helpful  in  Canada  and  elsewhere.  But  as  I  said  in  a  paper 
published  last  year,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  believe  that  statements  to  explicitly  guide 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
market  expectations  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates  are  best  reserved  for 
extraordinary  times, such  as  when  policy  rates are  at the  effective  lower  bound,  or  during 
periods  of  market  stress.  Keeping  forward  guidance  in  reserve  ensures  that  it  will  have  a 
greater impact when it is deployed. Otherwise, it becomes addictive and loses some of its 
impact – in short, forward guidance is not a free lunch, it comes with costs. 
Let me elaborate by stressing some of the points I made in that paper. Forward guidance 
works by taking some potential actions by the central bank off the table. A commitment not to 
raise  interest  rates  for  a  given  period,  or  until  certain  economic  conditions  are  met,  can 
flatten the yield curve and add stimulus to the economy. But in doing so, the commitment 
creates a skewed bet for investors. Volatility falls, for the time being, as market participants 
naturally position themselves around this bet, often using significant leverage to do so. 
So, what happens when circumstances change, as they inevitably do? What happens when 
investors start to consider the possibility that the guidance will change? The positions that 
are  stacked  around  the  central  bank’s  guidance  unwind,  and  all  that  suppressed  volatility 
suddenly  resurfaces  in  financial  markets,  often  to  levels  that  surpass  historical  averages. 
That’s when we pay the price of forward guidance. To be sure, when the policy rate is at the 
effective  lower  bound,  the  benefits  of  forward  guidance  can  easily  outweigh  the  costs.  At 
other times, the costs loom larger. 
Indeed, in normal times, when economic and financial risks are clearly two-way, there is a 
very basic law of economics at work. Volatility happens. It is a force of nature. Economists 
call this underlying volatility “shocks” – unexplained shifts in consumer demand or business 
behaviour, or oil-price shocks, or shocks from foreign economies, and, yes, financial market 
shocks.  This  volatility  must  go  somewhere  in  the  economy.  Central  banks  target  inflation, 
which  means  stabilizing  inflation  and  economic  growth,  not  interest  rates.  Pursuing  that 
mandate means that financial markets carry more of the natural volatility that arises. 
To make this point in its most extreme form, consider how a hypothetical, all-seeing central 
bank would behave. That central bank would anticipate all shocks to the economy and move 
interest  rates  up  and  down  to  offset  them,  so  inflation  would  always  stay  right  on  target. 
Looking at the data afterward, we might think that all the interest rate and financial market 
volatility was unnecessary, because inflation was on target the whole time. In other words, 
perfect  policy  making  might  look  silly,  simply  because  people  cannot  see  the  underlying 
shocks  –  but  the financial  market  volatility  would  be  a  natural  consequence  of  the  central 
bank’s efforts to achieve its mandate. 
Of  course,  we  haven’t  been  in  normal  times  for  quite  a  while. We  are  just  taking  the  first 
tentative steps toward normalization, and the road  won’t always be smooth, as our recent 
experience  in  Canada  illustrates.  Late  last  year,  we  saw  encouraging  signs  that  the 
economic recovery was broadening. Stronger exports had started to be reflected in greater 
business investment. However, as we approached our January decision on interest rates, we 
had to consider the unexpected plunge in global oil prices. Given the importance of oil to our 
economy, this shock represented a significant downside risk to our projected inflation profile. 
It  also  posed  a  risk  to  financial  stability  through  the  reduction  in  income  that  it  implied. 
Because lower oil prices mean lower Canadian income, the shock would worsen the debt-to-
income ratio of Canadian households, even if no new borrowing occurred. 
We  thought  in  January  that  it  would  be  best  to  act  sooner  rather  than  later,  given  the 
magnitude of the shock and the immediacy of its likely effects. Indeed, oil prices were still 
falling, and to levels below the assumptions built into our forecast. Accordingly, we took out 
some insurance in the form of a 25-basis-point cut in interest rates. The reaction to this cut 
across  the  yield  curve  and  in  the  exchange  rate  would  help  to  cushion  the  blow  to  the 
economy from the oil-price decline, bringing us back sooner to full capacity and sustainable 
2 per cent inflation. It would also help mitigate the rise in the debt-to-income ratio by reducing 
the drop in income, although debt levels could rise at the margin. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
We  knew  that  financial  markets  would  be  surprised  by  the  move  in  January,  and  we 
generally prefer to avoid surprises. But we  will do  what is necessary to fulfill our inflation-
targeting mandate. 
Over the following weeks, we saw inflation decline as expected, and output expand in line 
with  our  projection.  We  saw  financial  conditions  ease,  and  oil  prices  stabilize  in  a  range 
reasonably close to our January projection. This made us feel increasingly comfortable with 
the amount of insurance we had already taken out, which led to the decision to keep rates 
unchanged  earlier  this  month.  The  negative  effects  of  lower  oil  prices  are  beginning  to 
appear;  the  positives  will  take  longer  to  emerge.  So  we  need  to  watch  these  competing 
forces play out in the economy, and the January rate cut has bought us some time to monitor 
the situation as it evolves. 
Some have characterized this as a move to “data dependency.” I have to say I find this a bit 
strange.  Data  are  always  crucial  in  determining  how  the  economy  is  progressing.  Even  in 
extraordinary times, central banks depend on data to help them evaluate how the economy is 
performing relative to expectations. 
As  our  economy  gradually  gets  back  to  normal,  we  will  continue  to  speak  with  business 
leaders to get their perspectives. We will continue to watch the data closely, as we always 
do, and see how the numbers evolve relative to our forecasts. And we will look to market 
participants to keep watch on the same data, and form their own opinions about what they 
mean. 
Our communications focus on explaining how we expect the economy to unfold and being 
transparent about the risks that the central bank is weighing. All else equal, this should help 
reduce  the  chances  of  surprising  markets.  Still,  in  normal  circumstances,  it’s  natural  that 
there  would  be  volatility  as  economic  surprises  occur.  But,  we  think  it  best  to  have  this 
volatility  reflected  in  prices  in  informed,  well-functioning  financial  markets,  rather  than  be 
artificially suppressed by forward guidance. 
Conclusion 
Allow  me  to  conclude.  As  we  have  seen,  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  reflect  the 
unwavering  pursuit  of  our  inflation  goals.  They  show  that  market  participants  continue  to 
believe both in our commitment and our ability to return inflation to its target. 
Unconventional  monetary  policies  have  played  a  key  role,  in  Canada  and  elsewhere,  in 
promoting growth and helping to meet our inflation goals. As the global economy shakes off 
the Great Recession, and the  era of unconventional policies comes to an end, a return to 
ultra-low levels of financial market volatility is unlikely. Bouts of increased volatility can be 
expected as guidance-influenced positions are unwound and as markets react to shocks. As 
we  go  through  the  normalization  process,  this  represents  the  natural  reaction  of  financial 
markets  to  economic  uncertainty  and  a  return  to  a  normal  trading  environment  –  not  an 
erosion of central bank credibility. 
The Bank of Canada will continue to pursue and fulfill our inflation-targeting mandate. We will 
continue to follow the policies necessary to ensure a timely return of inflation to target while 
being mindful of financial stability considerations. This process takes place in an uncertain 
world where shocks happen daily, behaviour shifts repeatedly, and our analytical tools and 
models  can  offer  only  rules  of  thumb.  In  that  sense,  monetary  policy  is  a  very  imprecise 
business – less like engineering and more like risk management. 
Ultimately, our credibility will hinge on how well we meet our mandate over extended periods 
of time. I’m confident that we will continue to get the job done. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
