  R Gandhi: Roundtable on capacity building in banks 
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Roundtable 
on Capacity Building in Banks, organized by the Centre For Advanced Financial Research 
and Learning (CAFRAL), Mumbai, 18 June 2015. 
 Speech delivered by Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor Assistance provided by Ms Usha Janakiraman is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
I appreciate CAFRAL for taking the initiative of holding this roundtable on capacity building in 
banks. As I am given to understand, the objective of this roundtable is to discuss the key 
aspects of the recommendations of the Committee on Capacity Building in Banks and Non-
Bank Institutions (Chairman: Shri G. Goplalakrishna) and to formulate strategy to streamline 
and  implement the  recommendations. I  also  understand that the  issues  and  challenges  in 
implementing these recommendations would be the major focus area today. At a time when 
the  Reserve  Bank  as  a  regulator  is  engaged  in  consultation  with  the  stakeholders  on  the 
aspects  of  implementation  of  the  various  recommendations  of  the  Committee,  such  an 
initiative is most welcome. The feedback from the deliberations today would serve as a good 
input for us, going forward as we formulate the policies for implementation. 
Capacity Building 
2. 
Let me start by asking a fundamental question to set the tone for the deliberations to 
follow. What is “capacity building”? Capacity building is an ongoing process through which 
individuals,  groups,  organizations  and  societies  enhance  their  ability  to  identify  and  meet 
development challenges. It also aims at understanding the obstacles that inhibit people and 
organizations from realizing their development goals. 
3. 
• 
Capacity Building is much more than training and includes the following: 
Human  resource  development:  the  process  of  equipping  individuals  with  the 
understanding, skills and access to information, knowledge and training that enables 
them to perform effectively. 
Organizational development: the elaboration of management structures, processes 
and  procedures,  not  only  within  organizations  but  also  the  management  of 
relationships  between  the  different  organizations  and  sectors  (public,  private  and 
community). 
Institutional and legal framework development: making legal and regulatory changes 
to enable organizations, institutions and agencies at all levels and in all sectors to 
enhance their capacities. 
4. 
A practical definition can be as follows: Capacity Building is planned and continuous 
development  of  (or  increase  in)  knowledge,  management,  skills,  and  other  capabilities  of 
persons  and  organizations  through  acquisition,  guidance,  incentives,  technology  and/or 
training. 
  Capacity Building – an obsession with financial market regulators 
5. 
Capacity Building is an obsession with the financial market regulators in general and 
more  specifically  with  the  Indian  financial  market  regulators.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India, 
being the oldest among the financial market regulators has a long history of persisting with 
this  obsession.  Its  efforts  include  establishing  and  operating  or  being  a  catalyst  for  the 
formation  of  very  many  capacity  building  organisations,  not  just  for  itself,  but  also  for  the 
banking  and  even  the  financial  sectors. These  institutions  have  catered  to  training,  higher 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
academic research, technology, education and certification, etc needs of the sector. There is 
really a very long pedigree of institutions established / catalysed by the Reserve Bank right 
from early 1950s. These are the Reserve Bank Staff College, the Bankers Training College 
(BTC), the College of Agricultural Banking (CAB), the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development 
Research  (IGIDR),  the  Institute  for  Development  and  Research  in  Banking  Technology 
(IDRBT), the National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM), the Indian Institute of Banking 
and  Finance  (IIBF),  Indian  Institute  of  Bank  Management  (IIBM),  Institute  for  Banking 
Personnel  Selection  (IBPS)  and  now  the  Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and 
Learning (CAFRAL). And, we have not yet stopped; we are now at work to establish an RBI 
Academy. 
6. 
The other financial market regulators who came later have also imbibed this spirit 
and  have  established  institutions  to  meet  the  needs  of  their  sectors.  For  example,  the 
Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  has  established  the  National  Institute  of 
Securities Management (NISM) and the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of 
India (IRDAI) has established the Institute of Insurance and Risk management (IIRM). 
7. 
We can also observe this trend in the regulators of other countries as well, be it in a 
developed nation or in a developing nation or region. The Federal Reserve Bank, the Bank of 
England,  the  Bundesbank,  the  Banque  de  France,  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the 
World Bank and others have all established capacity building institutions and arrangements. 
Why this obsession? 
8. 
Finance  is  primarily  a  knowledge  oriented  activity.  The  chief  capital  and  inputs 
required  for  this  sector  all  relate  to  “information”  and  “knowledge”.  This  “information”  and 
“knowledge”  is  highly  dynamic;  new  research  and  new  concepts  crop  up  every  often.  The 
paradigm  changes  in  the  sector  has  very  wide  ramifications;  the  sector  is  highly 
interconnected; happenings in this sector has high visibility. That means that the regulators 
have to be upto date with such cutting edge “information” and “knowledge”; be abreast of the 
developments  in  the  sector;  and  be  hands  on.  On  top  of  these,  these  efforts  have  to  be 
continuous  and  over  the  whole  career.  That  is  why  the  regulators  typically  have  such 
capacity building institutions under their direct charge. 
Background and overview of key recommendations 
9. 
Another significant feature of Indian financial sector is that the Government is also 
equally keen on supporting these efforts. Before the regulators came on the scene, it was the 
Government which played the catalyst in establishing several capacity building arrangements 
for the securities and insurance sectors. The National Knowledge Commission, established 
in  2005  as  a  high-level  advisory  body  to  the  Prime  Minister  of  India,  has  made  several 
recommendations, with the objective of transforming India into a knowledge society. Several 
of these recommendations are being implemented. 
10. 
Further, the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC), established 
in 2011, has, while recommending a major transformation of the legal foundations for Indian 
finance  through  the  enactment  of  the  Indian  Financial  Code  (IFC),  made  several 
recommendations  which  pertain  to  capacity  building  in  banks  and  non-banks,  streamlining 
training intervention and other related measures. As you are aware, it is in this context that a 
Committee on capacity building in banks and non-bank institutions in India was constituted 
by the Reserve Bank and Shri Gopalakrishna headed that Committee. 
11. 
Let  me  begin  by  outlining  what  really  the  Reserve  Bank  had  in  mind  when  the 
Committee was constituted. The thrust was on the entire gamut of human resource skill set 
which is required for improving the efficiency of the employees of banks and NBFCs, which 
would in turn help the organisations individually and benefit the financial system as a whole. 
The  issue  is  the  level  of  intervention  that  would  ideally  be  required  in  terms  of  enhancing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
their  skill  building  –  entry  level  expertise,  training  requirements  both  initially  and  on  an 
ongoing basis, skill sets and qualifications required for certain specific and specialised areas, 
and  exploring  the  need  and  methodologies  for  prescribing  certification  for  required 
qualifications. In short, the most important deliverable for the Committee thus was to identify 
capacity  building  requirements  keeping  in  view  the  role  of  the  financial  sector  and  what  it 
should deliver. 
12. 
Key  recommendations  of  the  Committee  are  in  the  areas  of  HR  management 
practices, training methodologies and innovations, system wide institutions  and processes, 
exploring mandatory certification requirements and amplifying capacity related requirements 
in Boards of banks. I shall dwell on each of these aspects in some detail. 
HR management practices 
13. 
HR  management  is  an  important  function  for  banks  covering  the  whole  gamut  of 
areas such as recruitment, role mapping, training, skill set identification, building up of HR 
data base, and performance assessment. It is very important for this function to be taken up 
as a specialised area and given its due importance rather than as just a routine operational 
work to be done. HR is going to be at the forefront of change in the years to come and it 
should  be  understood  that  banks  having  clear  HR  policies  with  awareness  of  employee 
engagement  and  development  will  gain  a  vital  competitive  edge  in  a  tough  market 
environment in the years ahead. 
14. 
The HR function world over has undergone many developments / evolution over the 
years,  particularly  from  its  administrative  beginnings  to  a  strategic  orientation  as  is  seen 
today. However, it is a fact that in a majority of the banks in India even today, the HR function 
is  at  best  a  supplementary  function  which  is  not  given  its  due  importance  in  the  banking 
hierarchy. There is a need for change in the mind set to underscore the fact that to drive your 
efficiency,  as  well  as  the  topline  and  bottomline  in  your  balance  sheets,  you  need  skilled 
resources. Such skill resource base is not possible if you do not have a structured approach 
to the entire gamut of HR management. 
15. 
HR  is  an  essential  element  of  corporate  strategy  and  is  invariably  linked  to  the 
performance of banks as well. I am happy to observe that this aspect has been emphasised 
in the Committee report which talks about aligning human resource planning with strategic 
planning  to  achieve  the  strategic  goals  of  banks  and  non-banks.  As  you  go  about  your 
deliberations during course of the day, I am quite sure you will have some more clarity on 
these aspects. 
Training methodologies and interventions 
A  great  deal  of  emphasis  has  been  given  in  the  Report  on  the  process  of  skill 
16. 
development,  particularly  on  training  needs  and  training  strategies.  As  you  are  aware, 
training  enables  employees  develop  the  needed  competencies  to  achieve  the  desirable 
outcomes.  Training  ensures  learning  in  a  structured  manner  and  reduces  randomness. 
Banks and NBFCs need to encourage a culture of learning on an on-going basis. 
17. 
With  a  fast  changing  environment,  skills  and  qualifications  acquired  could  fast 
become  redundant  if  there  is  no  on-going  updation.  While  it  needs  no  emphasis  that  the 
initiative  should  also  come  from  the  employees  themselves  to  keep  abreast  of  the 
developments, it is also the duty of the organisation to equip their employees by providing a 
minimum  training  support  at  periodical  intervals.  Apart  from  taking  away  the  monotony  of 
their  daily  work,  and  expanding  their  horizons  and  knowledge  levels,  it  can  also  change 
employee attitude and behaviour, thereby contributing to the organisational performance. 
18. 
Studies have shown that training and effectiveness programs have a positive impact 
on  employee  performance.  In  this  backdrop,  there  is  an  interesting  suggestion  in  the 
Committee  Report  to  introduce  a  system  where  employees  have  to  pass  a  certification 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
program compulsorily to progress to the next grade in the hierarchy. It is in this context that 
institutes like IIBF, IBPS, NISM and CAFRAL have a very vital role to play. 
19. 
Another  interesting  suggestion  is  for  training  programmes  to  be  combined  with 
certification  which  will  improve  training  efficiency  and  will  offer  quality  assurance. This  will 
also ensure that training efforts are taken seriously by the recipients. 
System-wide measures 
20. 
The next set relates to the steps needed to be taken on a system-wide basis to drive 
capacity  building.  The  Committee  acknowledges  the  need  to  look  beyond  an  individual 
institution’s perspective and consider various measures on a system-wide basis to support 
and drive capacity building. The success of these measures would hinge on coordination and 
collaboration of all relevant stakeholders. The Committee has outlined the various aspects 
that  need  to  be  reckoned,  including  creation  of  accreditation  agency,  introducing  Banking 
Aptitude  test,  developing  Centre  of  Excellence  for  Leadership  Development  for  banking 
sector, fostering development of data and research on skills in banking sector and improving 
academic-industry interface, etc. 
21. 
A  very  important  suggestion  is  for  an  accreditation  agency  to  be  set  up  as  an 
independent quality assurance body for the banking sector which would be responsible for 
accrediting learning initiatives within the banking industry. As per the report, the main focus 
of the accrediting agency will be to accredit training institutes in the industry. When it comes 
to  implementing  this  recommendation,  the  modalities  of  such  accreditation  needs  to  be 
worked out. I understand that this would be one of the issues which will also be discussed 
today. 
22. 
In  this  respect  some  other  action  is  also  needed.  Of  utmost  importance  are 
discussions with the stakeholders – the banks, the premier training institutions, the bankers’ 
associations, and in the case of public sector banks, the Government itself. 
Building capacities of top management and members of boards of banks 
Public sector banks have been witnessing increasing number of younger officers at 
23. 
top levels of hierarchy over the last few years. Some of them have risen rapidly thru senior 
positions  over  a  short  period  of  time.  While  this  can  bring  fresh  perspectives  on  various 
issues,  it  is  also  a  fact  that  given  the  strategic  importance  of  leadership  at  the  top,  it  is 
important  to  understand  the  training  requirements  of top  management  and fulfil  the  same. 
The Committee has recommended mentoring programmes for CMD / CEOs of banks. I find 
that CAFRAL has already carved out a niche for itself in this area. 
24. 
We are all aware of the concerns that corporate governance weaknesses in banks 
world over had contributed to the financial crisis. Doubts have been raised on the ability of 
Boards  of  banks  to  adequately  guide  and  oversee  their  institutions.  There  have  been 
questions on the role of Boards of Directors and the desired, but frequently missing, skill sets 
of  non-executive  directors  in  light  of  lessons  drawn  from  the  crisis.  Bank  boards  are  in 
constant scrutiny of the regulator, shareholders, and various stakeholders. Needless to add, 
directors  need  to  possess  adequate  skill  sets  and  stay  abreast  of  developments  in  the 
financial sector to guide banks and steer them in the right direction. 
In our country, in terms of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, not less than fifty-one 
25. 
per cent, of the total number of members of the Board of Directors of a banking company are 
required to have special knowledge or practical experience in accountancy, agriculture and 
rural economy, banking, co-operation, economics, finance, law, small-scale industry or any 
other  matter  the  special  knowledge  of,  and  practical  experience  in,  which  would,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  Reserve  Bank,  be  useful  to  the  banking  company.  There  is  thus  no 
requirement for a specific educational qualification for nomination as a Director. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
26. 
What is interesting is that the Committee has deliberated in detail on the issue of 
compulsory  certification  of  individuals  before  their  appointment  as  Directors  on  boards  of 
banks.  While  the  Committee  has  recommended  that  such  certification  need  not  be 
considered as of now, it has thrown open the debate on the knowledge and skill development 
at the highest decision making body – the Boards. Formal and systematic induction process 
and  regular  training  intervention  subsequently  for  members  on  bank  Boards  have  been 
recommended.  These  are  some  of  the  recommendations,  which  in  my  view,  can  be 
implemented immediately. 
Certification 
27. 
Having discussed the recommendations in broad details, I would like to spend more 
time  on  the  specific  issue  of  certification  in  more  details.  Why  separate  certification  is 
needed?  Can’t  the  academic  credentials,  university  degrees,  diplomas  and  certificates  be 
sufficient? These questions can naturally be raised. The answer is that several aspects of 
banking  and  finance  is  becoming  increasingly  a  set  of  specialised  knowledge.  As  distinct 
from  an  academic  perspective,  a  practitioner’s  perspective  is  more  relevant  here.  India  is 
poised for growth; along with stable growth, we will have a stable & low interest regime. This 
will necessitate the capital market to grow much faster and larger. The financial instruments 
and services that will be demanded by the investors and offered by the financial institutions 
users will be much more in number and in complexity. Complex expertise in niche area will 
be the increasing need of the hour. Attrition and Lateral recruitments will further exacerbate 
this.  Knowledge  assurance  will  be  an  imperative.  Customer  rights  and  the  financial 
institutions’ liabilities and proof of burden will be squarely on the shoulders of the financial 
institutions. Legal and regulatory compliance will demand another set of special talents and 
skills. If the banks and the financial institutions will have to meet all these challenges, they 
will  need  the  assurance  that  their  operating  officials  are  duly  qualified  to  undertake  the 
respective responsibilities. And certification will provide that assurance. 
Implementation of the recommendations 
28. 
In  so  far  as  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations  of  the  Committee  are 
concerned,  since  it  involves  among  others,  issues  such  as  specialisation,  entry  point 
qualification, special recruitments based on job roles and competency, accreditation agency 
to be set up as an independent quality assurance body, national online aptitude test at entry 
level  as  well  as  exclusive  funding  arrangement  under  the  nomenclature  of  the  Financial 
Sector Development Fund with a large corpus (to be considered by the Government of India) 
to support various capacity building initiatives, etc. it will have a significant bearing on the HR 
policies  of  public  sector  banks.  In  view  of  this,  we  are  in  consultation  with  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  Government  of  India  and  the  Indian  Banks  Association  on  operationalising  the 
recommendations. 
29. 
While the consultation process is underway, there has been some feedback that the 
proposals  of  the  report  should  manifest  as  broader  guidelines  for  the  banks’  which  are 
recommendatory  in  nature  and  not  mandatory.  While  several  will  remain  so,  requirements 
like  certification  and  accreditation  can  be  mandatory.  If  this  roundtable  could  discuss  the 
suggestions  and  arrive  at  a  valuable  implementation  road  map,  it  would  be  a  welcome 
feedback for the Reserve Bank as we finalise our policy on implementation of the proposals. 
Conclusion 
30. 
Banking  sector  plays  a very  important  role  in the  economic  growth  of the  country 
and our banking system has to ensure that its capacity to deliver has to continuously evolve 
and adapt to the developments in the sector. Banks have to make conscious and structured 
effects in building such capacity, by putting in practice the various recommendations in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
Report. I am confident that the discussions in this roundtable will lead to specific road map 
for action and provide clarity on issues. 
31. 
Thanking you all for your patient attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
