  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Mobile money and the economy 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the workshop on “The Economics of Mobile Money”, Kampala, 12 February 2015. 
 Representatives of the Private Sector Stakeholders,  
Academicians, Policy Analysts and Practitioners,  
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Good morning. 
I would like to begin by welcoming everyone to this conference on the economics of mobile 
money  and  to  welcome  especially  all  those  who  have  made  the  effort  to  come  here  from 
abroad to share with us your experience and expertise. I am sure that it will prove to be a 
very interesting and fruitful conference, and will prove valuable to you whatever your field of 
work.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  International  Growth  Centre  and  the  United  Nations 
Capital Development Fund for joining with the Bank of Uganda to organize the conference. I 
would  also  like  to  thank  everyone  who  has  prepared  presentations  for  the  conference. 
Although the issues which we will debate at this conference clearly have global relevance, 
holding it here in East Africa is particularly apt, because this region has been at the forefront 
of the mobile money revolution over the last six years. 
The rapid growth of mobile money in East Africa is a phenomenon which has few precedents 
in  the  history  of finance  and  banking  and  which  has  implications  which  are  likely  to  prove 
profound, for the financial sector, for business, for the general public and for public policy. 
Trying  to  understand  what  these  implications  might  be  provides  the  motivation  for  this 
conference, which brings together academics, practitioners from industry and policy makers. 
In the four sessions which will follow we will hear and discuss both the results of academic 
research and the views of industry professionals. 
Mobile  banking  has  already  had  a  major  impact  on  broadening  access  to  basic  financial 
services  in  East  Africa.  The  benefits  in  terms  of  financial  inclusion  will  themselves  have 
important economic consequences, for business and household welfare. But I think that we 
are probably still only at the beginning of the transformation which mobile banking will create 
in our economy and society. In the rest of these remarks I will highlight what I think are some 
of  the  key  issues  which  we  need  to  study  and  debate  if  we  are  to  better  understand  the 
changes which mobile money will bring about and their implications. 
The  first  and  probably  most  complex  issue  I  want  to  highlight  is  the  impact  that  mobile 
banking  will  eventually  have  on  traditional  banking.  For  more  than  a  century,  finance  has 
been dominated by a traditional banking model in which customers hold deposit accounts in 
banks  and  receive  a  range  of  services  from  their  bank.  Mobile  banking  is  already  peeling 
away some of these services from banks, notably payment services. How many more types 
of financial ervice will migrate from traditional banks to mobile banking, or to some form of 
internet banking, in the future? And as commercial banks lose their traditional dominance in 
the  markets  for  these  services,  will  traditional  banking  remain  commercially  viable?  For 
example,  will  people  eventually  hold  the  money  they  require  for  transactions  purposes 
entirely  in  the  form  of  electronic  money,  rendering  cash  and  non  interest  bearing  demand 
deposits  in  banks  largely  redundant?  Will  banks,  as  a  consequence,  be  forced  to  adopt 
radically different business models focusing only on financial services which cannot easily be 
delivered electronically? 
Secondly, such transformations in the way in  which financial services are delivered matter 
profoundly for public policy, not least because traditional banks play a central role in the way 
in  which  monetary  policy  is  implemented  by  central  banks  and  are  the  focus  of  financial 
regulation. I will make a few remarks about both monetary policy and financial regulation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The current business model of mobile banking in East Africa implies a substitution of cash for 
bank  deposits,  and  hence  a  larger  money  multiplier,  because  all  virtual  money  sold  to 
customers  has  to  be  backed  up  by  deposits  in  the  partner  bank  of  the  mobile  money 
provider. Mobile money may also affect the velocity of circulation of money: in principle one 
might expect velocity to rise if mobile money makes retail payments transactions easier for 
customers. 
However, if more radical mobile banking business models are eventually developed in which 
mobile  money  becomes  a  substitute  for  demand  deposits  in  banks,  the  ability  of  central 
banks to control interest rates could be undermined. This is because central banks control 
short term interest rates by varying the liquidity available for commercial banks to meet their 
reserve requirements. But if mobile money eventually leads to a diminution of the role which 
commercial  banks  play  in  the  financial  system,  the  interest  rate  transmission  mechanism, 
which relies on movements in short term inter-bank rates being transmitted along the yield 
curve to all other interest rates in the economy, will be weakened, which in turn will weaken 
the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy.  Central  banks  will,  therefore,  need  to 
develop alternative tools for influencing interest rates in the economy. 
Financial regulation has focused on commercial banks largely for two reasons; they are the 
financial institutions in which are held the bulk of the financial savings of ordinary people and 
they  play  a  central  role  in  the  economy’s  payments  system.  For  both  these  reasons, 
commercial banks are much more important to the stability of the financial system and the 
delivery  of  essential  financial  services  to  the  economy  than  any  other  type  of  financial 
institution. As I have already noted, mobile banking is already providing a partial substitute 
for the retail payments services of banks and could eventually challenge the dominance of 
banks  in  the  provision  of  other  types  of  services,  including  deposits.  If  so,  prudential 
regulation which is focused on ensuring the soundness of the banking system may no longer 
be  sufficient  to  protect  the  safety  of  customers’  savings  or  the  systemic  stability  of  the 
financial system and the preservation of its critical functions. 
Finally  I  want  to  stress  the  vital  importance  of  carrying  out  high  quality  research  on  these 
issues. This is the only way we will improve our understanding of what is a very complex and 
rapidly changing phenomenon. I am pleased, therefore, that we will end this conference with 
a discussion on the directions of a future research agenda. 
I wish everyone a very productive conference. 
Thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
