  Jon Cunliffe: Pay and productivity – the next phase 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the Automative Fellowship International dinner, Luton, 22 June 2015. 
 is  more  efficient 
Between 2000 and 2007, the average worker in the UK automotive manufacturing industry 
produced  7.7  vehicles  a  year.  Over  the  past  seven  years  he/she  averaged  9.8  vehicles  a 
year. Productivity – output per worker – in car manufacturing has increased by 30% since the 
onset of the great financial crisis. Britain has become the fourth-biggest vehicle maker in the 
EU  and 
than  bigger  producers  such  as  Germany  and  France. 
It has not all been plain sailing. In the recession, productivity in the car industry fell as firms 
cut  back  production  and  held  on  to  workers.  But  productivity  in  the  industry  recovered 
quickly. 
If  productivity  in  the  UK  economy  as  a  whole  had  grown  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  car 
industry, and employment generally had grown as it did, the economy would now be 30% or 
£½ trillion larger than it is today. Annual GDP per person would be about £8k higher than it 
is. 
Unfortunately productivity in the UK has not followed the lead of the car industry. Indeed, the 
opposite is true. In 2014 labour productivity in the UK was actually slightly lower than its 2007 
level.  In  the  seven  years  between  2000  and  2007  labour  productivity  grew  at  an  average 
annual  rate  of  about  2%  a  year.  In  the  seven  years  that  followed,  our  annual  productivity 
growth averaged just below zero. Or to look at it another way, the level of labour productivity 
– output per hour worked – in the UK economy is now 15% below where it would have been 
if  pre-crisis  trends  had  continued.  Of  course,  a  hit  to  productivity  is  what  you  expect  to 
happen  in  a  financial  crisis  and  deep  recession.  Firms  cut  production  but  try  to  hold  onto 
workers. But even compared to the experience of others, the UK’s productivity performance 
has been disturbingly weak. It is true that the average output per hour of the rest of the G7 
advanced economies is only around 5% above its pre-crisis level. But as I have noted, in the 
UK it has not even recovered to that level. And in 2013 output per hour in the UK was 17 
percentage points below the average for the rest of the G7 – the widest gap since 1992. 
I  am  very  conscious  that  in  talking  about  the  importance  of  productivity  growth  before this 
audience  tonight  I  am  taking  coals  to  Newcastle  –  or  should  I  say  cylinder  heads  to 
Dagenham.  But,  against  this  background  of  the  UK’s  productivity  performance  since  the 
crisis, I want to review the prospects for the UK economy, the uncertainties that we on the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) now face and the importance of productivity growth going 
forward. 
I want to talk a little about how we have been able to grow relatively strongly over the past 
couple of years despite very weak productivity growth; but why that is unlikely to be possible 
over the coming years. And why we expect productivity to improve – albeit moderately – in 
the future. 
And  in  doing  so  I  will  also  talk  about  why  the  UK’s  productivity  performance  has  been  so 
puzzlingly  weak,  not just  in  the  depths  of  the  crisis  and  recession  but  in  the  recovery  and 
expansion  that  has  been  underway  since  the  middle  of  2013;  and  whether  the  boom  and 
bust  of  the  financial  sector  can  help  us  to  understand  the  UK’s  recent  productivity 
performance. 
The importance of productivity 
Productivity  growth  matters  hugely.  In  the  end  it  is  the  key  determinant  of  rising  living 
standards.  For  18  centuries  –  from  the  year  1AD  to  1800  when  the  industrial  revolution 
started – living standards in the West were fairly stagnant. It is because of the step change in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  productivity  growth  launched  by  the  industrial  revolution  that  living  standards  are  now  20 
times higher than they were then.1 Increases in population and the labour force can make the 
national  economy  bigger.  But  in  the  end  only  productivity  growth  –  producing more  output 
relative to input – can consistently raise GDP per person. 
Central banks like the Bank of England foster monetary and financial stability, which support 
investment  and  productivity  growth.  But  we  are  not  the  main  players  in  driving  long-term 
productivity  growth.  We  do  not  invent  new  technologies  or  processes.  And  the  necessary 
supporting  policies  such  as  product  and  labour  market  reform,  infrastructure,  education, 
ensuring the economy is open to competition including from abroad – these are issues for 
governments and elected politicians. Looking at advanced economies, particularly with aging 
populations, we are all going to have to work a bit harder on productivity growth in the longer 
term if living standards are to continue to rise. 
But the growth rate of productivity does matter to central banks. It is a very important factor in 
determining  the  supply  side  of the  economy;  the  capacity  of  the  economy  to  grow  without 
generating inflationary pressure. And in recent years, it has become more important to us as 
the  really  hard  questions  about  the  economy  have  been  as  much  if  not  more  about 
understanding post crisis changes in the level of supply as about the level of demand. We 
spend  more  time  now  discussing  the  supply  side  in  the  MPC  –  mentions  of  ‘supply’  and 
‘productivity’  in  the  minutes  of  MPC  meetings  have  doubled,  relative  to  mentions  of  other 
terms, between 2006 and 2014.Productivity is also a key determinant of the growth in real 
incomes and so affects the demand side of the economy as well. 
Drivers of the economic recovery 
Over the past two years, UK economic growth has averaged 2.5%; stronger than most of our 
G7 partners and we are forecasting that to continue. But our productivity growth has been 
dismal  How  is  it  possible  for  us  to  have  grown  relatively  strongly  with  poor  productivity 
performance  but  without  generating  inflation  pressure?  The  answer  is  simple.  We  have 
grown by using the spare labour supply in the economy after the great recession. This spare 
labour  supply  was  not  just  the  post-recession  stock  of  unemployed  workers.  It  was  also 
people  who  were  in  work  but  wanted  to  work  longer  hours.  It  was  people  who  were  not 
previously  participating  in  the  workforce  who  now  wished  to  work.  It  was  people  who  we 
would  have  expected  to  retire  but  who  decided  to  stay  in  work.  And  it  was  workers  from 
abroad. 
It is true to say that this reservoir of labour supply available to the economy has been larger 
and deeper than we or others would have predicted on pre-crisis trends. We have had what 
economists would call a “positive labour supply shock”. The crisis, recession and hit to living 
standards have clearly changed attitudes to work; more people want to work and work more 
hours than before. And the impact of those two domestic trends – higher participation in the 
workforce and people wanting to work more hours – are the most important elements of this 
positive  “shock”  relative  to  what  we  expected,  outweighing  factors  like  higher  net  inward 
migration. 
The numbers are striking. In the 10 years prior to the crisis, growth in the hours worked in the 
UK economy, accounted for 23% of the UK’s overall economic growth. The mainstay of our 
economic growth, the other 77%, came from growth in productivity. Since 2013 only 9% of 
our annual economic growth has come from productivity improvement. The remaining 91% 
has come from the increase in the total hours worked As a result, employment in the UK is 
now around its highest rate since comparable records began in 1971. Over 73% of people 
aged  16–64  are  working.  There  are  now  over  31  million  people  in  work  in  the  UK. 
                                                
1 See Jones C I (2015) ‘The Facts of Economic Growth’, NBER Working Paper No.21142. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Unemployment has fallen at among its fastest rate for 40 years and is now very close to its 
pre-crisis level – over the past two years over 1 million jobs have been created. 
The  benefits  of  this  are  clear.  Perhaps  only  a  proponent  of  the  ‘dismal  science’,  only  an 
economist would find something here to worry about. But the fact is that we can only go so 
far down this route. Since 2013, the economy’s output has grown by some 5%. But though 
we have increased by 5% the amount we have produced, we have increased even more the 
hours  worked  to  produce  it.  And  as  a  result  the  simple  arithmetic  means  our  productivity 
growth has been broadly flat. And the low of productivity that has resulted is one of the main 
reasons why pay growth has remained so low. We are now getting close to the end of that 
reservoir  of  spare  labour  supply.  It  is  very  difficult  to  say  how  close;  measuring  spare 
capacity  in  the  economy  with  great  precision  –  to  single  decimal  points  –  is  not  really 
possible.  But  for  the  economy  to  grow  robustly  and  sustainably  over  the  next  few  years’ 
productivity growth will need to begin to pick up. This does not need to happen overnight. But 
it does need to happen. 
The MPC’s economic forecast 
I am pleased to be able to say that this is the central scenario in the MPC’s latest forecast. 
Our forecast is for the economy to grow robustly at around 2.5% a year over the next three 
years. That is a bit slower than the average annual growth rate of nearly 3% in the seven 
years before the crisis. But it’s a great deal better than the roughly 0.5% annual average over 
the  seven  years  that  followed.  In  our  forecast,  growth  continues  to  be  driven  by  private 
domestic  demand  –  essentially,  household  consumption  and  business  investment,  both  of 
these have been growing strongly since the middle of 2013. Of course, given our history any 
forecast of sustained robust consumption growth in the UK automatically raises eyebrows; 
the suspicion of a debt fuelled spending boom is never far away. But our forecast of strong 
consumption growth over the next three years does not depend on an increase in household 
debt. 
In our forecast, consumption is initially supported by the growth in real incomes that result 
from  the  very  low  inflation  we  are  now  seeing  –  from  the  one-off  windfall  from  lower 
international energy and food prices. But as the sharp, one-off, drop in oil and other prices 
washes out of the system, real incomes increase over the next three years mainly because 
both pay and productivity gradually recover. In terms of inflation, we are forecasting that this 
growth  in  demand  from  business  investment  and  consumption  against  a  background  of 
tightening supply in the economy will push inflation back to its 2% target over the next two 
years. We expect interest rates to rise over the forecast period but gradually and to a level 
below  the  pre-crisis  average.  As  with  all  forecasts,  there  are  risks.  There  is  of  course 
geopolitical risk, including at present obvious risks around Greece. But that is not my focus 
tonight. 
Another  risk  that  has  attracted  some  attention  is  whether  we  see  a  change  in  people’s 
expectations about inflation due to the very low inflation over past months driven by the drop 
in oil prices. Clearly, if very low inflation expectations became entrenched this could weaken 
growth.  Sustained  deflation  can  also  in  more  extreme  cases  lead  to  lower  incomes  and 
higher real debt burdens – so-called ‘debt deflation’. 
The MPC has made clear that it is alive to this risk and would act if necessary to counteract 
it.  But  the  evidence  of  the  past  six  months  is  that  despite  very  low  inflation,  peoples’ 
expectations  about  inflation  have  so  far  remained  pretty  anchored.  The  ratio  of  household 
debt  to  income  is  not  rising.  We  are  certainly  seeing  no  evidence  of  debt-deflation  or  of 
deflationary spirals. 
But there are other risks as well. Productivity growth might not pick up. It has, after all, been 
a cause of serial disappointments over the past seven years. And if productivity does not pick 
up pay growth might not be sustained. Were that to happen, the increases in peoples’ real 
incomes  that  we  are  forecasting  to  support  consumption  and  growth  will  not  transpire. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Demand will be weaker. Lower productivity would mean less supply capacity in the economy. 
But  there  would  be  less  demand  as  well  because  of  weaker  pay.  In  such  a  scenario,  the 
prospects  for  inflation  might  therefore  not  be  very  different  to  our  forecast.  But  the  impact 
would  certainly  be  felt  through  weaker  economic  growth.  It  is  however  also  possible  that 
productivity does not pick up but pay continues to grow. There is some room for pay to grow 
before  productivity  picks  up  and  as  any  remaining  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market  is 
used up. In fact, we need to use that to boost unit labour costs and push inflation back to 
target. 
But a sustained increase in pay over the forecast period without a commensurate pick up in 
productivity  would  mean  that  the  supply  side  of  the  economy  could  not  keep  pace  with 
growing demand. That would mean upward pressure on prices. And it would mean greater 
pressure on the MPC than in our forecast to act to bring supply and demand into balance so 
as to meet the inflation target. 
The outlook for pay and productivity 
So the gradual pick up first in pay and then in productivity is central to the MPC’s forecast for 
both growth and inflation particularly in the later years. Given the serial disappointments on 
both  pay  and  productivity  in  recent  years,  why  do  we  now  think  that  will  happen?  On  pay 
there do seem to be signs now of stronger, more sustained growth. In the latest data, whole 
economy regular pay is growing at 2.7%. This is the highest annual growth rate since early 
2009 and over a percentage point higher than six months ago. The latest reading on private 
sector pay growth was 3.2% – the highest rate since December 2008. So the period of very 
cheap labour seems to be ending as expected. 
What about productivity growth? It was effectively zero in 2014. And we forecast it to remain 
pretty  weak in 2015. But there are reasons to think that we  will see a  pickup in 2016 and 
2017 as set out in the forecast Productivity growth can be divided into two sorts of change: 
the change in productivity inside individual firms and the changes between firms. The first, 
the changes within firms, happens as firms increase their efficiency. The second happens as 
labour and capital are reallocated between firms, from the less productive ones to the more 
productive.  This  reallocation  between  firms  in  the  economy  happens  through  changes  in 
market share as the more productive, higher return firms, grow and the less productive, lower 
return, firms shrink. And it happens through the deaths of the low return firms and the birth of 
new ones. After collapsing in the crisis, productivity began to increase again within firms two 
years ago. We expect that to continue. As the economy grows, spare capacity is used up. 
The  real  cost  of  labour  increases  relative  to  the  cost  of  investment.  Firms  have  a  greater 
incentive  to  find  efficiency  gains  and  to  switch  away  from  more  labour-intensive  forms  of 
production. This should boost productivity. 
In contrast, productivity growth due to the reallocation of resources in the economy remains 
weak.  We  can  see  this  in  the  divergence  of  rates  of  returns  across  firms  which  remain 
remarkably  and  unusually  high  and  the  change  in  capital  across  sectors  which  has  been 
particularly  low.  When  the  reallocation  mechanism  is  working,  the  transfer  of  capital  and 
labour from the less productive to the more productive pulls up the level of productivity in the 
economy  and  reduces  the  divergence  between  firms.  The  high  degree  of  divergence 
between firms at present implies that this reallocation mechanism is working significantly less 
powerfully now than before the crisis. This can also be seen in the proportion of loss-making 
firms which stands at around 20% higher than its long-run average.2 Company liquidations 
also remain low. So there is still more than a hint of ‘zombiness’ in the corporate sector. 
 
                                                
2 Changes in 2002 to the HMRC’s preferred creditor status means that the proportion of loss-making firms might 
not return to its long-run average. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The  damage  to  the  banking  system  has  certainly  played  a  large  part  in  this.  A  well-
functioning banking system is a key part of the reallocation mechanism. It allocates capital 
efficiently  to  its  most  productive  use  and  matches  risk  to  reward.  A  badly  damaged  one, 
recovering  slowly  from  a  period  on  life  support  does  not  play  that  role  well.  And  the 
exceptional  stance  of  monetary  policy  that  has  been  necessary  to  cushion  the  fall  of  the 
economy  and  to  provide  the  platform  for  recovery  may  also  be  part  of  the  story  here  by 
reducing the pressure on poorly-performing firms. 
As  an  aside,  I  want  to  make  a  brief  comment  in  the  context  of  the  other  part  of  my  job: 
financial stability. We know that recoveries from financial crises tend to be slow; it takes on 
average  about  eight  years  to  reach  the  pre-crisis  level  of  real  per  capita  income  following 
financial crises.3 Distorted and damaged financial sectors don’t allocate resources effectively. 
We may not pay the price for a number of years as the boom builds up. But in the end the 
price we pay is large when a financial system misallocates resources in the boom and in the 
following bust. Real GDP per head – the best measure of our aggregate living standard – 
remains 1% below its pre-crisis peak. This high cost to the economy and to society is why we 
need not only robust regulation of financial institutions but also of the financial system as a 
whole. Financial stability and sustainable growth are complements. They are not alternatives. 
Turning  back  to  the  reallocation  mechanism,  there  are  now  some  positive  signs.  The 
financial sector is well into its recovery. Bank lending growth to non-financial businesses was 
positive in 2015 Q1 for the first time since the crisis. Beyond the banking system, the Bank’s 
agents are reporting private equity firms purchasing debt-laden companies and restructuring 
their funding. The creation of new firms, a sign of vibrancy and reallocation in the economy, 
increased  by  30%  in  2013.  And  labour  market  ‘churn’,  the  movement  of  workers  between 
firms is almost back to its pre-crisis average having fallen sharply in the crisis. 
In  addition,  we  have  seen  a  return  of  business  investment  over  the  past  two  years.  Well 
directed investment is a key driver of productivity. The very sharp drop in investment in the 
crisis  and  the  years  immediately  afterwards  cast  a  shadow  that  has  certainly  damaged 
productivity growth in the recovery. Again the damage to the banking system will have played 
a part here. If business investment had continued to grow at its pre 2007 average, capital per 
worker would now be around 5% higher. Firms’ investment intentions are strong at present 
and  the  MPC  expects  business  investment  to  continue  to  grow  strongly  over  the  forecast 
period. That should increase capital per worker and therefore productivity, albeit with a lag 
And lastly, productivity over the last two years is likely to have been held back by changes in 
the composition of the labour force towards lower-skilled and lower productivity occupations. 
This has almost certainly had something to do with the very fast draining of the reservoir of 
labour  supply  that  we  have  seen  over  the  past  few  years.  The  rate  of  decline  in 
unemployment  is  slowing  noticeably  now  and  the  level  of  participation  and  hours  worked 
seems to be getting close to their trends. So the headwind to productivity from the change in 
the composition of the labour force should diminish over the next few years. 
I have given some of the reasons why we expect productivity growth to pick up over the next 
few years. To be clear, we are not forecasting a sustained burst of high productivity growth 
but  a  rather  more  modest  pick  up.  Nor  are  we  forecasting  that  we  will  recover  any  of  the 
accumulated 15% loss in the level of productivity, relative to pre crisis trend, since 2007. The 
longer term issues remain; UK productivity is now around 30% behind the US. And as I have 
explained  these  longer-term  issues  are  not  something  central  banks  can  do  a  great  deal 
about. 
                                                
3  See  Reinhart,  C  M  and  Rogoff,  K  S  (2014)  ‘Recovery  from  Financial  Crises:  Evidence  from  100  Episodes’, 
NBER Working Paper No.19823. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Nor  can  we  explain  fully  what  has  happened  to  productivity  in  the  UK  economy  since  the 
crisis. As well as the factors I have mentioned, other factors have surely played a role. And I 
don’t doubt there has been some mis-measurement of productivity growth in some sectors 
and of output more broadly. The Bank, like many others, has tried very hard to explain the 
puzzle  but  we  can’t  explain  it  all.  Indeed,  we  may  never  solve  the  productivity  puzzle. 
Perhaps that is not so strange. A very important part of productivity growth, so called Total 
Factor  Productivity  is  pretty  mysterious  by  definition.  It  is  the  extra  efficiency  with  which  a 
given amount of labour and capital can be used to produce output. It exists – but we can only 
estimate it by looking at the part of productivity growth our equations can’t explain. Indeed, 
because of this it is sometimes referred to by economists as the ‘Magic Fairy Dust’. And the 
last  seven  years  are  not  the  only  productivity  puzzle  in  history  that  we  can’t  explain. 
Economists are still arguing over the explanation of the industrial revolution which as I said 
heralded the largest step-change in productivity growth ever seen 
But  even  if  we  can’t  fully  explain  the  puzzle,  we  can  I  think  now  point  to  an  alignment  of 
factors that suggest that productivity growth will start to move in the right direction over the 
next  few  years.  This  is  of  course  the  MPC’s  forecast.  It  is  not  a  given.  We  have  been 
disappointed by UK productivity often over the last seven years. We seem now to be coming 
to  the  end  of  the  reservoir  of  labour  capacity  and  to  the  end  of  low  cost  labour.  So  if 
productivity  were  to  continue  to  disappoint  over  the  next  few  years,  other,  lower  growth 
outcomes are likely to follow. I have set out why I think that is not the most likely scenario. 
But I for one will continue to watch the evolution of pay and productivity very carefully as it is 
crucial  to  the  prospects for growth  and  inflation  in  the  UK  over  the  next  three  years.  And, 
when it comes to productivity, I very much hope the UK economy as a whole will take its lead 
from the UK automotive industry. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
