  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Opportunities in financial inclusion and 
financial integration 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the BAIPHIL Induction of Directors and Officers and First 
General Membership Meeting, Makati, 21 July 2015. 
 This  is  an  auspicious  time  to  be  involved  in  BAIPHIL.  Your  term  covering  fiscal  year  July 
2015-June  2016  coincides  with  BAIPHIL’s  75th  anniversary!  By  any  measure,  this  is  a 
significant  milestone.  Congratulations  BAIPHIL!  And  congratulations  to  your  officers  and 
members, past and present! 
By tradition, diamonds symbolize 75th anniversaries. This is because diamonds represent a 
highly prized quality – which is, enduring fidelity. Faithfulness. Commitment. 
I  am  pleased  to  know  therefore,  that  the  theme  you  selected  for  this  year’s  Induction  of 
Officers is – “Building Capacity for Financial Inclusion and Integration.” 
The  industry  is  in  the  midst  of  so  many  facets  of  change  that  the  concept  of  “capacity 
building”  takes  on  new  dimensions.  It  is  no  longer  enough  that  you  position  yourself  as  a 
trainor for your peers. BAIPhil itself must navigate through a fast-evolving market landscape, 
appreciate and relate all the strands of change, if you are to become an effective venue for 
continuing education. 
Training and education cannot be just about holding lectures and workshops. It is more akin 
to telling a good story with different chapters. 
In financial  inclusion,  we  see  the  dimension  of access  and  calibration  so  that  the financial 
system  itself  is  responsive  to  the  diverse  needs  of  differentiated  stakeholders.  How  much 
more  appropriate  can  this  be  than  in  an  archipelago  such  as  the  Philippines.  This  literally 
forces us to think out of the box, that comfort zone that we refer to as “traditional banking”. 
In financial integration, we bring together the collective aspirations of a regional community. 
This materially changes the landscape but more importantly, it does so at the same time that 
global best practices are themselves being re-set to a higher and more prescriptive bar. This 
forces us to think within the box, examining what we have, how we wish to position ourselves 
in this sea of change and what we need to do to remain competitively in the service of our 
respective constituents. 
In  each  of  these  two  facets,  we  have  a  lot  that  needs  to  be  covered.  Taken  together,  the 
strategic and tactical implications are significant. At the level of each bank, choices must be 
made today so that you can maximize competitive advantages that you expect will be your 
strength in the future. At the level of the industry, this requires an unwavering commitment to 
continuing education, to appreciate nuances without losing sight of the overall policy agenda 
of institutionalizing change that can strengthen the system and its institutions. 
Indeed  both  financial  inclusion  and  financial  integration  pose  challenges  as  well  as  vast 
opportunities. To dimension what exactly lies ahead of us, perhaps we need to step back a 
bit. 
Let  me  share  some  indicative  figures  that  came  out  of  our  national  baseline  survey  on 
financial inclusion done early this year. I am sure you will find these useful in crafting your 
way forward: 
• 
Only 4 out of 10 Filipinos save. Of those who save, roughly 30% save in banks while 
nearly 70% keep their money at home. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        6  out  of  10  adults  with  bank  accounts  indicated  that the  bank’s  reputation  is  their 
number  one  consideration 
in  opening  a  deposit  account.  Around  50%  of 
respondents  mentioned  interest  rates  as  another  major  consideration,  followed  by 
minimum maintaining balance ( for info only – 45.9%), proximity of the banking office 
(39.8%) and the way the bank employees treat their clients (34.8%). 
47%  of  Filipinos  borrow  money,  of  whom  72%  borrow  from  family,  friends  and 
informal  lenders.  Banks  as  source  of  borrowing  stood  at  only  4.4%,  lower  than 
lending/financing  companies  (12%),  cooperatives  (10.5%),  microfinance  NGOs 
(9.9%) and government entities (6.1%). 
The  main  purpose  for  borrowing  money  is  to  buy  food  (59.5%),  school  related 
expenses (38%) and to finance emergencies (32.7%). 
The  primary  considerations  in  borrowing  money  are  interest  rates  (57.5%),  loan 
amount (41.7%), period to pay for the loans (35.0%), ease of loan application (33.1), 
reputation of the credit institution (24.5%), amortization (14.9%), collateral (14.3%), 
fees and other charges (11.4%), and processing time (11.0%). 
More  than  50%  of  adults  who  have  transacted  with  banks  and  ATMs  are  just 
somewhat satisfied with their transactions; and 
More than 85% of respondents indicate that they want to access financial services 
from formal institutions. 
Ladies and gentlemen of the banking community, these are some of the gaps we need to 
address  in  our  financial  inclusion  program.  The  survey  also  gave  us  insights  into  what 
Filipinos  look  for  in  financial  service  providers.  We  can  therefore  move  forward  with  our 
financial inclusion programs with clearer and more specific objectives. 
Actually,  many  sectors  –  in  government  and  in  the  private  sector  –  are  joining  hands  to 
advance  the  cause  of  financial  inclusion.  For  your  information,  13  government  agencies, 
including  the  BSP,  launched  last  July  1  at  the  PICC,  the  National  Strategy  for  Financial 
Inclusion  or  NSFI.  The  agencies  who  crafted  the  NSFI  envision  a  financial  system  that  is 
accessible  and  responsive  to  the  need  for  various  financial  services,  including  credit, 
savings, remittances and payments, insurance and investments. 
The objective in implementing the NSFI is to support broad based and inclusive growth. The 
Strategy recognizes the important role of the private sector in 1) recognizing the commercial 
potential of the vast unserved market and 2) developing innovative solutions to viably cater to 
these markets that are replete with opportunities. 
Let me now tackle the matter of financial integration. Similar to financial inclusion, integration 
also  poses  challenges  and  opportunities  for  our  banks.  Under  the  ASEAN  Banking 
Integration  Framework  –  which  is  a  key  element  of  the  ASEAN  financial  integration  – 
Qualified ASEAN Banks or QABs will be awarded equal treatment as domestic banks in the 
host country. This may lead to increased competition in the financial system as QABs may 
venture into markets which our banks have been comfortably serving in the past. 
It is important to note, however, that this arrangement for QABs is made under the principle 
of reciprocity. Our banks will also have the opportunity to expand to other countries in the 
region and find new markets. Added competition will challenge banks to further improve their 
operations and venture to new markets. 
In addition, the reduction of barriers and cost to trade as a result of integration will catalyse 
economic activities which could be funded by our banks. 
For instance, our small and medium enterprises will have the opportunity to be part of the 
regional  value  chains  of  technology  giants,  leading  car  manufacturers,  and  garment 
producers,  among  others.  With  the  right  interventions  and  appropriate  financing,  we  can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  deepen  this  regional  participation  for  our  traditionally  domestic-oriented  SMEs  that  are 
unable to take advantage of available overseas markets. 
At this point, I want to share the story of a small food producer who was able to grow her 
home-based  business  with  the  help  of  a  microfinance  loan.  Her  business  was  able  to  put 
food on their family’s table, send her children to school and improve the overall quality of life 
of their family. We met at an awards program for microentrepreneurs. What I distinctly recall 
is that a year after she won the award, she was given the opportunity to export her goods. 
Sadly, she was unable to meet the order due to lack of capacity and additional financing from 
her microfinance institution. 
In  short,  she  lost  the  opportunity  to  expand  her  business,  to  earn  more  for  her  family,  to 
generate more employment and to add to her community’s income. 
Ladies and gentlemen, this is a poignant story of a success half-realized. On one hand, we 
saw  how  access  to  credit  made  such  a  huge  positive  impact  on  the  life  of  a 
microentrepreneur  from  the  marginalized  sector.  On  the  other,  we  saw  how  capacity 
limitations and the inability to access additional financing prevented her from realizing the full 
potential of offshore markets for her products. 
Multiply this story many times over and you can imagine the countless missed opportunities 
for improving the lives of many more Filipinos. Sayang. 
As the training arm of the banking industry, BAIPHIL’s role is crucial in building the capacity 
of  our  banks  to  transform  into  opportunities,  the  challenges  from  financial  inclusion  and 
integration. Toward this end, I would like to share my three-fold challenge to BAIPHIL, and 
we have another acronym B.I.G. 
B  is  for  Build.  Build  our  banks’  capacity  so  that  they  can  compete  under  regional  banking 
standards.  What  comes  to  mind  are  corporate  governance,  appropriate  risk  management 
and  internal  controls,  commensurate  capital  structure,  and  clear  business  plans  with  track 
record, among others. 
The regulations of the BSP support this objective, particularly our recent landmark issuances 
and those in the pipeline, such as the Credit Risk Management Framework, the Supervisory 
Enforcement  Policies,  and  the  Operational  Risk  Management.  They  provide  fundamental 
principles that empower banks to determine their business model, the markets they want to 
serve, the products they want to develop and the risks they are willing to take and manage. 
The I in BIG stands for Improve. I ask BAIPHIL to help improve our banks’ ability to develop 
responsive products that are suited to the needs of the markets they want to serve. This will 
entail systematic market research, as well as an innovative mindset. 
The  G  in  BIG  is  for  Guide.  Guide  your  banks  in  navigating  through  this  dynamic  and 
constantly  shifting  operating  landscape.  Banks  will  need  to  keep  abreast  of  developments 
and adjust to the changing demands of the market. 
Ladies and gentlemen. This is my BIG challenge to BAIPHIL. With BIG in place, I believe our 
banks will be able to drive and optimize the benefits and opportunities that financial inclusion 
and integration stand to generate. 
Finally, I thank BAIPHIL once again for its continuing support to the BSP in promoting good 
money  habits  among  teachers,  parents  of  our  schoolchildren  and  other  adults  from  the 
marginalized  sector,  through  your  personal  finance  management  lectures.  We  have  been 
receiving good feedback for this BSP-BAIPHIL program. 
Therefore, let us commit to continue working together, let us be faithful to what we set out to 
do – big or small, and then we can look forward to BIGger and better things that are yet to 
come. 
For your information, this is the 11th time I have attended BAIPHIL’s induction ceremony. I 
have been faithful and consistent to BAIPHIL. The BSP has been faithful and consistent to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  BAIPHIL. Therefore, insofar as staying true to your theme of “Building Capacity for Financial 
Inclusion  and  Integration”,  we,  at  the  BSP  expect  nothing  less  than  enduring  commitment 
from BAIPHIL. 
Ladies and gentlemen. You have it in you to help unlock the growth potential in our people, in 
our economy, and in our country, if you continue to pursue financial inclusion and integration 
with unwavering dedication. 
If we succeed, then the market for banking services expands, deepens and strengthens the 
Philippine banking industry in the process, even as we help improve lives, liberate millions of 
Filipinos from poverty, and bring prosperity to Filipino homes. Let this be our goal and our 
enduring legacy. 
I  look forward  therefore to  BAIPHIL  remaining faithful  and  steadfast,  like  a  diamond,  in  its 
pursuit of capacity building for financial inclusion and integration. 
Thank you for your kind attention. Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat! Maraming salamat! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
