  Pentti Hakkarainen: Supervisory policies after the start of Banking Union 
– initial experiences and outlook for CESEE countries 
Speech  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  ECB 
conference “CESEE – old and new policy challenges”, Frankfurt am Main, 10 June 2015. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF). 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  conference  here  at  the  ECB.  And  I’m 
particularly pleased to speak to you about the first experiences gained of the Banking Union, 
which is the most important step in the European integration since the introduction of euro. 
The recent crises have made it very clear that international, highly interconnected financial 
markets require a stronger institutional framework than what we have had in recent years. 
The key lesson we have learnt is that economic dislocations without proper arrangements to 
tackle  troubled  banks  have  devastating  effects  on  the  real  economy,  taxpayers  and  the 
whole society. And regaining growth proves to be painfully slow and long-lasting. 
In  response,  the  EU  leaders  agreed  in  June  2012  on  creating  the  Banking  Union  which 
consists  of  three  main  pillars:  (1)  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  (2)  the  Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  and  (3)  harmonized  deposit  protection  systems.  The  focus  of  this 
session  is  on  the  first  pillar,  i.e.  on  the  new  arrangements  for  the  conduct  of  supervisory 
policies and actions. 
The establishment of the SSM is not only a game-changer in the European financial market, 
but also very interesting and challenging from the perspective of the Nordic banking sector. 
As a euro area country, Finland automatically participates in the Banking Union. The Finnish 
banking market is integrated both within the Banking Union and across the Nordic area, with 
subsidiaries of large non-euro area banking groups playing an important role. Our banks are 
strongly  connected  to  the  other  Nordic  countries.  We  also  have  a  highly  concentrated 
banking market in European comparison. 
My views will be given with this background in mind, plus the fact that, some years ago, I 
have  worked  as  a  banker  in  the  private  sector  myself.  In  my  intervention,  I  would  like  to 
highlight three points particularly. 
First, we have gained a lot of information and valuable expertise. 
The Comprehensive Assessment, as a precursor for the start of the SSM supervision, was 
instrumental in many ways – not only in ensuring the health of the banks to be taken under 
direct  ECB  supervision,  but  also  in  providing  an  intensive  “prep  course”  for  the  SSM 
supervision. 
The Comprehensive Assessment was a laborious joint exercise and generated a lot of useful 
experience  for those  involved.  In  Finland,  and  in  other  countries  in  which  the  assessment 
was carried out largely  based on the existing staff of the national authorities, the exercise 
built up valuable human capital that bears fruit in the years to come – not to mention the fact 
that the assessment could be carried out with relatively low costs. 
The exercise also made very clear from the beginning what the SSM supervisory model is 
about:  joint  work,  using  best  local  knowledge,  with  a  clear  lead  by  the  ECB.  The  SSM 
operates  as  a  system, gathering  all the  expertise  of  national  supervisors  and  at  the  same 
time having a strong decision-making centre. The natural justification for the two-tier system 
is  that  local  supervisors  have  an  information  advantage  with  respect  to  local  banks.  The 
centralised decision making is required to address cross-border issues and to minimise the 
risk of excessive forbearance on the part of local supervisors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Common  methods  and  processes,  relying  on  an  integrated  and  harmonised  information 
base, have been – and are being – developed for carrying out SSM supervision. The SSM 
goes considerably deeper than the work of the EBA in adopting the Single Rule book and 
harmonising supervisory practices, also reflecting the different mandates of the two bodies. 
The  ECB’s  overall  responsibility  for  supervision  is  matched  by  controlling  powers  over  the 
system as a whole. The ECB has the power to overtake direct supervision of any bank or 
group  of  banks,  if  this  is  deemed  necessary  in  order  to  preserve  financial  stability  and 
confidence in the institutional framework. The centre monitors also that adequate supervisory 
quality prevails in national competent authorities. 
Second, we are getting uniform rules and supervisory practices. 
The  SSM  was  established  to  ensure  that  strong  supervisory  standards  are  applied  in  a 
consistent  manner  across  the  euro  area.  We  also  needed  the  SSM  to  strengthen  the 
confidence and resilience in the banking sector which has been shaken quite severely over 
the past few years. To achieve these goals, the SSM, with the ECB at its centre, has been 
entrusted with an extensive set of micro- and macro-prudential powers, covering all key tasks 
relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions. 
Moreover,  it  is  expected  that  the  SSM  adopts  a  European  approach  to  decision-making 
without  any  national  bias. The  ECB,  as  an  established  and  strong  European  institution,  is 
well  placed  to  tackle  the  emergence  of  national  interests  in  supervision.  It  is  therefore 
imperative that the structures and the processes of the SSM support a European perspective 
and interests. 
So,  how  does  the  SSM  measure  up  in  this  respect?  Joint  Supervisory  Teams,  led  by  the 
ECB, have been established for carrying out the day-to-day supervision of significant banks. 
They integrate the ECB and national authority staff into single supervisory units. It is fair to 
say  that  full  harmonisation  in  the  supervisory  approach  has  not  yet  been  reached,  but 
significant progress can already be observed. Going forward, the work on establishing clear 
principles and criteria to guide SSM supervisory decisions needs to be further prioritised. 
As regards the elimination of national biases in supervision, in my view, the functioning of the 
SSM  so  far  points  very  clearly  to  this  direction.  In  fact,  in  the  current  global  banking 
environment,  it  may  be  better  to  aim  for  a  level  playing  field  internationally  and  enhance 
competition in the national market than look after the interests of domestic banks. Frankly 
speaking, the elimination of the old habit of defending one’s “national champions” may turn 
out to be more challenging in the crisis resolution pillar of the Banking Union than in bank 
supervision. 
Third, the preconditions for the ECB to be a world-class supervisor are in place. 
The  SSM  aims  at  adopting  best  supervisory  practices  to  conduct  high-quality  supervision 
with no biases. The SSM, as a system, has the necessary skills and resources to live up to 
the high expectations placed upon it. It is a strong, independent and multicultural supervisor 
with the ability to attract highly skilled staff. 
The participating national authorities get all the information and take part in all supervisory 
decisions. Particularly the smaller national supervisors benefit from the SSM, since on their 
own  they  would  not  be  able  to  participate  in  all  relevant  work  in  an  increasingly  complex 
world. Through the SSM, they stay up-to-date and can take part in regulatory developments 
at the global fora. I am convinced that the SSM will soon establish itself among the leading 
global banking regulators with high demand for its best practices. 
Obviously, as with any new institution, getting up to full speed will take some time. Among 
other things, the increased demand for skilled supervisors needs to be matched at the SSM 
area,  and  there  are  a  number  of  practical  issues  related  to  day-to-day  supervisory  work, 
including language issues, yet to be fully ironed out. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As  a  conclusion,  let  me  recognise  the  very  good  progress  made  in  SSM  supervision  and 
Banking  Union  more  generally.  The  Banking  Union  corrects  a  basic  imbalance  we  had 
between  nationally  fragmented  supervision  and  internationally  integrated  banking  markets. 
And  in  doing  that,  national  interests,  and  I  would  argue  that  banks’  interests  as  well,  are 
taken  care  of  while  matching  regulatory  and  supervisory  institutions  with  the  reality  of 
banking business. 
We now have a structure which for the first time in the history of the European Union will 
allow  the  supervision  and  resolution  of  banks  to  be  based  on  a  European  mandate.  By 
pooling  a  part  of  the  national  sovereignty,  weak  when  separate,  strong  when  united,  the 
countries belonging to the Banking Union have gained access to the European level decision 
making in the key areas of supervision, crisis resolution, as well as in the regulation of banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
