 Benoît Cœuré: Interview in La Croix 
 Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in La Croix, conducted by Ms Marie Dancer and published on 10 June 2015. 
1. 
The economy 
 Are we seeing a real recovery in the euro area? 
Yes,  we  are  now  seeing  a  recovery.  Growth  is  returning  in  the  euro  area,  including  the 
countries that suffered the most during the crisis (with the exception of Greece). However, 
this recovery needs to be consolidated, as it is only just beginning and remains fragile. First 
of all, it is being driven  by a number of temporary factors: cheap energy prices, combined 
with the low levels of both interest rates and the euro’s exchange rate, which are a result of 
our monetary policy. We will not be able to rely on these factors forever. 
The  second  area  of  fragility  –  of  concern,  even  –  is  the  weakness  of  investment.  Until 
investment has clearly picked up again, we will not be able to say that the recovery is robust. 
The ECB has contributed to that pick-up in investment by reducing the cost of both short and 
long-term  financing.  (The  average  maturity  of  the  assets  that  we  have  purchased  is  eight 
years.)  However,  a  sustainable  pick-up  in  investment  requires  the  involvement  of  other 
players. It means having a business climate that encourages firms to invest and a favourable 
regulatory and social environment. It falls to governments and social partners to determine 
the rules of the game. Banks also need to lend. Lending is picking up in the euro area, but 
mainly for large firms. Lending to small and medium-sized enterprises is not growing strongly 
enough. The new banking regulations are intended to discourage speculation; they are not a 
reason not to finance the economy. 
Should we borrow at the European level in order to invest? 
Investment  should  primarily  be  in  the  private  sector,  so  the  priority,  again,  should  be  the 
creation of a favourable environment. The financial conditions have been achieved, but the 
regulatory and fiscal conditions have yet to be put in place. The question, then, is whether we 
need  greater  public  investment  in  order  to  act  as  a  catalyst.  Yes,  certainly  –  but  only  in 
countries with sufficient room for manoeuvre. 
Is the recovery not artificial, driven by liquidity? 
Prosperity  should  be  judged  on  the  basis  of growth  and  the  declining  unemployment  rate. 
Liquidity  is  merely  a  tool  serving  that  objective.  Unemployment  has  begun  to  fall  –  albeit 
gradually  –  in  the  euro  area.  But  in  a  number  of  countries,  including  France,  it  is  not  yet 
declining. In this sense, you are right – the job has not yet been completed. 
Is France lagging behind? 
I  am  French.  I  have  faith  in  my  country’s  ability  to  create  growth,  as  we  have  numerous 
assets,  such  as  our  demographics (which  are more  dynamic than the European  average), 
our ability to innovate and the strength of our exports. So I have no concerns about France’s 
position  in  the  euro  area  and  the  world  in  the  longer  term.  But  France  is  out  of  step  with 
neighbouring countries such as Ireland and Spain, which have carried out more reforms and 
done so earlier – not to mention Germany, which is benefiting from even older reforms. At 
the moment, those countries are reaping the benefits of their reforms in terms of growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Are the reforms in France sufficiently ambitious? 
Reforms are always more difficult in larger countries, but I am in no doubt that France is on 
the right track. Now that the recovery has clearly begun, we need to make it stronger and 
more  sustainable.  The  ECB’s  actions  have  created  a  window  of  opportunity  for  reforms. 
There is a risk that the pace of reforms will slow because of the electoral timetable, but now 
is the time to push ahead with them. 
What is working worst in France? 
It is not for the ECB to highlight good and bad points or go into detail about reforms carried 
out by elected governments. Much has been done to reduce the burden on firms through the 
Responsibility Pact and the Competitiveness and Employment Tax Credit (CICE), and efforts 
are  being made  to  cut public  spending. We can  argue  about those  efforts (since  the  ECB 
would like them to be more ambitious), but efforts are being made. The area where France 
suffers in comparison with the rest of the euro area is the labour market. It would benefit from 
moving towards a labour market that is more inclusive of people who have problems finding 
employment. 
2. 
Financial markets, liquidity and bubbles 
Is the excess liquidity that has been injected into the markets – notably by the ECB – 
not paving the way for a bubble and the next crisis? Are the markets not high on 
liquidity? 
The  ECB  has  pursued  its  policy  of  monetary  easing  –  rock-bottom  interest  rates  and 
purchases of securities in the markets – in order to return to growth and inflation below, but 
close to, 2% in the euro area, in line with our mandate. We know that this policy has some 
side effects. 
It is true that there is a lot of liquidity in circulation. We are not currently concerned about 
financial  bubbles  in  the  euro  area.  Financial  assets  are  not  over-valued  at  present;  I  am 
thinking of stock markets in particular. But we remain very vigilant in this regard, particularly 
since rates will remain low for an extended period of time. 
Does this mean that the economists who are sounding the alarm are correct? 
Such warnings are useful. We must learn the lessons of the financial crisis, which we have 
scarcely emerged from, and ensure that the growth model in the euro area is different from 
that which led to the crisis – based on uncontrolled debt, risky (and even unlawful) behaviour 
by  some  banks  and  non-productive  investment  (e.g.  investment  in  the  Spanish  and  Irish 
property markets). 
To that end, we now have new instruments. The financial sector is much better regulated – 
thanks, first of all, to the banking union, which allows banking supervision to be independent 
of political pressures, strict and harmonised. The banks are also better capitalised, and we 
have  new  “macro-prudential”  instruments  aimed  at  preventing  bubbles  and  financial 
instability, which we should not hesitate to use. 
The  ECB  is  also  involved  in  discussions  regarding  financial  regulation  at  the  global  level, 
where we are arguing that the non-bank sector – “shadow banking” – should be supervised 
just as rigorously as the banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
You are not worried that an abrupt reversal in the markets could quickly break through 
all of these firewalls? 
Admittedly,  there  has  been  some  short-term  volatility  in  the  markets  [ed.:  yo-yoing  rates]. 
That  is  inevitable,  not  so  much  because  of  the monetary  easing  pursued  by  the  ECB,  but 
because of uncertainties in the global economy, which went through a soft patch in the first 
quarter of this year. The financial markets need to adapt to the fact that we now have very 
different  monetary  policies  in  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  and  a  new  regulatory 
environment. That is causing a lot of uncertainty and will entail a period of adjustment. 
The ECB does not intend to counter that volatility in the short term, which would effectively 
give  market  participants  a  free  insurance  policy.  However,  we  will  not  allow  excessive 
fluctuations  in  financial  markets  to  threaten  the  achievement  of  our  objective,  which  is  to 
ensure price stability in the medium term. The best contribution that we can make is to be 
clear about the future direction of monetary policy. For this reason, we have been clear about 
the fact that purchases of securities will continue until September 2016 at least, and longer if 
necessary. 
Does the ECB still have room for manoeuvre, or has it now used all of the tools at its 
disposal? 
The  reason  that  rates  are  at  zero  and  purchases  of  securities  are  being  carried  out  is 
because we want to kick-start the European economy and raise inflation towards 2%. This is 
a temporary strategy aimed at responding to the very specific situation that we saw in 2014, 
when inflation rates deviated from our target on a lasting basis and flirted with deflation. 
Were we to abandon that policy today, we would plunge the euro area into an undesirable 
situation where both growth and inflation were weak in the long term. Some people refer to 
that as the “world of 1%” – i.e. 1% growth and 1% inflation. There is, of course, no question 
of us doing that. 
But  monetary  policy  cannot  do  everything.  In  order  to  avoid  the  “secular  stagnation”  that 
certain  economists  fear,  monetary  policy  must  be  supplemented  by  (i)  responsible  fiscal 
policies that use available room for manoeuvre in countries where it exists but prevent debt 
from exploding in countries where debt levels are high and (ii) an economic environment that 
allows firms to invest and create jobs and fosters employability. 
Does the ECB feel that it is alone in tackling the crisis in the euro area? 
We are independent of governments, and vice versa. There is dialogue between the various 
European institutions, but there is a concern that monetary policy is the sole response to the 
current crisis. That would be doomed to failure. 
Does the ECB’s quantitative easing signal a return to currency wars? 
There  are  no  currency  wars  at  present.  The  depreciation  of  the  euro  is  the  result  of 
differences  between  the  euro  area  and  the  United  States  in  terms  of  their  respective 
positions  in  the  economic  cycle  and,  accordingly,  their  monetary  policies.  Our  partners 
recognise that our monetary policy decisions are appropriate given the situation in the euro 
area. This is not a question of seeking to influence the euro’s exchange rate, in respect of 
which the ECB has no specific objectives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 3.  Greece 
 Could the ECB find itself on the front line when it comes to saving Greece if the 
negotiations fail? Could it end up having to print money? Will this involve it operating 
outside of the European treaties? 
We  are  already  on  the  front  line  and  we  are  fully  playing  our  part  as  the  central  bank 
responsible for all 19 countries that share the single currency, including Greece. The liquidity 
provided  to  Greek  banks  by  the  Eurosystem  (the  ECB  and  the  Bank  of  Greece)  has 
increased from €45 billion in December 2014 to €119 billion today, which gives you an idea 
of the extent of the support provided by the ECB to Greek firms and households. 
However, our ability to act is governed by rules stemming from the treaties, which have been 
approved by European citizens: on the one hand, we can only lend to Greek banks if they 
are solvent and provide collateral, and on the other hand, we are not allowed to lend to the 
Greek  government  (or  any  other  government).  It  is  for  the  governments  of  the  euro  area, 
which  together  form  the  Eurogroup,  to  decide  whether  they  wish  to  lend  to  the  Greek 
government and under what conditions, not for the ECB. 
In  2012  Mario  Draghi  said  he  would  do  whatever  it  takes  to  save  the  euro,  but  within  the 
ECB’s mandate. The ECB is an institution that has powerful instruments, but it can only use 
them within the narrow scope that has been set for it by the treaties, under the supervision of 
the European Parliament and the Court of Justice of the European Union. Respecting the law 
is fundamental to respecting democracy. 
That  being  said,  I  refuse  to  discuss  a  Greek  exit  from  the  euro  area  because  we  are  not 
working  within  that  framework. We  are  financing  the  Greek  economy  and  we  are  working 
alongside the IMF and the European Commission to secure an agreement with Athens, with 
the aim of keeping Greece in the euro area. 
Should Greece’s debt be restructured? 
This  question  is  not  taboo,  as  the  Greek  debt  has  already  been  restructured  for  private 
banks.  As  for  the  public  creditors,  they  have  already  agreed  to  significant  adjustments 
regarding the extension of repayment periods and rate cuts, with the result that the Greek 
debt burden is now significantly lower than that of Italy or Spain as a percentage of national 
income. 
Should more be done? The answer will depend on the final terms of the agreement between 
the creditors and the Greek authorities. This is the yardstick against which we will reassess 
the sustainability of the debt. The money that is at stake belongs to taxpayers in euro area 
countries, so it is for their governments, not the ECB, to make decisions in this regard. 
Could the ECB make some kind of gesture? 
The ECB’s claims on Greece stem not from loans that have been granted to the country, but 
from  bonds  purchased  in  the  capital  markets  at  the  height  of  the  crisis  to  improve  the 
transmission of our monetary policy decisions. We are not allowed to restructure them, as 
the treaties prohibit us from providing financial assistance to states. 
The negotiations between Greece and its creditors seem to be a dialogue of the deaf… 
The goal is to strike a balance between the programme of a newly elected government that 
has strong democratic legitimacy and the interests of the other euro area countries, which 
are also democracies. The issue is not just the reforms that are necessary for Greece, but 
also the fact that these reforms are financed by taxpayers in other countries, who have also 
been affected by the crisis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Would a Greek exit from the euro area trigger the demise of the single currency? 
The ECB, I reiterate, wants Greece to remain in the euro area. If, one day, a country were to 
leave the euro area, that would be a serious warning sign for Europe, because the question 
would inevitably arise as to whether such a scenario could be repeated. But the answer to 
this question is widely known – it seems to me that there is a broad consensus concerning 
the  conditions  that  enable  each  country  to  benefit  from  the  advantages  of  the  euro  on  a 
lasting basis. These conditions include accountability before, and solidarity towards, peers. 
These common values should be reflected in national and European institutions. Incidentally, 
the countries that have committed themselves to these values have successfully overcome 
the crisis (notably Spain and Ireland). So I am not at all worried about the cohesion of the 
euro  area.  But  if  a  country  were  to  decide  to  depart  from  this  consensus,  that  would 
undoubtedly oblige the other countries to unequivocally consolidate their commitment to the 
values  I  just  mentioned  by  accelerating  the  process  of  strengthening  the  euro  area.  This 
would entail the acceleration of a process of institutional reflection which is currently a long-
term endeavour. 
Is the IMF being too demanding? 
The IMF has a different mandate and different shareholders from the European institutions. It 
works on behalf of 188 countries, most of which are not in the euro area and have a standard 
of living lower than that of Greece. So the IMF has concerns regarding equal treatment that I 
think are entirely legitimate. 
4. 
The institutions 
Is the euro area today strong enough to face up to a new crisis? 
Yes, I am certain it is. Thorough reforms have been implemented since 2010 to reinforce the 
responsibilities of member countries (notably in fiscal matters), as well as solidarity between 
them  (with  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism),  while  the  banking  union 
strengthens banking supervision and has broken the financial link between banks and states. 
But  we  are  still  only  halfway  there.  We  have  not  yet  reached  the  point  where  we  can  be 
completely at ease about the strength of the euro area in the long term. It is essential that 
each country implements responsible policies. Economic policies and structural reforms need 
to  be  better  coordinated,  in  the  common  interest,  so  that  each  economy  becomes  more 
resistant to shocks. The resilience of the euro area as a whole must also be strengthened. 
This could be achieved, for example, by giving the euro area a specific budgetary capacity, 
the use of which would be subject to democratic oversight. The presidents of the European 
Council, the European Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB will soon publish proposals 
on these issues. 
Hasn’t the euro been a failure, given the substantial divergence among the 19 
countries that share the single currency? 
No,  the  euro  has  not  been  a  failure.  It  has  given  our  firms  access  to  larger  markets  and 
brought  about  more  favourable  financing  conditions.  It  is  also  a  symbol  that  unites 
Europeans and to which they attach value. 
The financing conditions which led to the crisis? 
The euro did not cause the crisis. What led to the crisis was that we allowed money to be 
invested  in  non-productive  activities,  like  the  housing  market.  We  also  allowed  certain 
countries to file false accounts and accumulate debt far beyond reasonable levels. This must 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  be rectified, but the existence of the euro itself has spurred growth in the euro area. Now we 
have to continue to identify, one by one, the sources of weakness, and propose solutions. 
What role can the ECB play in the face of the rise of populist movements? Many 
people believe that it is not a democratic institution… 
The best way to respond to Euroscepticism is to create growth. I repeat, we are using the 
tools at our disposal to work towards this. Everyone should do likewise. 
The  ECB  is  a  European  institution  that  has  been  given  certain  duties  to  perform,  within  a 
democratic framework. The treaties have been validated through a democratic process. The 
ECB  is  accountable  to  the  European  Parliament,  and  it  is  becoming  more  and  more 
transparent.  It  nowadays  also  explains  its  actions  to  national  parliaments.  We  have  also 
increased transparency regarding our decisions by publishing the minutes of monetary policy 
meetings. One day, I am sure, we will publish how the different members of the Governing 
Council vote. We have already come a long way in this regard, and we will continue to follow 
this path. 
Will the ECB save the euro? 
The euro is no longer in danger in the way that it could have been three years ago. But your 
question  is  revealing  –  it  shows  that  society’s  expectations  of  central  banks  are  still 
excessive. In one respect, the fact that the ECB is independent of political constraints means 
that  everyone  pins  their  (unrealistic)  hopes  on  it  in  terms  of  economic  policy.  But  this  is 
unreasonable! 
If too much is asked of central banks, they will become beholden to vested interests and less 
effective, losing their legitimacy in the process. 
But isn’t this evolution of the role of central banks irreversible? 
The best response is to show that we can consolidate growth without relying on monetary 
policy. This is the biggest issue for the coming months and years. To fulfil their goals in an 
extraordinary economic environment, central bankers have had to take no less extraordinary 
decisions that have placed them centre stage. As soon as stability returns, I have no doubt 
that they will return to their ploughs, like Cincinnatus in Roman times. 
Are you a candidate for the position of Governor of the Banque de France? 
This  is  a  decision  for  the  French  President  alone.  The  Banque  de  France  is  the  ECB’s 
second-largest  shareholder.  It  is  a  magnificent  institution  that  should  continue  to  make  its 
voice heard in the euro area and in global financial debates. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
