  Paul Fisher: Regulation and the future of the insurance industry 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of 
England and Deputy Head of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), at the Westminster 
Business Forum conference, London, 22 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. 
First, I would like to introduce myself. I have been both an academic and a long-term central 
banker,  working  across  the  Bank  of  England  in  various  roles  including  as  a  specialist 
economist, private secretary (to Eddie George), Head of Foreign Exchange and then Markets 
Director. I have been on the MPC and the interim FPC. In 2014 I took on the role of Deputy 
Head of the Prudential Regulation Authority and I attend the PRA Board. Since mid-2014 I 
have  also  been  covering  as  Executive  Director  of  Insurance.  In  taking  on  this  role 
temporarily,  I  have  promised  to  maintain  a  regular  and  open  dialogue  with  the  industry; 
enable the delivery of Solvency II; and embed insurance supervision as part of the Bank of 
England. 
I  welcome  the  opportunity  to  discuss  today’s  topics  and  the  role  regulation  will  play. 
However,  I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  some  of  the  broader  challenges  facing  the 
insurance industry. 
Those challenges include the prevailing low interest rate environment; the consequent influx 
of  alternative  capital,  especially  into  reinsurance  markets;  the  transformation  to  the  “at 
retirement”  taxation  system  in  the  UK;  competition  in  general  insurance  from  overseas 
locations, possibly linked to regulatory arbitrage; as well as the new Solvency II regime. 
I  plan  to  focus  my  time  mostly  on  Solvency  II;  but  will  also  touch  on  the  “at  retirement” 
taxation changes. 
Before that, I would first like to reflect upon the role insurance plays in the wider economy: 
• 
Insurance is a critical cog in a financial services sector which facilitates trade and 
commerce  and  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Without  a  fully  functioning 
financial services sector, the economy would stagnate. That importance of financial 
services to growth should be one of the big lessons of the Great Financial Crisis for 
anyone who did not appreciate the fact previously. More specifically, the insurance 
sector  provides  a  critical  risk-transfer  role  and  is  a  vital  long-term  investor  in  the 
economy. 
The UK insurance industry is also an end-contributor to UK output and employment 
– being the largest insurance industry in Europe and third in the world. 
 The  UK  insurance  industry  is  known  for  its  innovation  and  entrepreneurialism,  typified 
through  the  modest  beginnings  of  Edward  Lloyd’s  coffee  house.  The  role  played  by  the 
insurance  sector  in  future  will  be  contingent  upon  maintaining  that  tradition  of  competition 
and innovation and the PRA is committed to support that, not least through our secondary 
objective in respect of competition. 
A  safe  and  sound  firm  is  a  pre-condition  for  the  continuous  availability  of  critical  financial 
services  and  for  delivering  effective  competition.  A  healthy,  profitable  industry  is  entirely 
consistent with the aims of regulation. Indeed, a lack of profitability is a worrying sign for a 
supervisor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  greater transparency; 
a level playing field through greater EU-wide co-operation; 
an enhanced approach to groups; 
greater co-operation arrangements between European regulators; 
transformed data collection and analytics; 
a greater emphasis on high quality governance; and above all 
a more risk-sensitive regulatory framework. 
Solvency II 
Central  to  our  goal  of  preserving  a  healthy  insurance  sector  will  be  the  successful 
implementation of Solvency II. 
We are now well and truly into the “implementation phase”. 
Solvency II will be going “live” in less than 12 months. Transposition of Solvency II into the 
UK rulebook is underway and we will be open for applications for internal models, matching 
adjustment etc from April 1. 
Successfully landing Solvency II is a top priority for the PRA and the Bank. It will introduce: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Considering  how  much  effort  has  gone  into,  and  is  still  going  into,  its  development  and 
implementation, I think it is worth reflecting on the core purpose and objectives of the new 
regime. 
A main objective of Solvency II is the adequate protection of policyholders. 
As I stated earlier, insurers play an important risk-transfer role. In some instances, individuals 
rely absolutely for their future lifetime incomes on the continuity of their insurance cover. To 
achieve an appropriate level of policyholder protection, insurers must be, and be seen to be, 
safe and sound. 
I have said this before but I think it is worth reiterating. The PRA believes the UK industry is 
in a good position, having had the UK risk-based ICAS regime for around ten years. We are 
therefore  not  looking  to  use  Solvency  II  as  an  opportunity  to  raise  capital  requirements 
across the board. 
We do, however, recognise and respect that Solvency II is a maximum-harmonising Directive 
with  a  key  objective  of  promoting  supervisory  co-operation.  The  PRA  is  committed  to 
upholding this valued objective and will implement the Directive as intended. We can’t and 
won’t gold plate. 
Our  approach  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  proportionate  in  our  supervision.  As  a 
judgement-led, risk-based regulator, this principle is already part of the PRA approach. It is 
not the PRA’s role to make sure no insurer fails. However, we are concerned that any failure 
is  orderly  and  manageable.  We  seek  this  in  conjunction  with  appropriate  policy  holder 
protection. For example, when business models become challenged we may seek to secure 
manageable  and  orderly  wind-down,  as  has  been  seen  in  the  past  in  this  sector.  In  fact, 
roughly one third of insurers authorised by the PRA are in some form of run-off. 
More than just a capital regime, Solvency II strengthens the linkage between capital and risk 
management.  Solvency  II  will  introduce  an  enhanced  system  of  governance  standards  – 
promoting  the  embedding  of  a  strong  risk  culture,  demonstrable  within  the  day-to-day 
operations of insurers. 
The new regulatory regime will not look to fix firms’ business models to be identical, nor to 
restrict  the  level  of  innovation  across  the  market.  Rather,  Solvency  II  seeks  to  promote  a 
better understanding of the risks being taken, allowing insurers to take informed decisions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is for firms’ management to decide upon their chosen risk appetite and the precise details 
of their risk models. What matters to the PRA is that firms hold capital commensurate to such 
risk exposures, in line with the Directive. 
The introduction of the Prudent Person Principle is an example of how risk management and 
strategic decision making will be owned by the insurer and its management. 
The  Prudent  Person  Principle  will  require  investment  decisions  to  be  made  as  if  being 
decided  upon  by  the  objective  “prudent  man”  and  represents  a  shift  from  quantitative  to 
qualitative rules. Gone are the old investment limits for asset classes. So insurers will have 
much more freedom in their investment choices. 
The PRA does not and will not promote one asset class over another. There are two aspects 
to  this:  we  recognise  that  life  insurers  can  be  an  important  source  of  long-term,  stable 
financing for corporates, infrastructure and mortgages – this is an important function that we 
want  to  see  maintained;  but  we  also  must  consider  the  wider  financial  stability  angles, 
avoiding undue influence on the asset allocation behaviour of insurers. 
Solvency II should not materially drive investment decision making except in so far as it helps 
to make certain that insurers fully understand the risks that they take. The Prudent Person 
Principle  will  seek  to  ensure  that  the  industry  understands  and  is  capable  of managing  its 
investment risks. Specifically,  insurers must be able to demonstrate that they can properly 
identify,  measure,  monitor,  manage,  control  and  report  on  their  investment  risks  and  not 
place  reliance  upon  information  provided  by  third  parties.  Investment  choices  should  be 
made in the best interest of policy holders and beneficiaries. 
Those running a business are best placed to make business decisions. That being said, the 
PRA  does  have  the  benefit  of  perspective.  The  PRA  has  the  ability  to  look  across  the 
industry  and  can  also  draw  upon  the  expertise  of  specialists  working  across  the  different 
areas of the Bank of England. 
Whilst on the subject of the role of management, we understand that there has been some 
uncertainty  around  our  expectations  of  the  non-executive  director  role  for  firms  that  have 
internal risk models. 
Non-executive  board  members  need  not  be  technical  experts  in  risk  modelling.  However, 
each  board  collectively  should  understand  the  key  strengths,  limitations,  and  judgements 
within their model. Over-reliance on a single measure can be misleading. Therefore, we want 
non-executives to have the right tools and sufficient knowledge to be able to challenge model 
outputs, rather than follow them slavishly. 
Benefits to be gained through the implementation of a harmonised regime 
I  have  discussed  the  increased  flexibility  to  be  afforded  firms  in  business  and  investment 
decisions and the expectations placed upon insurers in their knowledge and understanding 
of the risk exposures and their models. But I would also like to consider the benefits to be 
gained through the implementation of a harmonised regime. 
The  benefits  of  Solvency  II  do  not  come  from  the  improved  prudential  regime  alone. 
Insurance  markets  across  the  EU  have  been  fragmented.  The  move  towards  a  more  co-
operative framework will widen existing opportunities and help create new ones. 
The new framework seeks to introduce a level playing field across the EU, with risk-based 
capital  standards  and  robust  valuation  practices  that,  together  with  enhanced  disclosure 
rules, encourage the effective exercise of market discipline through the increased provision 
of information. 
From a systemic point of view, a more coherent and understandable regime should enhance 
confidence in the European insurance industry. This is particularly important at a time where 
weak real growth is leading to low levels of inflation and interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Financial  markets  have  become  increasingly  interconnected  and  that  trend  has  only  been 
slowed  temporarily  by  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  PRA  therefore  welcomes  the  more 
rigorous approach to group supervision that will be introduced by Solvency II. This will lead to 
a  much  more  joined-up  approach  between  regulators  through  the  operation  of  colleges. 
Enhancing  information  flows  and  producing  equivalent  and  comparable  data  should  make 
European colleges easier to operate – leading to more effective supervision and enhanced 
co-ordination among national supervisory authorities. 
We think that the UK has been ahead of the game with the ICAS regime. But it is important 
that there is a more rigorous rulebook across Europe to allow more effective supervision in 
an interconnected world. 
New / untested risk exposures; 
Increased competition; 
A need for enhanced support for the consumer; and 
Potential redistribution of pension pot monies. 
Challenges ahead 
As I mentioned earlier, the industry is currently facing a number of other challenges. 
In particular the changes to the UK taxation system of the “at retirement” market, the impact 
of which is already significant on some insurers’ business models. 
Change to the annuity market will also bring about: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Changes to business models will naturally lead to changes in risk exposures which will need 
to  be  carefully  considered  and  managed.  Through  these  changes,  it  is  imperative  that  we 
continue to learn and adjust, working openly and transparently with the industry. 
I hope you will agree when I say the PRA has demonstrated its commitment to working with 
the industry – as seen with the UK securing the matching adjustment in Solvency II as part of 
the  long term guarantees  package. The  matching  adjustment  has  been  something  the  UK 
advocated strongly in the trialogue negotiations. We do recognise that certain annuity firms 
can afford to invest in less liquid assets. 
The PRA also introduced the ICAS+ process as a way in which to constructively deal with the 
delays to Solvency II implementation but also to provide useful and practical way to feedback 
to industry on the progress being made to their internal models. 
Now is an important conjuncture for the insurance industry as a whole. As such, we will need 
to work closely with industry (as we have done in the past) to get the best outcome. 
This  is  also  a  time  of  increased  opportunity.  By  pursuing  Solvency  II  and  our  statutory 
objectives, we will make our contribution to the sustainability of the insurance industry. 
I hope today has given you a good sense of the overall approach the PRA is taking and our 
commitment to ensuring a strong and resilient insurance sector. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
