  Ignazio Visco: Harnessing financial education to spur entrepreneurship 
and innovation 
Speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the Special Governors’ session 
on  “Advancing  financial  literacy  through  policy  and  research”,  3rd  OECD/GFLEC  Global 
Policy Research Symposium to Advance Financial Literacy, Paris, 7 May 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Investing in education and knowledge is increasingly recognized as a key factor in ensuring 
sustainable  and  inclusive  growth.  In  this  process,  the  role  of  financial  education  is  both 
important and wide-ranging. 
Indeed,  with  specific  reference  to  the  subject  of  today’s  Symposium,  the  objective  of 
advancing financial literacy should be set in the context of the fundamental goal of improving 
an  economy’s  growth  potential  by  encouraging  investment,  increasing  employment, 
enhancing trade and promoting competition. Improving the investment environment for small- 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and their financing conditions is part of this strategy, 
given the fundamental role that they play in all economies as key generators of employment, 
income and, ultimately, growth. 
Hence,  it  is  essential  to  understand  whether  and  how  financial  education  might  be  a 
component in this strategy and what our role, as regulators, should be. 
2.  
Channels through which financial education is important for the innovation 
and growth of SMEs 
Innovation is central to economic growth. The role of the State in promoting this is essential, 
but in the end innovation must be realised by companies themselves. There are at least two 
areas where financial education, in a broad sense, may have an impact on SMEs’ innovation 
and growth: their financial structure, on one side, and their managerial skills and corporate 
governance, on the other. 
The financial structure 
2.1 
Financial  literacy  may  help  to  improve  the  financial  structures  of  SMEs  through  a  better 
understanding  of  the  great  importance  of  the  communication  of  information  to  financial 
intermediaries and markets. 
SMEs  are  characterised  by  obvious  problems  of  asymmetric  information.  This  creates  the 
conditions for the primary role of banks in their financial structure, since banks are especially 
experienced  in  screening  and  monitoring  borrowers’  creditworthiness  in  order  to  address 
these information problems. The incidence of bank debt on financial debt is a bit more than 
40  per  cent  in  the  euro  area  and  one  third  in  the  US.  In  Italy,  where  SMEs  are  more 
widespread,  over  65  per  cent  of  financial  debt  comes  from  banks.  That  this  essentially 
reflects the conditions of our SMEs is easily concluded once we observe that for large firms 
(those  with  more  than  250  employees),  the  ratio  of  bank  debt  to  total  financial  debt  falls 
below 40 per cent. 
However, bank debt is not the optimal source for financing innovation; equity is better suited 
to this end. This is well known and supported by extensive research (see, inter alia, Brown 
Fazzari  and  Petersen,  2009,  Rajan,  2012,  and  Magri,  2014).  Equity  does  not  require  the 
collateral  needed  for  debt  financing,  which  innovative  firms  may  lack  due  to  the  larger 
incidence of intangible assets. Moreover, it does not increase the probability of bankruptcy, 
which is usually already high among innovative firms. A greater reliance on equity would also 
shield firms from the negative spillovers that may arise from the conditions of banks. The last 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  financial  crisis  has  clearly  illustrated  that firms which  depend  extensively  or  exclusively  on 
bank loans may face sudden financial constraints when banks experience difficult times and 
become more selective in granting loans. This evidence calls for a strong need to increase 
the role of capital markets – both corporate bond and equity markets – in supporting firms’ 
innovation and growth. 
In accessing capital markets, the way firms communicate information to external financiers is 
crucial. SMEs’ opaqueness and the insufficient transparency of their balance sheets are not 
exogenous features: they can be reduced. Whether and how an increase in SMEs’ financial 
education can help firms to understand the importance of financial statements and of sharing 
information with external financiers is a topic that is currently receiving increasing attention. 
In fact, there is evidence that after having completed financial education programmes, SMEs 
subsequently  produce  more  frequent  and  more  transparent  financial  statements,  with  a 
positive impact on some firms’ performance indicators (see Wise, 2013, for a recent analysis 
on Canadian firms). 
Within  the  Capital  Markets  Union  project,  aimed  at  creating  a  more  developed  financial 
market  in  Europe,  the  European  Commission  is  now  sponsoring  initiatives  to  improve  the 
standards  of  information  transparency  and  increase  their  diffusion,  specifically  for  SMEs. 
Micro-firms  and  small  firms,  which,  given  their  size,  find  it  very  difficult  to  access  capital 
markets, will also benefit from a greater transparency of their balance sheets as banks, in 
granting loans, can use credit scoring models that facilitate the selection of the borrowers. 
Managerial practices and corporate governance 
2.2 
Business and financial literacy may also improve managerial practices that are correlated not 
only with the firms’ size but also with their corporate governance. 
SMEs  are  typically  family-owned,  both  in  developing  and  advanced  countries.  It  is  less 
frequent  to  find  that  the  CEO  and  other  managerial  roles  are  also  covered  by  family 
members. This  situation,  however,  is  very  common  in  Italy:  among  (manufacturing) family-
owned firms, two thirds have a management team comprised exclusively of family members, 
compared with one third in Spain, one fourth in France and Germany and one tenth in the 
UK.  Recent  research  shows  that  managerial  practices,  more  specifically  the  definition  of 
targets, incentives and supervision, tend to be worse in family-owned firms that are also run 
by family members (see, inter alia, Bloom and Van Reenen, 2010, and Caselli and Gennaioli, 
2013). This is also associated with worse performance. In Italy there is evidence that family-
owned firms with only family-member managers are less likely to invest in R&D, a key driver 
of  innovation.  Practices  such  as  centralised  management  or  managers’  compensation  not 
linked  to  performance,  also  have  a  distinct  and  important  negative  effect  on  innovation 
(Bugamelli, Cannari, Lotti and Magri, 2012). 
However,  education  programmes  may  have  important  effects  on  managerial  ability.  Some 
studies,  concerning  developing  countries,  where  managerial  capital  is  lower,  show  that 
managerial skills can be taught and learnt, although results depend crucially on the approach 
to training. Other recent surveys also suggest that vocational and general business training 
appears to be a relatively cost-effective way of promoting business performance and growth 
(see Bruhn, Karlan and Schoar, 2010, Cho and Honorati, 2013, and Fernandes, Lynch and 
Notemayer,  2014).  In  Italy,  the  ELITE  project,  run  by  the  Italian  Stock  Exchange,  is  an 
example  of  a  platform  offering  services  to  unlisted  firms  aimed  at  expanding  their  size:  in 
addition  to  financial  advice  and  network  connections,  firms  are  provided  with  effective 
suggestions for the cultural, organisational and managerial changes required to realise their 
medium-term projects of growth. 
Evidence of the level of financial literacy for SMEs 
3. 
As has already been discussed in the morning session of this Symposium, there is evidence 
that  the  level  of  financial  literacy  of  SMEs  in  emerging  countries  is  very  low.  But  there  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  growing evidence that the situation in advanced countries is also far from satisfactory. In the 
case of Italy, weakness in financial literacy in a broad sense seems to affect all the areas 
previously  discussed  and  might  be  a  factor  –  together  with  much-discussed  negative 
institutional  aspects,  high  levels  of  taxation  and  insufficient  human  capital  formation  –  in 
accounting for the very low average size of firms, and especially their very modest ability to 
grow. 
Direct evidence of financial literacy and adult skills 
3.1  
On  average,  entrepreneurs  and  managers  of  Italian  SMEs  have  a  relatively  low  level  of 
financial literacy. In the 2008 wave of the Bank of Italy’s Survey on Household Income and 
Wealth  (SHIW),  heads  of  households  were  asked  questions  aimed  at  measuring  their 
competencies  and  financial  knowledge.  The  answers  to  questions  on  (i)  changes  in 
purchasing power, (ii) differences in the levels of risk of investing in shares and bonds, and 
(iii)  portfolio  diversification  (questions  chosen  with the  aim  of following  the  lead  by  Lusardi 
and Mitchell in their comparisons of financial literacy among individuals and across countries; 
see Lusardi and Mitchell, 2008 and 2011) show that only 47 per cent of entrepreneurs and 
managers of firms with less than 100 employees were able to respond correctly to all three 
(relatively  simple)  questions.  Hence  more  than  half  of  these  entrepreneurs  and  managers 
were not able to answer at least one of the relevant questions. This compares to 43 per cent 
among managers in the public sector or larger (with more than 500 employees) enterprises 
(the  difference  between  the  two  groups  is  only  partly  explained  by  their  educational 
qualifications).  Less  than  one  quarter  of  all  respondents  were  able  to  provide  a  correct 
answer to all three questions. These findings clearly suggest that there is significant room for 
improvement. 
Perhaps even more worrying is the result from the 2013 OECD Survey  of Adult Skills that 
shows  that  a  significant  proportion  of  Italian  adults  (higher  than  in  the  other  surveyed 
countries) score the lowest levels of proficiency on the literacy and numeracy scales. Less 
than  30  per  cent  of  adults  score  level  3  or  above  (on  a  1–5  scale)  in  both  literacy  and 
numeracy skills, compared to more than 50 per cent in the OECD average. 
Italian workers also display lower skills in literacy and numeracy in the work place (possibly 
also due to the average size of small companies), even if they seem to score better in their 
ability  to  use  ICT.  An  insufficient  level  of  literacy  and  numeracy  skills  might  impact 
productivity and innovation even more than financial literacy. 
Indirect evidence of the lack of financial literacy 
3.2 
Indirect evidence of the lack of financial literacy can be obtained by looking at the possible 
inefficient uses of financial instruments by smaller companies. One example is the potential 
misuse of derivatives by non-financial corporations. Our research shows that in Italy the use 
of  derivatives  has  been  large  also  among  SMEs.  Indeed,  these  instruments  have  mainly 
been used to cover interest rate risks by firms that have less balanced financial structures 
(higher  leverage  and  less  liquidity)  and  are  less  profitable; the  analysis  also  highlights  the 
relationship between high derivative exposure and financial distress, measured by the firm’s 
rating (Graziano, 2012). 
There are claims that those involved in such contracts may lack a thorough understanding of 
the risks involved. Recent judiciary investigations even go as far as to suggesting, in some 
instances, that they were purposely inadequately informed. Furthermore, among firms using 
derivatives,  less  than  half  acknowledge  this  in  a  recent  Bank  of  Italy  survey  (Survey  of 
Industrial and Service Firms, 2010), a possible indicator of lack of awareness. Although the 
number of firms using derivatives has been decreasing in recent years, the average amount 
per contract has risen, most likely due to an increasing use among large firms as of late. 
A lack of financial education may also reduce the capacity of firms to reap the benefits from 
positive changes in the external environment. In Italy, the tax advantage for debt has been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  widely  reduced  since  2011  (by  the  introduction  of  the  so  called  “Allowance  for  corporate 
equity”, ACE), and almost eliminated with subsequent interventions. Unfortunately, a recent 
survey  shows  that,  even  among  the  largest  non-financial  corporations,  the  changes  in  the 
equity tax regulation are not sufficiently known (Ambrosetti, 2015). In this context, SMEs are 
even more likely to be unaware of the new advantageous equity tax treatment. 
Policy implications 
4. 
More  research  is  obviously  needed  in  this  area.  Firstly,  the  economic  relevance  of  (the 
various  components  of)  financial  literacy  for  SMEs  should  be  better  assessed.  There  are 
numerous  analyses  of  the  impact  of  financial  education  and  financial  literacy  on  adults’ 
choices and welfare (see in the case of Italy, Guiso and Viviano, 2015), but almost nothing 
has been undertaken on firms. 
Secondly, the impact of different types of financial programmes (characterized, for example, 
by  different  durations,  channels  used  and  specific  content  covered)  should  be  thoroughly 
examined  in  order  to  evaluate  the  relevance  of  each  different  instrument.  Some  (limited) 
evidence seems to suggest that relatively “simple” programmes are the most effective since 
they  address  cognitive  biases  and  difficulties.  The  same  seems  to  hold  for  visual 
programmes or entertainment media-based programmes (see Drexler, Fischer and Schoar, 
2014;  Lusardi  et  al,  2014,  Berg  and  Zia,  2013).  The  evidence  seems  to  point  increasingly 
towards the effectiveness of “just in time” interventions, aimed at specific needs, relevant for 
individual businesses. 
A  further  issue  concerns  who  is  best  equipped  to  provide  financial  education  relevant  for 
SMEs’  managers  and  entrepreneurs.  Ideally  education  should  start  in  schools  (mainly  at 
secondary and university levels) but industry associations could play an active role. Banks 
too may have a special role to play in providing adequate and practical information to their 
clients. Evidence from Italy suggests that specific information policies implemented by banks 
have  been  able  to  raise  the  financial  literacy  of  their  customers  (mainly  individuals)  and 
improve their financial asset allocation (Fort, Manaresi and Trucchi, 2014). 
Finally,  a  few  words  on  our  role  as  regulators  and  central  banks.  Financial  education 
programmes  are  now  offered  by  a  number  of  regulators,  available  to  both  students  and 
adults. At the Bank of Italy we have been developing a programme of financial education for 
school  teachers  (coordinated  with  the  Ministry  of  Education)  since  2008.  During  the 
academic year 2014–15 it involved approximately 2.800 classes and 63.000 students. They 
seem to be effective in improving students’ familiarity  with money and alternative payment 
systems (Romagnoli and Trifilidis, 2013). The methodologies used are now being adapted to 
help the transition from the acquisition of knowledge to the development of skills, and new 
tools (including visual ones) are being introduced. Other sources of financial education, in the 
form of simple explanations on the nature and possible uses of various financial instruments, 
are also available on our website (www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/guide-bi/). 
These programmes should not be limited to young students. We are now working with other 
Italian financial regulators to develop a National strategy for financial education, the first step 
being the mapping of the existing initiatives available both to schools and other stakeholders. 
But as regulators we are obviously aware that financial education is complementary to and 
not  a  substitute  for  strong  and  effective  consumer  protection  and  should  not  therefore  be 
regarded as a silver bullet by any of the interested parties (customers, industry, regulators). 
Indeed, even financially-literate consumers make mistakes. The financial sophistication, and 
the  number  across  different  countries,  of  the  people  fooled  by  fraudulent  investment 
operations  are  a  sober  reminder  that  financial  education  does  not  provide  foolproof 
protection against fraud. 
Consumer protection must be pursued through regulations on transparency and the conduct 
of  business,  which  are essential  to  the  relationship  between  customers  and  intermediaries 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  where  unavoidable  information  asymmetries  make  it  impossible  for  the  investor  to 
independently  monitor  the  intermediary.  Moreover,  given  the  pace  at  which  financial 
innovation develops, investors are often faced with products with too short a history for the 
reliable prediction of returns. Customer protection promotes confidence in the enforceability 
of contracts, an essential ingredient for financial intermediation (see also Visco, 2010). 
Last  year,  an  ad-hoc  directorate  was  created  within  the  Banking  and  financial  supervision 
department  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  with  the  objective  of  dealing  specifically  with  consumer 
protection and anti-money laundering. The Italian model is based on both collective ex-post 
protection and individual ex-ante and ex-post protection. 
Individual (ex-post) protection is ensured through both the management and processing of 
customer  complaints  and  the  recourse  to  the  Banking  and  Financial  Ombudsman  (Arbitro 
Bancario Finanziario), which resolves individual disputes between clients and intermediaries. 
Disputes are submitted to a decision-making body composed of three territorial panels. The 
Bank of Italy is responsible for auxiliary activities, for which it makes available means and 
resources, including via technical secretariats established at the branches of the Bank where 
the Ombudsman’s panels operate. In 2014 approximately 14.000 individual complaints were 
received and managed; approximately 11.200 claims were submitted to the ABF (10 per cent 
by  corporate  clients,  90  per  cent  by  individuals);  65  per  cent  of  the  claims  were  ruled  in 
favour of customers. 
The information provided both through complaints and claims to the Ombudsman contributes 
to the off-site supervision of banks and financial intermediaries, a form of collective (ex-post) 
customer  protection.  Together  with  on-site  inspections,  it  represents  the  basis  for  specific 
enforcement  measures,  which  include  sanctions,  prohibitions  and  reimbursement  orders. 
These  instruments  complement  (and  might  also  inform)  the  individual  (ex-ante)  protection, 
which is enhanced by financial education both in schools and for adults. 
 To conclude, in recent years, following the financial crisis, trust in finance has been severely 
damaged. As a whole, it may only be restored through the implementation of a combination 
of instruments, developed within a coherent framework. This is a fundamental pre-condition 
for the efficient operation of the financial system. The latter, in turn, is an essential requisite 
for more financially-literate firms to exploit its full potential. 
References 
Ambrosetti Club (2015), “Finance for growth”, http://www.ambrosetti.eu/en/download/studies-
and-presentations/2015/finance-for-growthal. 
G.  Berg  and  B.  Zia  (2013),  “Harnessing  emotional  connections  to  improve  financial 
decisions:  evaluating  the  impact  of  financial  education  through  mainstream  media”,  World 
Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, n. 6407. 
N. Bloom and J. Van Reenen (2010), “Why do management practices differ among firms and 
countries”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24, 1. 
J.  Brown,  S.  Fazzari  and  B.  Petersen  (2009),“Financing  innovation  and  growth:  cash flow, 
external equity, and the 1990s R&D boom”, The Journal of Finance, 54,1. 
M. Bruhn, D. Karlan and A. Schoar (2010), “What capital is missing in developing countries”, 
American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings, 100. 
M.  Bugamelli,  L.  Cannari,  F.  Lotti,  and  S.  Magri  (2012),  “The  innovation  gap  of  Italy’s 
production system: roots and possible solutions”, Bank of Italy, Occasional Papers, n. 121. 
F. Caselli and N. Gennaioli (2013), “Dynastic management”, Economic Enquiry, 51, 1. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Y. Cho and M. Honorati (2013), “Entrepreneurship programs in developing countries”, World 
Bank, Policy Research Working Paper, n. 6402. 
A. Drexler, G. Fischer and A. Schoar (2014), “Keeping it simple: financial literacy and rules of 
thumb”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6, 2. 
D. Fernandes, J.G. Lynch and R.G. Notemayer (2014), “Financial literacy, financial education 
and downstream financial behaviours”, Management Science, 60, 8. 
M.  Fort,  F.  Manaresi  and  S.  Trucchi  (2014),  “Adults’  financial  literacy  and  households’ 
financial assets: the role of banks information policies”, CESifo Working Paper, n. 5047. 
M.  Graziano  (2012),  “Italian  non-financial  firms  and  derivatives”,  Bank  of  Italy,  Occasional 
Papers, n. 139. 
L. Guiso and E. Viviano (2015), “How much can financial literacy help?”, Review of Finance, 
forthcoming. 
A. Lusardi and O.S. Mitchell (2008), “Planning and financial literacy: how do women fare?”, 
American Economic Review, 98. 
A.  Lusardi  and  O. S.  Mitchell  (2011),  “Financial  literacy  and  planning:  implications  for 
retirement wellbeing”, in O. S. Mitchell and A. Lusardi (eds.), Financial literacy: implications 
for retirement security and the financial marketplace, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
A. Lusardi, A. S. Samek, A. Kapteyn, L. Glinert, A. Hing and A. Heinberg (2014), “Visual tools 
and narratives: new ways to improve financial literacy”, NBER Working Paper, n. 20229. 
S. Magri (2014), “Does issuing equity help R&D activity? Evidence from unlisted Italian high-
tech manufacturing firms”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 23,8. 
R. Rajan (2012), “Presidential address: the corporation in finance”, The Journal of Finance, 
67, 4. 
A.  Romagnoli  and  M.  Trifilidis  (2013), “Does financial  education  at  school  work?  Evidence 
from Italy”, Bank of Italy, Occasional Papers, n. 155. 
I.  Visco  (2010),  “Financial  education  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis”,  Review  of 
economic conditions in Italy, 2. 
S.  Wise  (2013),  “The  impact  of  financial  literacy  on  new  venture  survival”,  International 
Journal of Business and Management, 8, 23. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
