  Yves Mersch: Medium to long-term priorities of Capital Markets Union 
(CMU) for the ECB/Eurosystem 
Panel remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Eurofi conference, Luxembourg, 10 September 2015. 
 bankruptcy law, 
company law and 
taxation of financial products 
While the Green Paper has set the right overall objectives of CMU and identified priorities for 
early  action  and  the  measures  for  the  medium-  to  long-term,  CMU  needs  to  be  pursued 
through a higher level of ambition to achieve greater capital markets development and 
deeper financial integration. 
1. To bring about its expected benefits, the CMU should foster and result in a high level of 
financial  integration  in  capital  markets  across  the  EU  based  on  an  adequate  legal  and 
regulatory framework. This would imply more steps towards greater harmonization of 
1. 
2. 
3. 
that pose great political challenges. 
The  aim  is  to  ensure  that  investors  have  the  same  costs  and  equal  access  to  finance 
irrespective of where they are located in the EU. Ultimately, the supervisory architecture will 
also warrant revision. The final destination in the path towards CMU will need to include the 
development of a single rulebook. These elements are key if we are to attain what has been 
ambitiously coined as CMU. 
2.  A  schedule  with  clear  milestones  and  deadlines  in  the  upcoming  action  plan  would 
facilitate implementation. 
3. Market-led initiatives to promote capital markets are important but insufficient. Therefore, 
legislative action in targeted areas is warranted. While bold action towards the completion of 
the  single  rulebook  for  capital  markets  will  be  beneficial,  a  gradual  approach  to 
harmonization could be envisaged in those areas where political sensitivities prevent action 
at EU level in the short term. 
4.  Sufficient  attention  should  be  devoted  to  safeguarding  financial  stability,  such  as  in  the 
area of shadow banking. 
5.  A  single  rulebook for  EU  capital  markets  needs  to  be  complemented  with  strengthened 
supervisory convergence, delivering a common implementation and enforcement of rules. 
6. Further reducing still existing fragmentation in financial market infrastructures should be at 
the core of CMU. It needs to be recognized that banks will continue to play an important role 
for the financing of the real economy and in providing access to capital markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
