  Zhou Xiaochuan: People’s Bank of China Governor’s New Year message 
New  Year  message  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China, 
7 January 2015. 
 to 
improve,  contributing 
the  stable  and  sound  development  of 
The last day of 2014 is about to leave us and we will soon see the first light of 2015. At this 
juncture, I would like to convey, on behalf of the PBC CPC Committee, New Year’s Greetings 
to all the staff members of the PBC system and sincere gratitude to those who are still on 
their duty positions on the New Year Holiday and their family members. 
In 2014, we continued our endeavor on the road of reform and innovation. In the complex 
and  changing  international  environment  and  facing  the  arduous  domestic  task  of  reform, 
development and stability, under the leadership of the CPC Central Committee and the State 
Council,  the  PBC  continued  the  approach  of  seeking  progress  while  maintaining  stability, 
reform and innovation and achieved remarkable results in the various fields of central bank 
functions. We continued to implement a sound monetary policy, maintained policy continuity 
and  stability,  made  innovations  in  the  approach  of  macro-economic  management,  and 
conducted pre-emptive adjustment and fine-tuning. As a result, the growth of money, credit 
and all-system financing aggregate remained reasonable and the credit structure continued 
to 
the  economy. 
Breakthroughs were made in the key financial reforms including market-based interest rate 
reform,  exchange  rate  regime  reform,  and  deposit  insurance  scheme,  and  policy  financial 
institutions made new progress in their reforms. We have seen faster pace in the innovation 
of financial markets and a stronger role of financial sector in servicing the real sector. The 
cross-border  use  of  RMB  has  been  expanding.  The  reform  of 
foreign  exchange 
administration has been deepening. The management of financial risks has been effective. 
The  quality  and  management  of  financial  services  have  improved.  We  have  actively 
participated  a  wide  range  of  international  and  regional  financial  cooperation.  The  Party’s 
mass  line  education  and  practice  endeavor  has  produced  results.  The  PBC  has  further 
improved its Party building, style of work and internal management. 
The  year  2015  is  a  crucial  year  for  the  deepening  of  reform  as  it  is  the  first  year  of 
comprehensively promoting rule of law and the concluding year of the 12th Five-Year Plan. 
The PBC system will earnestly implement the decisions adopted at the 18th CPC National 
Congress,  the  Third  and  Fourth  Plenums  of  the  18th  CPC  Central  Committee,  and  the 
Central  Economic  Work  Conference,  follow  the  guidance  of  Deng  Xiaoping  Theory,  the 
important thought of Three Represents and the Scientific Outlook on Development, continue 
the  approach  of  seeking  progress  while  maintaining  stability,  develop  an  accurate 
understanding  and  adapt  to  the  new  normal  situation,  strike  a  balance  among  preserving 
stable  growth,  promoting  reform,  adjusting  structures,  improving  people’s  livelihood  and 
preventing  risks,  continue  the  sound monetary  policy,  maintain  stability  and  consistency  in 
the  policy,  focus  more  on  the  appropriate  stance  of  the  monetary  policy  and  conduct 
preemptive adjustments and fine-tuning when necessary. Efforts will be made to accelerate 
the  financial  sector  reform  and  innovation,  safeguard  financial  stability,  forestall  financial 
risks, and improve financial services and management, to support the sound and sustained 
development of the economy and contribute to the realization of the Chinese dream of great 
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
