  Erkki Liikanen: Monetary policy and its transmission to the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  4th FIN-FSA 
Conference on EU Regulation and Supervision, Helsinki, 9 June 2015. 
 Original presentation is on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF). 
[SLIDE 1] 
[SLIDE 2] 
Commitment to accommodative monetary policy benefits economic outlook 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of  monetary  policy  measures  to 
stimulate the economy. The aim is to maintain price stability over the medium term. The most 
recent  comprehensive  monetary  policy  easing  cycle  from  June  2014  to  January  2015 
consists of several standard and non-standard measures: 
[SLIDE 3] Interest rate policy in 2014 
In  June  and  September  the  Governing  Council  cut  the  monetary  policy  lending  rates  and 
decided on a negative deposit facility rate. 
[SLIDE 4] The decisions to support provision of credit in 2014 
The Governing Council also introduced two asset purchase programmes, for asset backed 
securities (ABS) and covered bonds. It also launched a new liquidity facility to provide longer-
term funding to banks conditional on their credit performance. 
[SLIDE 5] The decisions on large scale asset purchases and forward guidance in January 
2015 
In January 2015, the Governing Council judged that there was additional need for easing of 
the monetary policy stance, as the inflation outlook had weakened further. 
Through the expanded asset purchase programme, the Eurosystem extended its purchases 
to bonds issued by euro area governments, government agencies and European institutions. 
Purchases will be continued until inflation is sustainably on a path leading to a level close to 
2%. 
Engaging in large scale outright asset purchases switched the Eurosystem from a demand-
driven approach to a more active steering of the Eurosystem balance sheet and monetary 
base. 
The motivation behind the decision to expand purchases to euro-denominated public sector 
securities was the weakening of the inflation outlook: euro area inflation, core inflation and 
both  short  and  long-term  inflation  expectations declined  strongly  during  the second  half of 
2014. 
The  Governing  Council  has  stated  that  “they  are  intended  to  be  carried  out  until  end-
September 2016 and will in any case be conducted until we see a sustained adjustment in 
the path of inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term.” 
With this forward guidance, we, i.e. the Governing Council, indicate that our commitment to 
the accommodative monetary policy to align inflation with the price stability objective is the 
key component of our January decisions. 
Extensive securities purchases allow a substantial easing of monetary policy in a situation 
where there is no longer room for lower monetary policy interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The commitment to an accommodative monetary policy stance is all the more important, the 
lower  interest  rates  are,  and  the  further  inflation  expectations  are  from  the  price  stability 
objective. The confidence is key to raising inflation expectations amongst economic agents. 
Expanded asset purchases stimulate both demand and inflation 
[SLIDE 6] 
Two main channels of large scale asset purchases – often referred to in the literature – are 
the signalling effect and the portfolio balance effect. 
[SLIDE 7] Signalling and portfolio balance effects of a large scale asset purchase programme 
The signalling effect contributes to stronger anchoring of inflation expectations in line with our 
medium-term objective. This effect also contributes to reducing real rates further along the 
yield curve. 
[SLIDE 8] ECB’s accommodative monetary policy 
The portfolio balance effect broadens the effects to the whole financial system even if only a 
comparatively  narrow  range  of  high-quality  securities  are  purchased.  With  this  effect, 
investors are encouraged to shift holdings into other asset classes – e.g. from sovereign to 
corporate bonds, from debt to equity, and across jurisdictions. 
In combination, the lower cost of debt finance, reduced cost of equity and weaker exchange 
rates  all  contribute  to  making  some  investment  projects  profitable  that  were  previously 
deemed unattractive. 
[SLIDE  9]  Commitment  to  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  has  already  raised 
inflation expectations 
Conditions  in  a  host  of  asset  markets  have  developed  in  line  with  the  presumption. 
Commitment to the accommodative monetary policy stance has raised inflation expectations, 
thereby lowering the real interest rate. 
[SLIDE 10] Divergence in monetary policy cycles reflected in the euro 
The  divergence  in  international  monetary  policy  cycles  has  had  an  impact  on the  external 
value  of  the  euro.  This  development  is  partly  a  result  of  tightening  monetary  policy 
expectations in the USA. 
[SLIDE 11] Sharp fall in long-term bond yields over the past year, some reversal recently 
The asset purchase programme has already led to lower reference interest rates gradually 
resulting  in  more  favourable  borrowing  conditions  for  non-financial  corporations  and 
households. 
[SLIDE 12] Stock prices have increased 
A policy of quantitative easing also boosts asset prices. Equity prices have gone up, lowering 
the cost of equity for both non-financial corporations and banks. 
As to the recent general reversal in financing conditions and volatility, the Governing Council 
was unanimous in its assessment in June that we should look through these developments 
and maintain a steady monetary policy stance. At the same time we are aware that at very 
low levels of interest rates, asset prices  – bond prices in particular  – tend to show higher 
volatility. 
The  drop  in  the  real  interest  rate,  general  relaxation  in  financial  conditions  and  improved 
confidence  will  work  their  way  through  to  the  economy  to  boost  demand  and  drive  faster 
inflation. It will, however, still take time until we see the full impact. 
[SLIDE 13] 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy transmission to the real economy is improving 
The expanded purchases started at the beginning of March. The full impact of our measures, 
especially if accompanied by firm actions from other policymakers, will be seen in the months 
and years ahead. 
[SLIDE 14] Monetary policy measures support bank lending 
Recovery  in  bank  lending  and  strengthening  of  other  sources  of  financing  are  important 
factors behind the current monetary policy in the euro area. Our policies are also improving 
the credit channel, which is confirmed by the fact that credit to the private sector is gradually 
picking up. 
Monetary  policy  transmission  via  the  banking  system  requires  that  banks  have  sufficient 
capital to increase their lending, and hence risk-taking. 
In 2014, the ECB conducted a comprehensive assessment of the balance sheets of banks in 
the euro area. Completion of the comprehensive assessment, together with the steps taken 
by the ECB, is improving monetary policy transmission to the real economy via bank lending. 
Monetary  policy  transmission  through  the  banks  is,  however,  still  beset  with  challenges. 
Although  the  banking  system  is  currently  stronger  as  a  whole,  the  operating  environment 
remains challenging. 
[SLIDE 15] Monetary policy transmission via bank lending is improving 
The ECB’s monetary policy measures enhance financial intermediation in a number of ways. 
They lower funding costs for banks, which should make lending cheaper and more profitable, 
thereby boosting the volume of lending. Most of all, banks benefit from the ECB’s measures 
via their positive impact on the real economy. 
[SLIDE 16] Monetary policy transmission to non-financial firms improved, but still uneven 
These extraordinary monetary policy measures have contributed to a broad-based easing in 
financial  conditions  and  more  favourable  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households. 
They support economic activity in all countries, especially in those having suffered most from 
stressed  conditions  in  recent  years  but  having  at  the  same  time  executed  substantial 
structural measures to improve the performance of their respective economies in the longer 
run. 
[SLIDE 17] Corporate bond yields remain low, some reversal recently 
The  importance  of  market  funding  for  non-financial  corporations  is  increasing  in  the  euro 
area.  The  asset  purchases  support  the  corporate  bond  markets,  as  investors  selling 
government  bonds  are  expected  to  switch  to  higher-risk  corporate  bonds,  reflecting  the 
portfolio balancing effect. 
Corporate  bond  yields  reached  a  record  low  in  the  euro  area  in  early  2015.  Although 
corporate emissions have partially compensated for the decline in bank lending in the case of 
large corporations, SMEs do not have the same access to alternative sources of funding and 
are therefore still highly dependent on bank lending. 
The  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  also  pushing  up  share  prices.  This  could  boost 
corporations’ willingness to invest, as the market value of the corporations rises while their 
funding costs decline. 
[SLIDE 18] Corporate sector debt ratios declining 
However, the low price and improved availability of credit will be insufficient to restore more 
vigour to the economy if very indebted corporations decide to reduce their debt instead of 
investing.  The  debt  ratio  of  non-financial  corporations  in  the  euro  area  (aggregate  debt 
relative to GDP) has come down from the heights of 2009. The euro area corporate sector in 
general cannot be considered to be particularly indebted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
There are, however, large differences between countries. High corporate debt ratios in some 
countries may still be a partial cause of the weak developments in corporate borrowing and 
investment.  The  more  relaxed  financing  conditions  for  non-financial  corporations  and  the 
reasonable  level  of  indebtedness  in  the  euro  area’s  corporate  sector  should,  however, 
provide fertile ground for recovery in investment. 
[SLIDE 19] Average interest rates on new housing loans have declined 
From  the  perspective  of  achieving  price  stability  it  is  vital  that  monetary  policy  measures 
have  a  positive  effect  not  just  on  investment,  but  also  on  consumption.  The  process  of 
reducing  the  household  debt  burden  is  still  hampering  consumption  in  several  euro  area 
countries. 
The accommodative monetary policy stance can help with unravelling household debt. The 
average interest on the euro area household loan stock has already come down to around 
3%  and  can  be  expected  to  fall  somewhat  further.  There  are,  however,  large  differences 
between euro area countries in the transmission of monetary policy  via households to the 
real economy. 
[SLIDE 20] Eurosystem projections in June 2015 
As a result of the monetary policy measures taken between June 2014 and January 2015, 
both  the  inflation  and  growth  outlook  have  improved  considerably.  Eurosystem  staff 
projections published last week point to a sustained recovery that leads to a real growth rate 
of  2.0%  and  an  inflation  rate  of  1.8%  in  2017.  These  projections  are  based  on  full 
implementation of the purchase programmes as announced. 
[SLIDE 21] Inflation outlook has improved 
These numbers also represent a significant contribution to financial stability by overcoming 
the low nominal growth that has been portrayed as the underlying factor of the main risks for 
financial stability in the euro area in recent years. In any case, our monetary policy stimulus 
will stay in place as long as needed for its objective to be fully achieved on a truly sustained 
basis. 
The accommodative monetary policy is beneficial to the euro area and also to the Finnish 
economy. A Bank of Finland estimate1, to be published tomorrow in the context of the staff 
forecast, assesses the impact of the expanded asset purchase programme on the Finnish 
economy. According to these calculations, lower interest rates and a weaker exchange rate 
will  increase  the  GPD  growth  rate  in  Finland  by  0.3  percentage  points  in  two  years.  This 
positive indirect impact is also taken into account in the forecast for Finnish exports. 
[SLIDE 22] 
Financial stability risks and macroprudential policy 
While  the  current  monetary  policy  measures  are  necessary  for  the  ECB  to  achieve  its 
primary objective, the monetary policy stance may in some circumstances have unintended 
side  effects  on  the  financial  system.  A  key  concern  is  that  a  prolonged  period  of 
accommodative  monetary  policy  could  result  in  a  misallocation  of  resources  that  would 
ultimately undermine financial stability. 
[SLIDE 23] The mandate of the ECB 
The  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability,  and  monetary  policy 
decisions are based on the assessment of the risks to price stability in the euro area as a 
                                                
1   Elisa  Newby  and  Seppo  Orjasniemi:  “Suomi  hyötyy  eurojärjestelmän  arvopaperiostoista”,  Euro  & 
talous 3/2015. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
whole.  Higher  risks  to  financial  stability  should  be  met  primarily  through  domestic 
macroprudential policy. 
In  a  single  currency  area,  macro-prudential  policies  are  particularly  important  to  deal  with 
sectoral and regional risks. Macroprudential policy provides the most appropriate instruments 
for  mitigating  financial  stability  risks,  and  thereby  supporting  the  price-stability-focused 
monetary policy. 
[SLIDE 24] The ECB’s role in the new supervisory architecture 
From  the  perspective  of  financial  stability,  the  euro  area  is  now  in  a  substantially  better 
position than a few years ago. We are now operating in a new regulatory and supervisory 
environment.  In  November  last  year,  the  ECB  took  over  the  responsibility  for  supervising 
banks in the countries belonging to the Banking Union. It is less well-known that, at the same 
time, the ECB became the ultimate macroprudential decision-maker in the Union. 
[SLIDE 25] The ECB reinforces but cannot substitute national macroprudential policies 
More specifically, the ECB can apply higher requirements for specific macroprudential tools 
than  proposed  by  the  designated  national  macroprudential  authorities,  if  it  deems  that the 
suggested national measures are inadequate. 
In contrast to the single monetary policy, macroprudential policy in the Banking Union is a 
joint responsibility between different authorities. The main responsibility in macroprudential 
policy lies with national authorities. They are in the best position to detect country-specific 
systemic risks and take appropriate measures to address them. 
The role of the ECB in macroprudential policy is to enhance national policies and reduce the 
inaction bias inherent in taking potentially unpopular and intrusive national actions. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB), in turn, monitors the development of EU-wide 
cross-border  and  cross-sectional  systemic 
risks  and  provides  guidance  and 
recommendations to the national authorities. 
[SLIDE  26]  Macroprudential  policy  is  important  in  a  time  of  exceptionally  accommodative 
monetary policy 
A  necessary  precondition  for  successful  macroprudential  policies  is  the  availability  of 
sufficient  macroprudential  toolkits.  Importantly,  the  Capital  Requirements  Regulation  and 
Directive  (CRR/CRD  IV)  provide  the  ECB  and  the  national  authorities  with  a  common 
minimum set of macroprudential tools for the banking sector. These include countercyclical 
capital  buffer  requirements,  capital  surcharges  for  systemically  important  institutions  and 
minimum risk weights for real estate exposures, for example. 
However,  in  most  euro  area  countries,  the  national  toolkits  should  be  strengthened.  For 
example,  in  many  countries  the  tools  for  containing  excesses  in  housing  markets  and  for 
building resilience against the realisation of housing-related risks are not strong enough. 
The availability of strong national macroprudential toolkits and the courage to use those tools 
are of utmost importance in the environment of very low interest rates. The ECB’s Governing 
Council  is  closely  monitoring  any  potential  risks  to  euro  area  financial  stability,  including 
those from excessive risk taking. Currently, these risks are contained. Should they emerge, 
macroprudential policy would be best suited to address them. 
[SLIDE 27] 
Transparency improves the accountability and effectiveness of monetary policy 
In  January  this  year,  when  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  expand  its  asset  purchase 
programme, it also decided to publish a summary of that meeting’s deliberations before the 
next monetary policy meeting. The days of “never excuse, never explain” and central banks 
acting as opaque and secretive institutions were over for good. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
[SLIDE  28]  Transparency,  accountability  and  efficiency:  Accounts  of  the  monetary  policy 
meetings 
A high degree of transparency is an important tool for an independent central bank like the 
ECB,  as  it  facilitates  accountability.  We  are  accountable  to  achieve  our  mandate,  price 
stability.  By  explaining  the  reasoning  behind  our  monetary  policy  decisions  and  helping  a 
better understanding of monetary policy we make it easier to attain our objective, facilitating 
efficiency. 
In  mid-2013,  by  introducing  forward  guidance  and  through  2014  conveying  the  Governing 
Council’s  “reaction function” we increased our influence over the shape of the yield curve. 
When we had decided on our purchase programme in January, long-term nominal interest 
rates declined, as we had communicated our reaction function. 
We have emphasized that we will evaluate the likelihood for inflation not only to converge to 
levels  that  are  closer  to  2%,  but  also  to  stabilize  around  those  levels  with  sufficient 
confidence thereafter. 
The decision to publish an account of our monetary policy meetings was preceded by long 
and thorough discussions by the Governing Council. 
At  the  same  time,  we  felt  that  even  differences  of  views  can  be  communicated  without 
compromising  the  credibility  and  singleness  of  our  monetary  policy.  Such  differences  are 
quite  normal  and  should  exist  in  any  committee  having  meaningful  and  analytical 
discussions. 
The accounts we decided to start publishing are intended to provide a richer summary and 
convey the flavour of the discussion among Governing Council members. 
In our view, providing a fair and balanced summary of the main arguments put forward was 
the  best  way  to  achieve  this.  The  language  we  use  reflects  our  collegiate,  consensus-
oriented mode of discussion and decision-making. 
[SLIDE 29] 
Let me conclude. 
The  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  broadening.  ECB  policies  are  working,  as 
economic conditions in the short term are improving. Other policymakers are responsible for 
their  own  efforts  to  strengthen  the  euro  area  economies  and  their  potential  growth  in  the 
medium  to  longer  term.  This  will  be  achieved  mainly  by  implementing  structural  reforms 
based on each country’s own needs and capabilities. 
It  is,  however,  our  task,  especially  now  that  the  ECB  has  been  given  supervisory 
responsibilities, to ensure, besides price stability, also proper conditions of financial stability 
in  the  euro  area.  We  must  work  continuously  to  build  up  a  resilient,  robust  and  efficient 
financial system that is essential for the long-term prosperity of our monetary union. In this 
work  cooperation  between  the  Eurosystem,  the  SSM  and  national  central  banks  and 
supervisors is essential. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
