  Jens Weidmann: Presentation of the Bundesbank’s annual accounts for 
2014 
Opening  statement  by  Dr  Jens Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
presentation  of  the  Bundesbank’s  annual  accounts  for  2014,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  9  March 
2015. 
 Welcome 
1.  
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  I  am  glad  that  you  have  come  and  would  like  to 
welcome you to our press conference on the annual accounts of the Deutsche Bundesbank 
for 2014. 
I would like to take this opportunity to take stock in two ways. First, with regard to the size 
and determinants of our balance sheet and of the Bundesbank profit. Second, I would like to 
refer to key political and economic developments and how they have impacted on the work of 
the Bundesbank. 
Continuing the course of reform is the order of the day 
2.  
The debates on economic and monetary policy in the euro area were chiefly shaped last year 
by low interest rates and the no more than sluggish and uneven economic recovery in the 
countries of the euro area. 
Fortunately,  however,  despite  the  continuation  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  there  were  no 
periods of major tensions in the financial markets, such as those that occurred in 2012, for 
example. 
On the contrary: the spreads on sovereign bonds – in other words, the risk premiums which 
are frequently perceived as a barometer of the sovereign debt crisis – have gone back down 
in all of the member states severely affected by the crisis, with the exception of Greece for 
obvious  reasons.  Moreover,  interest  on  sovereign  debt  has  fallen  to  all-time  lows.  The 
governments of Italy, Spain and Portugal are obtaining funding more favourably than at any 
time since the introduction of the euro. 
An extremely accommodative monetary policy as well as continuing progress in adjustment 
in most of these countries are among the factors which have played a part in this. Despite 
differences  in  terms  of  how  far  countries  have  already  implemented  reform  steps,  the 
measures that have so far been taken nevertheless mostly point in the right direction. Price 
competitiveness  has  improved,  although  this  is  partly  due  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro. 
Large public deficits have been reduced and current account deficits have been massively 
cut back. 
It is now all the more important not to squander the progress made so far. Lasting success 
will be achieved only if budgetary consolidation and the improvement of competitiveness stay 
consistently at the top of the political agenda. 
The  favourable  conditions  for  government  financing  must  not  delude  governments  into 
thinking that further reforms are unnecessary. That naturally applies not only to the countries 
most affected by the crisis, but also to the large economies of France and Italy. 
There, too, central governments have ultimately recognised that reforms had been pushed 
into  the  background  for  too  long  –  something  that  was  also  reflected  in  their  low  rates  of 
growth. What is of crucial importance with regard to the announced reforms, however, is that 
they are implemented. In the end, that is the only way to measure whether the reform efforts 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  are having an effect. And that, in turn, is enormously important for the stability of the single 
currency area, which those two countries have a key part in shaping. 
Latterly, however, Greece has once again been the focus of public attention. Although the 
newly  elected  Greek government  takes  a  critical  view  of  the  assistance  programme  so far 
and  of  the  agreed  reforms,  three  weeks  ago  it  applied  for  the  existing  programme  to  be 
extended. 
The Eurogroup and numerous parliaments have now acceded to this wish on the basis of the 
existing agreements and extended the current programme by four months, but without taking 
on additional financial risks to begin with. For the existing programme to be extended, the 
Greek government  had to  commit  to  a  series  of  economic reforms,  which  now  have  to  be 
spelled out and then, most importantly, also implemented. 
Only  identifiable  progress  on  the  road  to  sound  public  finances,  a  competitive  economic 
structure and a functional political system will allow Greece to regain investors’ confidence 
and fund itself independently. Until then, the country will depend on further assistance; and I 
do not see that Greece can achieve an independent access to the capital market again by 
mid-year. 
But let me say one thing clearly. As I see it, further decisions about financial resources for 
Greece belong unequivocally in the field of politics. While fiscal policy has not approved any 
further financial assistance for some months now, the Eurosystem has  made considerable 
financial resources available – to be precise, lending to Greek banks has doubled to €100 
billion. 
Massive outflows of capital from Greece have been financed, and the Greek banks that are 
cut off from the capital market are dependent on funding by the Eurosystem, predominantly 
in the form of emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) from the Bank of Greece – with which, 
however, only temporary liquidity problems should be bridged. 
Liquidity assistance, as well as Eurosystem funding quite generally, should be granted only 
to  solvent  banks.  This  was  something  that  Mario  Draghi  stressed  once  again  at  the  press 
conference of the last meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB. 
Since  banks  and  central  government  in  Greece  are  very  closely  intertwined,  however,  the 
situation of the banks depends very heavily on whether the Greek government is solvent. 
The Eurosystem should pay careful attention to whether the Greek banks do not worsen their 
liquidity  position  by  acquiring  Greek  government  bonds  for  which  there  is  de  facto  still  no 
market.  Otherwise,  there  might  arise  the  suspicion  that  the  Eurosystem  does  not  take  the 
prohibition  of  monetary  financing  so  seriously.  That  was  something  Mario  Draghi  clearly 
pointed out, too. 
Given  the  government’s  and  banks’  lack  of  market  access,  financing  of  the  Greek 
government  via  banks  that,  in  turn,  avail  themselves  of  the  monetary  policy  financing 
opportunities  or the granting  of  ELA  by  the  Bank  of Greece,  also raises  obvious  concerns 
with regard to the prohibition of monetary financing. 
In  this  specific  situation,  governments  and  parliaments  must  decide  whether  they  are 
prepared  to  go  on  extending  the  Greek  risks  and  cover  the  funding  needs  of  the  Greek 
government despite the tangible uncertainty with regard to the government’s will to reform. I 
see this less than ever as a task within the remit of the Eurosystem. 
First and foremost, of course, the onus is on the Greek government. By means of credible 
and also quantifiable reform commitments, it must lay the foundation for a continuation of the 
support provided by the available assistance mechanisms. In this respect, a lot of confidence 
has been lost recently. 
Allow me to make one thing absolutely clear. The composition of the euro area is a political 
decision. Every country that has joined the monetary union also bears the responsibility to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  contribute  to  the  stability  of  the  single  currency  with  its  policy  and  by  compliance  with  the 
rules. This is also a matter of the general public’s confidence in the single currency and its 
institutions and, at the end of the day, the promise that the monetary union is a community of 
stability. 
Liability principle and commitment to fiscal rules 
3.  
Ladies  and gentlemen,  it  is  not just  the  current situation  in Greece  but  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis  as  a  whole  which  demonstrates  how  quickly  a  situation  can  develop  in  which  the 
Eurosystem comes under pressure to take on fiscal risks. 
In order to protect monetary policy from such risks, the euro area’s founders relied on sound 
public finances, which were to be ensured through the adoption of fiscal rules, amongst other 
things.  Unfortunately,  neither  the  rules  themselves  nor  their  implementation  were  strict 
enough in the past. And currently, there is not much to suggest that things will improve in the 
future. Quite the opposite, in fact. 
The  point  of  this  is  not  about  observing  these  limits  for  the  budgetary  rules’  sake,  placing 
constraints on government authorities or pushing through austerity programmes. It is about 
ensuring public finance sustainability and restoring confidence in sound government budgets. 
This is an important requirement for a stable single currency and for ensuring that monetary 
policy does not risk being drawn into a fiscal policy maelstrom from which it can no longer 
free itself. 
Budgetary  rules  are  anchors  of  trust.  They  tend  to  be  adopted  and  have  their  importance 
stressed  most  when  trust  is  urgently  required. When  the  monetary  union  was  established, 
the focus was on creating trust in the new currency. The decision to commit to the common 
currency on a permanent basis was, in return, to be accompanied by a reliable prospect of 
sound public finances. 
At  the  height  of  the  crisis,  the  focus  was  then  on  obtaining  approval  for  large-scale  joint 
liability  via  the  newly  created  European  support  funds.  Trust  also  had  to  be  built  here.  In 
return for joint liability, stricter fiscal rules were promised. The tougher fiscal rules were also 
intended to help restore confidence on the capital market, in an attempt to curb the increase 
in risk premiums. 
As  time  went  on,  the  risk  premiums  did  in  fact  fall.  But  this  was  probably  also  because 
monetary  policymakers  had  assumed  significant  fiscal  risks  –  the  Securities  Market 
Programme  (SMP),  for  example  –  or  announced  that  they  were  prepared  to  do  so  if 
necessary – here, I refer to outright monetary transactions (OMT). 
With pressure being reduced via the capital markets and given the security gained from the 
sizeable  fiscal  support  funds,  motivation  to  decrease  deficits  and  debt  evidently  also 
declined. Calls for “flexibility” in the fiscal rules grew louder, and the European Commission 
eventually gave in to the political pressure. 
The  Commission  took  advantage  of  its  stronger  position  with  regard  to  the  rules,  which 
actually  should  have  ensured  stricter  implementation  of  them,  to  interpret  the  rules  with 
greater political leeway and to take a softer approach to their implementation. 
As  a  result,  the  rules  are  more  flexible  and  political  today  than  ever  before.  They  have 
become extremely complex and have hardly any logic to them. Much scope is allowed for 
discretion and exemptions, meaning the binding effect of the rules is now weaker than before 
the crisis. 
The recent development in France’s excessive deficit procedure poses a problem with regard 
to  the  binding  effect  of  the  fiscal  policy  agreements.  It  also  weakens  other  coordination 
procedures and it certainly provides a reason not to expand euro-area joint liability elements 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  further,  as  has  often  been  called  for.  Liability  without  sufficient  control  undermines  the 
stability foundation of monetary union. 
Monetary policy stance eased further by purchase programme in early 2015 
4.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would now like to turn to the topic of monetary policy. Inflationary 
pressures in the euro area have been exceedingly low, especially since the second half of 
2014.  The  ECB  Governing  Council  responded  by  implementing  a  number  of  measures 
designed  to  loosen  still  further  their  already  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance.  Public 
attention  was  particularly  drawn  to  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  adopted  in 
January of this year. 
You  don’t  need  me  to  tell  you  that  I  had  my  qualms  about  this  decision.  But  the  ECB 
Governing Council faces a tricky monetary policy situation – inflation rates right now are far 
off our medium-term target. Indeed, some measures of long-term inflation expectations have 
even  diminished  distinctly  in  recent  months.  But  that’s  not  just  the  case  in  the  euro  area; 
other advanced economies that have already engaged in large-scale bond purchases also 
find themselves in the same boat. 
Finding the right monetary policy response to this predicament is anything but easy. The way 
policymakers  interpret  the  drivers  fuelling  the  current  low  inflation  rates  is  naturally  an 
important consideration. My preferred response would have been to “look through” this spell 
of low interest rates, rather like other central banks in advanced economies have done. 
I say that because the slack price pressures in the euro area are primarily the outcome of the 
drop  in  energy  prices.  This  decrease  ought  to  distinctly  boost  growth  in  the  euro  area 
because its member states are net importers of oil. 
Another point is that the available surveys suggest that long-term inflation expectations are 
still  well  anchored.  And  the  drops  in  market-based  expectations  don’t  automatically  mean 
that inflation expectations have contracted. Rather, they are also dictated to some extent by 
inflation risk and liquidity premiums. 
This assessment does not mean, say, that we at the Bundesbank are not being consistent 
with our declared primary objective of safeguarding price stability. And it most certainly does 
not  mean  that  we  are making  this  objective  play  second fiddle  to  other  considerations, for 
instance. 
What  it  does mean  is  that  in  the face  of  a  challenging  monetary  policy  situation,  we  have 
reweighted  economic  factors  and  developments  as  well  as  risks,  and  continue  to  weight 
these factors differently than the majority of ECB Governing Council members. 
You will no doubt know that the ECB staff project that the inflation rate will be zero this year, 
rising to 1.5% and 1.8% over the next two years. They also forecast that growth will climb 
from 1.5% this year to 1.9% in 2016 and 2.1% in 2017. 
This  assessment  is,  in  part,  also  a  reflection  of  expectations  placed  in the  transmission  of 
monetary policy decisions. But my reading of the latest data and the projection is that they 
are more an endorsement of a restrained monetary policy response. As I see it, the projected 
path of inflation clearly illustrates that the spell of low or even negative inflation rates is only a 
temporal phenomenon. 
The effect of the lower oil price plays a particularly important role in this regard, and it also 
significantly eases the financial strain for enterprises and households. This in turn stimulates 
their consumption and investment activity, contributing to the expected economic recovery. 
And it also reduces the threat of a prolonged phase of low inflation rates possibly sparking a 
self-reinforcing downward spiral of fallig prices, wages, production and employment. 
Incidentally, I see no signs of second round effects. The collective labour agreement in the 
metal-working  industry  is  largely  in  line  with  our  expectation  of  negotiated  wage  rates  in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Germany climbing by roughly 3% this year. And for the other euro-area countries, too, there 
is nothing at the moment to suggest that the European Commission’s projection of a 1.3% 
increase in euro-area employee compensation this year is untenable. 
I  am  not  denying  that  the  announcement  of  bond  purchases  has  further  reduced  the 
likelihood of deflation. That, at least, is what the data on inflation options seem to suggest. 
But the likelihood of deflation was rather remote even before the measures were announced. 
That’s  why,  on  the  whole,  I  don’t  think  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  further  ease 
monetary policy by rolling out the broadly based government bond purchase programme. 
All  the  more  so,  given  that  the  purchase  of  sovereign  bonds  in  the  euro  area  harbours 
specific risks, making it a monetary policy instrument unlike any other. 
But at least it is worth noting that the decision to largely rule out risk-sharing as part of the 
bond  purchase  programme  counteracts  the  direct  threat  of  sovereign  credit  risks  being 
mutualised. That also diminishes the legal risk involved in that kind of programme. 
But the fact remains that these purchases cause fiscal policy and monetary policy to become 
even more strongly intertwined. For when the purchases come to an end, sovereigns will be 
able to finance a substantial portion of their debt very cheaply without these financing costs 
being differentiated in any way according to the risk of the sovereign in question. 
If  the  member  states  were  to  become  accustomed  to  these  funding  terms,  they  might 
become less inclined to embrace further consolidation or reform measures. 
Together  with  the  Commission’s  unambitious  approach  to  enforcing  the  fiscal  rules,  this 
confluence of different factors might in fact turn out to complicate efforts to resolve the euro 
area’s structural problems. And that might make life more difficult, further down the road, for 
those of us looking to achieve the target of price stability. 
German economy has overcome weak growth 
5.  
Ladies and gentlemen, after getting off to a good start in 2014, the German economy did not 
perform as strongly in the second half of the year as originally expected. Nevertheless, the 
economy  appears  to  have  emerged  from  its  sluggish  phase  faster  than  many  believed 
possible given, amongst other things, Germany’s buoyant economic growth towards the end 
of last year. 
The economic upturn is currently being driven by a recovery in industrial activity as well as, 
above  all,  by  a  decidedly  positive  consumer  climate.  The  high  level  of  employment,  the 
favourable income prospects, the drastic fall in oil prices and the very low interest rates all 
promote households’ propensity to spend. 
In 2014, the negotiated wages of employees went up by 3% – an increase not seen in almost 
20  years.  In  the  light  of  the  low  inflation  rate,  real  disposable  incomes,  too,  increased 
considerably as a result. 
Enterprises benefited not only from low oil prices and favourable funding conditions, but also 
from the depreciation of the euro and the gradual recovery of international sales markets. As 
a result, enterprises increased their output on balance. 
Employment,  too,  continued  to  expand  while  unemployment  levels  fell.  Given  that  the 
economic environment is likely to remain favourable, the reduction in unemployment can be 
expected to continue this year. 
Hence, the German economy remains in good shape. Overall, many factors point to a growth 
rate for 2015 that is higher than what the Bundesbank published in its December projection. 
As  things  stand,  the  rate  of  1.5%  for  Germany  recently  provided  by  the  European 
Commission is fairly realistic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Public  finances,  too,  show  a  positive  picture  at  present.  In  2014,  Germany’s  general 
government  budget  again  recorded  a  slight  surplus.  While  government  expenditure  was 
fuelled by a sharp rise in pension and healthcare costs, government interest payments again 
contracted significantly, chiefly thanks to the very favourable funding conditions. 
The fiscal balance could deteriorate somewhat in the current year. Amongst other things, this 
is likely a result of faster expenditure growth due, not least, to the rise in social payments 
resulting from the pension benefits package adopted in mid-2014. However, a slight general 
government surplus will again be recorded this year. 
Regardless  of  the  good  situation  overall  and  the  favourable  economic  outlook,  continued 
risks  to  economic  developments  in  Germany  must  not  be  neglected.  This  includes 
geopolitical tensions, amongst other things. What is more, the economic recovery that has 
got underway in the euro area remains fragile. 
The  bottom  line  is  that  there  is  no  room  in  Germany  for  complacency  on  economic  policy 
matters.  In  particular,  the  unfavourable  demographic  outlook  will  weigh  heavily  on  the 
German  economy  in  the  medium  term.  By  2060,  the  population  will  have  shrunk  by  up  to 
20% and the labour force by around 30%. To make matters worse, policy measures such as 
early retirement on a full pension at 63 are already constraining the labour supply, thereby 
eroding growth opportunities. 
European banking union 
6.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (or SSM), based at the ECB, has 
been  up  and  running  since  4  November  2014.  In  parallel  to  the  introduction  of  the  SSM, 
policymakers  pressed  ahead  with  efforts  to  create  a  regime  for  the  orderly  recovery  and 
resolution of banks in 2014 without jeopardising financial stability or using taxpayers’ money, 
if at all possible. This project is the second pillar of the European banking union. 
In this context, the EU regulation establishing a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) created 
the  two  elements  of  this  pillar:  on  the  one  hand,  a  European  resolution  board  and  on  the 
other, a single bank-financed resolution fund. 
The SRM, which will enter into force in 2016, will apply the liability principle for banks as well. 
Freedom to take entrepreneurial decisions and responsibility for the consequences are to be 
inextricably linked here, too – and this means, if the worst comes to the worst, resolving and 
therefore closing a bank. Assuming they are involved at all, taxpayers will be the last to have 
to foot the bill, and even then only under certain conditions. 
However, this new joint responsibility for the resolution of banks also means that risks from 
the respective national private sector might be shifted to the community. This could be in the 
form of legislative measures which deteriorate the risk positions of banks in favour of their 
national  debtors.  For  example,  changes  to  insolvency  laws,  which  are  being  discussed  in 
some  euro-area  countries,  could  have  a  significant  impact.  I  therefore  believe  that  the 
banking  union  requires  policy  coordination  that  goes  beyond  the  level  that  has  been 
discussed so far. 
Overall,  however,  the  SRM  is  undoubtedly  a  key  step  along  the  road  to  a  more  stable 
banking system. 
But neither the SSM nor the SRM will solve the fundamental problem of the, in some cases, 
very  close  ties  between  banks  and  member-state  governments  in  the  euro  area. This  can 
lead to potentially threatening interactions in a crisis event. 
During  the  crisis,  distress  in  the  banking  system  of  some  countries  meant  that  their 
governments, too, faced considerable financial difficulties on account of the necessary public 
rescue  commitments.  However,  this  hazardous  “doom  loop”  between  banks  and  their 
sovereigns also means that sovereigns, in turn, can have a negative impact on banks. Banks 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  holding large portfolios of bonds issued by governments at risk of insolvency can be exposed 
to a considerable strain or even be dragged down along with them. 
That’s why I have repeatedly pointed out that, over the medium term, the current regulatory 
preferential  treatment  of  lending  to  sovereigns  needs  to  be  ended  or  at  least  substantially 
scaled back. The aim must be to loosen the sovereign-bank nexus over the medium term. 
The  conference  “Debt  and  Financial  Stability  –  Regulatory  Challenges”  being  held  by  the 
Bundesbank  and  the  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  at  the  end  of  this  month  will  therefore 
address this issue, too. 
One possible future approach could be for banks to back their claims on sovereign borrowers 
by capital commensurate with the risk and to subject them to large exposure limits. 
the 
the  problems  caused  by 
Privileged regulatory treatment of lending to sovereigns 
7.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen, 
interdependencies  between 
governments  and  banks  take  on  a  special  form  in  the  current  regulatory  framework  of 
European monetary union. This is reflected, amongst other things, by the fact that there is 
often very little diversification in European banks’ loans to sovereign debtors. 
On the contrary, in many cases, the vast majority of the government bonds held by euro-area 
banks  are  issued  by  just  one  sovereign  –  their  domestic  government.  For  example,  in 
December 2014, 98% of the loans from Greek banks to euro-area sovereign debtors were 
granted to the Greek government. 
Is it clear that in cases where the ties are so close, doubts concerning government solvency 
have a direct negative impact on the banking system. 
It is in this particular context that we have devoted the first main article of this year’s Annual 
Report  to  the  topic  of  the  sovereign-bank  nexus.  In  particular,  the  article  examines  what 
would  happen  if  sovereign  loans  were  backed  with  capital,  on  the  one  hand,  and  if  large 
exposures were subject to limits, on the other. 
Because of the potentially significant consequences, especially of the application of the large 
exposure  limit,  any  reforms  would  require  a  certain  transitional  period.  However,  the 
macroeconomic  effects  of  such  new  rules  would  no  doubt  be  positive.  Financial  stability 
would be enhanced, incentives to pursue this type of fiscal policy  would be increased and 
lending to private borrowers would become more attractive which, in turn, might boost capital 
stock and economies’ growth potential. It would therefore be important not to lose any time. 
This article should be seen as a contribution to this debate. 
Against  this  backdrop,  it  is  a  welcome  development  that  the  Basel  Committee  has  now 
added  the  regulatory  treatment  of  lending  to  sovereigns  to  its  agenda.  Furthermore,  the 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  published  its  report  on  this  topic  just  the  day  before 
yesterday. In the foreword to the report, Mario Draghi quite rightly said that a discussion on 
the topic was long overdue. 
If  it  is  not  possible  to  reach  a  consensus  at  the  international  level  on  eliminating  the 
privileged treatment of loans to sovereigns, we should push ahead with a European solution 
in order to make this important contribution to the long-term stability of the euro area. 
As well as focusing on major issues relating to a stability-oriented regulatory framework, the 
Bundesbank  also  takes  a  look  at  the  bigger  picture,  including,  for  example,  the  topic  of 
payment  transactions.  The  second  main  article  in  this  year’s  Annual  Report  therefore 
examines digital structural change in payment services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Bundesbank profit and risk provisions 
8.  
Ladies and gentlemen, finally I would like to come now to our annual accounts and hence 
also to this year’s Bundesbank profit. 
The  profit  and  loss  account  for  the  2014  financial  year  closed  with  an  annual  surplus  of 
€2.95 billion. The annual surplus for 2014 is therefore €1.6 billion below that of the previous 
year. 
The profit is lower mainly because of the significant decline in interest income last year. Net 
interest income came to €3.14 billion last year, which was €2.42 billion down on 2013. This 
decline was due, in particular, to the lower key interest rates, which were just over two-thirds 
lower on an annual average. 
With  regard  to  risk  provisions,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  risks  from  monetary  policy 
operations have grown considerably in recent years in the wake of the financial crisis. The 
Bundesbank  had  already  reacted  to  this  and,  from  2010  to  2012,  for  the  purpose  of  risk 
provisioning  increased  the  provisions  for  general  risks  in  three  steps  by  a  total  of 
€12.4 billion. 
The Executive Board also reviewed the requisite level of risk provisions for 2014 – as is the 
case  each  year  –  and,  in  doing  so, took  into  account  both  the  current  risk  situation  of the 
Bundesbank  and  the  available  financial  resources.  As  a  result  of  this  review,  the  risk 
provisions remain unchanged at €14.4 billion (as in the previous year). 
There are two main reasons for not running down the risk provisions. On the one hand, the 
risks for the Bundesbank from the risk-weighted assets, on which attention has hitherto been 
focussed,  have  declined  somewhat,  since  both  the  volume  of  refinancing  loans  from  the 
Eurosystem and that of the securities from the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) have 
decreased. 
On the other hand, additional credit risks will arise over the next two years. These are due to 
the  decisions  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council  on  the  purchase  programmes.  These  chiefly 
refer to the Asset-Backed Securities Purchase Programme (ABSPP) from September 2014, 
and  the  Covered  Bond  Purchase  Programme  (CBPP3).  The  large-scale  government  bond 
purchase  programme  (PSPP)  that  was  adopted  in  January  of  this  year  will  only  have  a 
negligible  impact  on  the  credit  risks.  After  all,  the  Bundesbank  primarily  only  purchases 
Federal bonds. 
At the same time, the cuts in the key interest rates in June and September 2014 have led to 
a decline in both the anticipated annual result for 2015 and in the Bundesbank’s available 
financial resources. In net terms, based on this overall review for 2014, no changes to the 
risk provisions are necessary. 
We  transferred  the  annual  surplus  in  full  to  the  Federal  Government  today.  The  Federal 
Government’s Budget Act for 2015 stipulates that €2.5 billion of the Bundesbank’s profit will 
be used for budgetary financing, and excess amounts will be used for debt repayment. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
