  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Celebrating freedom and responsibility 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the 117th Anniversary of Philippine Independence, Guam, 
26 June 2015. 
 I am deeply honored to be with you here in Guam to celebrate the 117th Anniversary of the 
Independence of the Philippines. This is a time of reflection. A time when we look back to 
honor  the  people  who  dedicated  their  lives  to  secure  our  freedom  as  a  nation.  A  time  to 
remember the significant events that define us as a people and as a nation. 
Indeed,  we  must  celebrate,  commemorate,  and  value  our  heroes  and  their  legacy  of 
freedom. We are happy to note that this is well recognized by the Government of Guam with 
the  proclamation  signed  by  Gov.  Calvo  declaring  June  2015  as  Philippine  Independence 
month. 
This brings me to the subject I wish to share with you tonight. 
In  the  Philippines,  we  are  working  on  developing  an  economy  where  growth  is  sustained, 
balanced and one that promotes inclusive growth. Growth that improves the quality of life. 
Growth  that  empowers.  Growth  that  breeds  financial  independence  among  our  people  - 
similar to what you have here in Guam. 
Indeed,  with  the  freedom  to  set  our  own  course,  the  Philippines  is  on  track  to  achieve 
sustained  long-term  growth.  Among  others,  we  have  registered  16  years  of  uninterrupted 
economic growth. And time and again, the Philippines has demonstrated a level of resilience 
that can withstand the effects of global financial distress or the devastating impact of natural 
calamities. 
In  2013,  for  instance,  central  Philippines  was  struck  in  succession  by  a  7.2  magnitude 
earthquake and by Typhoon Haiyan, considered the most powerful storm to make landfall in 
recorded  history.  Thousands  died,  millions  were  adversely  affected,  properties  and 
infrastructure  were  destroyed  and  heritage  sites  ruined.  Nevertheless,  with  overwhelming 
outpouring of international support, including from Guam, and with growth momentum on our 
side, our economy still expanded by 7.2%, the second highest in Asia, next to China. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – which is the Philippine central bank - plays a crucial role in 
laying  the  appropriate  foundation  to  help  keep  our  economy  growing.  In  line  with  our 
mandate, the Bangko Sentral works on providing an operating environment where stability is 
the  hallmark  of  price  movements  and  the  financial  system.  The  objective  is  to  create 
conditions that are conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy. 
Promoting  macroeconomic  stability  is  crucial  because  it  serves  as  a  solid  springboard  for 
households  and  businesses  to  flourish.  As  US  President  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt  famously 
declared  in  his  State  of  the  Union  address  in  1944,  and  I  quote:  “True  individual  freedom 
cannot exist without economic security and independence.” 
Indeed,  ensuring  economic  stability  and  security  is  in  the  best  interest  of  a  nation.  I  am 
pleased  to  report  therefore  that  we  continue  to  register  solid  gains  in  providing  a  stable 
environment for our economy to grow and for our people to benefit from opportunities that 
development brings. 
Among others, Philippine inflation in May was 1.6%, our lowest in 20 years. At this rate, we 
are  able  to  preserve  and  protect  the  purchasing  power  of  our  people.  By  comparison,  our 
inflation reached its highest at 50% in 1984 or three decades ago, when problems related to 
politics  and  economics  converged.  We  had  a  debt  crisis:  with  our  gross  international 
reserves insufficient to meet our overseas obligations, we declared a moratorium on foreign 
debt payments, which in turn triggered a credit freeze. As a consequence, government had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to ration scarce foreign exchange by prioritizing importation of critical commodities such as 
oil, medicines, and dairy products. The credit squeeze also pushed domestic interest rates 
higher, with housing loans going for over 30%. It was during this period when many Filipinos 
went overseas to find better opportunities. 
Today,  things  are  so  much  better  in  the  Philippines.  We  now  have  ample  international 
reserves that have enabled us to fully prepay our loans to the International Monetary Fund, 
after  45  years  of  indebtedness.  And  we  have  liberalized  foreign  exchange  transactions. 
Among  others,  with  minimal  documentation,  individuals  can  purchase  as  much  as  one 
hundred twenty thousand dollars ($120,000.00) per transaction from banks. 
Interest rates have  also  been  lower,  with  some  housing  loans going for  5%  per  year. The 
banking system is sound, stable and liquid, with bank capitalization more than compliant with 
global standards. 
In  fact,  last  year,  in  a  field  of  69  jurisdictions,  the  Philippine  banking  system  earned  the 
distinction of receiving the only positive outlook rating from Moody’s. Moving forward, we are 
confident that our banks can hold their own when ASEAN Banking Integration takes place by 
2020, as part of the wider implementation of the ASEAN Economic Community (AEC) by the 
end of 2015. 
In preparation for this, a new law was passed last year - Republic Act No. 10641 – allowing 
100% foreign ownership of banks in the Philippines. We believe this will encourage healthy 
competition that will benefit Filipino consumers in terms of having broader and better choices 
of  bank  products  and  services.  It  will  also  bring  in  more  foreign  investments  into  the 
Philippine economy. 
We hope that these favorable business conditions in the Philippines will prove attractive for 
increased investments from Guamanians to partner with us in exploiting such opportunities. 
Parallel to this, we are taking a proactive approach to ensure that Filipinos across the country 
are able to identify, gain and prosper from the fruits of economic progress. 
Our way forward is through financial inclusion. We want our people to save, invest and learn 
proper personal finance management to be financially secure and independent. We want our 
people to be part of the financial mainstream where they can access bank loans that will help 
them  grow  their  own  business.  We  want  our  people  to  have  options  other  than  informal 
lenders with prohibitive rates and onerous conditions. And we want our people to be able to 
protect themselves against scams and to know their rights as financial consumers. 
We are therefore working with other agencies and institutions to develop and implement a 
national  strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion  to  achieve  sustained  and  broad-based  inclusive 
growth. 
The upward trajectory of economic freedom in the Philippines is reflected in the 2015 Index 
of  Economic  Freedom  published  by  the  Wall  Street  Journal  and  The  Heritage  Foundation 
where we ranked as 76th freest among 186 countries. 
We  had  one  of  the  10  best  score  improvements  in  this  2015  Index,  with  notable 
improvements in financial freedom, freedom from corruption, and labor freedom. While the 
report  pointed  out  areas  of  remaining  concern,  it  acknowledged  that  wide-ranging  reforms 
have  put  greater  emphasis  on 
improving  regulatory  efficiency,  enhancing  regional 
competitiveness, and liberalizing the banking sector. In terms of overall economic freedom, 
the  score  of  the  Philippines  is  above  average,  relative  to  the  world  and  the  regional 
benchmarks. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  declaration  of  Philippine  independence  117  years  ago  was  a 
decisive step toward building a free and prosperous nation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Today,  more  than  paying  respect  to  our  forefathers  and  heroes,  let  us  reflect,  as 
beneficiaries  of  this  freedom  on  our  responsibilities  in  moving  our  country  and  our  people 
forward wherever we may be. 
The  current  generation  has  the  obligation  to  carry  on  with  the  task  of  nation-building  to 
ensure that future generations continue to have the rights and privileges that we enjoy today 
as free and independent citizens as Filipinos or as Guamanians. 
At the core of this shared mission is the spirit of community that we also celebrate tonight-the 
Filipino values of bayanihan and malasakit - both of which are underpinned by concern and 
caring for others, out of compassion, or a sense of duty. 
We  observe  this,  for  instance,  in  the  consistent  flow  of  remittances  from  Guam  to  the 
Philippines. According to data collated by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, cash remittances 
through banks by overseas Filipinos in Guam reached a total of $85 million in 2013 and $87 
million in 2014. 
The strong ties that bind us are also evident in the number of tourists from Guam who visit 
the Philippines. In 2014 for instance, we recorded 38,000 tourists from Guam - equivalent to 
roughly 23% of your population. 
And preference for products from the Philippines is on the rise. This includes dried mangos, 
shrimps and other food items and automotive vehicles. Philippine exports to Guam reached 
$13 million in 2013 and increased to $19 million in 2014. 
This  is  not  surprising.  Guam  and  the  Philippines  have  many  things  in  common  –  being  a 
former  colony  of  Spain  and  the  United  States  and  under  Japan  during  World  War  II. 
 
Indeed,  Guam  is  part  of  our  history.  Filipino  revolutionary  heroes  were  exiled  here.  This 
included Melchora Aquino who was 84 when the Philippine revolution against Spanish rule 
broke  out.  Popularly  named  as  “Tandang  Sora”  she  provided  shelter  and  resources  to 
freedom fighters and became known as the Mother of the Philippine Revolution. 
The other Filipino hero exiled here was Apolinario Mabini who was recognized as the Brains 
of the Philippine Revolution. He was the first Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government 
and the first Foreign Affairs Secretary of the Republic of the Philippines. He was 38 when he 
died, shortly after returning from exile. 
Indeed, no one is too young nor too old, to fight for freedom. 
As  fate  would  have  it,  we  recently  celebrated  milestones  of  these  two  heroes:  Melchora 
Aquino’s 200th birth anniversary in 2012, and Apolinario Mabini’s 150th birth anniversary in 
2014. The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas minted special coins and medals to commemorate the 
role of these two heroes in our fight to gain independence for our country and our people. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  donating  a  number  of  these  commemorative  coins  and 
medals  to  the  Filipino  Community  of  Guam  and  to  the  Philippine  consulate  here  as  a 
reminder of how Guam figured in the lives of these two heroes. 
And now, Filipinos come to Guam, not as exiles but as citizens of the world, who exercise 
their  freedom  to  choose  where  they  can  be  productive  members  of  the  economy  and  live 
better lives with their families. I understand that the number of tourists from the Philippines is 
also on the rise, as we have been learning good things about Guam and Guamanians. 
In  other  words,  the  Filipinos  here  have  been  actively  promoting  Guam  in  our  country.  I 
therefore  congratulate  the  Filipino  Community  of  Guam  (FCG)  in  fostering  and  nurturing 
Philippine-Guam relations. 
And most especially, I commend FCG for being responsible members of the community here 
for over 60 years now. I understand FCG channels its efforts and resources to respond to 
emerging needs in health care, education, as well as in disaster relief and mitigation. This is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  as it should be – paying back to the island of Guam, which, for many of you, has become 
your new home. 
I believe the members of FCG have made the right choice. Guam is economically active and 
has a bright future ahead of it. Among others, Guam is an exciting and popular destination 
for tourists who number over a million. In short, tourists easily outnumber the local population 
(est. at over 165,000). 
And projections of more active US military presence is bound to create more jobs and better 
opportunities here. I take this opportunity therefore to congratulate the leaders of Guam who 
are  here  tonight,  for  providing  a  clear  roadmap  to  sustaining  growth  and  a  better  life  for 
Guamanians and its other residents. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  task  of  nation-building  begins  when  we  gain  our  freedom,  our 
independence.  This  privilege  comes  with  an  obligation  to  nurture  our  freedom  by  working 
together to create better lives for our people. As French writer and philosopher Albert Camus 
once said: “Freedom is nothing else but a chance to be better.” 
Once again, I congratulate the members and officers, the Board of Directors, and the Board 
of Trustees of the Filipino Community of Guam under the leadership of President Baldovino 
for this successful celebration. 
Maraming Salamat! 
To my Kabalens, dacal a salamat! 
Thank you for your invitation and your kind attention. Mabuhay! Hafa Adai. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
