  François Groepe: Recent international and domestic economic 
developments and changes to the financial regulatory architecture 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Actuarial  Society  of  South  Africa  (ASSA)  2015  Investment  Seminar,  Cape  Town,  27  May 
2015. 
 Introduction 
Good day ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for inviting me to this seminar and I look forward 
to  sharing  my  views  on  the  recent  international  and  domestic  economic  developments,  as 
well as changes to the financial regulatory architecture. 
Global outlook 
The  global  environment  facing  South  Africa  remains  challenging  and  fraught  with  a  high 
degree  of  uncertainty.  Developments  in  the  US,  in  particular,  continue  to  have  spill-over 
effects on emerging markets in general and South Africa in particular. While it is clear that 
monetary policy normalisation will (and should) take place, the timing of the initial “lift off” is 
still uncertain, and dependent on domestic developments in the US, not least in the labour 
market. This makes each data release a source of volatility, with good news in the payrolls 
data generally being interpreted that it will bring forward the expected commencement date 
of  the  normalisation  process.  Perhaps  of  greater  importance  than  the  “lift  off”  itself  is  the 
question  of  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  The  US  Fed  has  gone  to  great  pains  to 
communicate  a  gradual  path,  but  the  “dots”  (the  interest  rate  forecasts  of  the  individual 
members)  that  illustrate  this  are  subject  to  a  high  degree  of  dispersion  and  change  from 
meeting to meeting. This reflects the high degree of uncertainty. 
However, uncertainties in the US economy abound. The economy appeared to be well on the 
road  to  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  but  the  first  quarter  data  disappointed, 
following an advanced estimate growth rate of 0,2 per cent. The general expectation is that 
this was due to temporary factors, but risks still remain that it could portend a more general 
extended slowdown. Furthermore, there is still uncertainty regarding the improvement in the 
labour market: in particular, whether the improvement is a result of a decline in labour force 
participation  rates,  which  could  reverse  should  the  improvement  in  the  economy  be 
sustained.  Finally,  there  is  still  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  whether  potential  growth 
rates  will  return  to  pre-crisis  levels  or  settle  at  a  lower  level,  and  this  is  likely  to  have 
implications for the longer term neutral rate of interest. 
The Eurozone appears to be improving following a weak few quarters, with positive growth 
impulses  from  the  weaker  euro  and  lower  oil  prices.  The  partial  reversal  of  the  oil  price 
suggests  that  this  impulse  may  be  waning.  It  does  however  appear  that  the  quantitative 
easing by the ECB is bearing fruit, but the question remains as to whether the region can 
sustain  the  recovery  without  this  support.  A  question  mark  also  remains  regarding  the 
possible contagion effect from the Greek debt crisis. The market reaction to date suggests 
that this is more contained, unlike the more generalised crisis in 2011 when risk premia on all 
peripheral Eurozone bonds widened significantly. 
The Chinese economy continues to focus on rebalancing away from investment to domestic 
consumption. This has resulted in a downward revision of growth targets, but has also meant 
that demand for commodities is not as strong as it was previously. While a growth rate of 
7 per cent would seem unattainable for South Africa, it is relatively low by recent historical 
standards for China. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Domestic outlook 
The spill overs on to South Africa from these developments are significant. The US impact is 
through the exchange rate and long term bond yields, which are highly correlated with those 
in the UK. The Eurozone is an important destination for South Africa’s manufactured exports, 
so a slow recovery is bad for the manufacturing sector, while the (until recently) weaker euro 
means  that  the  competitive  advantage  from  a  weaker  rand  is  undermined.  Although  the 
African continent, which has been growing quite robustly, has emerged as one of the main 
destinations  of  South  Africa’s  manufactured  exports,  there  are  downside  risks  to  the 
continent’s  growth  prospects  given  the  decline  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices.  The 
slowdown  in  China  has  had  a  marked  impact  on  global  commodity  prices,  resulting  in  a 
deterioration of South Africa’s terms of trade, which was only reversed to some extent with 
the collapse of international oil prices since late last year, but even this windfall has reversed 
somewhat. So all in all we are indeed facing a challenging international environment. 
However, it would be wrong to suggest that the subdued outlook for the domestic economy is 
purely a function of global developments. Domestic factors are also important, and some of 
them  are  of  our  own  making.  Real  GDP  for  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  slowed  down  to 
1.3 per cent compared to the 4.1 per cent (qqsa) recorded for the final quarter of 2014. This 
is against the backdrop of the sluggish growth rate of 1,5 per cent for 2014 and which is well 
below  the  Bank’s  estimate  of  potential  output  of  between  2,0  and  2,5  per  cent.  The  weak 
outcome  last  year  was  partly  due  to  the  impact  of  protracted  strikes  in  the  mining  and 
manufacturing  sectors  during  the  year.  The  Bank  estimates  the  negative  impact  of  these 
strikes to be in the order of around 1,2 percentage points of GDP. Hopefully, prolonged work 
stoppages will not be a regular feature each year. 
The question we need to ask ourselves is why the growth prognosis is so weak. Some of it 
has  to  do  with  the  global  economy,  as  I  outlined  earlier.  Secondly,  there  are  binding 
constraints coming from the electricity supply uncertainties. Our estimate of growth tries to 
incorporate some element of the impact of load shedding on output. There are two elements 
here: one is the impact of longer term constraints which hamper new investment, and which 
is reflected in the overall lower potential output; the other is the impact of load-shedding on 
existing capacity and therefore on current output. We estimate this latter factor to be in the 
order of magnitude of around 0,5 percentage points of GDP. Load-shedding appears to have 
contributed  to  a  general  low  level  of  business  confidence,  as  evident  in  the  various 
confidence  indices,  but  also  evident  in  the  very  low  growth  in  private  sector  gross  fixed 
capital  formation.  In  2014,  gross  fixed  capital  formation  contracted  by  0,4 per  cent,  driven 
mainly by the 3,4 per cent contraction in investment by the private sector, which accounts for 
just under two thirds of capital formation. On a more positive note, in the second half of the 
year growth was positive, a reversal of the strongly negative trends observed in the first half 
of  the  year.  However,  supply  side  constraints  and  low  confidence  are  likely  to  constrain 
stronger  growth.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  more  favourable  fixed  investment  outcomes 
observed in 2013 were mainly related to renewable energy projects. 
The  main  driver  of  growth  in  recent  years  has  been  the  consumption  expenditure  by 
households. However, the contribution to growth in 2014 declined by one percentage point to 
0,8  percentage  points.  While  we  would  prefer  to  have  investment-driven  growth,  even 
consumption has been relatively subdued for some time, declining to 1,4 per cent in 2014 
compared  with  2,9  per cent  in  2013.  A further concern  has  been  the recent  sharp  drop  in 
consumer confidence, which, according to the FNB/BER survey reached a level of –4 in the 
first  quarter  of  the  year,  compared  to  an  average  of  +5.  Factors  undermining  consumer 
confidence include the partial reversal of the boost to consumption provided by lower petrol 
prices; the increase in the marginal tax rate in the February budget; high levels of household 
indebtedness despite some deleveraging; and continued weak growth in credit extension to 
households. Employment growth trends are also not supportive in this respect, and although 
wage growth remains relatively high, the positive net impact on consumption could be offset 
to some extent by the negative impact on employment from relatively high wage growth. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Inflation is currently well within the inflation target band of 3–6 per cent. However, the focus 
of  monetary  policy  is  not  current  inflation,  which  is  something  that  we  cannot  do  anything 
about,  but  rather  on  the  inflation  trajectory  over  the  relevant  policy  horizon,  i.e.  the  time 
period  over  which  monetary  policy  can  have  an  impact  on  inflation  and  which  is  around  
12–18 months ahead. Headline CPI inflation accelerated to 4,5 per cent in April, which is at 
the mid-point of the target range. The main drivers of the annual increase were housing and 
utilities  (1,3 percentage points), miscellaneous  goods  and  services  (1,1  percentage  points) 
as  well  as  food  and  non-alcoholic  beverages  (0,8  percentage  points).  On  a  monthly  basis 
Headline CPI inflation increased by 0.9 percentage points, up from the recent low of 3,9 per 
cent in February and which is mainly attributable to the previous decline in the petrol price, 
which has largely been reversed. 
As we noted in our monetary policy statement last week, inflation is expected to accelerate in 
the coming months, and is expected to rise to 6,8 per cent on average for the quarter thus 
temporarily  breaching  the  upper  end  of  the  headline  inflation  target  range  during  the  first 
quarter of 2016. The CPI inflation rate is expected to average 6,1 per cent and 5,7 per cent in 
2016 and 2017, respectively. Core inflation is forecast to average 5,4 per cent and 5,2 per 
cent in the outer two years with the persistence in this measure largely being attributed to 
high  levels  of  wage  growth,  currency  depreciation  and  inflation  expectations  that  are 
anchored at the upper end of the target range. 
There  are  a  number  of  upside  risks  to  this  outlook.  The  main  one  emanates  from  the 
exchange rate, given the rand’s sensitivity to imminent US Fed monetary tightening. South 
Africa, along with other emerging markets with wide current account and fiscal deficits are 
seen to be particularly vulnerable. However, there is a great deal of uncertainty in this regard. 
How  much  is  already  priced  in  to  the  exchange  rate? Will  any  weakening  be  a  temporary 
overshoot? To what extent is this offset by QE in the Eurozone and Japan? We should also 
recognise  that  domestic  factors  also  play  a  role,  including  the  persistently  wide  current 
account  deficit,  weak  growth  outlook  and  uncertainty  arising  from  the  binding  electricity 
constraints.  And  finally,  in  this  regard,  there  is  uncertainty  regarding  the  degree  of  pass-
through from the depreciation to inflation. We have seen far more muted pass-through in the 
past few years, than during previous episodes of rand depreciation and the Bank estimates 
that actual pass-through could be about half of what is assumed in the forecast model. The 
uncertainty is whether this represents some form of structural change, or whether it is cyclical 
–  in  which  case  it  will  increase  when  growth  picks  up  –  or  whether  some  inflexion  points 
exist, beyond which inflation will accelerate. 
A further issue relates to electricity prices. There is some uncertainty following the application 
to  Nersa  for  a  25  per  cent  increase  in  electricity  tariffs.  The  Bank’s  model  previously 
incorporated  an  increase  of  around  13  per  cent,  effective  from  1  July  2015,  but  should  a 
higher increase be granted, we will see further upside pressure on inflation. 
The  above  backdrop  provides  a  difficult  challenge  for  monetary  policy.  It  is  clear  that  the 
main pressures on inflation are supply side shocks, rather than demand pressures which are 
easier to deal with through monetary policy. At the same time, the growth outlook remains 
highly constrained. We, however cannot simply  ignore supply side developments, as in so 
doing we could allow inflation expectations to become unanchored. Furthermore, the MPC is 
concerned about the persistence of the medium term inflation outlook at heightened levels 
and the significant upside risk to this outlook, which includes electricity tariff increases, the 
exchange rate and the level of wage settlements. Our focus is therefore sharply on possible 
second round effects of these shocks to see if it spills over into more generalised inflation. 
Monetary policy has been accommodative, which has been appropriate in light of the weak 
real economy. We are however in a hiking cycle and the deteriorating inflation outlook may 
necessitate policy action as the window for an unchanged stance has narrowed. The pace of 
normalisation will however be influenced by the data. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Regulatory reforms 
As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  the  Bank’s  mandate  has  been  broadened  to  more  explicitly 
include  financial  stability.  Following  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  became  clear  that  price 
stability is a necessary, but insufficient condition for financial stability and it has now become 
a more explicit mandate of central banks in many countries. While the price stability mandate 
of the SARB is clearly defined and measureable, its mandate for financial stability is much 
broader and is a shared responsibility with other stakeholders. 
National  Treasury  published  a  policy  document  in  February  2011  titled  A  safer  financial 
sector to serve South Africa better, which outlined government’s decision to shift to a Twin 
Peaks  model  of  financial  sector  regulation.  The  Twin  Peaks  model  of  financial  sector 
regulation represents a move away from a fragmented regulatory approach which was based 
on the institution or activity towards a regulatory and supervision model based on objectives. 
It is envisaged that, once fully implemented, the Twin Peaks system of regulation will focus 
on a more harmonised system of licensing, supervision, enforcement, customer complaints, 
an appeal and review mechanism, and consumer advice and education. 
National  Treasury  published  the  second  draft  of  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  in 
December  2014. This  bill  proposes  to  confer  upon  the  Bank  the responsibility  for financial 
stability and the oversight of market infrastructure and payment systems. It further proposes 
the establishment of two regulators, namely a Prudential Authority within the Bank and a new 
Financial Sector Conduct Authority. The Prudential Authority would supervise the safety and 
soundness of banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions, while the market 
conduct  authority  would  supervise  the  way  in  which  financial  services  firms  conduct 
themselves and treat their customers. 
This reform forms part of the current broader overhaul of the global regulatory system which 
aims  to  address  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions, 
building  resilient  financial  institutions,  reducing  the  opacity  of  over-the-counter  derivatives 
markets, mitigating the impact of shadow banking on financial stability, enhancing financial 
benchmark transparency, and promoting the convergence of accounting standards. 
Within  each  of  these  themes  there  are  a  number  of  regulatory  initiatives,  such  as  the 
regulation  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  under  the  too-big-to-fail  problem, 
Basel III and proposals for a basic capital requirement for insurers to strengthen the theme of 
building resilient financial institutions. 
The  Bank’s  main  activities  in  the  financial  stability  arena  currently  include  developing  and 
implementing recovery and resolution plans for systemically important financial institutions, 
introducing  a  macroprudential  toolkit  of  policy  instruments  to  contain  risks  associated  with 
imbalances in the financial system, and applying a top-down stress testing framework to the 
banking sector in South Africa. 
Although  the  Bank’s  financial  stability  mandate  is  distinct  from  its  price  stability  mandate, 
careful consideration is continuously given to the interaction between the Bank’s monetary 
policy and financial stability objectives. This coordination is facilitated by cross-membership 
between the Bank’s monetary policy and financial stability committee structures. 
The main risks from the global and domestic environments that might impact the stability of 
the  domestic  financial  system  and  that  are  monitored  continuously  in  terms  of  possible 
mitigating actions include the possibility of severe electricity supply disruptions, volatility and 
risk aversion in global financial markets, a protracted period of slow growth in the euro area, 
low growth in the domestic economy and the escalation of global geopolitical tensions. These 
possible  scenarios  of  potential  threats  to  financial  stability  are  rated  according  to  the 
likelihood  of  occurrence  and  the  expected  impact  on  the  domestic  financial  system.  The 
results are captured in a risk assessment matrix and published in the latest Financial Stability 
Review which was released at the end of April. This publication is aimed at analysing these 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  potential  risks  to  financial  stability  and  to  stimulate  debate  on  pertinent  financial  stability 
issues. 
Conclusion 
It is clear that although the global recovery has started to gain momentum it continues to be 
erratic and there are a number of downside risks to the global economic growth outlook. The 
recent partial rebound in the price of crude oil has ameliorated some of the benefits arising 
from its earlier sharp decline. A further risk is a possible Grexit and other geopolitical risks. 
On the domestic front, growth continues to disappoint, and the medium term growth outlook 
is likely to be constrained due to the binding electricity constraints. The inflation outlook has 
deteriorated  to  uncomfortable  levels  recently  with  inflation  expectations  remaining  close  to 
the upper-end of the target and with further notable upside risk to the outlook. 
The  scale  of  the  regulatory  reform  process  under  way  is  probably  the  most  significant 
overhaul of the financial regulatory architecture in the last few decades. Despite its ambitious 
scale, the Bank is making good progress in preparing itself to take up its new responsibilities 
as set out in the Financial Sector Regulation Bill. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
