  Mario Draghi: Inauguration of the new ECB premises 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the inauguration of 
the new ECB premises, Frankfurt am Main, 18 March 2015. 
 Deputy Minister President Mr. Al-Wazir, 
Lord Mayor Mr. Feldmann, 
Former President of the ECB, dear Jean-Claude Trichet, 
Fellow and former members of the Governing Council, 
Former Lord Mayor, Mrs. Roth, 
Honorary citizen, Mr. von Metzler, 
Head of the Jewish Community, Mr Korn, 
Heir of the Grossmarkthalle architects, 
Mr. Elsaesser, and 
Mr. Prix, the famous architect of our new house 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  all  today  to  the  inauguration  of  the  new  European  Central 
Bank headquarters. 
Creating our new home is a project as old as the ECB itself. It began in 1998 with the search 
for a suitable site. In 2001 we found that site here at the Grossmarkthalle. A year later, an 
international  competition  was  launched  for  the  best  architectural  design,  which  was 
eventually won by Wolf Prix and his team. And in May 2010 the foundation stone was laid 
and  the  main  construction  works  started.  Many  people,  some  of  them  here  today,  have 
worked  tirelessly  over  this  period  to  make  this  project  a  reality.  I  would  like  to  thank 
everybody involved for such tremendous work. 
The euro, our single currency, has become the most tangible symbol of European integration 
– a piece of Europe accessible and valuable to each and every one of us. This building will 
inevitably become known as the “house of the euro”. It provides a sound foundation for the 
ECB to pursue its mandate of maintaining price stability for all euro area citizens. 
In that sense, the building is a symbol of the best of what Europe can achieve together. But it 
is also a symbol of why we can never again risk to split apart. 
We  are  standing  here  today  in  what  used  to  be  Frankfurt’s  former  wholesale  fruit  and 
vegetable market, a state-of-the-art functional building from the 1920s that has largely been 
preserved  and  incorporated  into  the  new  structure.  Between  1941  and  1945,  more  than 
10,000  Jewish  people  from  Frankfurt  and  nearby  were  deported  from  here  to  the 
concentration camps. A memorial on the east-side of the building has been built to remind 
us, and those who come after us, of deeds that cannot and must never be forgotten. 
An integrated, democratic and peaceful Europe was one of the key lessons from this dark 
chapter  in  history. We have  come  a  long  way  since  then  –  but  nothing we  have  achieved 
should be taken for granted. 
European  unity  is  being  strained.  People  are  going  through  very  difficult  times.  A  recent 
Eurobarometer  survey  on  how  households  in  several  countries  are  coping  with  the  crisis 
showed that all respondents had been affected by a loss of income, and almost all said life 
was worse since the crisis hit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As an EU institution that has played a central role throughout the crisis, the ECB has become 
a focal point for those frustrated with this situation. This may not be a fair charge – our action 
has  been  aimed  precisely  at  cushioning  the  shocks  suffered  by  the  economy.  But  as  the 
central bank of the whole euro area, we must listen very carefully to what all our citizens are 
saying. 
There are some, like many of the protestors outside today, who believe the problem is that 
Europe is doing too little. They want a more integrated Europe with more financial solidarity 
between nations. 
And there are others, like the populist parties we see emerging across Europe, who believe 
that Europe is doing too much. Their answer is to renationalise our economies and reclaim 
economic sovereignty. 
I  understand  what  motivates  these  views,  why  people  want  to  see  a  change.  Yet  in  truth 
neither offers a real solution to the situation we face today. 
Solidarity is central to European integration and it is right that countries have supported each 
other  during  the  crisis.  But  the  euro  area  is  not  a  political  union  of  the  sort  where  some 
countries permanently pay for others. 
It has always been understood that countries have to be able to stand on their own two feet – 
that each is responsible for its own policies. The fact that some had to go through a difficult 
period of adjustment was first and foremost a consequence of their past decisions. 
Nevertheless,  standing  on  one’s  own  feet  is  not  the  same  thing  as  standing  alone. 
Renationalising our economies is also not the answer. 
It would not change the basic economic realities that European countries confront – that we 
are ageing societies which have to grow primarily through raising productivity. And it would 
not offer citizens any more economic security. There is no country in the world that is both 
prosperous and insulated from globalisation. 
In fact, the Single Market process was introduced precisely because European economies, 
acting alone, could not create enough jobs in an increasingly open world. And that process 
led  in  turn  to  monetary  union  because  –  as  the  ERM  crisis  in  the  early  1990s  showed  – 
countries  realised  they  could  not  integrate  in  part  and  benefit  in  full.  The  financial  and 
sovereign debt crises since 2008 have only reaffirmed that truth. 
So  the  answer  is  not  to  unwind  integration.  Nor  is  it  to  hold  out  an  unattainable  vision  of 
where integration should lead. It is to complete our monetary union in the areas where it can 
and needs to be completed. We need ambition in our ends and pragmatism in our means. 
We  have  already  shown  how  this  can  be  done  with  the  solidarity  and  stabilisation 
mechanisms  that  were  set  up  during  the  crisis.  Banking  Union  is  also  a  remarkable 
achievement.  Now  we  need  to  make  progress  in  the  other  areas  that  remain  unfinished, 
notably in terms of economic and institutional convergence. 
Still, I recognise that we cannot have a purely economic perspective on the questions facing 
our  Union. While  economic  integration  produces  more  jobs  and  growth  on  aggregate,  this 
does not completely solve the problem that drives dissatisfaction with the euro and the EU. 
There is also the problem of distribution: who gains and who loses from that process? 
For example, higher labour mobility across countries might reduce unemployment, but it can 
also stoke fears about immigration and create insecurity for low-skilled workers. Opening up 
a previously protected sector might reduce costs for consumers, but it can also leave citizens 
employed there with an uncertain future. 
So, if we are to build lasting confidence in our Union, we still need to address this tension – 
to  reconcile  the  economics  of  integration,  which  is  about  efficiency,  with  the  politics  of 
integration, which is about equity. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This is a complex issue, but a solution can be summed up in one word: skills. 
Theoretical and empirical research both suggest that recent technological change has been 
skill-biased. In other words, production technology has shifted in a way that favours skilled 
over unskilled labour, by increasing its relative productivity and therefore its relative demand. 
Equipping  workers  with  the  right  skills  therefore  makes  the  economy  more  efficient  and 
creates new job opportunities. And it also makes the economy more equitable by allowing as 
many citizens as possible to participate in those opportunities. 
For this reason, education and training need to be as much a part of the reform agenda as 
creating more flexible markets and reducing red tape. 
But there is also a second way in which the economics and politics of integration need to be 
reconciled. The more decision-making over economic issues moves to the European level, 
the more democracy needs to move with it. 
This is not just because democracy is a core value of the EU. It is because making policy 
without  adequate  representation  and  accountability  does  not  work.  So  we  need  to  deepen 
our  economic  union  and  our  political  union  together.  And  this  means  strengthening  the 
channels for genuine European democratic legitimacy, like the European Parliament. 
Inevitably European democracy will be different. Voters in any one country may initially fear 
that they have less influence over decisions than at present. But it is my belief and certainly 
what has happened in the monetary policy area that in giving up some formal sovereignty, 
people will gain in effective sovereignty. 
They  will  empower  institutions  with  euro-wide  responsibilities  able  to  tackle  the  pressing 
problems of jobs and growth – and so their votes may in fact make more of a difference to 
their lives than they do today. 
In this way, I trust, we can reconcile those who feel left out, including many of the protesters 
gathered in Frankfurt this week, with a process of integration that has already generated so 
many benefits for three generations of Europeans. 
Let me conclude. 
This building is a credit to all those who have worked to bring it to fruition. It is a landmark for 
the  city  of  Frankfurt.  And  it  provides  the  ECB  with  an  impressive  new  home  to  pursue  its 
mandate. 
But it also stands as a powerful symbol of what European integration is about. It reminds us 
of where we have come from and where we have come to. Of the horrors that can happen 
when we split apart, and the huge steps forward we can make when we work together. 
So let us not undo what has been achieved. Let us not hanker for the past. Let us draw on 
the past to unite us in the present – to build a complete Union that can deliver the stability 
and prosperity we need. 
We as the central bank will do our part in this process by ensuring the integrity of our single 
currency. Our shared money is the most tangible sign of the trust we place in one another. 
As  the  ECB’s  first  President, Wim  Duisenberg,  put  it  at  the  launch  of  the  euro  more  than 
16 years ago: 
“A  currency  is  far more than  just  a medium  of  exchange  …  A  currency  is  also  part  of  the 
identity of people. It reflects what they have in common, now and in the future.” 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
