  Thomas Jordan: Switzerland at the heart of Europe – between 
independence and interdependence 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank, at the Université libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, 17 January 2015. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Nicolas  Stoffels  and  Attilio  Zanetti  for  their  valuable  support  in  preparing  this 
speech. He is also grateful to Rita Kobel and Alexander Perruchoud. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  honoured  to be  with  you  today  in  Brussels,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Swiss 
Mission to the European Union and the Institute of European Studies at the Université libre 
de Bruxelles for their kind invitation. 
When I arrived at Brussels airport, I couldn’t help noticing the range of delicious chocolate on 
offer. It seems to be as abundant as in Switzerland. 
So I can see immediately that Switzerland and Belgium have important things in common. 
This  certainly  makes  me  feel  very  comfortable  here.  Although  I  am  unlikely  to  end  up 
emulating  Jean  Neuhaus.  As  some  of  you  may  know,  Belgium’s  most  famous  chocolatier 
was actually a native of Switzerland. He came to Belgium in 1857, and decided to stay and 
set up shop in Brussels. As for me, I plan to return to Switzerland. 
Introduction 
1. 
Belgium and Switzerland have a lot of other things in common besides chocolate: Both are 
small, very open economies, which have successfully embarked on the road to globalisation. 
Both  are  home  to  world-class  corporations,  as  well  as  very  innovative  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises. 
But  there  are  also  some  crucial  differences.  Unlike  Belgium,  Switzerland  is  not  part  of 
European monetary union – nor indeed of the European Union (figure 1). Switzerland has 
chosen to preserve its political autonomy and conduct an independent monetary policy. As a 
result, its economy has at times been subject to major exchange rate shocks. Furthermore, 
since it is not part of a large internal market, Switzerland is particularly dependent on open 
international markets. 
The purpose of my remarks this evening is to show how Switzerland perceives its position on 
the international economic scene, between the two poles of attraction mentioned in the title 
of my speech: independence and interdependence. I will, in particular, elaborate on features 
which, in my view, have been key in allowing the Swiss economy to strengthen its resilience 
to external shocks and to fully benefit from globalisation. Switzerland is known as a country 
with one of the highest living standards in the world. Yet this privileged condition should not 
be  taken  for  granted.  Quite  the  opposite:  Achieving  and  maintaining  economic  and  social 
progress is an ongoing challenge. 
The  years  since  the  beginning  of  the  global  financial  and  economic  crisis  have  been 
particularly testing. The events of the last few weeks are a striking example of this. As you 
certainly know, the Swiss franc has again appreciated rapidly and massively. I will take this 
event as the starting point for my presentation. 
Monetary policy and the Swiss franc 
2. 
Switzerland conducts an independent monetary policy and has historically had a strong and 
important currency that plays a much bigger role in the international financial system than the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  size of the economy would imply. The attractiveness of our currency as a safe haven reflects 
the stability of the country and is, as such, an asset for our economy. However, since the 
start  of  the  crisis  back  in  summer  2007,  this  factor  has  also  repeatedly  been  a  source  of 
pressure. 
The  Swiss  franc  started  appreciating  in  August  2007  (figure  2),  with  the  onset  of  the  US 
subprime  crisis.  The  huge  uncertainty  generated  by  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  one 
year later and the Great Recession which ensued put the Swiss franc under further upward 
pressure. The situation worsened in 2010 and 2011. The European sovereign debt crisis and 
the  fears  of  a  break-up  of  the  monetary  union  sent  jitters  through  financial  markets.  In 
addition,  market  participants  were  worried  that  the  US  Congress  would  not  reach  an 
agreement  to  avoid  hitting  the  debt  ceiling.  To  complicate  matters  still  further,  the  global 
economic  outlook  turned  noticeably  gloomier.  As  a  result,  enormous  safe-haven  flows 
poured  into  the  Swiss  franc.  From  August  2007  until  August  2011,  the  Swiss  currency 
appreciated by about 40% in real effective terms. Yields on Swiss Confederation short-term 
debt turned negative and have remained negative ever since. 
Confronted with such dramatic developments, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) introduced a 
minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro on 6 September 2011. Against the backdrop 
of a rapidly deteriorating global economic outlook and policy rates that were already at the 
zero  lower  bound,  this  measure  helped  to  avoid  an  extreme  tightening  of  monetary  policy 
conditions. By setting a cap on exchange rate appreciation, the SNB provided some relief to 
businesses and bought them time to adopt measures that would reduce costs and improve 
productivity. Nonetheless, the Swiss franc remained highly valued. 
However, the minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per euro was only ever meant to be an 
exceptional and temporary measure. A few weeks ago, on 15 January, the SNB announced 
its discontinuation. Publishing such a decision as a surprise announcement for the markets 
and  the  public  was  unavoidable.  No  pre-emptive  guidance  is  possible  for  this  kind  of 
decision. Any guidance would have invited speculative attacks. Markets reacted accordingly, 
and the Swiss franc appreciated massively within minutes after the announcement. Although 
some  of  the  overshooting  has  since  been  corrected,  our  currency  is  still  trading  at  a 
significantly overvalued level as we speak. 
Once again, the reasons for the SNB decision are to be found in international developments. 
In  particular,  over  the  course  of  2014  it  became  increasingly  evident  that  the  European 
Central  Bank  (ECB)  and  Fed  policies  would  diverge.  In  the  US,  the  ongoing  recovery 
rendered  the  prospect  of  an  exit  from  the  unconventional  policies  more  likely.  In  the  euro 
area, meanwhile, the ECB made it clear that additional monetary stimulus would be required. 
A tangible sign of these diverging patterns was the substantial weakening of the euro against 
the  dollar.  With  the  clear  prospect  of  a  significant  QE  programme  in  the  euro  area,  the 
pressure  on  the  minimum  exchange  rate  intensified  hugely  at  the  beginning  of  2015  – 
especially in the last few days leading up to the SNB’s decision on 15 January. 
Against that backdrop, the minimum exchange rate became unsustainable and the SNB had 
no choice but to discontinue its policy. By maintaining the minimum exchange rate for longer, 
the SNB would have run the risk of losing control over its balance sheet. This, in turn, would 
have  hampered  its  stability-oriented  policy  in  the  future.  Once  you  have  arrived  at  such  a 
conclusion,  you  have  to  act  swiftly.  Speculative  position-taking  against  the  minimum 
exchange  rate  could  easily  have  caused  the  SNB’s  balance  sheet  to  double  within  a  few 
months. We would subsequently have been compelled to discontinue the exchange rate floor 
under even greater pressure, with all the consequences for our balance sheet and the Swiss 
economy that this would have implied. The costs of maintaining the floor would have been 
out of all proportion to the benefits. 
As  a  consequence,  the  Swiss  economy  is  now  dealing  with  very  difficult  exchange  rate 
conditions. In an interdependent world with highly integrated and liberalised capital markets, 
the strengths of an economy like Switzerland can, paradoxically, turn into a major challenge. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  How  should  Switzerland  deal  with  these  extreme  conditions,  overcome  the  difficulties  and 
maintain its current high living standard? To answer this question, I will now step back for a 
moment from current events, and highlight some of the factors that, historically, have been 
instrumental  in  allowing  Swiss  businesses  to  seize  opportunities  abroad  and  cope  with  an 
ever-changing environment. 
A tradition of political independence 
3. 
However, let me first briefly turn to our tradition of independence. Although mostly favouring 
a free-trade approach in its economic relationships with the outside world, Switzerland has 
traditionally been very reluctant to relinquish political sovereignty. 
In  particular,  federalism,  direct  democracy  and  citizen  involvement  are  seen  by  the  Swiss 
population as crucial elements of their identity. They are considered key factors to ensure the 
cohesion of a country made up of different linguistic and cultural groups. 
External  neutrality  helped  Switzerland  to  escape  the  tragedies  which  devastated  the 
European continent during the last century, while maintaining internal cohesion. Hence, the 
two world wars fostered Switzerland’s attachment to its political autonomy. 
But  autonomy  does  not  mean  isolation,  or  neglect  of  what  happens  abroad.  Switzerland’s 
political neutrality has often put it in a good position to mediate during conflicts and provide 
active solidarity. Our country has made very active use of this comparative advantage. The 
most  well-known  example  is  the  Swiss  engagement  in  the  International  Committee  of  the 
Red Cross (ICRC). It has also a long and well-established tradition of offering its good offices 
for diplomatic negotiations. 
From an economic point of view as well, political autonomy should not and does not mean 
economic  isolation.  Today,  Switzerland’s  economy  is  amongst  the  most  internationally 
integrated in the world. As a small country lacking in natural resources, Switzerland started 
very early on to cultivate cross-border economic relations. Since then, economic integration 
has contributed greatly to Switzerland’s prosperity. The flipside of the coin, however, is the 
country’s broad exposure to economic and financial developments abroad, as demonstrated 
by the global financial crisis and its aftermath. 
Factors supporting Swiss economic performance 
4. 
In  the  wake  of  the  global  shock  triggered  by  the  Lehman  Brothers  collapse  in  September 
2008,  activity  in  Switzerland  declined  very  significantly  (figure  3).  However,  the  recession 
was  softer  and  the  ensuing  recovery  stronger  than  in  the  euro  area.  There  are  various 
reasons for the relatively solid performance of the Swiss economy. First, the purely domestic 
banking sector was in good shape and the economy was never faced with a credit crunch. 
Second,  domestic  demand  has  stayed 
favourable  housing  market 
developments. Third, exports were relatively resilient to international headwinds. Fourth, as 
we have already seen, monetary policy acted to limit the negative impact of the Swiss franc’s 
massive appreciation. 
Let  me  now  elaborate  on  the  structural  factors  that  have  played  an  important  role  in 
strengthening the resilience of the Swiss economy to shocks. I will start by focusing on some 
interesting shifts that have taken place in the structure of Swiss international trade. 
robust,  amid 
Innovative and diversified Swiss international trade 
4.1 
Looking at the structure of Switzerland’s international trade will allow me to dispel some well-
established preconceptions about the Swiss economy. If I asked you to list some core Swiss 
economic  sectors,  you  would  probably  mention  banks,  watches  and  chocolate.  But 
Switzerland  is  much  more  than  that.  The  Swiss  economy  is  in  fact  highly  diversified.  For 
example,  the  share  in  total  value  added  of  the  sector  comprising  financial,  insurance  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  business  services  is  smaller  than  the  EU  average  (20.3%  vs  26.2%  in  2012,  according  to 
OECD figures). By contrast, the share of the manufacturing sector is significantly larger. 
Overall, the amount of goods and services that Switzerland sells abroad is equivalent to half 
of  its  Gross  Domestic Product  (GDP).  Goods  dominate  export  activity  but,  with a  share  of 
one-third,  the  contribution  of  services  is  by  no  means  negligible.  The  export  intensity  is 
significantly above the OECD average. Switzerland is surpassed by the Benelux countries, 
however.  Part  of  the  gap  with  the  Benelux  reflects  the  extensive  re-exports  of  imported 
goods  generated  by  the  activity  of  the  world-class  ports  in  Belgium  and  the  Netherlands. 
Admittedly, access to the sea is not a key comparative advantage of Switzerland… 
In  order  to  maintain  competitiveness,  the  Swiss  export  sector  has  gone  through  profound 
structural changes during the last decades. 
First,  there  has  been  a  shift  in  the  composition  of  the  export  sector  (figure  4).  The 
pharmaceutical  industry  has  gained  in  importance,  whereas  the  share  of  exports  of 
machinery  has  declined.  In  passing,  let  me  just  mention  that  the  popular  cliché  which 
associates  Switzerland  with  watches  is  actually  true.  Their  share  in  total  goods  exports  is 
sizeable (11%). Note, however, that this has nothing to do with cuckoo clocks, which were 
invented and are produced in Germany. 
A  closer  look  at  the  development  across  industries  reveals  that  this  compositional  shift  is 
important  in  understanding  Swiss  performance  during  the  crisis.  In  fact,  individual  export 
categories  were  affected  very  differently  by  the  great  international  trade  collapse  in  2009. 
While  shipments  of  machinery  and  metals  suffered  severely,  dropping  by  roughly  30%, 
exports of chemicals and pharmaceuticals barely declined at all. As this sector accounted for 
more  than  one-third  of  total  exports  in  2008,  it  strongly  dampened  the  negative  impact  of 
other sectors. Exports of watches also provided important support. 
The  second  structural  change  has  occurred  within  industries.  For  instance,  the  machine 
industry today is not the machine industry of the 1990s. There has been a constant effort to 
innovate  both  products  and  production  processes.  Swiss  businesses  have  specialised  in 
high-value-added  products.  Switzerland  has  among  the  highest  densities  of  high-tech 
industry in the world. The volume of research and development spending is driven by large 
multinational  firms  in  globally  integrated  economic  sectors,  such  as  pharmaceuticals  and 
chemicals.  But  small  and  medium-sized  manufacturing  firms  in  a  broad  range  of  market 
segments  also  play  a  key  role  in  Swiss  exports,  and  are  typically  also  strong  innovators. 
More  than  40%  of  them  undertake  in-house  research  and  development,  a  world  record. 
Overall,  thanks  to  this  innovation  strategy,  the  contribution  of  the  manufacturing  sector  to 
Swiss  GDP  has  been  remarkably  stable  since  the  beginning  of  this  century,  breaking  the 
previous downward trend. 
The  third  structural  change  concerns  the  regional  composition  of  Swiss  exports  (figure  5). 
Swiss  exporters  have  increased  their  focus  on  the  US,  China  and  other  emerging 
economies, while relying less on traditional markets such as Germany, France and Italy. This 
stronger diversification turned out to be very helpful during the global financial crisis. Indeed, 
exports across regions evolved differently. Shipments to Germany, France and Italy declined 
much  more  at  first  and  then  picked  up  much  less  substantially  than  those  to  the  US  and 
China. 
Despite  this  increasing  regional  diversification,  Swiss  exporters  remain  strongly  dependent 
on the European market. Today, the EU market still absorbs more than half of Swiss goods 
exports. The European sovereign debt crisis, amid the sharp weakening of domestic demand 
in the euro area and the dramatic appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro, has thus 
heavily weighed on Swiss exports. While the demand effect dominates, the negative impact 
of the exchange rate is very significant. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Overall – and despite the strong appreciation of the Swiss franc – Switzerland’s exports of 
goods  declined  somewhat  less  in  the  crisis  than  the  exports  of  other  European  countries 
such as Germany or Belgium (figure 6). 
Flexible labour markets 
4.2 
The structure of the labour market also plays an important role in strengthening resilience to 
shocks.  It  must  provide  the  necessary  flexibility  for  firms  to  adjust  rapidly  to  changing 
conditions  at  home  and  abroad.  A  key  characteristic  of  the  Swiss  labour  market  is  the 
combination of little layoff protection with a fairly generous unemployment insurance system. 
If  they  have  to,  firms  can  reduce  their  workforce  with  relatively  few  administrative 
impediments. Conversely, when the economic situation improves, firms will readily hire new 
workers  again.  As  a  consequence,  the  outflow  rate  from  unemployment  is  higher  in 
Switzerland  than  in  most  European  countries,  with  the  exception  of  the  Nordic  countries 
(figure 7). 
Another  important  institution  is  short-time  working.  It  was  used  extensively  by  firms  during 
the crisis. Short-time working enables firms to adjust their labour force to temporary shocks 
without  destroying  existing  job  matches.  This  is  a  crucial  advantage,  especially  for 
businesses  operating  with  a  highly  skilled  workforce.  It  effectively  cuts  costs  during  the 
downturn  while  allowing  businesses  to  quickly  expand  production  once  demand  picks  up 
again. 
A further key feature of the Swiss labour market relates to the way employers and employees 
interact. Generally, labour-management relations are good and disruptive strikes are rare. In 
the context of wage setting, many employment contracts are regulated by collective labour 
agreements. However, in contrast to the situation in other countries, these agreements are 
typically  the  result  of  consensus-oriented  negotiations,  with  very  limited  government 
intervention. In fact, the instrument of collective labour agreements is regulated by only three 
short  paragraphs  in  Swiss  law.  The  negotiation  setup  typically  guarantees  that  firm  and 
industry specifics are taken into account in the arrangements, so that competitiveness can be 
preserved. 
The high employment rate among the domestic working-age population shows that the Swiss 
labour  market  is  in  good  shape.  Currently  running  at  80%,  employment  is  almost 
15 percentage points above the European average. 
A sound fiscal policy 
4.3 
Another  supporting  factor  for  the  Swiss  economy  is  sound  public  finances,  as  reflected  in 
relatively low fiscal deficits and public debt. 
This fiscal discipline is related to the political institutions of direct democracy and federalism. 
Swiss voters tend to be pragmatic and have generally shown little inclination for large and 
‘creative’ public projects. Furthermore, fiscal decentralisation is pervasive: the cantons, the 
main  sub-national  entities,  are  like  sovereigns  on  a  smaller  scale,  and  have  extensive 
taxation and spending powers. In Switzerland, regional autonomy enhances control of public 
spending  and  accountability.  One  element  of  the  incentive  scheme  is  the  tax  competition 
among cantons. The cantons are free to set their own tax rates or establish new taxes. As 
companies and individuals can vote with their feet, cantonal governments have an incentive 
to  strike  the  best  possible  balance  between  the  tax  burden  they  impose  and  the  public 
services they provide. 
These traditional elements were complemented at federal level with a stringent debt brake 
mechanism in the early 2000s. The experience at federal level motivated various cantons to 
follow suit. This has proved to be a very effective fiscal policy reform. The debt brake is a rule 
that  links  expenditure  to  the  amount  of  cyclically  adjusted  revenue.  It  aims  at  a  balanced 
structural  budget  over  the  medium  term.  Fiscal  policy  maintains  a  countercyclical  profile 
through the mechanism of automatic stabilisers. The strict implementation of this rule led to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  significant  budget  surpluses  in  the  boom  years  preceding  the  global  financial  crisis. 
Importantly,  the  debt  brake  has  made  it  possible  to  regain  control  over  public  spending, 
which had steadily increased during the 1990s. 
Since  the  main  focus  of  the  debt  brake  rule  is  on  long-term  sustainability,  the  framework 
leaves  little  room  for  discretionary  spending.  The  Federal  Government  can  make  an 
exception  and  allow  additional  emergency  spending  only  in  the  event  of  a  proven  severe 
crisis. 
During  the  recent  crisis,  the  healthy  state  of  Swiss  public  finances  enabled  the  automatic 
stabilisers to play their role to the full extent, which contributed to supporting the economy, 
without  threatening  medium-term  fiscal  stability.  In  particular,  public  spending  on  the 
unemployed  and  short-term  workers  increased  significantly,  while  income  and  profit  tax 
revenues decreased. Contrary to what we have seen in other countries, no tax increases or 
austerity  measures  were  needed  to  correct  the  public  finance  trajectory.  This  has  had  a 
positive impact on households’ disposable income, and hence on both private consumption 
and business confidence. 
Let  me  now  wrap  up  my  presentation  and  add  a  few  words  about  our  current  monetary 
policy. 
Concluding remarks 
5. 
Switzerland has a long history of political independence. At the same time the country has 
consistently pursued prosperity via strong integration in the world economy in general and 
the European economy in particular. 
Through  this  active  international  integration  into  the  global  economy,  the  country  has 
achieved and maintained a high level of affluence. However, the notion that Switzerland is a 
sheltered island in the midst of a stormy sea could not be further from the truth. For a small 
open economy like Switzerland, the international environment is source of both opportunities 
and large destabilising shocks. 
The  unavoidable  discontinuation  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate  against  the  euro  is  a 
powerful example. It provoked a strong reaction on international financial markets and, as a 
result,  the  Swiss  franc  appreciated  sharply.  The  significant  overvaluation  of  our  currency 
means that the Swiss economy, notably the sectors exposed to international competition, is 
currently facing strong headwinds and a number of challenges. 
The  SNB  has  lowered  interest  rates  to  unprecedented  levels  to  cushion  the  effects  of  the 
currency  appreciation.  The  lowering  of  interest  rates  means  that  holding  Swiss  francs  is 
significantly  more  costly  than  holding  foreign  currency.  The  negative  interest  rate  is  set  to 
have a corrective effect on the Swiss franc’s valuation. Moreover, the SNB will continue to 
take the exchange rate situation into consideration when formulating its monetary policy. It 
will therefore remain active in the foreign exchange market, should this prove necessary in 
order to influence monetary conditions. 
Nevertheless,  the  near  future  will  see  major  challenges  in  Switzerland.  Today  more  than 
ever, the Swiss economy has to focus on its structural strengths and flexibility, to ensure its 
international competitiveness and thus the country’s prosperity in the future. 
Thank you very much. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     7
   8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
