  Koji Ishida: Japan’s economy, price developments and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kyoto, 30 July 2015. 
I. 
Developments in economic activity and prices 
 Overseas economies 
A. 
Overseas economies – mainly advanced economies – have been recovering, albeit with a 
lackluster  performance  still  seen  in  part.  Aggregate  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  major 
economies, weighted by value of exports from Japan, decelerated to around 2.5 percent in 
the January-March quarter of 2015 due to the slowdown in the U.S. and Chinese economies. 
Although  low  crude  oil  prices  since  summer  2014  had  been  expected  to  push  up 
consumption, the growth rate has been decelerating on a quarterly basis recently – resulting 
in somewhat sluggish economic conditions. 
The  projection  of  global  economic  growth  in  the  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  Update 
released  in  July  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  been  revised  somewhat 
downward for 2015 relative to the April 2015 WEO, but the projection that the growth rate will 
accelerate toward 2016 is unchanged. Although overseas economies might continue to lack 
momentum  for  the  time  being,  the  Bank  expects  that  they  will  continue  to  recover 
moderately,  as  advanced  economies  will  continue  to  recover  firmly  and  as  the  positive 
effects gradually spread to emerging economies. 
Looking at movements by major region, the U.S. economy has been recovering, following its 
exit  from  the  slowdown  observed  last  winter,  which  was  affected  mainly  by  the  severe 
weather. According to U.S. employment statistics for June 2015, the unemployment rate has 
been  decreasing  and  the  number  of  employees  has  been  increasing  firmly.  In  addition, 
consumer confidence has been improving. As for the outlook, although attention should be 
paid to the effects of low crude oil prices and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar, the economy 
is  likely  to  continue  to  see  growth  led  mainly  by  private  demand,  with  robust  household 
spending assisted by the favorable employment and income situation. 
Economic activity in the euro area seems to have continued to recover moderately, although 
there  was  still  tension  in  financial  markets  regarding  the  debt  problem  in  Greece.  Private 
consumption has been increasing, supported in part by the improvement in the labor market, 
and business sentiment as well as production activity have been recovering moderately. As 
for  the  outlook,  the  euro  area  economy  is  likely  to  maintain  its  moderate  recovery  as  the 
effects of the depreciation of the euro and monetary easing will permeate the economy, but 
close attention should continue to be paid to such risk factors as the debt problem in Europe, 
including developments in political and economic conditions in Greece. 
As  for  the  Chinese  economy,  the  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  for  the  April-June 
quarter  was  7.0  percent,  generally  maintaining  its  stable  growth.  However,  its  growth 
momentum  remains  sluggish  against  the  backdrop  of  the  deceleration  in  fixed  asset 
investment,  particularly  that  in  real  estate,  and  continued  inventory  adjustments  in 
manufacturing. Stock prices have been volatile as well. As for the outlook, the economy is 
likely  to  follow  a  generally  stable  growth  path,  albeit  at  a  somewhat  reduced  pace,  due to 
policy  measures  carried  out  by  the  authorities  to  support  economic  activity  from  both  the 
fiscal and monetary sides. However, the nominal GDP growth rate has been declining, and 
the acceleration of the disinflationary trend as well as the excess debt problem continue to 
require attention. 
Emerging  economies  have  been  somewhat  weak.  Asian  economies  continue  to  be 
underpinned  by  the  positive  effects  of  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and  monetary 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  easing, but recently weakness has been seen in exports and production of IT-related goods 
due to downward pressure from the slowdown in the Chinese economy. Economic activity in 
Russia  and  Brazil  –  that  is,  the  countries  facing  structural  problems  and  political  unrest  – 
continues  to  be  severe.  As  for  the  outlook,  emerging  economies  as  a  whole  are  likely  to 
gradually increase their growth rates, but the pace is highly uncertain as several economies 
are facing various structural problems. 
Japan’s economy and price developments 
Current situation 
B. 
1. 
Now I will discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. In the corporate sector, the diffusion 
index  (DI)  for  business  conditions  (the  proportion  of  firms  responding  that  business 
conditions  were  “favorable”  minus  the  proportion  of  those  responding  that  they  were 
“unfavorable”)  in  the  June  2015  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in 
Japan),  which  was  released  at  the  beginning  of July,  has  improved  for  large firms  in  both 
manufacturing and nonmanufacturing – recovering to a level close to that seen prior to the 
consumption tax hike in 2014. The DI for small firms has been unchanged for all industries, 
but it continues to be at a relatively high level. As for business fixed investment, firms have 
maintained  their  positive  investment  stance,  as  suggested  by,  for  example,  the  upward 
revision  of  their  fixed  investment  plans  for  fiscal  2015  in  the  June  Tankan,  with  corporate 
profits increasing to a historical high. In the household sector, despite the effects of irregular 
weather,  private  consumption  has  been  resilient,  reflecting  steady  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation, as seen in, for example, the continued improvement in the 
active job openings-to-applicants ratio. In addition, housing investment has started to pick up. 
Given these developments, a virtuous cycle from income to spending is expected to continue 
operating steadily in both the corporate and household sectors. 
With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for 
all items less fresh food had slowed toward the end of fiscal 2014, due in part to the effects 
of low crude oil prices. Excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the rate has 
been about 0 percent recently. 
2. 
Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  continue  recovering  moderately.  On  the  price  front,  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to be about 0 percent for the time being, due 
to the effects of the decline in energy prices. Nevertheless, as the underlying trend in prices 
steadily rises and the effects of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate, the rate is likely to 
accelerate toward 2 percent – the price stability target. 
Risks to the outlook are those that primarily stem from overseas factors. Specifically, these 
include  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  the  prospects 
regarding the debt problem and the momentum of economic activity and prices in Europe, 
and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy. 
The Bank compiles and releases the Policy Board members’ forecasts for economic activity 
and prices on a quarterly basis. Looking at the medians of the members’ forecasts released 
in  July  2015,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  is  projected  to  be  1.7  percent  for  fiscal  2015, 
1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, and 0.2 percent for fiscal 2017. The year-on-year rate of increase 
in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food),  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the  consumption  tax 
hikes,  is  projected  to  be  0.7  percent  for  fiscal  2015,  1.9  percent  for  fiscal  2016,  and 
1.8 percent  for  fiscal  2017.  The  Bank  projects  that  the  timing  of  the  rate  reaching  around 
2 percent will be around the first half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil prices will rise 
moderately from the recent level. 
Outlook 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Exports and production 
Keys to assessing the outlook 
Private consumption and real income 
3. 
Next,  I  will  discuss  the  three  keys  to  assessing  economic  activity  and  prices  for  the  time 
being. These are developments in various components of the economy. 
a. 
The  first  is  developments  in  exports  and  production.  Real  exports  had  increased  for  three 
quarters in a row since the July-September quarter of 2014, but registered negative growth of 
3.6  percent  in  the  April-June  quarter  of  2015,  mainly  because  the  slowdown  in  overseas 
economies  during  the  first  half  of  the  year  weighed  down  on  them  with  some  time  lag. 
Industrial  production  has  shown  sluggishness  recently,  partly  due  to  domestic  inventory 
adjustments  of  small  cars  with  engine  sizes  of  660cc  or  less  and  an  accompanying 
weakness in automobile-related industries – namely, materials – in addition to the slowing in 
exports. 
While the sluggishness in exports and production is likely to exert downward pressure on the 
real GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter of 2015, which will be released in August, 
what matters is whether both exports and production will emerge from the pause and trend 
moderately upward again from summer. At the moment, it seems likely that both will increase 
moderately, albeit with some fluctuations, due to the rebound in the U.S. economy and the 
progress in inventory adjustments at home. However, exports could come under downward 
pressure  due  to  concern  over  a  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  and  a  subsequent 
spreading of its effects to emerging economies, as well as a global decline in business fixed 
investment related to energy brought about by low crude oil prices. Production is also subject 
to  some  uncertainty  regarding  the  pace  of  progress  in  inventory  adjustments  in  materials 
industries. In any event, I would like to closely monitor the pace of improvement in exports 
and production while paying attention to underlying downside risks. 
b. 
The  second  key  is  developments  in  private  consumption  and  real  income,  which  have  a 
significant impact on prices. Some recent indicators with respect to private consumption have 
been  relatively  weak,  due  partly  to  adverse  weather  conditions.  Nevertheless,  private 
consumption  is  likely  to  remain  resilient  for  the  time  being,  as  it  is  expected  to  be 
underpinned  by  an  improvement  in  the  income  situation;  namely,  a  rise  in  base  pay  this 
spring  and  an  increase  in  summer  bonus  payments.  That  being  said,  in  a  situation  where 
price  rises  are  expected  to  take  hold  from  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2015  onward, 
improvement in real wages should become an important key to ensuring continued resilience 
in private consumption. 
Looking back on developments in fiscal 2014, the year-on-year rate of change in real wages 
has remained substantially negative as improvement in wages has not been able to keep up 
with the substantial price increases, which reflected the effects of the consumption tax hike. 
This  seems  to  have  led  to  consumers’  defensive  attitude  toward  spending,  bringing  about 
sluggishness in private consumption and weakness in the supply side’s price-setting stance, 
which until then was starting to show confidence. 
Since the turn of fiscal 2015, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) has been about 0 percent, but the Nikkei-UTokyo Daily Price Index – which is mainly 
comprised of daily necessities and food products – has been trending upward, and there has 
been  no  sign so far  that  the  trend  in  price  rises  will  stall  as  it  did  last  year. This  indicates 
firms’ aggressive stance of setting higher prices on the sales front, evidencing the resilience 
in  private  consumption.  Having  said  that,  although  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  real 
wages  –  which  greatly  affects the sustainability  of consumption  –  had  recently  been  rising 
rapidly, it has just reached close to 0 percent. Thus, I would like to pay attention to the future 
pace of improvement in real wages. 
In  assessing  developments  in  private  consumption,  consumption  by  pensioners  warrants 
attention. With the aging of the population, the number of pensioners has reached close to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  to 
the  consumption 
Business fixed investment 
40 million, and the effects their behavior exert on overall private consumption have become 
significant. From a relatively longer-term perspective, a cut in real pension benefits, owing in 
part to the introduction of the macroeconomic slide formula, might exert downward pressure 
on pensioners’ consumption. Thus, I believe that even greater attention should be given to 
future developments. 
c. 
The  third  key  is  developments  in  business  fixed  investment.  For  part  of  2014,  growth  in 
business fixed investment was sluggish relative to that in corporate profits and firms’ fixed 
investment plans, partly due to the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded 
increase  prior 
tax  hike  and  heightened  uncertainty  regarding 
developments in foreign exchange rates and crude oil prices. However, the rate of change in 
business fixed  investment  on  a  real GDP  basis turned noticeably  positive for  the  January-
March  quarter  of  2015.  Thereafter,  the  June  2015  Tankan  showed  that  firm’s  fixed 
investment plans have been relatively strong, particularly of large manufacturing firms, and 
machinery orders – a leading indicator of machinery investment – have increased as well, 
indicating a clear improvement in firms’ investment stance. 
As for the outlook, business fixed investment is likely to continue increasing moderately on 
the back of an improvement in corporate profits, accommodative financial conditions, and an 
increase in domestic investment by manufacturing firms in view of developments in foreign 
exchange  rates.  However,  I  presume  that  there  is  a  risk  that  the  recent  deceleration  in 
overseas  economies  and  the  accompanying  sluggishness  in  exports  and  production  will 
weaken business sentiment, which is starting to become aggressive. I believe that the pace 
of increase in business fixed investment for the time being will be determined by the extent to 
which  firms  will  be  able  to  gain  confidence  and  certainty  regarding  the  outlook  for 
developments  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad  amid  continued  moderate  recovery  in 
Japan’s economy. 
II. 
The Bank’s monetary policy 
The current conduct of monetary policy 
Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) 
A. 
Thus far, I have outlined developments in economic activity both at home and abroad and 
price developments in Japan. Next, I would like to discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. I will 
start by briefly explaining the Bank’s current conduct of monetary policy. 
1. 
QQE, which the Bank continues to pursue, has entered the third year since its introduction in 
April 2013. At the end of October 2014, the Bank decided to expand QQE to preempt the 
manifestation of a risk that the emergence from the deflationary mindset might be delayed, 
due  mainly  to  a  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices.  The  specific  measures  of  the 
expansion were as follows. First, the Bank decided to accelerate the pace of increase in the 
monetary base it provides from an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen to an annual pace 
of  about  80  trillion  yen.  Second,  it  decided  to  raise  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  amount 
outstanding of the Bank’s holdings of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) from an annual 
pace of about 50 trillion yen to an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. At the same time, the 
Bank  decided  to  extend  the  average  remaining  maturity  of  its  JGB  purchases  from  about 
seven  years  to  a  flexible  range  of  about  seven  to  ten  years.  And  third,  it  decided  to  triple 
annual purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts 
(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase by about 3 trillion yen and about 
90 billion yen, respectively. 
2. 
Prior  to  the  introduction  of  QQE,  the  Bank  established  –  on  its  balance  sheet  –  the  Loan 
Support Program, with the aim of making the effect of monetary easing permeate the entire 
The Loan Support Program and other measures 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy.  Through  this  program,  it  has  been  providing  support  for  private  financial 
institutions’ efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth and to increase their 
lending.  Meanwhile,  the  Bank  has  also  been  conducting  the  funds-supplying  operation  to 
support financial institutions in disaster areas affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake. 
Since  the  establishment  in  2010  of  the  measure  that  later  constituted  the  Loan  Support 
Program,  the  Bank  has  been  enhancing  the  program  by,  for  example,  increasing  the 
maximum amount outstanding of its fund provisioning and extending the application period of 
the program. As a result, the amount outstanding of loan disbursement under the program 
has reached about 29 trillion yen as of mid-July 2015. Through these efforts, the Bank will 
further  promote  financial  institutions’  lending,  as  well  as  stimulate  firms’  and  households’ 
demand for credit and continue to support the efforts of financial institutions in disaster areas 
toward rebuilding. 
Assessment of the underlying trend in prices 
B. 
I will now move on to discussing price developments – a crucial factor in making the Bank’s 
policy decisions – with a particular focus on how to assess the underlying trend in prices in 
an environment where fluctuations in energy prices observed since 2014 have been exerting 
a substantial influence on overall prices. 
When assessing the underlying trend in prices, I consider it appropriate to also examine for 
the time being the CPI (all items less energy), given that price fluctuations of energy items 
since 2014 have been exerting a significant effect on the year-on-year rate of increase in the 
CPI for all items. There is a view that it is necessary to pay attention to a similar index, the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy). However, in Japan, 
food expenditures account for a quarter of total household expenditures, which is quite high 
among advanced economies. Therefore, I personally consider it inappropriate to examine the 
price  index  that  excludes  food,  considering  the  extent  to  which  food  expenditures  affect 
households. 
In assessing the underlying trend in prices, I also consider it necessary to take note of the 
characteristics of the components of the CPI basket in Japan. For example, prices of public 
services  and  rent  in  Japan  are  sticky  by  nature,  and  less  susceptible  to  developments  in 
economic activity compared to those in the United States. In addition, imputed rent does not 
represent  households’  actual  expenditures  and  the  existence  of  bias  in  its  index  has  been 
pointed out due, for example, to the fact that the index does not incorporate deterioration in 
housing  quality.  Given  the  limitations  of  respective  price  indexes  in  accurately  grasping 
prices, I believe it is necessary to make a comprehensive assessment of price developments 
in  the  policy  conduct,  keeping  in  mind  how  the  CPI  is  affected  by  factors  such  as  the 
characteristics of its components, items on which households actually spend, and people’s 
perceptions of inflation.  
Transmission effects of monetary policy and financial system stability 
C. 
Before closing my remarks, I would like to briefly touch on the subject of the transmission 
effects of monetary policy and the financial system stability.  
The Bank has been implementing QQE with the aim of achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent. Under QQE, naturally, the Bank has been able to bring about various transmission 
effects on corporate financing conditions, financial markets, and a variety of asset markets.  
Financial institutions have been advancing so-called portfolio rebalancing. While decreasing 
the  amount  of  their  holdings  of  Japanese  government  securities  (JGSs),  they  have  been 
increasing various risk assets including foreign currency assets. With QQE’s strong monetary 
easing effects, long-term interest rates have stably remained at extremely low levels. While 
this has brought down yields on financial institutions’ interest-earning assets, firms’ funding 
costs  have  declined  substantially.  Moreover,  through  an  improvement  in  economic  activity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  and  corporate  profits,  stock  prices  have  been  rising  and  real  estate  transactions  have 
become active. 
All  of  these  developments  are  effects  that  have  emerged  with  the  mechanisms  that  were 
intended  with  QQE’s  introduction  and  basically  can  be  regarded  positively.  To  achieve 
sustainable economic growth with price stability, any large imbalances or overheating on the 
financial front should be clearly identified. In this regard, I believe that there have been no 
signs of financial imbalances or overheating to date. 
Nevertheless, to ensure financial system stability under QQE, it is necessary to thoroughly 
examine, from a longer-term perspective and without holding a predetermined view, whether 
risks are accumulating in the financial system due to excessive strength in financial activity 
and overheating in economic activity. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
