  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Alternatives Economiques 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  Alternatives  Economiques,  conducted  by  Ms  Sandra  Moatti  and  published  in  the 
May 2015 issue of the magazine. 
 There is a great deal of discussion about the effects of QE. What can you hope to 
achieve when long-term yields are already extremely low? 
Within the euro area, the transmission channel that is almost the most important in my view 
is  confidence.  Confidence  that  the  ECB  will  take  its  mandate  to  keep  inflation  below,  but 
close to, 2% seriously. Before we took this step there had been doubts about the willingness 
of the ECB to respect its mandate. But it was the only substantive measure possible in the 
circumstances;  we  had run  out  of  conventional measures  because  the scope  to  lower  key 
rates had been exhausted. 
The second channel is to lower borrowing costs, which aren’t negligible for companies and 
households.  The  policies  combating  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area  have  borne  fruit;  now 
when  interest  rates  for  government  borrowing  fall  it  has  a  noticeable  effect  on  corporate 
borrowing costs across the euro area – which was not the case even two years ago. That’s 
essential  if  investment  is  to  recover.  Sure,  rates  are  already  low,  but  since  QE  was 
announced  and  implemented  at  the  start  of  March  long  and  very  long-term  interest  rates 
have  fallen  significantly  in  all  countries,  including Germany  and  France,  and  even  more  in 
Spain, Italy and those most affected by the crisis, such as Ireland and Portugal. 
The third channel works through portfolio rebalancing: it’s still too soon to assess that. Bank 
and  non-bank  investors  who  sell  us  their  securities  have  a  very  strong  incentive  to  invest 
elsewhere rather than leave their money doing nothing, with deposits at the ECB costing –
0.20% p.a. The sharp upturn in the real economy should encourage them to lend more to 
business. In that sense, the time is right: the impact of QE is being felt just as the recovery is 
being confirmed, and it will reinforce it. It’s a mechanism that is potentially powerful. 
The  final  channel,  of  course,  is  the  exchange  rate:  this  is  not  an  objective  in  itself,  but  it 
reflects market participants’ expectations of the different monetary policies being pursued on 
each side of the Atlantic. If you include the oil price too, you have a combination of factors 
favouring recovery and investment. So as things stand right now, there is no reason to worry 
about the euro area recovering in 2015 and 2016. Mind you, all these factors are short-term. 
One possible concern is the ability to boost the potential growth of the euro area, which has 
been hit hard by the crisis. That’s more a long-term issue, though. 
Aren’t you afraid that one of the effects of QE will be to create price bubbles for 
certain assets? Does the ECB have the means to combat these side effects? 
Our  actions  do  have  an  impact  on  asset  prices;  you  just  have  to  look  at  the  way  markets 
have  risen  since  the  public  asset  purchases  started. We  monitor  risks  to  financial  stability 
very closely: Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa used to say this was in central banks’ DNA. But let’s 
not forget that the objective of monetary policy  is price stability. Financial stability  involves 
different  tools.  As  far  as  we  are  concerned,  it’s  a  question  of  bank  regulation  and 
“macroprudential” tools. 
There is one effect you didn’t mention: this policy cuts governments’ interest rate 
costs and potentially gives them room for fiscal manoeuvre again. 
That is not our objective. Monetary policy serves to guarantee price stability and support the 
productive  economy.  Where  countries  have  room  for  fiscal  manoeuvre,  lowering  rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  increases  the  scope  that  can  be  used  to  support  growth,  particularly  by  increasing 
investment.  Where  countries  do  not  have  this  room  for  manoeuvre,  such  as  France,  my 
advice  would  be  to  use  the  lower  rates  to  lend  credibility  to  debt  reduction,  rather  than  to 
increase spending or cut taxes. However, that’s not a matter for the ECB to decide. It’s the 
European Commission that is the guardian of the fiscal policy framework in the euro area. 
Would you say that QE is helping immunise the euro area against the risk of an exit by 
a Member State, even if this is not its objective? 
I wouldn’t put it like that. It is certainly reducing the risk of contagion in the euro area, but the 
context  right  now  is  very  different from  2012. The  problem for countries  such  as  Portugal, 
Spain and Ireland is no longer an exit from the euro area, far from it. Their main concern now 
is how to capitalise on the return of growth in order to step up the reduction in unemployment 
and return to normal as quickly as possible. I am leaving out Greece, which is a very specific 
case in the light of the discussions ongoing at the moment. 
It was Greece that I had in mind... 
The  exit  of Greece  is  not  a scenario  we  are  working  on.  All  the  efforts  being made  at  the 
moment are aimed at updating the relationship with Greece in the light of the new priorities of 
its government, within a framework which remains that of the euro area and which implies 
rights as well as the duty to respect the common rules. So we are not putting the question in 
those terms. 
You expressed your concern about long-term growth. Couldn’t the ECB do more to 
relaunch investment in Europe in particular through more targeted policies? 
It is not for the ECB to encourage particular investment decisions which form part of this or 
that  policy.  To  do  so  would  be  to  cross  the  line  between  monetary  and  economic  policy. 
However,  everything  we  are  doing  at  the  moment  forms  part  of  an  approach  aimed  at 
rekindling  investment.  Compared  with  the  traditional  policies  of  central  banks,  which  are 
geared to the short term, QE is an extension of the intervention horizon of monetary policy. 
For instance, the average term of the securities purchased as part of QE is nearly nine years. 
So monetary policy is having more impact than before on the financing conditions for long-
term investments. This is particularly crucial for financing investments linked to the energy 
transition. In short, we are creating favourable conditions for long-term investment, and it is 
up to the governments and the European institutions to take advantage of these conditions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
