  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Europe 1 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in Europe 1, conducted by Mr Jean-Pierre Elkabbach on 26 January 2015. 
 Welcome, Benoît Cœuré. Good morning. 
Good morning. 
So, the Greek people have handed a huge victory to Alexis Tsipras, who has promised 
them  an  end  to  austerity  and  social  suffering.  Will  Greece’s  €320  billion  debt  be 
waived? 
I think this is a two-way challenge. There is a dual responsibility. Europe must show that it 
can  adapt  to  a  change  in  government,  even  a  radical  one,  in  a  Member  State.  This  is 
Europe’s  democratic  responsibility.  Equally,  Mr  Tsipras  must  comply  with  the  rules  of  the 
European game. 
So what does this mean for the debt? It will be discussed, but let me remind you that the 
€40 billion that Greece owes to France is not owed to speculators or the financial markets: it 
is owed to the French taxpayers. Cancelling this debt would be giving a gift of €40 billion to 
Greece. Any restructuring of the debt must be meaningful. It must allow Greece to overcome 
this situation while continuing with reforms. 
The French are owed €40 billion? How much are the Germans owed? 
Around €60 billion. 
So, you are saying that, if the debt can be renegotiated, it will happen soon. But in the 
meantime is it sufficient for Mr Tsipras to say that he will pay it back, or must he pay it 
back? 
He  must  pay  it  back.  Those  are  the  rules  of  the  European  game.  There  is  no  room  for 
behaving unilaterally in Europe. This does not preclude, for example, the restructuring of this 
debt from being discussed. However, I must stress that this money does not belong to the 
European Central Bank. This money belongs to governments. This discussion will take place 
between Mr Tsipras and the European governments. 
And should take place very quickly? 
It will no doubt start today or tomorrow. 
Yes. And do you think that Greece, after this massive victory by Mr Tsipras and the 
Greek  people,  must  fulfil  its  commitments  whatever  happens,  in  other  words  that  it 
must pay off its debts? 
It is essential for Greece to continue with the reforms, for the Greek economy to pull through. 
This is what is in the interests of the Greek people. 
But how? Today you have been informed that it is the end of austerity and of a number 
of reforms which have been too painful for the Greek people. 
There are certainly different ways of carrying out the reforms. But that does not obviate the 
need for them. Greece is still financing itself thanks to European money. The country needs 
to become independent again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Are you, Benoît Cœuré, as someone at the European Central Bank, able to say that it 
is  the  end  of  austerity  in  Europe  or  at  least  in  certain  countries  that  have  been 
practising austerity? 
You know, austerity is a very generic term. Each country does it differently. Some countries 
are  not  reducing  their  deficit  at  all  or  only  reducing  it  by  a  little,  with  France  being  one  of 
them, while other countries have done a lot. There is room for other policies, provided that 
they comply with the rules of the European game. 
And what if Mr Tsipras says “I’ll stay in the euro area, but I won’t pay”? 
If  he  does  not  pay,  it  constitutes  a  default  and,  as  such,  is  in  breach  of  the  rules  of  the 
European game. 
Meanwhile, do you think that all aid to Greece should be frozen or suspended? As a 
result of loan maturity dates? 
Europe is in a process of dialogue and cooperation with Greece. That’s what I said earlier. It 
is necessary to help them. It has to work, which is why the negotiations and discussions are 
about to start. 
And you say that Mr Tsipras has no choice but to involve Brussels, adhere to what the 
ECB wants, and honour the natural commitments of a Greek government. 
Because  Europe  is  a  community  based  on  the  rule  of  law.  It  is  co-owned.  We  manage  a 
single currency together. There are European laws, and what Greece does has an impact on 
other countries, such as Portugal, Spain, Ireland, France or Germany. 
Could  there  be  a  chance  or  risk  of  contagion  in  the  countries  you  refer  to:  Spain, 
Portugal, Ireland? 
I  don’t  think  so,  because  the  financial  markets  understand  very  well  that  the  situation  is 
different, and also because the decisions of the European Central Bank itself, the decisions 
that we have taken, ensure financial conditions that will be very protective for the rest of the 
euro area. 
But, what do you mean, or what do you want to indicate, when you say that it is the 
French, the French taxpayers, who will pay if Greece does not pay €40 billion. What 
about the Germans? 
The Germans have €60 billion in outstanding loans, or debt securities. 
And if it carries on, if this climate continues, could there be tensions? 
I  don’t  think  so  if  everything  is  –  If  the  discussions  take  place  in  a  cooperative  way,  if  a 
process is put in place from today, everyone will understand that all parties want to a come to 
a successful conclusion. 
Can we say that you can, you could, extend the maturity on the debt, the repayment of 
the debt, because you have already done so before? 
Once more, it is not up to the central bank to decide. It is taxpayers’ money and it is therefore 
up to the finance ministers to decide on this. 
Benoît Cœuré, the ECB, with Mario Draghi, yourself, Christian Noyer and others has 
decided to buy assets for an unprecedented, unheard of amount of one thousand four 
hundred billion between now and September 2016. First, if it does not work, can you 
continue beyond 2016? 
First of all, it will work. It will work because it is a huge sum. It has been implemented quickly 
and  it  will  be  efficient.  And  we  will  re-evaluate  all  that  in  the  course  of  2016,  and  we  are 
prepared to continue further if at that time it is not enough. But I am sure that it will work. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  other  words,  you  are  printing  banknotes  and  will  keep  on  printing  and  printing, 
endlessly? 
We  are  creating  money,  and  with  this  money  we  will  buy  financial  securities.  The  money 
should irrigate the economy, as long as the banks play ball, of course. 
Yes,  because  they  might  not  play  ball.  Might  they  behave  badly?  Because  some 
people  are  saying  that  they  can  solve  their  problem  of  their  dividends,  their 
shareholders, etc., and that they might not pass the money on to the real economy. 
The  most  important  thing  for  me  is  that  at  the  end  of  the  day  people  want  to  invest  and 
consume. So it is a question of confidence. The decision we have taken this week should 
contribute  to  the  confidence  level,  and  in  the  end  we  also  need  the  economic  conditions 
which make people want to invest. 
And from when do you think it will have an effect on the economy? You expect results 
both in terms of inflation and in terms of growth, if it should happen. 
There  will  be  more  growth  in  2015  in  any  case,  given  the  combination  of  what  we  have 
decided, the lower price of oil, which is good for growth, and the lower exchange rate, which 
is also good for growth. 
Like others, I have tried to do some calculations, Benoît Cœuré. One thousand four 
hundred billion in 20 months. Many people are wondering why you didn’t just send a 
cheque  for  €3,500  to  every  citizen  in  Europe,  directly,  instead  of  going  through  the 
banks. 
It would be very complicated to do that, and if there are things to be done that target citizens 
directly, it is up to governments to do it, because doing that looks very much like budgetary 
or fiscal policy. That is not our work. 
So,  we  should  say  that  the  ECB  is  contributing  and  each  central  bank  as  well. 
Christian Noyer for the Banque de France. Will the Bundesbank buy German bonds? 
It will buy German bonds, absolutely. 
Are you saying that there is risk-sharing for these operations between Draghi, Cœuré, 
Noyer, etc.? 
On these 1,100 billion, 20% will be held by the ECB and 80% will be on the balance sheets 
of national central banks, therefore a risk that will not be shared. 
That is not shared? Or that is shared? 
That is not shared because there it is a question of taking fiscal risks, risks on governments, 
and it is not for the ECB to decide on, to create, fiscal union in Europe. I think it is desirable, 
but it is a democratic debate which takes place in parliaments and in governments. It is not 
for us to do it. 
You are having difficulty convincing Chancellor Merkel, the Bundesbank. Is the ECB 
independent? And can it remain so? 
I think the ECB showed last week that it is independent, and it will remain so. You can rely on 
us. 
What does this commitment mean? 
It  means  that  we  will  take  the  necessary  decisions  in  the  interests  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole and that we will continue, if necessary, to find new instruments, on condition that they 
are legal, without concerning ourselves with political pressures. 
The euro is falling. With the ECB’s decisions, it will stay [inaudible] against the dollar. 
At what level should it stop? Because we see the drop and wonder, « when » ? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  You know, economics is not an exact science so I do not know what the right level is. Indeed, 
what  matters  is  that  the  euro  is  stable,  and  so  this  «  falling  dynamic  »  is  economically 
justified, but at some point it will have to stop and the euro stablise. 
President  Hollande,  who  congratulated  the  ECB,  promises  that  France  will  not  stop 
making  the  necessary  reforms.  In  your  opinion,  is  the  Macron  Law  which  is  being 
debated  in  the  National  Assembly  one  of  the  elements  of  the  reform  ?  Or  is  it 
insufficient? 
For us, it is a small step in the right direction. We are going to make investment easier in 
Europe,  but  people  have  to  want  to  invest,  and  for  that  it  is  necessary  to  have  reforms 
promoting  entrepreneurship  and  which  make  the  economy  more  flexible,  and  the  Macron 
Law is going in this direction. 
We must continue to reform? 
It is necessary to continue to reform – in all the euro area countries, for that matter, not only 
in France. 
Last question on the Troïka. Will it make another visit to Greece? Or will it lie low? 
Because it would not be welcome there at the moment. 
I think it would be welcome there because the new Greek government will need and want to 
talk with Europe. We are waiting to know who our new contacts will be, who the new finance 
minister in Greece will be. We will know in the days to come. 
Isn’t he extreme-Left? 
He will have his ideas and, in the end, Europe is a compromise of different ideas. That is how 
it works. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
