  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 23 September 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
During the summer break, our Union faced exceptional challenges. First, there was the long 
and complicated discussion on the new adjustment programme for Greece. And now, in an 
area very much outside the ECB’s competence, there is the challenge of harbouring a large 
number of refugees that had to leave their homes behind. Both these events – although very 
different in nature – have shown again that Europe can only be strong if it acts in unity on the 
basis of solidarity and cooperation. This is a lesson we should draw also for the challenges to 
come. 
In my remarks today, I would like to discuss two main topics: first, our assessment of the 
latest economic developments and its implications for our monetary policy stance; second, 
the proposals my colleagues and I presented in the Five Presidents’ Report. 
Economic developments and monetary policy 
Turning to the first topic, let me give you an overview of the economic developments since 
the  last  hearing  in  June.  Over  the  summer,  industrial  production  and  other  indicators  of 
economic  activity  showed  signs  of  resilience.  At  the  same  time,  the  macroeconomic 
environment  has  become  more  challenging.  Our  September  macroeconomic  projections 
indicated a weaker economic recovery and a slower increase in inflation rates than we had 
expected earlier this year. The inflation rate will remain close to zero in the very near term, 
before rising again towards the end of the year. It will take somewhat longer than previously 
anticipated for it to converge back to and stabilise around levels that we consider sufficiently 
close to 2%. 
Slowing growth in emerging market economies, a stronger euro and the fall in oil prices and 
in  commodity  prices  more  generally  are  the  main  causes  for  these  developments.  As  a 
result,  renewed  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  have  emerged.  For 
many of these changes, it is too early to judge with sufficient confidence whether they will 
cause lasting slippage from the trajectory that we initially expected inflation to follow when we 
decided  to  expand  our  asset  purchase  programme  in  January.  More  time  is  needed  to 
determine in particular whether the loss of growth momentum in emerging markets is of a 
temporary  or  permanent  nature  and  to  assess  the  driving  forces  behind  the  drop  in  the 
international  price  of  commodities  and  behind  the  recent  episodes  of  severe  financial 
turbulence. We will therefore monitor closely all relevant incoming information and its impact 
on the outlook for price stability. 
Our  monetary  policy  measures  in  place,  including  the  TLTROs,  continue  to  have  a 
favourable impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and households. They have 
so far prevented a measurable tightening in financial conditions for the real economy despite 
the  recent  surge  in  financial  volatility.  The  sustained  decline  in  the  cost  of  borrowing  is 
strengthening domestic demand, by supporting durable goods consumption and stimulating 
investment particularly by small and medium-sized businesses. This is making the euro area 
economy more resistant to external shocks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Should  some  of  the  downwards  risks  weaken  the  inflation  outlook  over  the  medium  term 
more  fundamentally  than  we  project  at  present,  we  would  not  hesitate  to  act.  The  asset 
purchase programme has sufficient in-built flexibility. We will adjust its size, composition and 
duration as appropriate, if more monetary policy impulse should become necessary. 
I am aware that many of you closely scrutinise the potential effect of the low interest rate 
environment  on  financial  stability;  ECON  coordinators  chose  this  as  one  of  the  topics  for 
today.  Building  on  what  I  said  during  the  hearing  in  March,  let  me  underline  that  we  are 
closely  monitoring  risks  to  financial  stability,  but  we  do  not  see  them  materialising  for  the 
moment. Should this be the case, macroprudential policy – not monetary policy – would be 
the tool of choice to address these risks. 
Here,  we  can  build  on  the  recent  experience  in  developing  these  tools:  over  the  last  two 
years,  national  authorities  in  Europe  have  been  active  in  introducing  macroprudential 
policies, such as caps on loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios to structurally strengthen the 
mortgage  market  and  to  counter  growth  in  real  estate  prices  as  well  as  mortgage  loans. 
Similarly, to strengthen the banking system, countries have introduced systemic risk buffers, 
in  addition  to  the  buffers  for  globally  systemic  banks  and  other  important  institutions. 
However,  these  macroprudential  instruments  mainly  cover  lending  through  the  banking 
sector. As there are signs that the financing of the euro area economy has tended to shift to 
non-banks, the coverage of the macroprudential framework needs to start being extended to 
the shadow banking sector so as to address risks in the financial sector as a whole. 
I would also like to say a few words about Greece. During the last hearing in June, I called 
for a comprehensive and fair agreement with Greece. In the following weeks, coming to such 
an agreement was very difficult and necessitated tremendous efforts from all those involved. 
But I am grateful that in the end, an agreement was reached. If it is completely implemented, 
the new programme will put Greece in a position to grow again and to reap the full benefits of 
participating in our common currency. The ECB contributed, in line with the provisions laid 
out in the legal framework, to the negotiation of the programme. In addition, the ECB closely 
monitored the provision of emergency liquidity assistance by the Bank of Greece according 
to our rules, taking into account the prospect of a successful completion of the negotiations 
at any point in time. 
Completing EMU: following up on the Five Presidents’ Report 
The negotiations over the summer revealed again the fact that our institutional framework is 
still not commensurate with the requirements of sharing one currency. In the Five Presidents’ 
Report that we published shortly after the last hearing, the five authors shared one common 
conviction,  namely  that  to  make  monetary  union  stable  and  prosperous,  a  more  complete 
union is necessary. But we did not only outline this common conviction; we also presented a 
concrete roadmap showing how to attain this objective. This roadmap should now guide our 
discussions in the months to come. 
From  our  perspective,  two  elements  are  of  particular  importance.  First,  despite  the  best 
efforts  of  all  actors  involved,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  monetary  union  requires  a  political 
centre; a centre that can take the relevant fiscal, economic and financial decisions for the 
euro area as a whole in a swift and transparent manner with full democratic legitimacy and a 
clear set of responsibilities given to it by the legislators. It is in this spirit that I have called 
repeatedly  for  a  move  from  rules-based  coordination  to  sharing  of  sovereignty  within 
common institutions. The report proposes a euro area treasury as one example. Such ideas 
now need to be spelled out. 
But we should also go further with regard to our policies. The report makes clear that EMU 
will also need to strengthen its tools to manage and prevent the build-up of fiscal, financial 
and other macroeconomic risks. In the last few years, notably with the reforms strengthening 
the  economic  governance  framework  and  setting  up  the  ESM,  SSM  and  SRM,  we  have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
made important first steps in improving our crisis prevention and crisis management toolkit. 
But we are not there yet. 
Most  imminently,  we  should  move  towards  completing  banking  union  through  a  common 
backstop for the Single Resolution Fund and through a European deposit insurance scheme. 
Both are essential to create a truly single banking system to mirror our single currency, and 
both  are  crucial  to  underpin  the  credibility  of  banking  union  and  finally  achieve  its  initial 
promise,  namely  breaking  the  bank-sovereign  nexus,  making  the  financial  system  more 
resilient,  and  protecting  the  interests  of  taxpayers.  At  the  same  time  –  going  beyond  the 
confines of the banking sector and banking union – we must make progress in developing a 
capital markets union to enhance further the scope for cross-border private risk-sharing. 
In addition, we need to prevent imbalances – whatever their nature – from developing into a 
crisis environment. Therefore, we need a new convergence process based on the capacity of 
our economies to withstand shocks and grow out of them quickly. This would imply not only a 
more robust financial system as just described, but also stronger governance over structural 
reforms and a tighter control of national fiscal policies. To ensure that Member States can 
adjust to shocks, whatever their size, we will also need to add a layer of fiscal stabilisation at 
the European level. 
Taken together, these steps towards completing EMU would help to make the euro area not 
only survive, but thrive and prosper. 
On that note, I am now looking forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
