  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Geared up for global reform and regional 
integration 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the FT-First Metro Philippines Investment Summit, Makati, 
20 May 2015. 
 I am pleased to have this opportunity to share my thoughts with you this afternoon. At last 
year’s Summit, we tackled the “new wave of volatilities” that we were then experiencing. You 
may recall that the markets (both global and our own) were at that time still internalizing the 
“reality” of Fed taper. In the interim, however, a more upbeat outlook on the US economy has 
surfaced  as  well  as  significantly  lower  oil  prices.  Recently,  improvements  have  also  been 
noted in Europe and Japan. 
Domestically,  there  have  also  been  quite  a  number  of  positive  developments.  Private 
consumption  has  remained  buoyant,  inflation  has  been  kept  within  target,  current  account 
surpluses  have  been  sustained  and  the  banking  system  has  stayed  sound.  Against  this 
backdrop, the IMF, the World Bank and the ADB have all projected strong GDP growth for 
2015 and 2016 for the Philippines. 
Moody’s  backed  these  up  by  describing  our  banks  as  being  “well  positioned  to  manage 
unexpected downward pressures”. While we await an update from S&P after its recent due 
diligence,  Fitch  has  highlighted  the  “sound  liquidity,  high  capital  buffers  and  stable  asset 
quality” of our banks. 
All things considered, the Philippine financial system is in a good place today. But we can’t 
afford to be complacent. Not at all. 
For  this  afternoon,  let’s  consider  two  things  that  are  top-of-mind  of  the  market  that  could 
change the situation: 1) the global reform agenda, and 2) regional financial integration. 
First, the global reform agenda. We have seen the reform agenda take shape – from banking 
to  securities,  insurance,  infrastructure,  governance  and  market  conduct.  All  these  reforms 
are meant to institutionalize a “new normal” under a revised set of global best practices and 
minimum standards. We all appreciate how different this new normal is against the “older” 
ways  of  doing  thing.  I  fully  understand  that  making  this  transition  is  a  challenge  for 
stakeholders, regulators and the regulated alike. 
The  principles  underlying the  various  reform  components,  however,  make  a  clear  case for 
why there is a need for change. As responsive and responsible agents, it is incumbent upon 
us to adopt and adapt. 
We  adopt  the  higher  norms  prescribed  for  good  governance,  risk  management,  market 
conduct and consumer protection since these define our new market architecture. However, 
we are equally practical and pragmatic in recognizing idiosyncratic conditions that require us 
to adapt the global standards in ways that better serve our prudential purposes. 
Moving on to the second issue. We are seeing regional financial integration materialize into a 
defined  reality.  What  was  perhaps  a  faint  prospect  at  an  earlier  time  and  was  hardly 
discussed publicly, we now hear of promises of improved well-being for financial consumers 
and  prospects  of  larger  markets  for  service  providers  under  the  certainty  of  enhanced 
competition. 
The  integration  timelines  have  been  set  and  how  we  handle  ourselves  against  those 
milestone  dates  will  greatly  determine  the  macro-financial  landscape  for  generations  to 
come. In banking, we have a few short years before Qualified ASEAN Banks (QABs) may 
enter our market. The integration of ASEAN insurance markets has a more assertive timeline 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  while  capital  market  development  has  a  definitive  vision  for  a  harmonized  framework  for 
cross-border securities transactions. None of these integrated markets could exist, however, 
without the necessary pipelines and so interoperable and/or interlinked trading, clearing and 
settlement systems are likewise a necessity. 
As you can see, ladies and gentlemen, there is much that lies ahead of us. The new normal 
has  set  the  bar  higher  in  the  manner  regulators  supervise  the  financial  market  and  how 
market participants conduct themselves. 
Against the certainty of change, are we ready? 
Thankfully,  the  Philippine  financial  system  has  the  advantage  of  being  in  a  position  of 
strength.  But,  we  have  repeatedly  argued  that  this  strength  is  neither  permanent  nor 
absolute. Change is a certainty because the needs of financial consumers evolve with time. 
Markets,  in  turn,  offer  a  richer  menu  of  products  and  services  that  address  the  evolving 
broader needs of financial consumers. And on top of these, we have seen in recent times 
that  markets  sometimes  need  a  fresh-but-major  reboot  and  that  too  will  certainly  call  for 
change. 
These  changes  are  most  apparent  in  the  recent  legislative  and  policy  initiatives  to  further 
open  our  banking  market  to  foreign  interests.  I  am  often  asked  whether  the  Philippines  is 
ready for banking integration. Although it is not as often raised, the accompanying question is 
why we should be part of such integration efforts. 
Let me address the latter question first as a prelude to the former. The answer really may just 
boil down to two numbers: 600 and 31. 
The latest figures suggest that the world generally saves at a rate of roughly 20% of GDP. 
ASEAN, however, has a Gross Domestic Saving rate of 31%. Applying these figures to the 
USD2.395 trillion GDP of ASEAN in 2013 , we have ASEAN saving at USD742.5 billion of 
which USD263.5 billion (i.e., 11% of GDP) can be seen as a saving that is higher than the 
norm for the rest of the world. 
These are not small numbers, a good portion of which is invested outside of ASEAN. When 
combined  with  the  estimated  ASEAN  population  of  over  600  million  individuals,  a  more 
organized ASEAN financial market does seem to make its own case. 
Preparing for new foreign interests and added competition 
This brings me back to the first question: how do we prepare for the new foreign interests 
coming  into  our  banking  industry?  Perhaps,  with  one  eye  equally  focused  on  trying  to 
mobilize a portion of the USD742.5 billion in ASEAN saving in 2013 alone? 
Unfortunately, there is no switch that we can conveniently toggle between “on” and “off” for 
this. The best preparation is simply to have each bank operate with due recognition of the 
impact of financial risks on its own balance sheet and that of the system as a whole. 
This  combines  1)  the  effective  management  of  risk  exposures  and  the  enforcement  of  a 
binding governance culture at the bank level and 2) the regulatory oversight and mitigation of 
systemic  pressures  that  may  be  developing.  This  is  the  specific  context  of  what  we 
euphemistically refer to as an “enabled environment”. It is simply a regulatory framework that 
deliberately  nurtures  the  creativity  of  providers  to  deliver  innovative  product  and  services 
while giving regulators enough leeway to intervene to address conflicts of interests, including 
the possibility that what may be good for individual banks may not necessarily be beneficial 
to the system at large. 
In the capital market, we need to strengthen and finalize our pricing conventions so that there 
are no material gaps between reference rates and market valuation. We strongly subscribe 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  to  price  discovery  and  we  aspire  to  implement  the  principles  on  financial  benchmarks 
soonest. 
Market  infrastructure,  of  course,  plays  a  central  role  for  the  efficient  transfer  of  funds  and 
settlement of obligations, whether onshore or offshore. The BSP is playing a very prominent 
role in regional and global discussions to calibrate the global OTC Derivatives infrastructure 
requirements to better reflect the less active markets in Asia. Currently, financial regulators 
are actively reviewing our payments and settlement system so that a harmonized domestic 
structure puts us in a viable position to be a strong node within the ASEAN network. Indeed, 
to the extent possible, we lend our voice in global and regional forums where market reforms 
are either being designed or discussed for cross-border application. 
To  be  sure,  we  will  not  forget  our  financial  consumer.  The  Financial  Consumer  Protection 
Framework recently approved by the Monetary Board is a milestone in what can prudentially 
be expected by consumers and of financial service providers. The fact that a recent World 
Bank-funded review describes our consumer protection framework as one of the best in the 
world is a major strength as we move forward. 
Collaboration and cooperation 
Ladies and gentlemen, much has already been put on our collective plate but the reality is 
that much more can be expected ahead of us. It is not our intention to push all of these to our 
supervised entities for them to deal with on their own. Critical collaboration and cooperation 
is necessary because these are major developments that will dictate the market landscape 
for decades ahead. 
This extent of collaboration is an essential facet of how we got to this position of strength. 
Now, we have to build upon that collaboration and that position of strength for us to move 
forward. The winds of change have brought both the global reforms and regional integration 
into their respective mature stages and it is now the challenge of execution that is before us. 
We  may  not  always  agree  with  the  specific  form  of  the  global  and  regional  changes  but, 
perhaps,  we  can  agree  on  the  principles  for  which  change  is  being  espoused.  Borrowing 
from  the  website  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  we  continuously  need  to  build  resilient 
financial institutions, make markets safer, instill more effective supervision and institutionalize 
more  effective  resolution  regimes.  In  other  words,  we  need  to  uphold  transparency,  be 
mindful of contagion and concentration, and monitor simple risks that can subtly transform 
into systemic vulnerabilities. 
Ladies and gentlemen, vigilance has been the seed for which we are now reaping the fruit of 
macro-financial  strength.  Being  continually  cognizant  of  the  need  for  such  vigilance  and 
adhering to the discipline of governance are the keys to continued resilience. These are the 
responsible investments we need to make and with contributions from all stakeholders, we 
can expect a better and stronger financial market ahead. 
Thank you and good afternoon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
