  Vítor Constâncio: Monetary policy challenges in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual 
Conference of the Marshall Society on “The power of policy: solving problems and shaping 
the future”, Cambridge, 31 January 2015. 
This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form in Cambridge on 31 January. 
 Summary 
The  monetary  policy  experience  of  the  past  seven  years  is  reviewed.  In  pursuit  of  its 
objectives, the ECB has been very flexible in adjusting and expanding its toolkit. 
In  a  first  phase,  from  2008  to  2013,  monetary  policy  measures  aimed  at  easing  financial 
constraints arising from malfunctioning money and funding markets. Non-standard monetary 
policy was conducted in a context of well-anchored inflation expectations. It was not aimed 
at, but unavoidably resulted in, the expansion of the ECB’s balance sheet. 
The second phase, since 2013, is characterised by a more active use of the ECB’s balance 
sheet, as inflation started to fall significantly below 2%, accompanied by declines in various 
measures  of  long-term  inflation  expectations.  Non-standard  measures,  introduced  as  from 
July  2013,  included  a  policy  of  forward  guidance,  asset  purchase  programmes  of  private 
debt, a programme to provide targeted long-term funding to banks and an enlargement of the 
asset purchase programme to include sovereign bonds. 
A  number  of  concerns  have  been  voiced  regarding  the  adoption  of  a  large  scale  asset 
purchase programme (APP) in the euro area. It is argued that these concerns are unfounded 
since: the transmission channels of the APP go well beyond the direct effect on the price and 
yield  of  the  purchased  assets;  government  fiscal  discipline  should  not  be  achieved  at  the 
expense of central bank independence; central banks have instruments to absorb the effects 
of  an  expanded  monetary  base  should  inflation  become  a  risk  in  the  future;  and  finally, 
exuberance  in  specific  asset  markets  should  be  addressed  with  macro-prudential  policy 
tools, at national level, since price stability relevant for monetary policy refers to the market of 
goods and services, not to asset markets at large. 
At the moment, the euro area is suffering mostly from weak aggregate demand. Supply-side 
policies  are  necessary  to  increase  the  medium-term  growth  potential.  Monetary  policy, 
aiming  at  price  stability  by  stimulating  demand  and  supporting  investment,  should  reduce 
employment and output gaps, thereby positively affecting medium-term growth. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  this  invitation  to  participate  in  the  Annual 
Conference  of  the  Marshall  Society.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  and  support  the  Marshall 
Society’s quest to further young economists’ interest in economics. 
The subject of this year’s conference is ambitiously on the power of policy to solve problems 
and shape the future. 
In  modern  times,  monetary  policy  is  usually  considered  the  most  powerful  of  the  macro 
policies to stabilise the economy. It was not always assessed like that and it is important to 
be aware of its limitations. For instance, it is sometimes said that the world avoided the worst 
in 2008, only because central banks made bold use of their tools, cutting rates and providing 
abundant  liquidity.  The  truth  is  that  without  the  significant  use  of  fiscal  policy  in  2008  and 
2009  stimulating  our  economies  and  supporting  the  banking  sector,  the  meltdown  of  the 
financial system could not have been avoided. At their meeting in Toronto in 2010, the G20 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  financial 
fragmentation  made 
decided  to  reverse  the  policy  and  embarked  in  fiscal  consolidation,  to  different  degrees, 
leaving monetary policy to deal with macroeconomic stabilisation. In this context, it is easier 
to  explain  by  fiscal  policy  short-term  effects,  the  double  dip  suffered  by  the  euro  area 
economy after 2011, than by the behaviour of monetary policy. 
The tasks for monetary policy became particularly challenging in the euro area, in view of the 
imbalances built prior to the crisis by private debt expansion and the subsequent sovereign 
debt  crisis  of  2010–2012.1  The  resulting 
the  proper 
transmission of monetary policy more difficult. 
The first part of my remarks today will be dedicated to briefly review the experience of the 
past  seven  years  in  order  to  illustrate  two  broad  features  of  the  Governing  Council’s 
response  to  the  evolving  phases  of  the  crisis.  The  first  feature  is  naturally  that  all  ECB 
actions have always been guided by the compliance with its mandate, which is to maintain 
price stability as a primary objective as I will clarify below. 
The second feature is that, in the pursuit of its objectives, the ECB has been very flexible in 
adjusting and expanding its toolkit. Flexibility has been an important principle to ensure that 
economic and financial shocks would be met by the most efficient response at any point in 
time. Without going into the details of the individual instruments that we have operated, I will 
identify two broad phases in our response to the crisis. The two phases are characterised by 
different uses of our balance sheet as an instrument of monetary policy. 
This  will  lead  me  to  comment  on  the  implications  of  our  approach  for  the  current  cyclical 
phase. The main message that I would like to convey is the following: even if the traditional 
instruments of monetary policy, short-term interest rates, are constrained below zero, central 
banks have other tools, including large scale asset purchases, to ensure price stability over 
the medium-term. The ECB has never hesitated to use these tools, in accordance with its 
mandate. The monetary policy measures announced between June 2014 and last week are 
a testimony of our resolve and our independence. 
The ECB’s goal and strategy 
Let me start by recalling the exact contours of the ECB mandate. Monetary policy in the euro 
area has a strictly lexicographic mandate. Price stability is its primary objective according to 
Art. 127 of the Treaty. It is only without prejudice to the objective of price stability that the 
ECB should support the general economic policies in the Union, including the stabilisation of 
output and unemployment, as well as financial stability. 
The review of the ECB strategy in May 2003 clarified that price stability in the euro area is to 
be  understood  as  a  year-on-year  increase  in  the  harmonised  index  of  consumer  prices 
(HICP) below but close to 2%. Another fundamental aspect of the ECB’s monetary policy is 
that  it  aims  to  pursue  price  stability  over  the  medium-term  and  not  every  quarter  or  every 
year.  This  emphasis  on  the  medium-run  recognises  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  cannot 
stabilise prices at short-horizons and that short-term fluctuations are inevitable, especially if 
they  result  from  supply  shocks.  Hence,  the  ECB  is  not  an  “inflation  nutter”,  to  use  the 
expression of Mervyn King, ready to implement extreme changes in its policy instrument to 
try to prevent any blip in inflation. As long as they are temporary, short-term fluctuations in 
inflation  do  not  pose  a  threat  to  price  stability,  because  they  do  not  affect  inflation 
expectations  in  the  medium-term,  and,  therefore,  key  economic  decisions  such  as  wage 
formation or real interest rates. 
                                                 
1   See  Constâncio,  V.  (2013),  “The  European  Crisis  and  the  role  of  the  financial  system”  Speech  at  the 
the  euro  area”  Athens,  23  May  2013, 
Bank  of  Greece  conference  on 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130523_1.en.html. 
“The  crisis 
in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
This medium-term approach to the inflation target, as demonstrated by Lars Svensson2, an 
eminent  supporter  of  a  “flexible  inflation  targeting”  framework,  is  equivalent  to  an  optimal 
policy  rule  resulting  from  optimising  an  objective  function  containing  simultaneously  the 
deviation  of  inflation  from  the  target  and  the  output  gap.  This  means  that  a  medium-term 
strategy for the inflation target does not ignore what is happening with the output stabilisation 
or the slack in the economy. More trivially, it is clear that there are many situations, like the 
present  one,  where  aiming  at  the  inflation  target  by  influencing  aggregate  demand  is  fully 
aligned with the goal of stabilising the output gap. 
These two features of monetary policy in the euro area – an overriding emphasis on price 
stability  accompanied  by  a  publicly  announced,  numerical  definition  of  the  inflation 
objective  –  are  also  key  characteristics  of  inflation  targeting  strategies.  According  to  an 
influential definition, the inflation targeting approach “is characterised, as the name suggests, 
by the announcement of official target ranges for the inflation rate at one or more horizons, 
and  by  explicit  acknowledgment  that  low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  overriding  goal  of 
monetary policy.”3 
In  practice  however,  the  debate  on  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  ECB  has  mostly 
focused  on  its  differences  from  the  theoretical  notion  of  “flexible  inflation  targeting”.4 
Specifically,  the  ECB  itself  has  emphasised  its  reliance  on  two  pillars:  a  broadly-based 
assessment of the outlook for future price developments and a prominent role for monetary 
analysis.  However,  since  the  review  of  the  ECB  strategy  in  May  2003,  the  high-level 
similarities between our two-pillar strategy and inflation targeting are even more striking. In 
particular,  the  Governing  Council  clarified  the  definition  of  price  stability.  As  a  safeguard 
against the risks of deflation, it stressed that inflation should remain “below, but close to 2%”, 
not  just  “below  2%”,  over  the  medium-term.  The  Governing  Council  also  emphasised  that 
monetary analysis mainly serves as a means of cross-checking, from a medium to long-term 
perspective,  the  short  to  medium-term  indications  coming  from  economic  analysis.  It 
therefore  decided  to  discontinue  the  previous  practice  of  conducting  a  review  of  the 
reference value for a broad monetary aggregate on an annual basis. This decision was also 
consistent with the ongoing deepening and broadening of the analysis, under both pillars, to 
go beyond any individual indicator. 
The  publication  of  the  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,  available 
since  June  2004,  goes  in  the  same  direction  of  underscoring  the  similarities  between  our 
two-pillar strategy and the notion of inflation forecast targeting. 
Hence,  at  a  broad  level,  the  ECB  monetary  policy  strategy  is  not  radically  different  from 
inflation targeting. Differences emerge when we look at a finer level. For example, although 
the  review  of  our  strategy  led  to  a  reduced  emphasis  on  the  role  of  the  broad  monetary 
aggregate M3, our broader monetary pillar continues playing a role. The evolution of credit 
and the growth rate of various monetary aggregates are for instance relevant inputs in our 
assessment of the risks to price stability in the medium to long-term. 
All in all, the signposts guiding ECB actions have remained unchanged since the launch of 
the  Monetary  Union  in  1999.  They  include  the  primary  goal  of  price  stability,  as  defined 
numerically in 1998 and clarified in 2003, and a comprehensive strategy which encompasses 
information from both economic and monetary analyses. 
                                                 
2   Svensson, L., ( 1997), “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets” European 
Economic Review, 41, 1111–1146. Previously published as NBER Working Paper 5797. 
3   See Bernanke, B. S. and F. S. Mishkin, (1997), “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, pp. 97–116. 
4   See ECB (2011), “The monetary policy of the ECB”, third edition, May. For a detailed review of the theoretical 
features of inflation targeting, see Svensson, L., (2010), “Inflation Targeting,” in: Benjamin M. Friedman and 
Michael Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, edition 1, volume 3, chapter 22, pp 1237–1302. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The  precise  instruments  employed  by  the  ECB  to  pursue  its  goals  have,  however,  starkly 
changed after the financial crisis. We have devised many new tools, which we have defined 
as “non-standard measures”. In describing such measures, I think it is useful to identify two 
broad phases, which I describe in turn.5 
The ECB as a lender of last resort 
The  first  phase  covers  the  period  from  2008  to  2013.  Following  the  ECB’s  decision  to 
immediately  and  sharply  reduce  interest  rates  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Lehman  bankruptcy, 
this  phase  was  marked  by  the  decision  to  conduct  many  different  types  of  operations  to 
refinance banks. 
The immediate objective of these operations was to ease unwarranted liquidity constraints 
for  financial  institutions,  arising  from  the  malfunctioning  of  the  money  market  and  bank 
funding markets in general. Our measures ensured that solvent but illiquid institutions could 
continue  to  have  access  to  our  primary  liquidity  provision.  This  can  be  characterised  as 
performing  a  role  of  lender  of  last  resort,  a  traditional  function  of  central  banks  since  the 
19th century.6 In the face of impairments in private funding markets, the ECB stepped in and 
provided unlimited liquidity to all banks subject to adequate collateral. 
In  late  2011  the  banking  sector  faced  a  new  severe  liquidity  squeeze  and  two  large 
extraordinary  liquidity  provision  operations  were  conducted,  amounting  to  €1  trillion,  for  a 
three year maturity but payable after one year. 
While  the  immediate  objective  of  this  lender  of  last  resort  activity  was  to  ease  funding 
constraints  and  prevent  sound  institutions  that  were  experiencing  temporary  liquidity 
shortages from collapsing, its ultimate objective was to pre-empt risks to price stability over 
the medium-term, and therefore fully in line with our mandate. If left unaddressed, funding 
tensions  would  have  led  to  impairments  in  the  euro  area  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism, with adverse consequences on the  provision of credit, the real economy, and 
ultimately inflation. As history has taught us, a liquidity crisis could have triggered a wave of 
bankruptcy, leading to a Great Depression scenario. Thanks to our non-standard measures, 
this scenario did not materialise. The fall in inflation rates at the peak of the Great recession 
was short-lived and inflation expectations remained solidly anchored at levels that were fully 
consistent with our definition of price stability. 
A side-effect of the non-standard measures implemented in this phase was to produce an 
increase in the size of the ECB balance sheet. Starting with the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 
the  increase  in  financial  institutions’  demand  for  ECB  liquidity  led  to  a  progressive,  and 
sizeable, increase in bank reserves. Between 2007 and mid-2012, the ECB balance sheet 
more  than  doubled  in  size.  This  increase  was  not  the  direct  objective  of  our  non-standard 
measures, but only the endogenous result of liquidity needs from the banking sector. Indeed, 
after a fast growth, the balance sheet started to slowly decline from mid-2012 onward, as the 
funding situation in the banking sector improved. 
                                                 
5   This discussion does not consider the measures targeted at the sovereign bond crisis, the SMP and the OMT, 
which would require a more complex treatment. 
In the modern context, the expression “lender of last resort” is sometimes reserved to designate the provision 
of  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance”  (ELA)  to  individual  institutions  and  not  to  the  system  as  a  whole. 
Extraordinary  provision of  liquidity through  regular  lending operations, ELA, as theorised  by Bagehot in the 
19th  century,  is  also  provided  against  collateral  but  at  penalising  rates  above  the  main  policy  interest  rate. 
Nevertheless,  the  regime  of  full  allotment  of  liquidity  (whatever  the  banks  demand  against  collateral)  was 
made  available  since  October  2008  at  the  normal  interest  rate  and  had  the  unique  rationale  of  being  the 
fulfillment of the role of lender of last resort in the broader sense of the expression. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
6  
4 
   Some  commentators  have  interpreted  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  as  a  direct  signal  of 
future high-inflation risks. Similarly, the more recent reduction in the size of the balance sheet 
was interpreted by some as a cause of recent deflationary pressures.7 
These views are wrong and based on traditional technical monetarism, are ultimately rooted 
in the existence of a long-run link between money and prices and on a predictable relation 
between  the  monetary  base  (or  simply,  the  size  of  their  balance  sheet)  and  the  broader 
monetary  aggregates.  When  applied  to  the  euro  area  experience,  it  must  however  be 
qualified in two important ways. 
The first qualification is theoretical, but related to a property of the operational framework of 
the  ECB.  The  unlimited  provision  of  liquidity  to  banks  was  accompanied  by  a  policy  of 
remuneration of bank reserves at an interest rate linked to our main policy rate – the rate on 
our Main Refinancing Operations (MRO). This policy has been in place ever since the start of 
the  Monetary  Union  and  it  implies that  banks can  smoothly  adjust  their  desired  amount  of 
central bank liquidity without bearing a large cost, when excess liquidity is deposited at the 
central  bank  in  the  form  of  excess  reserves.  In  the  case  of  a  monetary  framework  where 
reserves are fully remunerated, changes in the amount of bank reserves become completely 
endogenous.  Increases  in  the  quantity  of  reserves  can  be  the  result  of  temporary  liquidity 
shocks and, as a result, never be followed by corresponding increases in prices.8 
The main point though is that those predictions are not supported by the empirical evidence. 
The  large  increase  in  the  euro  area  monetary  base  until  mid-2012  has  never  led  to  an 
acceleration of inflation. In the same vein, the decrease of our balance sheet since mid-2012 
is  not  responsible  for  the  trend  of  low  inflation  that  started  in  2013.  Even  over  the  longer 
sample  ranging  from  the  beginning  of  2007  to  the  end  of  2014,  this  interpretation  of  the 
balance  sheet  suggests  that  today  we  should  be  concerned  about  strong,  upward  risks  to 
inflation,  because  the  monetary  base  in  the  euro  area  increased  by  about  120%  over  this 
period.  The  problem  today  in  the  euro  area,  however,  is  not  too  high,  but  rather  too  low 
inflation. Let me recall that this disconnection between the monetary base and inflation has 
also been observed in other countries. It is especially striking in the United States, where the 
monetary base increased by more than 300% between 2007 and 20149 and there were no 
signs of strong inflationary pressure. 
There is no theory of inflation, even in technical monetarism, based only on the central bank 
monetary base increase without a corresponding development in broad monetary aggregates 
and this never happened. During the Great Recession, when the ECB balance sheet started 
its  expansion,  M3  growth  fell  dramatically  to  negative  levels.  Since  2010,  M3  growth  has 
remained very low, at average levels below 2%. 
To sum up, the first phase of non-standard monetary policy was conducted in a context of 
well-anchored  inflation  expectations.  Our  non-standard  measures  over  this  period  were 
aimed at addressing specific market impairments, to pre-empt risks to price stability over the 
medium-term. These measures produced implications on the size of the ECB balance sheet 
only  as  a  by-product,  as  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  was  passively  determined  by  the 
demand for liquidity emanating from the banking sector. 
                                                 
7   See for instance Orphanides, A. (2014), “European Headwind: ECB Policy and Fed Normalization”. MIT Sloan 
Research Paper No. 5119–14. 
8   See  also  the  discussion  in  Curdia,  V.  and  M.  Woodford,  (2011),  “The  Central-Bank  Balance  Sheet  as  an 
Instrument of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 58(1), pp 54–79, January. 
9   See  also  Williams,  C.  J.,  (2012),  “Monetary  Policy,  Money  and  Inflation”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco, Economic Letter, 9 July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  The more recent phase: more active steering of the ECB balance sheet 
The  second  phase  of  our  non-standard  measures  started  in  2013  and  corresponds  to  the 
period  during  which  inflation  started  to  fall  significantly  below  2%.  HICP  inflation  hovered 
below 1% in the second half of 2013 and kept drifting down over the entire 2014, reaching a 
slightly negative level, –0.2%, last December. These developments were accompanied by a 
significant decline in various measures of long-term inflation expectations. 
This situation is different from the one faced by the Governing Council in previous years. One 
way to characterise the difference is in terms of the nature of the shocks that are likely to 
have  determined  economic  outcomes.  Specifically,  the  Great  Recession  and  the  years 
before 2013 were characterised by a large increase in financial spreads and relatively stable 
inflation.  This  suggests  that  financial  disruptions  were  the  root  cause  of  real  economic 
developments. Recent academic results for the United States have confirmed the realism of 
this hypothesis from a quantitative perspective.10 In contrast, current downward pressures on 
both output and inflation are not accompanied by an increase in financial market spreads. 
For  instance,  the  spread  between  the  three-month  EURIBOR  and  three-month  euro 
overnight  interest  swap  (OIS),  identified  as  a  key  indicator  of  money  market  tensions,  is 
currently hovering around levels last seen during the pre-crisis period. Right now, with more 
favourable  yields  and  spreads  the  situation  suggests  that  current  developments  of  low 
inflation, high unemployment and significant economic slack, are more likely to be driven by 
a negative aggregate demand shock. There is a general lack of demand in the euro area and 
at the present pace the negative output gap would last until 2019, with a corresponding high 
unemployment that is fostering socio-political tensions. 
Maintaining  price  stability  in  the  face  of  insufficient  aggregate  demand  and  downward 
inflationary pressures requires a more expansionary monetary policy stance that, by reducing 
the economic slack, will contribute to improve price stability in the medium term. 
In  response  to  these  developments,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  introduced,  in  July 
2013, a policy of forward guidance, indicating its intention to keep interest rates at prevailing 
or lower levels “for an extended period of time”.11 In June 2014, the Governing Council also 
introduced two purchase programmes, for asset backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds, 
and a programme to provide longer-term funding to banks for new loans, which we refer to 
as targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTRO). 
The  negative  developments  after  the  preparation  (in  November)  of  the  December  staff 
projections and the relatively weak use by the banks of the TLTRO, led the ECB to enlarge 
the  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (APP)  by  including  sovereigns  bonds  and  by  deciding  to 
calibrate a monthly amount of €60 billion purchases of the three types of assets. This amount 
of purchases is “intended to be carried out until end-September 2016 and will in any case be 
conducted until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation which is consistent with 
our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium-term”.12 
The switch to a more active steering of the ECB balance sheet is the distinguishing feature of 
the new phase of our non-standard measures. It is important to underline the nature of this 
new phase. We are not thinking of increasing our monetary base, expecting that through a 
working  and  stable  multiplier  the  monetary  aggregates  will  increase  correspondingly  thus 
                                                 
10   Christiano,  L.,  M.  Eichenbaum  and  M.  Trabandt,  (2015),  “Understanding  the  Great  Recession”,  American 
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 7 No. 1 (January 2015). 
11   For a detailed assessment of the effects of forward guidance in the euro area, see Coenen, G. and A. Warne, 
(2014), “Risks to Price Stability, the Zero Lower Bound, and Forward Guidance: A Real-Time Assessment,” 
International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10(2), pp 7–54, June. 
12   Introductory statement to the press conference  by Mario  Draghi, President of the ECB, Frankfurt am Main, 
22 January 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  achieving  an  upward  movement  in  inflation,  by  whatever  ways  the  traditional  quantitative 
approach  conceived.  We  decided  on  a  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchase  (LSAP)  mostly  to  be 
able to use several new channels of transmission of an expansionary monetary policy. The 
increase of the monetary base and the total balance sheet is a consequence of this new type 
of monetary stimulus. 
By purchasing this type of long-maturity assets, we intervene directly on medium-term rates, 
we  extract  duration  from  the  market,  we  provide  liquidity  directly  to  non-bank  entities,  we 
open  space  in  banks’  balance  sheets  for  increasing  credit.  Also,  by  reducing  persistent 
market spreads, in ABSs for instance, we encourage banks to increase their supply. As new 
money  origination  can  only  be  achieved  through  the  creation  of  more  loans,  this  measure 
has the potential to increase the supply of credit and reduce the price at which it is granted. 
Another  important  channel  through  which  we  expect  asset  purchases  to  work  in  the  euro 
area  is  the  broad  portfolio  balance  channel.  If  different  assets  are  imperfect  substitutes, 
interventions by the central bank that affect the supply of various assets available to private 
investors could influence the prices of many other assets, including investment grade bonds, 
equities,  real  estate  or  foreign  assets  with  consequences  for  the  exchange  rate.13  Higher 
valuation would also facilitate the process of balance sheet repair that is ongoing in the euro 
area, and more generally contribute to support credit growth. We see that the various effects 
also impact the credit channel. 
Finally,  asset  purchases  would  operate  through  a  signalling  effect,  i.e.  by  affecting 
expectations of future inflation and the future likely path of the key ECB rates. In the United 
States,  there  is  for  instance  evidence  suggesting  that  quantitative  easing  contributed  to 
increase inflation expectations, and therefore that asset purchases by the Fed reduced real 
interest  rates.14  Lower  real  rates  would  stimulate  aggregate  consumption  and  investment, 
and ultimately contribute to a faster return of the euro area inflation rate to levels consistent 
with our definition of price stability. 
The adoption of a Large Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) programme 
The ECB is responsible for price stability which is always effectively controlled by monetary 
policy on a medium-term basis. Having reached the zero lower bound of our policy rates, we 
had the duty to try all legal instruments to fulfil our mandate. In the present case, it implied 
exploring  new  channels  of  transmission  of  monetary  policy  that  have  worked  in  other 
countries like the U.K. and the U.S. 
We were, of course, aware of several objections and concerns that have been used against 
adopting a LSAP Programme. One concern at this point in time relates to the already very 
low  level  of  government  bond  yields.  There  is  certainly  limited  scope  for  further  yield 
reductions 
the 
transmission channels of the programme go well beyond the direct effect on the price and 
yield  of  the  purchased  assets  as  I  just  explained.  Besides  the  points  already  mentioned, 
government bond purchases at this point in time would firm markets’ expectations that the 
monetary policy stance of the ECB will remain expansionary for an extended period, even if 
through  a  government  bonds’  purchase  programme.  Nevertheless, 
                                                 
13   For a detailed review of the literature, see for instance Bernanke, B., (2012), “Monetary Policy since the Onset 
of the Crisis”, Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, 31 August. 
14   See for instance Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, (2011), “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on 
Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, The Brookings 
Institution, vol. 43(2 (Fall)), pp 215–287. For a recent analysis about the ECB, see Boeckx, J., M. Dossche 
and G. Peersman, (2014), “Effectiveness and transmission of the ECB’s balance sheet policies” National Bank 
of  Belgium  Working  Paper  275,  December;  See  also  Rogers,  J.  H.,  C.  Scotti  and  J.  H.  Wright,  (2014), 
“Evaluating asset-market effects of unconventional monetary policy“, Federal Reserve International Finance 
Discussion Paper 1101; Butt, N., R. Churm, M. McMahon, A. Morotz and J. Schanz, “QE and the bank lending 
channel in the UK”, Bank of England Working Paper 511, September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  interest rates started rising in other monetary areas. While current expectations are already 
consistent with persistently low levels of key ECB interest rates, government bond purchases 
should produce further reductions in yields by dampening their volatility in reaction to news 
and therefore their risk premia. 
We should also not forget that the recent reduction in government bond yields has been the 
result of increasingly widespread market expectations of a forthcoming ECB programme to 
purchase such bonds. The announcement of such a programme would therefore be effective 
by merely validating those expectations and thus preserving the low yield levels. 
A  second  concern  is  that  purchases  of  government  bonds  may  have  adverse  unintended 
consequences.  Specifically,  they  could  reduce  governments’  incentives  to  undertake  the 
necessary structural reforms or fiscal adjustments in countries where they are needed. 
All policies imply trade-offs and an independent central bank, responsible for price stability in 
an acute situation, cannot be condemned to inaction by arguments related to the amount of 
pressure that it may exerte or not on governments regarding other policies for which they are 
responsible. There are other instruments to achieve appropriate fiscal discipline that are in 
the hands of the EU Commission and Member States. 
Concerns regarding possible future inflation resulting from the increase in the monetary base 
have been less prominent this time. These traditional views have been disproved by the facts 
since 2007 and, in any case, the central banks have instruments to absorb the effects of the 
monetary base, if and when inflation would threaten to become a risk again. 
Then, there is the argument that in the present environment of low interest rates, a LSAP 
Programme can reinforce the trend of search for yield and lead to instability in asset markets. 
The  question  is  that  monetary  policy  cannot  tackle  two  objectives  at  the  same  time.  Our 
primary  mandate  as  stated  in  the  EU  Treaty  is  price  stability  in  the  market  of  goods  and 
services and not the market for assets. What this implies is that central banks must be given 
a second set of instruments of a regulatory nature under the umbrella of what is now called 
macro-prudential policy. When the business cycle diverges from the financial cycle, as is the 
case  now,  bold  and  efficient  macro-prudential  policies  are  essential,  even  if  their  more 
intrusive nature raises doctrinal objections in certain quarters. Advanced economies have no 
alternative  in  the  present  environment  of  secular  stagnation,  because  otherwise  the 
reluctance to tame excessive leverage of finance can lead to future crisis. 
Finally, there is the misguided argument that the euro area problem is almost exclusively a 
supply  side  question.  The  supply  side  policies  are  indeed  absolutely  essential  to  increase 
long-term potential growth by fostering total factor productivity, especially now when working 
age population is already declining. However, they take time to produce effects and there is a 
short-term horizon of two to three years where the question is mostly a situation of lack of 
aggregate  demand  and  Europe  needs  to  increase  growth  now  in  order  to  avoid  vicious 
circles related with the so-called debt-trap. 
Short-term stimulus to demand also helps the long-term and the supply side. In reality, only 
in our textbooks is there a pedagogical but artificial separation between the short-term and 
the  long-term  or  between  the  supply  and  the  demand  side.  The  nature  of  mathematical 
economic  models  enhances  this  pseudo-difference  as  they  feed  the  confusion  between 
logical time (long-term in the models only means a logical interval until the final equilibrium) 
and the chronological time that we face in policy-making. 
In the historical chronological time, the long-term is no more than a sequence of short-terms. 
In the case addressed, the main links between the short and the long-term are investment 
and hysteresis in the capital and labour markets. As we all know, investment has collapsed 
since  2007  and  in  the  euro  area  is  still  almost  20%  below  what  it  was  then.  This  has 
decreased the long-term potential growth rate as the capital became less efficient (hysteresis 
effect)  and  has  not  grown  sufficiently.  Hysteresis  in  the  labour  market  means  that 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  unemployed human capital loses quality, is discouraged and abandons the labour supply so 
that short-term prolonged high unemployment affects the long-term. 
In the present situation, monetary policy, by aiming at inflation, stimulates aggregate demand 
and, by doing so, positively affects medium-term growth, if indeed investment increases and 
the output and employment gaps are reduced. 
To conclude, I should refer to an important dimension of policy decision-making which is the 
cost  of  inaction.  At  the  moment,  default  risk  in  the  sovereign  debt  market  is,  in  almost  all 
countries,  a  result  of  the  prolonged  recession,  rather  than  the  outcome  of  current 
irresponsible  fiscal  actions.  From  this  perspective,  a  sovereign  bond  purchase  programme 
would  foster  growth  and  thus  be  instrumental  in  making  any  further  consolidation  of 
government finances possible. 
We have been encouraged by the initial reaction to our decisions: the portfolio rebalancing 
was reflected in increases in the price of equities and bonds and on the exchange rate. A 
word  of  caution  is  however  necessary  about  the  measurement  of  the  effectiveness  of  our 
decision. Indeed, it is not correct to look only for what happens to financial and real variables 
after the date of our decision. Firstly, because the measures have been partially anticipated 
by  the  markets,  so  that  the  effects  started  even  before  our  decision  was  taken;  secondly 
because it is necessary to compare with the counterfactual of what could have happened if 
the measures had not been adopted. As we are not in the domain of natural experimental 
science, the counterfactual has to be model-based with all the caveats of such endeavour. 
Concerning  inflation  itself,  in  the  short–term,  the  impact  of  oil  price  declines  is  likely  to 
prevail. Nevertheless, monetary policy can indeed control inflation on its own, on a medium-
term  basis,  provided  the  proper  instruments  are  used  with  persistence  and  determination. 
This is a basic tenet of theory that ultimately is the argument that justifies the independence 
of central banks. Other policies can indeed help and should help but in the end, monetary 
policy alone can do it. Inflation is the main remit of central banks and a responsibility that no 
independent central bank can disregard. That is why, we have repeated several times in the 
past few months that “Should it become necessary to further address risks of too prolonged a 
period  of  low  inflation,  the  Governing  Council  is  unanimous  in  its  commitment  to  using 
additional unconventional instruments within its mandate”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
