  Peter Praet: Price stability – a sinking will-o’-the-wisp? 
Intervention  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  during  a  panel  on  “The  elusive  pursuit  of  inflation”  at  the  IMF  Spring  Meetings 
Seminar, Washington DC, 16 April 2015. 
 I would like to thank John Hutchinson and Elena Bobeica for their contributions to this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the IMF for inviting me to this excellent workshop and to be part of such 
a distinguished panel. 
Introduction 
I. 
Almost 50 years ago Milton Friedman famously described the Phillips curve as a “will-o-the-
wisp”. When he first used this metaphor, he was isolated in the macroeconomist community. 
But in a matter of few years – and after a few bad inflation surprises that were hard to square 
with the solid and steady Phillips curve formalism that was embedded in many models of the 
time – his vision became less alien. Many of his colleagues started to admit that the Phillips 
curve  was  an  extraordinarily  frail  platform  for  central  banks  to  base  monetary  reflation 
experiments on. 
Indeed,  at  that  point,  Friedman  had  been  joined  by  the  so-called  Neo-Classicals  to 
demonstrate that what might appear as a steady association between price pressures and 
economic slack could in fact represent a collection of disequilibrium points which could only 
be  maintained  by  monetary  policy  perpetuating  the  disequilibrium  through  ever-more 
aggressive  expansion.  Arthur  Okun,  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  post-war  stabilisation 
theories,  was  more  cutting  in  his  assessment.  On  observing  a  scatterplot  of  Phillips  curve 
observations over the stagflation decade of 1970–1980 – which defied theory as it showed a 
positive (not a negative) correlation between inflation and unemployment – he remarked that 
the curve resembled “an unidentified flying object.” 
I think it is safe to say that few economists at that time, at either end of the macro-theory 
spectrum,  could  have  imagined  that  a  destabilisation  of  the  Phillips  curve  could  occur, 
symmetrically, in both directions – that is, on a sustained decelerating as well as accelerating 
path.  That  today  a  no  less  influential  observer  and  global  policy  actor  than  the  IMF  itself 
entertains  this  possibility  makes  it  sufficiently  important for  us  central  bankers  to  consider. 
Therefore,  I  am  grateful  for  this  opportunity  to  clarify  my  own  thinking  on  this  topic, 
particularly in the context of the euro area. 
Is  sustained  disinflation indeed  a  realistic  possibility?  I  believe  it  is  not  –  that  is,  unless  at 
least one of the following three conditions holds: 
1. 
the  structural  connection  between  inflation  and  unemployment  vanishes,  with  the 
Phillips curve interpreted as the aggregate supply condition in the spirit of the New 
Keynesians. This would imply that inflation becomes unreactive to economic slack; 
the  financial  transmission  channel  remains  blocked,  and  at  the  zero  lower  bound 
monetary policy cannot maintain sufficient traction on real activity. In the context of 
the Phillips curve, the measure of economic slack becomes uncontrollable; 
macroeconomic policymakers lose their commitment to their stabilisation mandates 
and  renounce  control  over  demand  conditions.  Consequently,  inflation  is  left  to 
move freely in the Phillips curve space, being driven only by pure sunspots. 
2. 
3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To bring forward my conclusions, I do not see evidence to support the first two conditions in 
the euro area. In terms of (1), the inflation/unemployment connection remains intact – in fact, 
it  has  probably  strengthened  precisely  in  those  economies  where  labour  market  slack  has 
exerted a disproportionate influence on the weak euro area-wide inflation trends. 
As for (2), the financial transmission channel has largely been restored. In the wake of the 
sovereign crisis, frictions in financial intermediation had increased on account of heightened 
risk  aversion  and  driven  a  large  wedge  between  the  risk-free  interest  rate  and  the  cost  at 
which private borrowers could borrow. Credit standards tightened despite the ECB’s policy 
orientation  to  loosen  its  stance.  Over  the  last  year,  however,  these  wedges  have  largely 
disappeared and financing conditions have fallen in line with our policy intentions. 
Turning to (3), there is certainly no lack of commitment on the part of the ECB. I believe that 
the ECB has demonstrated the necessary awareness when confronted with a downward shift 
in realised and anticipated inflation. Furthermore, it acted with the requisite force to address 
those  concerns  and  to  leave  no  doubt  about  its  commitment  to  delivering  price  stability. 
Other  economic  policy  makers,  however,  now  need  to  meet  the  challenge  with  the  same 
degree of determination. In particular, they should view the current loose credit conditions as 
a historical opportunity to launch policy initiatives that would be far more difficult to enact in a 
less supportive environment. 
Let me elaborate on these thoughts in some more detail. 
A flat Phillips curve 
II. 
A  key  enabling  condition  for  sustained  disinflation  is  the  presence  of  a  totally  flat  Phillips 
curve. On first reading, this concept may sound somewhat counterintuitive. After all, a vast 
literature has adduced that a flat Phillips curve is proof that central banks have been, and will 
continue  to  be,  successful  at  both  macroeconomic  and  inflation  stabilisation.  Indeed,  John 
Roberts  has  argued  this  point  particularly  forcefully  and  cites  the  influence  of  the  Federal 
Reserve’s stabilisation policies on US inflation dynamics.1 
But  a  negatively  sloped  Phillips  curve  –  in  the  inflation/unemployment  space  –  is  a 
precondition for central banks to exercise monetary control in the first place. When the slope 
of the Phillips curve approaches zero, the inflation process becomes impervious to monetary 
policy  interventions.  The  NAIRU  which  divides  regimes  of  accelerating  inflation  from 
decelerating  inflation  loses  significance.  In  other  words,  any  level  of  unused  capacity 
becomes  consistent  with  any  rate  of  inflation  and  the  inflation  target  ceases  to  exert  its 
gravitational pull on inflation expectations. 
Indeed, why should expectations gravitate around the central bank’s target if the central bank 
itself  cannot  correct  an  inflation  deviation  by  steering  the  level  of  economic  slack  to  the 
appropriate level and, thereby, bring inflation back to target? As inflation expectations set the 
intercept that determines the height of the Philips curve in the inflation/unemployment space, 
in this hypothetical case, nothing can prevent the curve from sinking in an uncontrolled way. 
While it is a matter of dispute whether and where that sinking process would end, it would 
certainly pull inflation away from levels that are consistent with central banks’ mandates and 
with macroeconomic stability. 
Let me make an incidental remark here. The major historical episode of unanchored inflation 
expectations,  at  the  start  of  the  1970s,  which  ultimately  opened  the  door  to  a  decade 
characterised by bouts of double-digit inflation, occurred precisely at a time when the Phillips 
curve  was  thought  to  have  become  flat  and  policymakers  saw  wage  and  price-setting  as 
having  become  insensitive  to  economic  slack.  This  perspective,  which  contrasted  sharply 
                                                
1  Roberts, J., Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics, International Journal of Central Banking, International Journal 
of Central Banking, vol. 2(3), September, 2006. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  with Milton Friedman’s famous dictum that “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary 
phenomenon”, led the Fed and other central banks to lend their support to measures such as 
wage and price controls rather than monetary solutions to address inflation.2  
My  own  view  is  that  I  do  not  see  signs  of  a  disconnection  between  inflation  and 
unemployment in the data for the euro area. There are three observations that lead me to 
this position. 
First, various estimates of the euro area Phillips curve slope show that while the slope has 
varied over time, in recent years it has steepened (see Chart 1). There is no agreed upon 
functional form of the Phillips curve, and our confidence that estimates using clouds of points 
in an inflation/economic slack space can capture the structural elasticity attached to slack in 
the conceptual Phillips curve, is indeed quite limited. Nonetheless, using different measures 
of  unused  capacity  to  at  least  hedge  against  mis-specification  risks,  we  obtain  estimates 
which all indicate that there has been an increased responsiveness of inflation to economic 
slack in recent years. 
If I interpret this evidence in a deep parametric way, I tentatively conclude that the slope of 
the Phillips curve is currently around 0.2. This implies that a 1 percentage point increase in 
economic slack would, on average, lower inflation excluding food and energy by about 0.2 of 
a  percentage  point.  And  in  fact,  this  relationship  measurably  increases  if  one  adjusts  the 
headline rate of unemployment for those who have become detached from the labour market 
for  a  long  time,  and  who  are  likely  to  exert  only  a  mild  amount  of  downward  pressure  on 
wage and price formation.3 Robert Gordon documents a similar result for the US.4 
As  I  mentioned  above,  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  Phillips  curve  has  steepened  in 
particular  in  some  of  the  so-called  euro  area  periphery  countries,  where  lawmakers  have 
actively  reformed  local  labour  market  institutions  and  deficient  demand  has  promoted  a 
protracted period of wage moderation. 
There are of course many caveats to interpreting this data: lining up a time sequence of dots 
in the inflation/unemployment or wage growth/unemployment space and using the slope of 
that  line  to  draw  conclusions  for  the  Phillips  curve  elasticity  is  hazardous  (see  Chart  2). 
Through time, an economy could be moving along a steady Phillips curve, or Phillips curve 
could be shifting in the space. And the shift could be due to a host of factors: a revision in 
inflation expectations for example, or a permanent or temporary change in wage and inflation 
mark-ups. 
Incidentally, this latter factor – a temporary reallocation of wage negotiating power between 
employers  and  job-seekers  –  appears  to  be  particularly  relevant  once  the  recovery  has 
moved beyond its initial phase. Evidence suggests that the relationship between inflation and 
labour market slack can be weakened not only during a recession but also in the early phase 
of a recovery. While the decline in euro area wage growth during the recession was limited 
due  to  downward  nominal  wage  rigidities,  in  the  early  phase  of  the  recovery  wage  growth 
may  remain  subdued  as  a  result  of  “pent-up  wage  restraint”.  In  other  words,  the  wage 
adjustment which did not occur during the recession may cause employers to initially curtail 
wage increases as they do not see a need to attract suitably qualified employees by wage 
incentives.  However,  once  this  pent-up  wage  restraint  has  been  absorbed,  wages  should 
begin to rise at a more rapid pace. 
                                                
2  See Christina Romer and David Romer, (2012). 
3  See ECB Monthly Bulletin, July, 2014. 
4  Gordon, R., “The Philips Curve is Alive and well and the NAIRU During the slow recovery”, NBER Working 
Paper, No 19390, August 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Discriminating across such null hypotheses is hard. But with these caveats in mind, a study 
by Banca d’Italia finds, for example, that the Phillips curve has undergone a structural break 
in  both  Spain  and  Italy,  and  for  two  reasons.  First,  nominal  price  rigidities  have  declined, 
possibly on account of the impact of structural reforms. Again, this result can be interpreted 
in  a  variety  of  ways,  including  the  idea  that  a  temporary  destabilisation  of  inflation 
expectations at some point started to influence wage contracts and produced a parallel drift 
in the curve. 
The second factor is a higher elasticity of consumer prices to the output gap. The underlying 
reason mentioned in the study is changes in the price setting behaviour of firms. This reflects 
the  lower  number  of  firms  in  the  market  in  the  aftermath  of  the  deep  recession  and  the 
reduction  in  strategic  complementarities  in  price  setting that  this  leaner retail  sector  brings 
about. This latter factor indeed comes very close to a New Keynesian type interpretation of 
the  higher  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  the  underlying  economic  conditions,  where  different 
degrees of strategic complementarities in price setting can indeed be viewed as influencing 
the  coefficient  attached to  slack (or,  rather, the marginal  cost  of  production)  in  the  Phillips 
curve condition. This evidence could tentatively support the contention that what is observed 
in the data is indeed a structural shift.5 
It is important to remember that a steep(er) Phillips curve is a curse for inflation stability on 
the  way  down,  when  cyclical  unemployment  is  on  the  rise.  But  it  is  a  blessing  when 
unemployment is being re-absorbed, as the revival in business activity places more intense 
upward pressures on prices and thus helps nudge inflation back toward its target level more 
rapidly. 
The  second  reason  why  I  do  not  see  signs  of  a  disconnection  between  inflation  and 
unemployment in the euro area is that – echoing a point also raised by Robert Gordon – the 
inflation process is occasionally subject to short-term spells of inertial drift, when supply side 
shocks  hit  repeatedly  and  cause  serial  downward  inflation  surprises.  Five  years  ago  this 
phenomenon  was  invoked  to  explain  the  “missing  deflation”  in  the  post-Lehman  world  of 
mass  worker  dismissals,  when  realised  inflation  turned  out  consistently  higher  and  stickier 
than forward looking macro models were predicting on the basis of the observed levels of 
unused  capacity.  Today,  the  delayed  adjustment  of  the  same  inertial  process  is  probably 
producing  a  symmetric case  of  “missing  reflation”. In  other  words,  a  sequence  of  negative 
commodity  price  surprises  may  be  dampening  the  reflationary  effect  of  the  economic 
recovery. 
Still,  the  possibility  that  inflation  may  occasionally  be  driven  by  spells  of  backward-looking 
dynamics does not mean that downward drifts – in both observed and expected inflation – 
should  necessarily  be  looked  through  by  the  monetary  authorities,  as  self-correcting  and 
hence policy irrelevant. In fact, I will advocate the opposite view later when I turn to the role 
of monetary policy. What I want to say here is the following: provided the appropriate policy 
response  has  been  put  in  place  to  ward  off  serious  risks  of  nominal  de-anchoring,  any 
outbreak  of  adaptive  expectations  will  be  transient. When  the  adaptive  expectation  rule  of 
both  households  and  firms  starts  to  perform  badly  in  the  face  of  strengthening  business 
conditions,  they  will  switch  back  to  expecting  price  stability  in  line  with  central  banks’ 
numerical mandates. 
The  third  factor  behind  my  assertion  is  that  the  flow  of  incoming  survey  data  indicates  a 
turnaround in inflationary pressures in line with the cyclical upturn, as evidenced for example 
by the latest PMI data. Both output and input prices as well as European Commission survey 
data on selling prices have rebounded since the turn of the year. Looking ahead, the weaker 
euro exchange rate as well as the continued closing of the output gap will be key drivers in 
                                                
5  Riggi,  M.  and  Venditti,  F.,  Surprise!  Euro  area  inflation  has  fallen,  Banca  d’Italia  Occasional  Papers, 
September 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  supporting the upward inflationary trajectory for euro area inflation back towards our aim of 
below but close to 2%. 
Re-integration of financial transmission 
III. 
Another  possible  condition  for  a  situation  of  sustained  disinflation  is  that  monetary  policy 
losses traction over the economy in the presence of disrupted transmission mechanisms. In 
the euro area our monetary policy response has indeed focused on two tracks: engineering 
an  appropriately  expansionary  stance,  while  simultaneously  repairing  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism so that this stance reaches euro area firms and households. 
The first track has seen us progressively cut rates, resulting in the ECB being one of only a 
handful of central banks whose short-term rates have gone into negative territory. The power 
that  negative  rates  have  had  in  propagating  our  policy  stimulus  has  been  striking,  for  two 
reasons. 
First, because a negative interest rate policy can to a certain extent be seen as a substitute 
for quantitative interventions. Bringing the overnight interest rate to a negative level already 
in June last year de facto meant that we started generating effects – again to a certain extent 
– that one expects to see under quantitative policies, eight months before we expanded our 
purchase programmes on a large scale. And second, because a negative interest rate policy 
is  indeed  a  complement  to  a  quantitative  programme.  Let me  explain  both  points  in  some 
more detail. 
When  the  short-term  interest  rate  falls  to  zero,  the  yield  curve  tends  to  steepen.  This 
phenomenon is a mechanical consequence of agents revising their interest rate expectations 
at the zero lower bound. Long-term interest rates are to a large extent driven by expectations 
of the future evolution of the short-term interest rate. If agents – looking forward – can only 
expect the short-term interest rate to rise in the future from a zero level, because they think 
zero is the lower bound, then the long-term interest rate will be determined on the basis of a 
probability distribution that is skewed toward positive numbers. This is what causes the term 
structure to steepen. 
Now, if agents can be convinced that the lower bound for the short-term interest rate is not 
zero but can be made negative, then this problem is likely to become less severe. In fact, 
over the summer and the autumn we have seen our long-term interest rates starting to react 
to  our  negative  interest  rate  policy  in  much  the  same  direction  as  long-term  interest  rates 
have reacted to QE in other countries and, subsequently, in the euro area. 
We  also  expect  the  negative  rate  to  complement  –  and  in  fact  empower  –  the  expanded 
asset purchase programme that we decided in January. A negative rate on bank reserves is 
an  inducement  for  banks  selling  securities  to  the  Eurosystem,  or  receiving  an  inflow  of 
reserves  and  deposits  as  a  consequence  of  central  bank  purchases,  to  lend  these money 
balances on and avoid the tax that is paid on them otherwise. In other words, we expect an 
increase  in  the  velocity  of  circulation  of  cash  reserves  –  another  way  to  describe  an 
acceleration in the portfolio rebalancing effect that is a key component in the transmission of 
asset purchases to the real economy. 
Turning  to  the  second  track  of  our  policy  –  the  repair  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism – the flow of data indicates that our credit easing measures taken last summer 
are  improving  the  pass-through  of  our  accommodative  stance  to  the  real  economy.  The 
nominal  cost  of  bank  borrowing  for  euro  area  NFCs  has  declined  sharply,  with  some 
convergence  across  countries  (see  Chart  3).  The  March  2015  Bank  Lending  Survey  also 
shows  that  euro  area  banks  have  continued  with  their  net  easing  of  loans  to  NFCs  with  a 
further decline in the disparity across countries. 
These  improvements  in  net  easing  were  mainly  driven  by  the  improved  cost  of  funding  – 
across all main market instruments – and balance sheet conditions. In contrast with the past, 
the  last  six  months  have  shown  that  banks  are  now  passing  along  their  cheaper  funding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  conditions to their customers. Our credit easing measures have supported this process by 
generating  competitive  pressures,  which  in  turn  makes  banks’  lending  behaviour  more 
responsive to their funding situation. 
As lending rates have declined in tandem with market rates, the demand for loans has also 
continued to pick-up. Improvements in the net demand for loans to NFCs persisted into the 
first quarter of this year across almost all euro area countries. This indicates that, by reducing 
the interest rate charged on the marginal loan, a bank makes the investment project of a firm 
which requires the marginal loan profitable. It follows from this that the more lending rates 
are reduced, the greater the number of investments that will break even and consequently, 
the  more  investors  will  ask  for  loans.  Looking  ahead,  the  indications  bode  well  for  future 
economic activity, as euro area banks expect both a further easing of credit standards and a 
continued increase of net NFC loan demand. 
In sum, the monetary impulse is being passed along the entire credit pipeline, including via 
banks. 
Policy reaction functions 
IV. 
When  all  the  structural preconditions  are  in  place for  central  banks to  influence  short-term 
real activity and limit excessive fluctuations in the rate of inflation from targets – namely a 
negative Phillips curve coefficient and a viable transmission mechanism – a sustained period 
of  disinflation,  if  this  is  possible  at  all,  can  only  emerge  if  monetary  policy  facilitates  it. 
However,  present  day  central  banks  have  little  scope  to  show  forbearance  when  price 
stability is at risk. Tolerating inflation destabilisation is not an option for them. Modern central 
banks have two strong antidotes at their disposal to avoid this. 
First, their robust monetary policy frameworks prescribe the delivery of price stability within a 
policy-relevant horizon. I stress this qualification as it is a key element. To be sure, the time 
horizon for central banks to normalise inflation cannot be preset, by statute, unconditionally. 
Indeed, in a vast part of the world where central banks are assigned numerical objectives for 
price  stability  the  stabilisation  horizon  is  not  defined  in  rigid  calendar-time  form,  but  is  left 
rather flexible for central banks to determine according to the nature of shocks that cause 
inflation to deviate from target. 
At the same time, a central bank which allows itself too much discretion over the time horizon 
when inflation should return to its target would de facto be claiming authority over redefining 
its  monetary  policy  objective.  This  would  be  manifestly  inappropriate,  probably  illegitimate. 
Central  banks  know  that  if  they  lack  a  verifiable  commitment  to  control  inflation  over  a 
horizon  for  which  the  public  retains  some  visibility,  this  can  result  in  inflation  expectations 
becoming “unanchored”. To go back to a point I made earlier, it is in this spirit that a central 
bank may choose to react vigorously to supply-side shocks so that it can restore the public’s 
faith in the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Second, and as a corollary, present day central banks do not indulge in the self-absolving 
notion that monetary policy has reached its limits and that further actions would be fruitless. 
Historically  this  sort  of  pessimism  about  the  potency  of  monetary  policy  has  led  to  policy 
paralysis. To make matters worse, this idea was often combined in central banking circles 
with  the  conviction  that  those  authorities  with  control  over  income,  structural  and  fiscal 
policies should be principally responsible for reviving the economy and countering deflation 
risks.  In  both  the  1930s  and  1970s  as  well  as  in  the  early  2000s  in  Japan,  these 
counterproductive beliefs led to policy inaction which ultimately resulted in enormous harm 
being inflicted on their economies. Today’s central banks have learned the lesson from these 
episodes and do not wait for others to move first. 
The ECB’s actions reflect this learning. Many observers expected that the EU environment of 
diffuse  macroeconomic  authority  would  lead  to  strategic  paralysis.  Instead,  the  ECB  has 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  risen  to  its  responsibility  of  ensuring  control  over  inflation  in  the  medium  term,  and  has 
responded vigorously to any risks of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. 
As a result, our expanded asset purchase programme has had three tangible effects. It has 
prompted a reassessment of inflation prospects as priced in inflation protection contracts: the 
steady decline of breakeven and inflation swap forwards which occurred in the recent past 
have  not  only  halted,  but  have  reversed  at  all  horizons.  The  implemented  measures  have 
also flattened the nominal term structure for safe as well as riskier fixed income securities at 
the longest maturities. And as a consequence of this, they have led to a drop in real rates 
across the entire spectrum of term contracts. 
The importance of other stakeholders 
V. 
Nonetheless, it is clear that all stakeholders must also play their part in ensuring a swift and 
sustained  recovery.  The  current  environment  where  the  real  interest rate  is  below  the  real 
GDP  growth  rate  is  one  that  is,  as  I  already  intimated,  very  supportive  and  ripe  for 
undertaking investment. But it is also not without risks. 
Chart  4  contrasts  estimates  of  the  long-term  real  GDP  growth  rate  with  long-term  real 
forward rates for the euro area. We see that since May last year the real forward curve has 
been  declining  consistently.  It  is  now  below  a  range  of  estimates  for  real  potential  growth 
rates  and,  in  fact,  below  the  zero  line  throughout  the  maturities.  This  chart  admits  two 
stylised interpretations. 
In the first interpretation, the movements of the forward real curve are just a mirror image of 
the compression in term premia achieved via our expanded asset purchase programme. The 
fact that the forward real curve has continued its descent observed since 2014 may be the 
result  of the  term  premium  compression, given  the  anticipation  (first)  and  actual  execution 
(then)  of  central  bank  purchases  of  securities  held  in  price-inelastic  portfolios.  Indeed,  the 
term premium is part of the real remuneration that investors demand in order to hold on to 
their investments. 
In  the  second  interpretation,  long-term  forward  real  rates  are  a  measure  of  an  equilibrium 
“norm”,  rather  than  a  reflection  of  a  monetary-policy  induced  compression  of  term  premia. 
Another way to look at the outer maturities along the real forward curve is to interpret these 
rates as a market measure of the equilibrium real rate. That is, they reflect the markets’ view 
of the real cost of borrowing that can be sustained by an economy that is neither overheating 
nor decelerating. Indeed, barring preferred habitat and extreme price inelasticities on the side 
of potential sellers, at those maturities all shocks should have dissipated, and the economy 
should be expected to have returned to a sustainable path. 
This interpretation is less benign than the first one I advanced. If one interprets long-term real 
forward  rates  as  a  measure  of  the  equilibrium  rate,  the  comparison  of  these  persistently 
negative  rates  with  the  growth  rate  of  potential  suggests  that  the  economy  may  be 
dynamically inefficient and expected to remain so for a very long time. 
What conclusions can one draw for policies (and I intentionally use the plural)? 
If the first  interpretation is  correct  and  one  interprets  long-term real  rates  as  influenced  by 
term  premia  and  monetary  policy,  then  –  by  bringing  the  real  cost  of  long-term  borrowing 
below  potential  growth  –  monetary  policy  can  lower  the  “return  bar”  at  which  investment 
projects  break-even  and  become  profitable.  Provided  investment  reacts  to  this  very  strong  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  price incentive, the imbalance will be rectified at some point, and real rates will catch up with 
(a higher) potential rate over time.6  
If  the  second  interpretation  is  correct,  we  are  in  the  fortunate  position  that  the  policy 
conclusions are not so different. The necessary policies that are required to capitalise on the 
low interest rate environment are the same policies that can repair dynamic inefficiency. In 
essence, no matter how you read the Chart 4 – or if indeed a combination of interpretations 
is  correct  –  the  safest  template  for  policy  action  involves  largely  the  same  combination  of 
policy strategies. 
While  monetary  policy  is  attempting  to  shadow  the  equilibrium  real  rate,  which  has  been 
reduced in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the counterpart economic policy authorities 
should  concentrate  on  lifting  potential.  What  is  needed  is  to  boost  growth  via  increased 
investment,  as  investment  not  only  creates  current  demand  but  future  supply.  Public 
investment  on  infrastructure,  if  sufficient  fiscal  space  exists,  as  well  as  on  education  and 
training can promote a new wave of innovations and put more of the labour force to work. At 
the same time, removing barriers that restrict the reallocation of workers across firms while 
enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  national  competition  authorities  to  drive  out  rent  seeking 
behaviour  would  reduce  market  functioning  impediments  and,  thereby,  increase  the 
profitability of investment. The European capital union would greatly facilitate firms wishing to 
undertake cross-border investment opportunities. 
Ultimately, a higher potential will create the conditions for a rising equilibrium rate and will 
pave the way for monetary policy normalisation. 
Conclusion 
V. 
Let me conclude. 
Euro area inflation declined substantially over the past year, but as I have just outlined, all 
the indications are there to support the view that inflation will gradually return to our definition 
of price stability of below but close to 2%. 
While the debate over the Phillips curve is likely continue for decades and beyond, there can 
be  no  doubt  that  monetary  policy  is  playing  a  key  role  in  helping  to  make  this  return  of 
inflation  to  our  objective  possible.  However,  it  is  now  up  to  governments  to  seize  on  this 
opportunity to ensure that the cyclical recovery becomes permanent. 
                                                
6  Of course, one should not overlook the fact that, even in this benign case, there are risks. In a world where the real 
interest rate is below the growth rate of the economy a self-perpetuating asset price inflation dynamic can become a 
reality. Borrowing to purchase assets that are limited or rigid in supply – for example real estate – may become a 
more attractive investment due to the expectation of increasing prices than investing in reproducible capital with a 
lower  return.  Indeed  it  is  in  such  a  setting,  combined  with  some  additional  very  strong  assumptions,  that  a 
sustainable “rational bubble” as depicted by Tirole emerges. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Annex 
Chart 1:  
Time varying estimates of different specifications  
of the Phillips Curve 
  Sources: Eurostat and ECB staff calculations 
Note: The Phillips curve relates the inflation measure to its first two lags and the first lag of the 
slack measure. The coefficients are assumed to evolve following a random walk process; the 
variance  of  the  errors  area  also  assumed  to  evolve  over  time.  The  available  short  term 
unemployment series was shorter than the full sample, so the unemployment gap was used in 
this  framework  to  proxy  the  labour  market  slack.  The  choice  of  priors  is  not  optimized.  The 
unemployment gap is inverted. 
 Chart 2:  
Pent-up wage restraint in the euro area 
(annual growth rates, percentage point) 
 Source: Eurostat. 
Notes:  the  chart  shows  the  relationship  between 
year-on-year growth in compensation per employee 
and the unemployment gap for different episodes in 
the euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Chart 3:  
Cost of borrowing for NFC’s new loans 
Composite indicator (percentages per annum) 
Source: ECB MFI interest rate statistics. 
Notes:  The  indicator  for  the  total  cost  of  borrowing  is  calculated  by  aggregating  short  and  long-term  rates  using  a  
24-month moving average of new business volumes. The cross-country dispersion displays the min and max range over 
a fixed sample of 12 euro area countries after excluding the extreme values. The last observation is February 2015. 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 4:  
Market-implied path of 1-year real rate  
in the euro area (% p.a.) 
 
Sources:  Reuters  and  ECB  calculations  with  other 
sources indicated in the legend. 
Note: last observation is 26th March 2015 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
