  François Groepe: Recent economic and regulatory developments 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  François  Groepe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve 
Bank, at The Webber Wentzel Leadership Network, Johannesburg, 4 March 2015. 
 Introduction 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  the  Webber  Wentzel  Leadership  Network,  which  is  aimed  at 
reinforcing your firm’s dedication to the future of South Africa and underscores the role that 
young professionals should play in the advancement of our country’s democracy. 
I  look  forward  to  sharing  my  views  on  the  recent  international  and  domestic  economic 
developments, as well as changes to the financial regulatory architecture. 
International economic developments 
We have entered the seventh year since the start of the Great Recession, and despite the 
significant  elapse  of  time,  the  global  recovery  can  be  characterised  as  uneven.  Global 
economic growth decelerated significantly to an annualised rate of 3,4 per cent in the final 
quarter of 2014 compared to the 4,6 per cent recorded in the third quarter. This slowdown 
can largely be attributed to the slower growth recorded in both advanced economies, as well 
as a number of the large emerging market economies, such as China and India. 
The  US  economy,  after  expanding  strongly  by  5,0  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter  of  2014, 
slowed to 2,2 per cent in the fourth quarter. Overall economic activity expanded by a solid 
2,4 per cent during 2014, which represented a notable improvement in economic conditions 
following  the  contraction  of  2,1  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2014.  Although  the  US 
unemployment rate ticked up marginally to 5,7 per cent, this could be attributed to the slight 
improvement of 0,2 percentage points in the labour force participation rate to 62,9 per cent 
and which can broadly be interpreted as an improvement in labour market conditions. 
Although  headline  CPI  inflation  has  declined  to  –0,1  percentage  points  and  Personal 
Consumption Expenditure inflation stands at 0,2 percentage points (year-on-year), it is likely 
that monetary policymakers will look through the oil price shock. Core Personal Consumption 
Expenditure inflation is at 1,3 per cent and services inflation is at 2,1 per cent, very close to 
the US Fed’s 2 per cent goal. Wage growth ticked up to 2,2 per cent in January. 
It is anticipated that the Federal Open Market Committee will commence with the process of 
interest-rate normalisation during the course of this year, despite its use of the term “patient” 
during  its  January  statement,  and  market  participants  are  eagerly  anticipating  the  March 
statement  to  analyse  it  for  any  change  in  the  language  used.  Although  lift-off  is  possible 
towards the middle of the year, it will be data-dependent. And as the timing risk of a lift-off is 
asymmetric  (i.e.  the  perceived  risk  of  tightening  too  soon  outweighs  the  risk  of  tightening 
slightly too late), there is a chance that lift-off may be delayed to the second half of this year. 
Should the so-called lift-off occur earlier than the market expects, market volatility is likely to 
heighten, despite the committee’s guidance that normalisation will be at a slow and gradual 
pace. 
The  UK  economy  expanded  by  a  briskly  2,6  per  cent  in  2014,  despite  growth  slowing  to 
2,2 per cent in the final quarter of 2014 compared to the 2,6 per cent registered in the third 
quarter. 
In the euro area, economic growth remains pedestrian despite accelerating from 0,4 per cent 
in the third quarter to 1,6 per cent in the final quarter of 2014, which helped to push growth to 
0,9 per cent for 2014. Growth for 2015 is projected at 1,3 per cent, but with downside risk.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Although the immediate risk of a Grexit has receded, following an agreement to a four-month 
extension  to  its  EU/IMF  bailout  programme, significant  risks  remain  as  some  €10  billion  in 
loan, bond and interest repayments is due in the next few months. 
Preliminary headline inflation registered –0,3 percentage points in February 2015, which is 
marginally  better  than  the  –0,6  percentage  points  reported  for  January,  due  to  the  lower 
energy prices, thus raising the spectre of deflation. The European Central Bank announced 
in January 2015 that it would embark on an open-ended monthly asset purchase programme 
of some €1,1 trillion in total. This seems to have partly stabilised inflation expectations in the 
euro  area.  Unemployment  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  improve  marginally  and  is  now  at 
11,2 per cent. 
Japanese growth  returned  to  positive  territory  in  the fourth quarter  of  2014  on  the  back of 
brisk growth in net exports. Despite this, growth for 2014 registered zero per cent. Headline 
inflation in January amounted to 2,4 per cent, but when allowance was made for the effect of 
the  increase  in  consumption  taxation  in  April  2014,  consumer  price  inflation  was  merely 
0,4 per  cent  and  hence  some  way  off  the  2  per  cent  target  that  has  been  set  by  the 
authorities. The Bank of Japan increased its quantitative and qualitative easing programme 
to approximately ¥80 trillion per annum in October 2014. 
Earlier this year, the IMF lowered its global growth forecast for 2015 and 2016 to 3,5 per cent 
and  3,7  per  cent,  respectively.  This  was  mainly  due  to  a  more  bearish  growth  outlook  for 
certain emerging market and oil-exporting economies, as well as the euro area and Japan. 
China’s real output decelerated from 8,3 per cent in the third quarter to 7,2 per cent in the 
final quarter of 2014 while its growth for 2014 registered 7,4 per cent, its slowest expansion 
in more than two decades. 
The impact of unconventional monetary policy on emerging market economies 
The  global  increase  in  liquidity,  following  the  launch  of  widespread  quantitative  and 
qualitative easing programmes, or the unconventional monetary policy, by several advanced 
economies  played  an  important  role  in  preventing  the  Great  Recession  from  degenerating 
into  a  Great  Depression,  and  more  recently,  has  been  used  to  counter  the  possible 
unanchoring of inflation expectations in the face of deflationary conditions. 
The  transmission  of  global  financial  conditions  and  shocks  across  borders  seems  to  have 
intensified following the implementation of the unconventional monetary policy in advanced 
economies.  This  is  as  a  result  of  increasing  global  trade  and  integrated  financial  markets. 
The channels by which these shocks are transmitted to emerging market economies are the 
interest-rate channel, the exchange-rate channel, and changes in asset prices. 
The  interest-rate  channel,  and  especially  the  yield  curve,  has  been  a  key  transmission 
channel of extraordinary monetary accommodation in advanced economies. With the decline 
in  global  interest  rates to  near-zero  and the  consequent  easing  of financial  conditions, the 
term  premium  was  compressed,  which  prompted  investors  to  rebalance  their  portfolios 
towards  higher-yielding  assets  in  emerging  market  economies.  Higher  interest  rates  and 
relatively  stronger  growth  in  emerging  market  economies  acted  as  a  pull  factor  on  capital 
flows. International financial and monetary conditions were therefore the trigger for flows into 
the  bond  markets  of  emerging  market  economies,  or  what  Hyun  Song  Shin  terms  as  the 
second  phase  of  global  liquidity,  bringing  economic  benefits,  but  also  making  these 
economies more vulnerable to external shocks. Investors drew scant little distinction between 
the  riskiest  high-yield  corporate  bonds  and  the  emerging  market  sovereigns  while 
excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  prevailed.  However, 
with  increased  expectations  of  normalisation  of  policy  rates  and  the  end  of  the  asset 
purchase  programme  in  the  US,  the  high-yielding  emerging  market  economies’  securities 
has lost their appeal somewhat. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A  further  channel  of  transmission  for  quantitative  easing  has  been  through  exchange-rate 
movements.  Capital  inflows,  particularly  portfolio  inflows,  to  emerging  market  economies 
have resulted in the appreciation of some emerging market economies’ currencies. However, 
according  to  the  IMF,  the  overall  impact  on  emerging  market  economies  was  generally 
positive.  It  further  argues  that  the  positive  spill-over  effects  from  the  relatively  stronger 
demand  in  advanced  economies,  as  well  as  from  the  lower  costs  of  capital,  cheaper 
sovereign  financing  and  higher  equity  prices,  outweighed  the  negative  effect  of  currency 
appreciation. 
Some of the positive net effects of quantitative easing on emerging market economies were, 
however,  reversed  following  the  “tapering”  announcement  in  May  2013  which  triggered 
changes  in  US  policy  expectations.  Some  evidence  suggests  that  the  announcement  has 
likely reduced market participants’ risk appetite for investing in emerging market economies. 
Indeed, many emerging market economies experienced a sharp withdrawal of private capital 
inflows  and  increased  financial  market  volatility.  The  impact  has,  however,  increasingly 
become  differentiated  among  economies.  Countries  with  stronger  fundamentals,  deeper 
financial markets and a tighter stance on capital flows and macro-prudential policies, prior to 
tapering, seems to have experienced less volatility. 
South Africa was among the emerging market economies strongly affected by the US Fed’s 
tapering  announcement.  As  in  other  emerging  market  economies,  portfolio  inflows  slowed 
from May 2013 and turned to outflows in the second and fourth quarters of 2013 and again in 
the  third  quarter  of  2014.  The  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  has  also  been  volatile.  Although 
some of this volatility can be explained by the changing expectations of the timing of the first 
US  interest-rate  increase,  domestic  idiosyncratic  factors  were  also  at  play,  including  weak 
growth projections, large twin deficits, a sizable share of foreign holdings in rand government 
debt and downgrades of South Africa’s credit ratings. The flexible exchange-rate system and 
robust macro-prudential policies in South Africa have, to some extent, served as a buffer in 
offsetting some of the negative spill-overs. 
Market  perceptions  of  a  possible  delay  in  US  normalisation,  coupled  with  the  European 
Central Bank action, have changed global market risk sentiment and improved the prospects 
for  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets  over  the  short-term.  This,  however,  is  likely  to  be 
temporary in nature. 
The  third  transmission  channel  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  has  been  through  the 
increase in asset values, both through the liquidity effect and by lowering the rates used to 
discount  future  streams  of  earnings.  This  has  occurred  both  in  advanced,  as  well  as  in 
emerging market economies. Since the US Fed embarked on the first round of quantitative 
easing, the US equity market, as measured by the S&P500, has gained over 232 per cent. 
The equity market in South Africa gained 236 per cent over the same period in rand terms. 
However, even though foreign equity flows slowed somewhat since the taper tantrum in May 
2013 and the actual tapering commencing in January 2014, the JSE has continued rising and 
equity valuations at about 17,3 times forward price-earnings ratio are firmly above their long-
term trend. 
While  South  Africa  has  experienced  significant  volatility  in  its  exchange  rate,  as  well  as  a 
surge in asset prices, there is little evidence to suggest that this has had a significant impact 
on  the  domestic  credit  cycle.  The  credit-to-GDP  gap,  which  was  in  line  with  the  positive 
levels of the credit-to-GDP gap of most advanced economies during the build-up phase of 
the global financial crisis, is currently below its long-term trend in South Africa. 
Recently, Christine Lagarde, the MD of the IMF, argued that even if the process of interest-
rate increases by the US Fed is well-managed, it may result in excessive volatility in financial 
markets and trigger a reversal of capital flows, particularly from vulnerable emerging market 
economies as investors reassess their perception of risk. South Africa, with its large budget- 
and current-account deficits, remains vulnerable to capital outflows and a weakening of the 
currency. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The impact of low oil prices on the global economy 
The similarities between the transmission mechanism of the 2006 fall in US house prices and 
the fall in the price of oil since June 2014 have prompted some analysts to predict that the 
correction  in  the  oil  price  could  ultimately  lead  to  negative  spill-over  effects  to  the  global 
economy. 
The US shale gas and oil industry is highly leveraged, and capitalised on the rise in the price 
of  oil  that  started  almost  a  decade  ago.  Banks’  lending  to  the  energy  sector  of  billions  of 
dollars could pose a systemic risk to the global financial system. The exposure was seen as 
low-risk  and  the  pricing of  risk  by  lenders  might  have  been  less  robust  during  the  upward 
swing in oil prices. 
The recent precipitous plunge in oil prices from approximately US$115 to US$60 has stoked 
concerns over growth of particularly the oil-producing countries, fuelling fears about deflation 
and intensifying scrutiny of capital spending across the energy sector, with companies set to 
slash their exploration and development budgets. Some estimates put the figure of possible 
losses related to halting exploration projects at US$1 trillion. Sustained low oil prices could 
further  trigger  a  wave  of  bankruptcies  and  defaults  with  concomitant  negative  spill-over 
effects to the financial sector. 
A number of sub-Sahara African countries are particularly at risk from the fall in oil prices, 
with oil exports accounting for 40–50 per cent of GDP for Gabon, Angola and the Republic of 
the  Congo,  and  80  per  cent  for  Equatorial  Guinea.  In  Angola,  the  Republic  of  Congo  and 
Equatorial Guinea, the oil industry accounts for 75 per cent of government revenue, while in 
Nigeria  oil  still  accounts  for  more  than  70  per  cent  of  the  national  budget,  leaving  public 
institutions exposed should low oil prices persist for some time. 
Although low oil prices could boost consumption, their impact on growth could be mixed, with 
oil-exporting countries particularly vulnerable and they may be negatively affected by these 
developments  in  the  form  of  deteriorating  fiscal  and  external  balances.  This  may  further 
result in sovereign wealth liquidating some of their investment holdings. 
The  lower  oil  prices  may  also  accelerate  the  build-up  of  deflationary  pressures  in  certain 
advanced economies. 
Domestic economic developments 
Although the South African economy expanded at a brisk annualised rate of 4,1 per cent in 
the  final  quarter  of  2014,  growth  for  the  full  year  was  a  disappointing  1,5  per  cent  and 
represents  the  second-lowest  growth  rate  recorded  over  the  past  sixteen  years.  The  real 
output during 2014 was severely affected by the industrial action in the platinum, as well as 
steel and engineering sectors, and supply-side bottlenecks such as the interruptions to the 
electricity supply towards the end of last year. Although mindful of the impact that monetary 
policy  may  have  on  economic  growth,  the  Bank  has  to  remain  focused  on  its  primary 
objective  of  price  stability  without  being  oblivious  to  growth  dynamics.  Similarly,  monetary 
policy does not cure all ills, and South Africa needs to be alive to the structural reforms, albeit 
painful, that may be required to place the country on a firm path to balanced and sustainable 
growth.  These  reforms  extend  beyond  labour  market  reforms  and  according  to  the  IMF’s 
2014  Article  IV  Consultation  Staff  Report,  they  should  include  increased  product  market 
competition,  as  it  would  help  to  reduce  the  wage-productivity  gap  by  lowering  the  cost  of 
living and enhancing productivity. 
The  current-account  deficit  improved  during  the  second  half  of  2014.  It  improved  from  a 
deficit of 6,2 per cent in the second quarter to 5,8 per cent in the third quarter of 2014. This 
can be attributed to mineral exports improving in the second half of the year, following the 
crippling platinum strikes in the first half of 2014, improved terms of trade due to the sharp 
decline in the international crude oil prices, and a more competitive rand exchange rate. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Headline CPI inflation decelerated to an annual rate of 4,4 per cent in January 2015, down 
from 5,3 per cent in December, and is now below the mid-point of the inflation target range. 
Consumer goods price inflation slowed markedly from a year-on-year rate of 4,8 per cent in 
December  2014  to  3,0  per  cent  in  January  2015.  Similarly,  non-durable  goods  inflation 
decelerated sharply to 2,5 per cent in January 2015 from 4,8 per cent in December 2014, as 
a  result  of  the  sharp  decline  in  fuel  prices,  which  resulted  in  transport  contributing 
0,7 percentage points to the 0,9 percentage points decline in headline CPI inflation. Services 
price inflation remained sticky in January and moderated only slightly to 5,8 per cent from 
5,9 per cent in December 2014. 
Headline  CPI,  excluding  food  and  non-alcoholic  beverages,  petrol  and  energy  –  the  most 
popular measure of core inflation – accelerated marginally to 5,8 per cent in January 2015 
from  5,7  per  cent  in  December  2014.  The  underlying  measures  of  CPI  remain  stable,  but 
elevated, which points to fairly persistent underlying inflationary pressures. 
The most recent rally in international crude oil prices resulted in a rebound in the petrol price 
of 96 cents per litre at the beginning of March 2015, which on its own may add approximately 
0,6 percentage points to headline CPI. 
Although the more benign headline CPI outlook has given the MPC some room to pause in 
its  process  of  interest-rate  normalisation,  it  had  emphasised  that  the  bar  for  further 
accommodation  remains  high  and,  as  indicated,  would  require  a  sustained  decline  in  the 
inflation rate and sticky inflation expectations. 
Regulatory, supervisory, and financial stability matters 
Following  the  Great  Recession  of  2008,  the  Bank’s  mandate  of  price  stability  has  been 
expanded  in  line  with  most  other  central  banks’  in  the  world,  to  include  the  additional 
responsibility of overseeing and maintaining the stability of their financial systems. The Bank 
shares  this  mandate  for  financial  stability  of  the  South  African  financial  system  with  other 
stakeholders in the financial and public sectors. 
National  Treasury  published  a  policy  document  in  February  2011  titled  A  safer  financial 
sector to serve South Africa better, which outlined government’s decision to shift to a Twin 
Peaks  model  of  financial  sector  regulation.  The  Twin  Peaks  model  of  financial  regulation 
represents a move away from a fragmented regulatory approach (based on the institution or 
activity)  towards  a  regulatory  and  supervision  model  based  on  objectives.  It  is  envisaged 
that,  once  fully  implemented,  the  Twin  Peaks  system  of  regulation  will  focus  on  a  more 
harmonised system of licencing, supervision, enforcement, customer complaints, an appeal 
and review mechanism, and consumer advice and education. 
National  Treasury  published  the  second  draft  of  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  in 
December  2014. This  bill  proposes  to  confer  upon  the  Bank  the responsibility  for financial 
stability and the oversight of market infrastructure and payment systems. It further proposes 
the establishment of two regulators, namely a Prudential Authority within the Bank and a new 
Financial Sector Conduct Authority. The Prudential Authority would supervise the safety and 
soundness of banks, insurance companies, and other financial institutions, while the market 
conduct  authority  would  supervise  the  way  in  which  financial  services  firms  conduct 
themselves and treat their customers. 
This reform forms part of the current broader overhaul of the global regulatory system which 
aims  to  address  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions, 
building  resilient  financial  institutions,  reducing  the  opacity  of  over-the-counter  derivatives 
markets, mitigating the impact of shadow banking on financial stability, enhancing financial 
benchmark transparency, and promoting the convergence of accounting standards. 
Within  each  of  these  themes  there  are  a  number  of  regulatory  initiatives,  such  as  the 
regulation  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions  under  the  too-big-to-fail  problem, 
Basel III and proposals for a basic capital requirement for insurers to strengthen the theme of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  building  resilient  financial  institutions.  This  list,  although  not  exhaustive,  suggests  the 
significant  scope  and  amount  of  the  work  still  ahead.  Adding  to  this  burden  are  the 
implementation  and  monitoring  processes,  such  as  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Programme and related peer reviews to assess progress made with the implementation of 
internationally agreed regulatory standards by member jurisdictions. 
On 1 January 2013, South Africa implemented the Basel III framework. The implementation 
period  for  several  of  the  Basel  III  requirements  that  were  incorporated  into  the  domestic 
banking regulations commenced on 1 January 2013, and includes transitional arrangements, 
which will be phased in until 1 January 2019. The purpose of the transitional arrangements is 
to afford banks sufficient time to meet the higher standards while still supporting lending to 
the real economy. 
South Africa underwent a peer and thematic review by the Financial Stability Board in 2013, 
and  recently  participated  in  an  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programme, 
which was finalised towards the end of 2014. The purpose of such programmes is to assess 
the  stability  of  member  jurisdictions’  financial  systems  as  a  whole;  they  intend  to  help 
countries identify key sources of systemic risk in the financial sector and implement policies 
to  enhance  their  resilience  to  shocks  and  contagion.  Overall,  the  assessment  of  South 
Africa’s financial sector and its supervision and regulation was positive, the report noting a 
high-level of compliance and strong supervision but finding that the financial sector operated 
in a challenging economic environment, identifying some gaps. 
Conclusion 
It is clear that although the global recovery has started to gain momentum, particularly in the 
US  and  the  UK,  it  is  multispeed  and  there  are  a  number  of  downside  risks  to  the  global 
economic growth outlook. Although the slump in oil prices can be described as equivalent to 
a tax reduction of approximately US$1 – 1,5 trillion and is viewed by most analysts as net 
positive for global growth, the positive and negative shocks are asymmetric, and certain oil-
exporting countries will be severely affected should oil prices remain at current levels for an 
extended  period  of  time.  Many  of  these  countries  may  be  downgraded  by  rating  agencies 
and  may  experience  significant  capital  outflows,  particularly  if  the  US  economy  recovers 
more  strongly  and  if  lift-off  happens  sooner  or  at  a  faster  pace  than  markets  may  have 
anticipated. This may elevate global financial stability concerns. 
Further risks to the global economic outlook include a possible disorderly Grexit and the risk 
of deflation, should inflation expectations become unhinged in the euro area and in Japan. 
On  the  domestic  front,  growth  continues  to  disappoint,  and  potential  growth  is  likely  to  be 
constrained  due  to  the  electricity  load-shedding.  The  inflation  outlook,  although  materially 
better,  remains  sticky,  with  inflation  expectations  remaining  close  to  the  upper-end  of  the 
target. It has, however, provided some room for pause, but the bar for an interest reduction is 
high, as previously stated. 
The  scale  of  the  regulatory  reform  process  under  way  is  probably  the  most  significant 
overhaul of the financial regulatory architecture since the 1970s. Despite its ambitious scale, 
the  Bank  is  preparing  itself  to  embrace  this  expanded  mandate  in  its  quest  to  promote, 
maintain,  and  ensure  a  more  stable  financial  system.  That  will  hopefully  allow  all  of  us  to 
sleep more soundly at night, knowing that our savings and investments are safer. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
