  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Building an efficient and inclusive national 
payment system 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  signing  of  the  Memorandum  of  Agreement  on  the 
Consolidation of ATM Networks, Manila, 30 January 2015. 
 We  at  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  are  happy  to  join  you  to  witness  the  start  of  the 
consolidation  of  our  ATM  networks  under  the  umbrella  of  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines. 
This  is  the  second  significant  program  that  we  are  launching  today  to  move  our  financial 
system forward. 
Two  hours  ago,  the  BSP  launched  the  electronic  trading  platform  for  the  BSP’s  Reverse 
Repurchase Electronic Trading System. This time, it is the private sector that is launching its 
own milestone: the consolidation of our Bancnet and Megalink ATM networks. 
While the BAP and our ATM networks describe this event as inspired by the BSP, to us the 
credit for implementing this milestone program properly belongs to our banks. 
Indeed,  it  has  been  our  position  that  the  BSP  receives  recognition  for  its  regulatory 
framework  because  it  works;  and  it  works  because  our  banks  are  part  of  the  consultative 
process. Thus, our banks are able to respond and implement programs accordingly. 
I  have  said  this  before  and  I  will  say  it  again:  I  believe  that  the  BSP  and  the  banking 
community work well together simply because we are on the same page – we both want to 
make our banking system better, stronger and more inclusive so that we can help keep our 
economy growing and improve the lives of Filipinos. 
In particular, this coming together of our ATMs under a single network is the important first 
step toward an efficient and inclusive retail payment system. In this connection, I am pleased 
to note that our ATM network has been expanding steadily – it increased from 6,200 units in 
2005 to over 16,000 in 2014. 
And over this period, you have expanded the use of the ATMs beyond deposit withdrawals, 
to  bills  payment,  to  making  donations  and  even  to  selling  e-loads  to  pre-paid  cellphone 
users. 
Ladies and gentlemen. Today, the Philippines average 2.5 billion payments per month which 
correspond to a value of over PhP 3.2 trillion – 99% of these payments are cash-based. This 
is  an  expensive  way  of  transacting  as  the  cost  of  producing,  transporting,  protecting  and 
even retiring cash is quite high. This high cost poses a barrier to inclusion. 
Greater  access  to  payment  or  transactional  accounts  can  be  an  effective  on-ramp  to  a 
broader  range  of  financial  services  and  boost  our  efforts  toward  financial  inclusion.  In 
addition, a shift to electronic payments will facilitate efficiency, which is convenience at the 
right cost. This will lead to lower business costs and higher consumer expenditure, a driver of 
economic growth in many economies. 
In fact, a cross country study found that a 10% increase in the share of electronic payments 
was  correlated  with  a  .5%  increase  in  consumer  spending.1  This  efficiency  will  also  drive 
business innovation and promote greater transparency in transactions. 
All these are also crucial in preparing for a more integrated ASEAN Economic Community. 
                                                
1  Le Sar, Porteous, Introduction to National Payments System, National Payments System Institute, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Nevertheless,  while  we  celebrate  this  milestone  today,  we  realize  that  this  is  just  the 
beginning. There are still things to do and bear in mind as we take this journey forward. Let 
me focus on three: 
First, it is important to establish well-defined rules, policies and processes to set the stage for 
areas of cooperation and areas of competition. This will facilitate the entry of new players, 
create a level playing field and provide the framework for inter-operability. 
Second,  there  is  a  need  to  upgrade  current  arrangements  to  enable  the  participation  of 
payment  service  providers,  including  non-banks.  This  will  support  the  environment  for 
innovation  and  efficiency  in  payment  channels  and  the  development  new  and  inclusive 
business models. 
Third  and  last  is  to  always  have  the  customer  in  mind.  The  retail  payment  system  should 
provide each of its users with transparency, certainty and reliability. 
These are the critical steps in this journey; which will surely lead us to a destination that will 
benefit  all  –  a  truly  inclusive  and  efficient  national  retail  payment  system  that  promotes 
electronic payments in the country. 
These benefits reveal the very purpose of this journey. I have no doubt that the members of 
our banking community will all continue to work together toward this end of providing better 
payment services to our people. 
Our next step is to collaborate on how to best implement not only the merger of ATM and 
POS or point of sales operations, but the overall integration of our payments system. 
Finally, I thank and congratulate everyone responsible for this milestone event. 
Mabuhay ang banking system! Mabuhay po tayong lahat. Maraming, maraming salamat! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
