  Vítor Constâncio: Nonlinearities in macroeconomics and finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
conference  on  “Nonlinearities  in  Macroeconomics  and  Finance”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
15 December 2014. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to Frankfurt for this conference on “Nonlinearities in 
macroeconomics and finance in the light of crises”. 
Nonlinearities  might  arise  in  many  economic  contexts.  Yet,  in  practice,  before  the  recent 
global financial crisis, economists have often relied on linear approximations when trying to 
capture economic interdependence. One reason for this is that the solution and estimation of 
non-linear models involves many challenges. 
There  is  a  saying  that  when  an  economist  mentions  some  nonlinear  effects,  it  means  this 
person  does  not  have  a  proper  model  worked  out.  This  is  not  the  case  concerning  this 
conference, where significant advances in several dimensions are on display. 
For investigating normal business cycle phenomena, linear models  might serve as a good 
approximation.  However,  the  experiences  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  and  the 
European sovereign debt crisis have highlighted the importance and usefulness of nonlinear 
models and suggest that nonlinear models should receive more prominence than they had in 
the  past.  Indeed,  these  models  appear  crucial  for  conducting  research  on  the  kind  of 
phenomena we have observed during the recent crises. 
The progress achieved in developing solution techniques to include nonlinearities in macro 
models  has  been  impressive  in  the  past  few  years.  This  conference  demonstrates  that 
nonlinear  models  are  relevant  for  a  broad  range  of  economic  themes  of  high  relevance  to 
policy-making. In my remarks, I will focus on some of the issues of particular importance to 
the ECB, where nonlinearities assume a significant role. These include issues related to the 
conduct of monetary policy at the zero lower bound (ZLB), housing, financial markets and the 
macroeconomy, fiscal policy and the European sovereign debt crisis. 
The Zero Lower Bound 
One key characteristic that introduces nonlinearities in economic developments is the ZLB. 
This is taken up in a number of papers in the conference, particularly the ones by Arouba 
and Schorfheide or by Larry Christiano et al (2014).1 
Let me elaborate on the relevance of the ZLB for policy-making at the ECB at the current 
juncture. In the summer of 2012, we faced a fragmented financial system, with banks being 
reluctant to lend and the euro area economy in recession. Since then the ECB has carried 
out several measures to address these problems and the financial situation in the euro area 
has improved dramatically. However, the economic situation remains difficult, with negative 
implications for investment. The prospect of a prolonged period of low inflation might have 
adverse effects, including a possible de-anchoring of inflation expectations. This is why, after 
setting our policy rates to their effective lower bound, the ECB has decided to engage in a 
mix  of  further  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures.  We  are  convinced  that  these 
measures,  working  through  several  channels,  will  provide  further  monetary  easing  and 
underpin the anchoring of inflation expectations. 
                                                 
1   See e.g. Aruoba and Schorfheide (2014), Christiano et al (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  From  a  policy  point  of  view  it  is  important  to  incorporate  the  ZLB  explicitly  in  models  that 
inform  the  policy  process.  This  results  in  nonlinearities  that  have  far-reaching  implications, 
including for the size of the fiscal multiplier and for the role of goods and labour markets to 
exit the ZLB. 
Housing 
Another important theme treated in the conference is housing and its relationship with global 
macroeconomic  conditions.  The  model  used2  by  Justiniano  et  al  (2014)  explains  the  U.S. 
house  price  boom  that  preceded  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  as  the  consequence  of  looser 
lending  conditions  in  the  mortgage  market.  Looser  lending  conditions  were  the  direct 
consequence  of  a  variety  of  factors,  in  particular  of  the  process  of  securitisation  and  the 
diffusion  of  market-based  financial  intermediation.  The  lax  macro-prudential  regulatory 
framework  was  a  pervasive  factor  in  producing  looser  lending  conditions.  An  important 
lesson to be drawn from this analysis is the significance of an active macro-prudential policy 
capable  of  containing  the  unwanted  effects  of  the  kind  of  credit  standard  loosening  that 
seems to have been responsible for the inception of the housing boom. 
Monetary Union 
The  future  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  is  another  particularly  relevant  theme.  It  is 
possible to relate the current problems faced by many euro area countries to the existence of 
relevant  heterogeneity  in  financial  frictions  across  single  member  countries.3  In  the  model 
used by Simon Gilchrist et al (2014), these differences allow firms from strong countries to 
undercut prices and gain market share from firms in vulnerable countries. This generates real 
exchange rate misalignments and current account deficits in peripheral countries, which may 
be  viewed  as  a  cause  of  the  current  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe.  Under  these 
circumstances,  a  possible  way  forward  is  to  implement  measures  to  enhance  risk-sharing 
between core and periphery countries. 
As  the  ECB  has  repeatedly  indicated,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  should  remain  the 
anchor of confidence in the sustainability of public finances. Nevertheless, a further sharing 
of sovereignty over economic policy making is necessary to strengthen both discipline and 
solidarity within EMU. Further steps from common rules towards common institutions will be 
discussed in the upcoming report by the Euro Summit on the future of economic governance. 
In addition, pursuing structural reforms aimed at increasing the overall efficiency of financial 
intermediation, and thus eliminating asymmetries in financial friction, will greatly contribute to 
reduce  the  pro-cyclicality  of  capital  flows  and  the  magnitude  of  fiscal  imbalances4  as 
illustrated by Jaccard and Smets (2014). 
Financial markets and the macroeconomy 
The research agenda on the interaction between the real economy and financial markets has 
become  extremely  important  in  light  of  the  recent  global  financial  crisis  and  European 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  his  keynote  speech,  the  Nobel  Laureate  Christopher  A.  Sims  will 
focus  on  expanding  an  empirical  structural  vector  autoregressive  model  with  structural 
identifying  restrictions 
for 
nonlinearities. Nonlinearities can be allowed in shock volatility and the transmission of those 
shocks through the economy. In this context, he will consider novel identifying restrictions. 
financial  and  macro  variables  allowing 
jointly  model 
to 
                                                 
2   See e.g. Justiniano et al. (2014). 
3   See e.g. Gilchrist et al. (2014). 
4   See e.g. Jaccard and Smets (2014). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Results  from  these  estimated  models  provide  crucial  empirical  evidence  to  complement 
insights from structural economic models. 
The growing literature on structural models to study macro-financial relationships includes, 
at  this  stage,  fully  articulated  nonlinear  models  that  are  solved  with  global  methods,  as 
well as Markov-Switching DSGE models to capture the sort of dynamics that underscored 
the  2008–9  financial  crisis.  Recent  papers  make  key  contributions  to  incorporating 
financial  instability  in  macroeconomic  theory,  featuring,  for  instance,  credit  constraints, 
endogenous risk taking and regime changes, bank defaults and imbalances on banks’ assets 
or liabilities. An important extension is to incorporate risk premia and to allow them to vary 
with the state of the economy, in order to draw conclusions on the risk aversion of agents in 
the economy as in the model by Swanson (2014).5 Such a model can be used to assess the 
effects of policy changes and structural breaks on asset prices. From a policy perspective, 
enhancing  our  knowledge  about  the  role  of  risk  aversion  and  amplification  mechanisms  in 
explaining the build-up and unravelling of crises provides important insight on how to conduct 
monetary and financial stability policy. 
Fiscal policy and the euro area sovereign debt crisis 
The last theme of the conference that I would like to mention is the effect of fiscal policies 
and the evolution of the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. By using a suitable nonlinear 
model, Born et al (2014) show that the effects of fiscal consolidations on the cost of servicing 
sovereign  debt  depend  crucially  on  the  degree  of  fiscal  stress.6  While  expenditure-based 
fiscal consolidations carried out in normal fiscal circumstances have favourable effects on the 
cost of servicing debt, in situations of fiscal stress, sovereign spreads tend to rise. 
These  findings  suggest  that  fiscal  policies  in  the  euro  area  should  be  oriented  towards  a 
growth-friendly composition. As pointed out by the ECB President in his 2014 Jackson Hole 
speech,  selective  tax  cuts  should  be  matched  by  corresponding  selective  spending 
reductions,  targeting  taxes  with  high  fiscal  multipliers  and  unproductive  expenditures. 
Additional  benefits  could  be  reaped  by  implementing  strong  co-ordination  among  fiscal 
policies of the different euro area countries, with an active role for complementary actions at 
the EU level with public investment. 
Another  important  concern  for  the  ECB  has  been  the  possibility  that  self-fulfilling  beliefs 
might lead to unsustainable sovereign debt dynamics and therefore precipitate a crisis.7 As 
Bacchetta  et  al  (2014)  show,  a  belief-driven  crisis  cannot  be  prevented  by  conventional 
monetary policy, unless the monetary authority is ready to generate very high inflation levels 
for a prolonged period. Non-conventional policies – based on issuing monetary liabilities in 
the form of fiat money – could be used, but their effectiveness would be limited. Either the 
central bank has a large amount of assets relative to the sovereign debt, or the zero lower 
bound has to bind for an unrealistically long time. 
Hence, it seems legitimate to conclude that the effectiveness of policy actions in preventing 
self-fulfilling sovereign debt crises is subject to important qualifications. This is in line with the 
ECB  announcement  of  the  Outright  Monetary  Transaction  (OMT)  programme  in  August 
2012,  aimed  at  eliminating  self-fulfilling  beliefs  of  a  euro  area  break-up.  The  OMT 
programme announcement has been successful so far mainly because of its careful design. 
The  programme  is  strictly  conditional  on  adjustment  programmes  and  structural  reforms 
actually being implemented and is limited to short-term maturities, in this way containing the 
duration of risk exposure of the ECB to any given bond issuer. 
                                                 
5   See e.g. Swanson (2014). 
6   See e.g. Born et al. (2014). 
7   See e.g. Bacchetta et al. (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  Conclusions 
Let  me  conclude.  Novel  and  effective  nonlinear  techniques  allow  us  to  gain  a  deeper  and 
more nuanced understanding of highly policy-relevant issues. We believe that these methods 
will be further incorporated among the tools routinely used also by central bankers as valued 
sources of policy advice. I wish you a stimulating and productive conference. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
