  Harun R Khan: Derivatives dynamics – looking back and looking ahead 
Keynote address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Finance Conclave 2015 on “Indian Derivatives Markets – Striking a Balance between Risk 
Protection  and  Liquidity”,  organised  by  the  SP  Jain  Institute  of  Management  &  Research, 
Mumbai, 17 January 2015. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Himansu Mohanty of the Reserve Bank of India. The speaker 
also acknowledges the inputs from Shri. Sudarsana Sahoo of the Reserve Bank of India. 
1. 
Prof.  Sesha  R.  Iyer,  Prof.  Suresh  G  Lalwani,  Prof.  Ranjit  Pattanaik  and  learned 
panellists & invitees. I am happy to be here today on the occasion of the Finance Conclave 
2015  on  “Indian  Derivatives  Markets  –  Striking  a  Balance  between  Risk  Protection  and 
Liquidity” organized by the SP Jain Institute of Management & Research and share some of 
my thoughts on the dynamics of derivatives in the Indian context. 
2.  
“Derivatives”  have  for  quite  some  time  been  a  totem  of  expertise  for  anyone 
connected  with  finance,  be  it  a  market  practitioner  or  a  financial  economist  or  a  financial 
sector regulator. Part of the interest no doubt stems from the usefulness of the derivatives, 
but a large part of interest is actually a form of pure wonder of incomprehension owing to the 
complexity  of  its  valuation,  design  and  risk  implication.  Be  that  as  it  may,  derivatives  at 
various times have evoked quite extreme reactions from thought leaders in the field. Warren 
Buffet is reported to have described derivatives as, “financial weapons of mass destruction, 
carrying  dangers  that,  while  now  latent,  are  potentially  lethal.”  Similar  sentiment  has  been 
echoed by George Soros, while advising people to avoid derivatives, “....because we don’t 
really understand how they work.” At the other end of the spectrum, former Federal Reserve 
Chairman Alan Greenspan, a steadfast defender of derivatives, said in a Senate Committee 
hearing “What we have found over the years in the marketplace is that derivatives have been 
an extraordinarily useful vehicle to transfer risk from those who shouldn’t be taking it to those 
who  are  willing  to  and  are  capable  of  doing  so”.  The  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC)  had 
spurned a large volume of literature laying  much of the blame for the crisis at the door of 
indiscriminate  use  of  derivatives,  pointing  out  the  dangers  inherent  in  derivatives  and 
underscoring the need for further regulating the market. Immediate aftermath of a crisis was 
not  a  good  time  to  take  a  balanced  view,  and  now  that  much  of  the  dust  has,  somewhat 
settled down, we can perhaps look at the problem dispassionately. 
Financial sector & the derivatives 
3.  
Before  we  go  to  the  theme  of  derivatives,  it  is  necessary  to  briefly  discuss  the 
financial  sector  as  such  so  as  to  provide  a  backdrop,  as  it  were.  It  has  been  generally 
accepted  that  a  financial  sector  is  a  necessary  precondition  for  economic  growth  and 
progress.  Economists  like  John  Hicks,  Walter Bagehot  and  Joseph  Schumpeter  have  held 
that  the  development  of  financial  sector  helped  mobilize  the  resources  necessary  for  “the 
immense  work”  that  constituted  the  industrial  revolution.  Of  course,  like  everything  else  in 
economics, this also has a contrary view point. Economists Joan Robinson and Robert Lucas 
have  expressed  scepticism  about  the  emphasis  given  to  the  financial  sector.  Extensive 
research in recent years goes to show that a well developed financial sector may be neither 
a  necessary  nor  a sufficient  condition  for  economic  growth but  the  absence  of an efficient 
financial sector can surely retard growth. 
4.  
The  financial  sector  essentially  enables  inter-temporal  transfer  of  income  and 
smoothens the consumption over the life time of an individual. On the other side, it also pools 
the surplus and allocates it to various socially productive projects which require an upfront 
outlay with the potential of generating a surplus at the end of the production cycle. It involves 
parting of money from the one who has the surplus to the one who needs it. But it could be a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  dangerous  proposition.  It  is  for  nothing  that  Polonius  counsels  his  son  Laertes  in 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet, “Neither a borrower nor a lender be”. The legal-financial system that 
has evolved over the centuries has developed an elaborate architecture to ensure that the 
trust  of  the  people  is  maintained  in  the  financial  system  and  they  lend  and  borrow  their 
requirement freely and safely. The financial sector has basically two kinds of problems. The 
first relates to information asymmetry inasmuch as one party to the transaction, the borrower 
or the investee, always knows more than the other party, the lender or the investor. This is a 
large topic in itself which I do not intend to deal with here, except that it also lays the ground 
for the second problem in financial transactions, that is, the risk of default or more generally 
the  risk  of  erosion  in  the  value  of  the  asset.  A  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial  system 
requires that this problem is adequately addressed. 
5.  
Derivatives  play  an  important  role  in  addressing  the  risk  inherent  in  financial 
transactions. A derivative has traditionally been defined as a contract whose value derives 
from and is dependent on the value of an underlying asset, such as, a commodity, currency, 
or security. The concepts of various derivatives have been known since antiquity – the oft-
cited anecdote of the sixth century BC philosopher Thales buying options on olive pressing 
mills is too well known to recount here. Various forms of derivatives – mostly forwards and 
futures – have traded off and on in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, for example, 
forwards on tulips and futures in the Yodoya rice market in Japan. The major milestones in 
the  history  of  derivatives  are  the  establishment  of  the  Chicago  Board  of  Trade  (CBOT) 
(1848),  establishment  of  the  Chicago  Produce  Exchange  (1874),  which  was  converted  to 
Chicago  Mercantile  Exchange  (CME)  (1919)  and  the  formation  of  futures  clearing  houses 
(1925).  I  may  mention  in  passing  that  notwithstanding  the  increasing  activity  in  the 
commodities  derivatives  markets,  there  were  always  apprehensions  about  the  impact  of 
derivatives trading on the cash market which led to frequent bans on commodity derivatives. 
6.  
The  history  of  derivatives  on  financial  securities  is  rather  short.  Following  the 
breakdown of the Bretton-Woods, which led to floating exchange rates, the CME introduced 
the first currency futures in 1972. In 1975 CBOT created the first interest rate futures contract 
to which CME responded with Treasury bill futures contract in 1975. In 1977, CBOT created 
the first treasury bond futures contract. In 1982, Kansas City Board of Trade launched the 
first Stock Index futures followed by the CGOT’s futures contract on S&P 500 index in the 
same  year.  In  1983,  the  Chicago  Board  of  Exchange  (CBOE)  introduced  an  option  on  an 
index of stocks. 
7.  
During the 1990’s, there was huge outcries over a series of debacles over derivative 
trading  with  market  participants  reporting  large  losses.  The  cases  of  Proctor  &  Gamble 
(swaps), Showa Shell (forwards) Metallgeselschaft (futures), Allied Irish Bank, Barrings Bank 
(options)&  Orange  Country(swaps)  have  become  standard  case  studies  in  the  academic 
curriculum.  The  discourse  that  followed  sometimes  blamed  the  products  and  often  the 
entities trading these products. The markets continued more or less in the same vein but the 
trading and risk management protocols amongst the market participants were tightened. 
8.  
The  GFC  brought  the  focus  back  to  the  derivatives  and  their  trading.  What 
happened is essentially as follows. Innovative design of derivative instruments facilitated flow 
of large quantum of funds to the housing sector through sub-prime loans, fuelling a housing 
sector boom and when the housing prices started correcting, the derivative instruments too 
started  losing  value.  Both  forces  interacted  with  and  reinforced  each  other,  and  the 
snowballing effect brought the markets down. It has been argued that laying the blame for 
the crisis entirely on the derivative products is akin to a bad workman blaming his tools. The 
problem perhaps lied not so much on the instruments themselves, but on the inadequacy of 
the market infrastructure to deal with the opacity and complexity of these products and on the 
lack of appropriate risk management protocol amongst the financial institutions that traded 
and took position in these products. Let me quote Kenneth Arrow, who in an article in the 
Guardian, sums up the predicament rather succinctly when he says “There have been two 
developments  in  the  economic  theory  of  uncertainty  in  the  last  60  years,  which  have  had 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  opposite implications for the radical changes in the financial system. One has made explicit 
and understandable a long tradition that spreading risks among many bearers improves the 
functioning  of  the  economy.  The  second  is  that  there  are  large  differences  of  information 
among market participants and that these differences are not well handled by market forces. 
The  first  point  of  view  tends  to  argue  for  the  expansion  of  markets,  the  second  for 
recognising that they may fail to exist and, if they do come into being, may fail to work for the 
benefit of the general economic situation.” And again, “There is obviously much more to the 
full  understanding  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  but  the  root  is  this  conflict  between  the 
genuine social value of increased variety and spread of risk-bearing securities and the limits 
imposed by the growing difficulty of understanding the underlying risks imposed by growing 
complexity.” 
irrational  exuberance 
Dynamics of derivatives market 
9.  
Before I deal with the Indian derivative markets, let me discuss some salient issues 
about the derivatives market in general. The market for financial derivatives, as indeed the 
market  for  any  financial  assets,  is  populated  by  three  generic  classes  of  participants:  the 
hedgers,  the  arbitrageurs  and  the  speculators.  The  hedgers  are  the  final  consumers,  as  it 
were. The arbitrageurs help establish the law of one price across market segments so that 
similar products with similar risk profiles cost the same in various markets at any given point 
of  time.  The  speculators,  a  word  with  much  negative  connotations,  essentially  do  inter-
temporal  arbitraging  and  serve  a  very  useful  economic  function  of  price  discovery, 
particularly in the financial markets. Inasmuch as the value of all financial assets is based on 
a view of the future, the act of speculation tends to correct the value of under-valued or over-
valued  assets.  Caution,  however,  is  invited  by  the  fact  that  the  future  is  uncertain,  and 
leveraged  speculation  based  on 
fraught  with  dangerous 
consequences as has been witnessed during many a crisis. 
For  the  market  participants,  liquidity  has  talisman  like  significance.  What  is  the 
10.  
meaning  of  liquidity?  Trading  volumes?  Bid-ask  spread?  These  are  only  indicators  of 
liquidity. In an economic sense, liquidity means the ease with which a security or an asset 
can be converted to “money” (bank and ultimately central bank liability) at the going price. It 
is  a  basic  requirement  of  a  market  because  an  investor  will  hold  an  asset  only  if  she  is 
convinced that she will be able to sell that asset at the going price without the price tumbling 
by the act of her sale. Similarly one will be able to issue liabilities, assured that investors will 
buy it without a discount. Thus smooth functioning of the financial market requires liquidity. 
But  at  the  same  time,  it  must  be  understood  that  liquidity  is  not  an  end  in  itself  that  the 
market  efficiency  increases  with  increase  in  liquidity  without  any  bound.  Here  I  will  like  to 
quote  Bob  Solow  on  this.  He  says,  “Much  more  significant  is  the  fact  that  the  bulk  of 
incremental financial activity is trading, and trading, while it may provide a little useful public 
information about market opinion, is largely a way to transfer wealth from those with inferior 
information and calculation ability to those with more. There is no enhancement of economic 
efficiency to speak of.” Hence it is necessary to keep the context of economic efficiency in 
view while talking about market efficiency. 
is 
Indian equity market & the derivatives 
11.  
Financial markets in India in the modern sense of the term have had a short history 
and are in a way in their nascent stage. You will recall that post-independence, in the plan-
economy era, we had what has been called a regime of financial repression where the key 
economic  variables  were  determined  by  fiat  rather  than  through  a  market  process.  The 
financial markets evolved into their present form following the liberalization that started in the 
early  nineties.  The  introduction  of  the  floating  exchange  rate  and  deregulation  of  interest 
rates  facilitated  development  of  an  active  foreign  exchange  and  fixed  income  securities 
market. It is true that India had perhaps the oldest stock market in Asia, with the Bombay 
Stock  Exchange  dating  back  to  1855.  The  stock  market,  however,  saw  quantum  change 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  following  the  scam  of  1991.  Securities  &  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  was  formed  in 
1992, and NSE in 1992(it started operations in 1994). I will just mention two other landmarks: 
the introduction of the NIFTY futures on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) in 1998 and the 
SENSEX futures on the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) in 2000. 
12.  
Equity  markets  are  the  quintessential  representation  of  functioning  of  a  market 
economy. They are the ultimate crucible for ideas such as corporate governance, investor 
protection,  market  discipline,  etc.,  and  the  existence  and  success  of  a  buoyant,  robust 
corporate sector is critically dependent on the functioning of equity market. One can say with 
pride  that  notwithstanding  the  low  ranking  of  India  in  the  World  Bank’s  list  of  countries  in 
regard to “ease of doing business”, we rank 7th in the attribute “protecting minority investors”. 
The  equity  markets  in  India  today  are  among  the  best  in  the  world,  with  state-of-the-art 
technology, institutional mechanism, and products. Apart from large daily volumes, we have 
other products such as equity derivatives, security lending and borrowing, algorithm trading, 
etc. 
13.  
The  main  focus  of  concern  in  equity  market  is  investor  protection  and  integrity  of 
trading.  Equity  derivatives,  like  all  derivatives,  can  be  used  either  to  hedge  an  existing 
position  or  express  a  view  on  the  equity  prices  or  indices.  Derivatives  being  leveraged 
structures have the potential to amplify the loss or gain in an asset. For the same reason, it 
can also contribute to the volatility. 
14.  
From a systemic financial stability perspective, the concern about the equity market 
stems  from  the  source  of  financing  equity  positions.  It  is  matter  of  great  concern  if  bank 
lending funds an equity market boom, or for that matter, any asset price boom. This is an 
unforgettable lesson from the crash of 1929, further underscored by the GFC. Recognising 
this, the banking regulations cap banks’ exposure to the equity markets. 
15.  
When  we  come  to  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  derivative  markets,  the 
perspective  changes  significantly.  It  is  to  be  appreciated  that  interest  rate  and  exchange 
rates are important macro-economic variables with economy-wide implications. The Reserve 
Bank  of  India  has  responsibility  in  regard  to  both  the  rates  and  is  statutorily  mandated  to 
ensure sound functioning of these markets. Therefore, its approach to development the cash 
as well as derivative segments of these markets has been characterised by what one can 
call as cautious gradualism. I shall elaborate on the issues involved in these markets. 
Foreign exchange derivatives 
16.  
The  backdrop  for  the  foreign  exchange  market  is  provided  by  several  factors 
following the Balance of Payment crisis we faced in 1991. Full current account convertibility 
since 1994, increasing openness on the capital accounts, a persistent and sometimes rapidly 
increasing current account deficit, the instability in autonomous capital flows, the investment 
needs of an expanding economy and globalization aspirations of Indian corporates are some 
of them. Our stated objective is to maintain orderliness in the foreign exchange market even 
as the exchange rate is market determined without any target level or band. The other factor 
one  has  to  reckon  with  is  the  so-called  impossible  trinity  where  an  independent  monetary 
policy, a fixed exchange rate and an open capital account are impossible to simultaneously 
attain.  Since  no  economy  of  India’s  size  and  complexity  can  sacrifice  its  independence  in 
monetary  policy,  the  inevitable  consequence  is  an  eclectic  combination  of  some  capital 
account openness and some flexibility in the exchange rate. 
17.  
How  does  all  this  influence  the  development  of  the  foreign  exchange  derivatives 
market? Our approach to development of the foreign exchange derivatives market has been 
largely biased by the use of these products as instruments of hedging for individuals and real 
sector  firms  with  a  pre-existing  foreign  exchange  exposure.  Take  for  example  an  exporter 
who has a foreign exchange receivable at a future date and any adverse movement is likely 
to  adversely  affect  her  expected  Rupee  revenue  and  therefore  her  balance  sheet.  A 
derivative  product  like  a  forward  sale  or  a  put  option  is  designed  to  remove  all  or  some 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  uncertainty  of  the  exporter’s  expected  revenue  and  thereby  impart  stability  to  its  balance 
sheet. 
18.  
But a derivative product also is an instrument for expressing a view on the future 
path of the price of the underlying. Thus if you expect the Rupee to fall in value at a future 
date, you can sell it in the forward or futures market or buy a put option. This has the effect of 
depreciation in the spot exchange rate of the Rupee. Can this be called a justified correction 
in  the  spot  exchange  rate?  It  depends  upon  how  justified  the  expectation  was  in  the  first 
place. Expectations are often mechanical extrapolation of the immediate past. If Rupee starts 
depreciating  for  some  reason,  an  expectation  of  further  depreciation  is  engendered, 
derivatives provide the means to express this expectation, and expectations are often self-
fulfilling.  Any  sharp  depreciation  of  Rupee  could  lead  to  further  panic  reactions:  exporters 
cancelling the forward sale contracts they had already booked and importers rushing to buy 
forwards to protect their future commitments. 
19.  
As I have mentioned, exchange rate is an important macro variable and given the 
various  factors  affecting  our  external  sector,  our  tolerance  for  large  volatility  or  sharp 
movements  is  rather  limited.  In  this  background  one  can  understand  the  regulatory 
framework  for  foreign  exchange  derivatives  in  India.  Firstly,  it  has  so  far  been  mostly 
dominated by the OTC segment and derivatives have been meant as instruments of hedging. 
That  is,  an  entity  can  enter  into  a  derivative  contract  only  if  it  has  a  foreign  currency 
exposure.  One  party  to  the  contract  has  necessarily  to  be  an  Authorised  Dealer  who  is 
supposed to be the market maker. So as to ease the derivative transactions, we have been 
making operational relaxations, such as, buying or selling forwards or options on the basis of 
past performance as indicator of current and future exposure rather than having to produce 
evidence of underlying each time. But still, underlying exposure is the basic driver. 
20.  
In 2008, currency futures started trading on the exchanges with a view to expanding 
the derivatives products, improving transparency and price discovery and affording an easy 
access to the foreign exchange derivative market. This brought in a kind of dichotomy in the 
foreign exchange derivative market. A futures market does not usually work on the basis of 
an underlying exposure. Moreover, there is free entry and exit and is cash settled. This is a 
perfect setting for anyone to express a view on the currency and it is quite contrary to the 
regime  for  the  OTC  market.  It  has  been  a  usual  response  to  sharp  movements  in  the 
exchange rate to modulate the regulatory regime in the OTC market by disincentivising free 
booking and cancellation of contracts aimed at making gain out of the Rupee movement. But 
is such a thing possible in the futures market? That is why during the volatility episode in July 
2013, restrictions were imposed in the futures market. These have been mostly undone and 
some  extent  of  symmetry  has  been  brought  about  between  the  OTC  and  the  exchange 
traded  segments  of  the  foreign  exchange  derivative  markets.  An  important  step  in  this 
connection has been to grant access to the futures market to the foreign portfolio investors in 
an attempt to offer them a viable alternative to the overseas NDF market. To provide boost to 
the currency futures, some more relaxations like enhancing the limit upto which exposure will 
not  require  the  proof  of  the  underlying  exposure  &  procedural  simplification  relating  to 
documentation are being examined. 
21.  
The Currency Futures volume that plunged post administrative measures taken by 
the  Reserve  Bank  in  July  2013  recovered  after  removal  of  the  restrictions.  The  trading 
volume though remains lower than the pre-July 2013 levels (US$ 3.2 billion in January 2015 
so far vs. US$ 7 billion in June 2013), the daily open interest position has improved to near 
pre-July  2013  level  of  about  US$  4  billion.  The  trading  in  the  Currency  Futures,  however, 
continues  to  be  dominated  by  non-bank  trading  members  (proprietary)  and  the  brokerage 
firms (as clients). There are only a few corporates holding insignificant open interest in the 
currency  futures.  Though  the  effectiveness  of  currency  futures  as  a  hedging  instrument 
remains low for several reasons, the product enjoys complementarity with the OTC products 
in developed markets as counter-parties to OTC transactions aggregate their exposures and 
cover them though exchange traded products (hub-and-spoke approach) which are quoted at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  narrow  bid-offer  spread.  It  is  expected  that  with  active  participation  of  banks  in  currency 
futures,  this  complementarity  will  provide  useful  linkage  between  the  OTC  and  exchange 
traded currency derivatives. 
22.  
We are committed to the idea that the range of derivative products should be wide 
enough  so  that  market  participants  are  free  to  choose  them  according  to  their  risk 
management strategy in a cost effective manner. Though options, mostly plain vanilla, have 
been allowed, their use has not been widespread. The average daily trading volume of forex 
options  is  just  about  US$  300  million.  We  are  contemplating  expanding  the  products 
available and considering allowing option trading strategies. In this context, it will be useful to 
note the use of various option structures by market participants during the period prior to the 
GFC.  The  currency  market  volatility  and  sharp  movements  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC 
caused many of these entities to book heavy losses, which lead to a spate of complaints and 
litigations. For that matter, the Rupee which has been mostly on an appreciating mode during 
2007–08, suddenly reversed the trend post-Lehman and many exporters suffered large MTM 
losses even on simple forward contracts. This brings home the point I made earlier that the 
blame  lies  with  unwise  use  of  the  derivative  products  linked  to  forex  or  otherwise  for  that 
matter  other  underlyings  rather  than  the  products  themselves.  While  the  firms  using 
derivative  products  must  have  an  adequate  risk  management  framework  comprising  an 
understanding of the risk and the derivatives used to mitigate that risk, the banks also have a 
responsibility to offer products that are suitable &appropriate for their client’s risk profile and 
risk  management  framework.  This  concern  is  sought  to  be  addressed  through  mandating 
banks to ensure suitability and appropriateness of the derivatives products they are selling to 
their clients. 
23.  
It is pertinent to mention briefly a theme current in contemporary discourse- Bond-
Currency-Derivatives (BCD) nexus. This is an ideal objective in an open economy financial 
system. What it means is this: any foreign investor, using any international currency, can buy 
an Indian Government or corporate liability denominated in Rupees or otherwise and hedge 
all risks, either onshore or offshore, the attendant credit, interest rate & currency risks. This is 
a  natural  prerequisite  for  free  international  capital  movements,  and  from  an  Indian 
perspective,  for  mobilisation  of  the  much  needed  resources.  The  problem,  however,  is 
inherent  in  the  proposition  itself.  This  presupposes  complete  capital  amount  openness, 
particularly  for  financial  institutions&  transactions.  The  pros  &  cons  of  full  capital  account 
openness is a contentious issue and in any case, we are not ready for it at this point of time. 
Thus  the  full  BCD  nexus  has  to  wait  on  progress  in  capital  account  liberalisation.  In  the 
meanwhile, I must point out that BCD nexus is neither absolutely necessary nor a sufficient 
condition for mobilising resources for investment to support economic growth. I will just have 
to point out the growth story of post-war Japan, that of China of last two decades and even of 
India before the crisis to support this point. 
Interest rate derivatives 
24.  
In an economy with expanding financial sector, interest rate is a key variable that 
affects firms and individuals across the board. In the pre-liberalisation era, the interest rate 
was largely “administered” and there was little need for hedging interest rate risk. It must be 
appreciated that interest rate derivatives market is not a retail market. But the individuals and 
small  firms  do  benefit  out  of  an  interest  rate  derivative  market  in  so  far  as  the  financial 
institutions  and  market  makers  can  hedge  their  interest  rate  risk  and  consequently  offer 
better  rates  to  their  customers.  Globally,  the  interest  rate  derivatives  constitute  the  largest 
segment of the derivatives market. 
25.  
Need for interest rate derivatives was recognised early and in 1999, guidelines were 
issued for two core products in the OTC segment: the Forward Rate Agreements (FRA) and 
the Interest Rate Swaps (IRS). The absence of a term money market has hampered the any 
meaningful  growth  of  the  interest  rate  derivative  markets,  except  one  product  viz.,  the 
Overnight  Index  Swaps  (OIS),  which  has  gathered  large  volumes.  We  have  always  been 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  concerned about lack of a term money market and have taken some steps ( e.g. introduction 
of term repos under Liquidity Adjustment Facility of the Reserve Bank of India, increasing the 
frequency  of  Bank’s  term  repos  to  four  times  during  a  reporting  fortnight,  recent 
announcement for permitting re-repoing of government securities, etc.) to nudge the market 
participants in that direction. Hopefully, term money market and an active interest rate swap 
market will develop in tandem. 
26.  
The need for an exchange traded interest rate derivative market was also felt pretty 
early.  An  exchange  traded  market,  apart  from  transparency,  price  discovery,  cost 
effectiveness,  and  better  risk  management,  also  provides  a  market  where  market  makers 
can hedge their risk. The development of an active interest rate futures market has so far 
eluded  us  and  the  process  can  provide  an  interesting  case  study.  The  products  were  first 
introduced  in  2003  which  were  cash  settled  and  based  on  zero  coupon  yield  curve.  After 
some  initial  interest,  the  market  liquidity  completely  dried  up.  In  2008,  after  the  currency 
futures were introduced, interest in Interest Rate Futures (IRF) were revived and after wide 
consultations,  physically  settled  futures  contracts  were  introduced  on  10-year  Government 
bonds. This is a classic product and it was expected that it will attract market interest. This 
product too did not survive beyond its infancy. After a lull, a cash settled single bond futures 
contract was introduced in January 2014 and has been trading with reasonable liquidity. It is 
proposed to expand such contracts to other tenors. The volumes and open interest in such 
contracts is limited by the total outstanding of the respective bonds. In the recent times, the 
volumes have picked up significantly. The average daily volume rose from Rs.13.97 billion 
post-launch of single bond futures in January 2014 to about Rs.25.50 billion in January 2015 
so far. More importantly, the open interest have registered steady growth in the recent period 
with average daily figure of Rs.63.60 billion during the current month so far. It is expected 
that  this  product  will  develop  market’s  familiarity  with  the  terrain  and  prepare  it  for  more 
generic products in future. 
27.  
The  reason  for  lukewarm  response  in  interest  rate  product  partially  lies  in  the 
structure of our debt markets. The government bond holding is concentrated amongst banks, 
insurance  companies,  provident/pension  funds  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  same 
goes for corporate bonds as well. Most of these investors are hold-to-maturity types who do 
not face volatility in the value of their holdings and consequently have no need for a hedging 
product. Secondly, there is perhaps a lack of diversity of view among the market participants. 
The  market  structure  does  not  change  quickly  and  it  may  not  be  optimal  to  impose 
accounting hegemony on banks and financial institutions to force them towards hedging in 
the interest of developing the market. The strategy for development of the market, therefore, 
has to comprise widening the range of products, granting flexibility in product design to the 
exchanges,  removing  barriers  for  participation,  etc.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  now  considering 
introduction of bond futures in other maturities in consultation with the SEBI. 
Credit derivatives 
28.  
The  Indian  financial  system  has  traditionally  been  bank  based  system  where  the 
external  financial  requirements  of  firms  have  been  mostly  met  by  banks.  In  the  pre-
liberalisation  era,  there  were  specialised  term  lending  institutions  which  used  cater  to  the 
long term capital requirement. This is no longer the case now. The need for a vibrant and 
liquid corporate bond market is based on several considerations. First, it will cater to the long 
term  funds  requirement  of  the  corporate  sector  and  help  the  banks  manage  their  asset 
liability mismatch more effectively. Second, in a growing economy and with complex financial 
needs  of  existing  and  new  firms,  the  corporate  debt  market  provides  a  better,  more  cost 
effective  access  to  funds.  Among  the  steps  taken  to  bring  liquidity  into  the  market  is 
introduction of credit derivatives which help bond holders to insure themselves against risk of 
default. Having been introduced in the aftermath of the GFC, the product has been launched 
perhaps  with  a  high  dose  of  safety  measures  as  some  analysts  suggest  and  this  could 
perhaps  accounts  for  its  limited  liquidity.  There  is  a  need  to  re-visit  the  issues  hindering 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  development  of  the  CDS  market,  such  as,  non-availability  of  netting  benefit  of  marked  to 
market (MTM) leading to higher capital charges for the market players, dominance of high 
rated bonds not warranting any need for credit risk protection, procedural issues for some of 
the  foreign  banks  being  reluctant  to  execute  Credit  Support  Annexes  (CSA),  large  players 
like  insurance  companies  not  being  able  to  sell  protection,  etc.  The  Reserve  Bank  is 
examining  some  of  the  prudential  conditions  that  can  be  relaxed  without  compromising 
systemic stability. 
Financial market infrastructure 
29.  
As I mentioned earlier, the considered view of the GFC is that it is not so much the 
derivative  products  that  are  to  be  blamed  but  the  infrastructure  for  trading  and  the  risk 
management  and  regulations  of  the  institutions.  The  corrective  steps  to  prevent  the 
recurrence of such a crisis have focussed a great deal on improving the transparency and 
risk management in the market infrastructure. Let me quote from the Pittsburgh Declaration 
of  G-20  leaders  summit.  It  stated,  “All  standardized  OTC  derivative  contracts  should  be 
traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where appropriate, and cleared through 
central counterparties by end-2012 at the latest. OTC derivative contracts should be reported 
to  trade  repositories.  Non-centrally  cleared  contracts  should  be  subject  to  higher  capital 
requirements. We ask the FSB and its relevant members to assess regularly implementation 
and  whether  it  is  sufficient  to  improve  transparency  in  the  derivatives  markets,  mitigate 
systemic risk, and protect against market abuse.” Keeping in view the thrust of the G20 on 
reforms in the OTC derivatives market, Reserve Bank has drawn up and is implementing a 
roadmap  focussed  on  standardisation  (e.g.,  OIS  has  been  standardised)  reporting  to  the 
Trade Repositories {e.g., all foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives are reported to 
the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL)}, central clearing (e.g., 90 per cent of the 
IRS  currently  are  being  cleared  through  the  Central  Counter  Party,  i.e.,  the  CCIL)  & 
exchange  or  electronic  platform  based  trading  (e.g.,  permission  to  CCIL  to  start  electronic 
trading platform for the IRS). 
30.  
The need for robust market infrastructure has been recognised in India quite early. 
Settlement of financial contracts through a central counterparty (CCP) mechanism is a key 
risk-mitigation  measure.  We  had  introduced  CCP  clearing  in  government  debt  and  foreign 
exchange  spot  transactions  by  a  specialised  institution  (viz.  CCIL)  in  2001  and  2006 
respectively. CCIL has  also been permitted to  act as CCP for interest rate swaps and the 
service  is  expected  to  be  launched  shortly.  Mandated  central  clearing  of  forward  foreign 
exchange transactions has also been put in place. 
31.  
The  important  role  of  a trade  repository  for  OTC  derivative  transactions  has  been 
recognised for dealing with opacity inherent in OTC transactions. It must be recognised that 
even  before  the  GFC  brought  to  the  fore  the  importance  of  trade  repositories,  we  had 
enabled  CCIL  to  collect  and  store  transaction  level  data  in  respect  of  rupee  interest  rate 
swap reported to it through a regulatory mandate. The scope of the repositories has since 
been expanded to include the entire spectrum of OTC derivative products which is assisting 
regulatory surveillance and supervision. 
32.  
Much as the exchange traded segment  may provide safety and transparency, the 
role of the OTC market cannot be overlooked. The main advantage comes from the bespoke 
nature  of  the  market.  In  modern  finance,  the  funding  requirement,  cash  flows  and  risk 
appetite vary from company to company and from financial institution to financial institution. 
An  exchange-traded  product  is  necessarily  standardised  and  disincentivises  financial 
innovation. Completely moving away from OTC products is like throwing the baby with the 
bathwater.  Of  course,  the  need  to  improve  the  market  infrastructure  and  regulatory 
framework for the financial institutions’ trading and taking position in OTC products needs to 
be strengthened. This is precisely what we have been doing for the OTC derivatives in forex 
and interest rate and credit derivatives. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In parallel drawing from the lessons of the recent GFC for effective risk management 
33.  
of the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMI), the existing structures have been strengthened 
and  consolidated  by  the  Committee  on  Payment  &  Settlement  System  (CPSS)  {now 
Committee  on  Payments  &  Market  Infrastructure  (CPMI)}  and  the  Technical  Committee  of 
the International Organization of Securities Commission (IOSCO) by way of 24 Principles for 
the  FMIs  (PFMIs).  Some  of  the  principles  which  have  assumed  more  importance  involve 
general  business  risk  in  terms  of  recovery  and  resolution  of  the  FMI,  settlement  finality, 
operational risk, tiered arrangements and disclosure of market data by the TR besides the 
requirement of the central bank and other regulators to exercise effective oversight over the 
FMIs in relation to these principles. Reserve Bank of India and the security market regulator, 
SEBI, are committed to fulfil their responsibilities and ensure compliance with the PFMIs by 
the CCPs. For example, CCIL is being regularly evaluated for its level of compliance and our 
assessments indicate that there is a very high degree of convergence with these principles. 
Of  course,  continuous  evaluation  against  existing  and  evolving  standards  will  remain  a 
priority  for  us.  Currently,  we  are  in  advance  stage  of  dialogue  with  European  Market 
Infrastructure Regulators (EMIR), the ESMA & the US authorities like the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC), for recognition of our FMIs like the CCIL of following standards 
equivalent to those prescribed by them for settlement of securities, forex & derivatives so that 
market  participants  from  these  countries/region  can  participate  in  our  markets  without 
impacting their trading activities & raising transaction costs, thereby affecting market volumes 
& liquidity. 
Conclusion 
34. 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
 Let me now conclude based on what emerged from the above discussion. 
The  importance  of  financial  sector  in  lubricating  a  modern  economy  cannot  be 
overemphasized. 
Financial  transactions  are  subject  to  information  problems  and  hence  prone  to 
market  failure.  This  motivates  the  need  for  regulation  and  the  regulations  have  to 
such as to address possibility of market failure but at the same time not discourage 
growth of the sector nor stifle responsible innovation. 
Derivatives contribute to efficient working of the financial system and management 
of risk. This is also necessary for socially useful but risky projects to be ventured. 
But at the same time, if their risk implication is not understood, they can cause and 
aggravate market failures. 
Modern financial markets including markets for derivatives in India are a little more 
than  two  decades  old.  They  are  still  evolving.  It  is  wise  to  learn  from  other’s 
mistakes and adopt a cautious and gradual approach, recognising at the same time 
that one cannot cross a chasm in two leaps. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
