  Ben Broadbent: The economics of deflation 
Speech by Mr Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at Imperial College Business School, London, 27 March 2015. 
 The CPI in February this year was no higher than in February 2014. This is the first time the 
UK  has  failed  to  record  positive  annual  inflation  for  over  50  years.  Inflation  was  briefly 
negative in late 1959 and early 1960. Before then, you have to go back to the early 1930s, 
and the agonies of the Great Depression, to find a period when UK consumer prices fell over 
a  sustained  period  (Chart  1  plots  three-year  rolling  averages  of  inflation).  Because  of  the 
depth of the economic downturn at that time, and the more recent stagnation of Japan, the 
weakness  of  price  inflation  today  has  raised  fears  in  some  quarters  about  the  risks  of 
sustained deflation in this country.  
The MPC’s objective is not simply to prevent prices from falling: it is to ensure they rise at the 
target rate  of  2%  a  year.  Because  of  the  attention  it’s  been getting,  however,  I’m going  to 
focus today on negative inflation specifically. I’ll divide the substance of my remarks in two. 
One part will discuss the basic economics – how and why it matters if prices decline over a 
protracted  period  –  the  other,  the  frequency  and  implications  of  deflation  in  the  historical 
data.  
Chart 1 Deflation last seen in 1930s 
Source: ONS and Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
Within  that  first  section  there  are  two 
points I’ll try and get across. One is the 
distinction between the price of what we 
buy  (consumer  prices)  and  the  price  of 
what  we  sell  (mainly  wages).  For  the 
moment it’s the first that’s fallen not the 
second:  the  drop  in  inflation  has  been 
driven  largely  by  something  that  has 
significantly  boosted  real  incomes  (the 
sharp decline in commodity prices). It is 
what some have termed “good” deflation 
and, while it is unlikely to go on for that 
long,  it  is  positive,  not  negative,  for 
demand and output. 
There  is  a  risk  that  the  fall  in  prices 
becomes  more  generalised  and  more 
sustained. If so – and this is the second 
point  about 
the  economics  –  what 
matters  is  not  deflation  per  se  but  the 
capacity  of  monetary  policy  to  respond 
to it. 
  
There are circumstances, in particular when the appropriate or “neutral” real interest rate is 
clearly positive, and when it’s not entirely unexpected, in which mild deflation wouldn’t pose a 
problem. I think Britain was in precisely that position for much of the classical gold standard 
period, during the second half of the 19th century (you can see from Chart 1 that periods of 
deflation were common at that time; as we shall see, they didn’t appear especially damaging 
for output growth). Deflation becomes a problem if, in conjunction with the zero lower bound 
on  nominal  interest  rates,  it  prevents  the  monetary  authority  from  setting  a  real  short  rate 
that’s sufficiently low to ensure stable growth.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Following  the  financial  crisis,  of  course,  the  developed  world  has  been  in  exactly  that 
position: the neutral real rate of interest has been extremely depressed, official interest rates 
have been pushed to the zero lower bound and central banks have employed unconventional 
means  of  easing  monetary  policy.  Were  it  to  occur  right  now,  sustained  deflation  would 
therefore pose more of a risk than at times when the neutral real rate was higher.  
But, in my view, those risks are nonetheless relatively contained. For one thing I think the 
evidence  suggests  that  unconventional  policy  is  effective:  even  if  they  don’t  circumvent  it 
entirely, asset purchases help soften the constraint of the zero lower bound. Second, with the 
financial system gradually improving my guess is that the neutral real rate of interest is more 
likely to rise than fall over the next couple of years. Third, and most importantly, I think the 
chances of a sustained and widespread deflation are in any case low.  
That’s certainly what the international experience suggests. That experience is substantial: 
we have annual CPI data since 1960 for over 70 countries, a total of over 3,000 data points. 
In only 70 cases (barely 2% of the sample) have consumer prices actually fallen and in the 
majority of those inflation was positive the following year. Of the 24 instances in which prices 
have  fallen  for  more  than  one  year,  all  but  four  –  two  in  Japan,  two  in  Bahrain  –  have 
occurred  in  developing  countries  with  pegged  exchange  rates.  In  fact,  there’s  a  general 
tendency for changes in inflation to be more persistent when the exchange rate is fixed. At 
least when policy has a degree of credibility, deviations of inflation tend to peter out relatively 
rapidly in countries with independent monetary policies.   
In part this may reflect precisely the freedom to ease policy that, if it’s not ruled out by an 
exchange rate peg, may nonetheless be compromised by the zero lower bound. At least until 
it began to conduct QE, almost a decade after the economy began to turn down, Japan was 
clearly  in  this  position.  But  I  suspect  it’s  also  because,  when  there’s  an  independent  and 
credible policy, the risk that inflation expectations become “de-anchored” from any target is 
lower to begin with.  
As I say, for us that target is 2%, not zero. Even if the current undershoot is due mostly to the 
effect on the level of the CPI of the sharp drop in commodity prices, and should therefore 
have only passing effects on its rate of growth, our central expectation is that inflation will still 
be below target in a year’s time. All else equal, we probably need to see not just stable prices 
of  commodities  and  other  tradable  goods  if  we’re  to  meet  the  target  over  a  reasonable 
horizon, but some further acceleration in domestic costs as well. While that’s what the central 
forecast in the February Inflation Report entails, the MPC will obviously have to be watchful, 
in the meantime, for signs that “good” deflation is turning into something worse.  
But we should not over-state the risks. 
The costs of deflation: income and interest rates matter too 
Something one hears quite often is that deflation is a problem “because it encourages people 
to postpone consumption”. Deflation – or more precisely the expectation that prices will fall – 
therefore weakens demand, it is said, and this can lead to a vicious circle in which prices are 
then depressed further.  
As far as it goes this has some truth to it. But it’s at best a partial description of the problem, 
at worst a bit misleading. It leaves out two important considerations.  
One is nominal income. Suppose you’re told that prices will fall over the next year but that 
the value of your income will remain unchanged. All else equal, the prospect of falling prices 
will give you an incentive to save more of your income (i.e. to postpone a bit of consumption). 
At  the  same  time,  the  real  value  of  that  income  will  prospectively  have  risen.  On  most 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  estimates  of  the  various  sensitivities  the  second  effect  will  dominate  the  first  and 
consumption should actually rise1, even before those price cuts actually arrive.  
Conversely, if all prices fall simultaneously, including the price of labour (the nominal wage), 
then there’s no boost to real income to offset any increased tendency to save. Not only that, 
falls in nominal income would also expose the economy to a potentially much more serious 
risk,  namely  a  rising  burden  of  debt.  Because  the  principal  is  fixed  in  nominal  terms, 
shortfalls  in  cash  income  make  debts  harder  to  service,  increasing  the  risk  of  financial 
instability and the pressure on debtors to cut back spending. It’s this “debt deflation” channel, 
emphasised  originally  by  Irving  Fisher  and  studied  in  depth  by  Ben  Bernanke,  amongst 
others,  that  is  thought  to  have  been  the  main  cost  of  falling  prices  and  wages  during  the 
Great  Depression.  It’s  therefore  important  to  understand  whether  “deflation”  is  happening 
simply because there’s been a sharp drop in the price of something we buy – oil, say – or 
whether it’s a more generalised phenomenon in which nominal incomes too are falling.  
The other important factor is interest rates. The incentive to save depends not on inflation 
expectations  per  se  but  on  the  (ex  ante)  real  rate  of  interest.  As  long  as  nominal  interest 
rates are higher than inflation – and that’s been the case through history, more often than not 
– foregoing £1 of spending today buys you more than £1’s worth of spending tomorrow. So 
this “postponement” effect doesn’t suddenly appear when expected inflation dips below zero: 
it’s always there, to varying degrees, and depends on the extent to which expected inflation 
lies below the nominal rate of interest, i.e. the real interest rate.  
Indeed,  it’s  partly  by  tweaking  this  incentive  to  save,  via  the  short-term  real  rate,  that 
monetary policy is in theory supposed to work. If confidence in the future suddenly declines, 
for example – something that would on its own tend to push up rates of saving – the central 
bank will tend to react by lowering interest rates and pushing back in the opposite direction, 
in order to sustain demand. The appropriate real interest rate will therefore change over time. 
And the relevant question, in this context, is not so much whether people expect any sort of 
deflation, but whether they expect it at a pace that exceeds whatever is the appropriate real 
interest rate at the time2. If that were to happen, policy would run into the zero lower bound 
for nominal rates and central banks will find themselves reaching for unconventional policy 
tools.  
Similarly, debt dynamics are driven not by nominal income growth in isolation but how that 
growth  compares  with  nominal  interest  rates3.  If the  two fall  rise  and fall  together  – to the 
extent  nominal  interest  rates  can  accommodate  movements  in  nominal  income  growth  – 
there’s  no  impact  on  debt  accumulation:  whatever  proportion  of  income  was  needed  to 
service debts beforehand is sufficient after the fact. It’s when income growth falls a lot further 
2 
                                                
1  Economists call the sensitivity of consumption to a change in its relative price over time the “inter-temporal 
elasticity”.  That  coefficient  is  poorly  measured  in  the  data  but  usually  found  to  be  relatively  small  and 
significantly less than one. At the same time, a permanent gain in real income should, even it’s expected to 
arrive only a year from now, prompt an immediate and almost one-for-one response of spending today. So, at 
least in principle, the positive “income effect” of a prospective drop in prices – holding fixed nominal pay – 
should be expected to outstrip the negative “inter-temporal substitution effect”.   
If the appropriate real rate is r* then the central bank would ideally want to set a nominal rate of r*+ πe, where 
the second term is inflation expectations. But nominal rates can’t be lower than zero – or whatever number, 
close to zero, constitutes the effective lower bound – so if r*+ πe < 0 the actual real rate will be higher than it 
should be. Note that this can happen either if πe is well below zero or if, as has been the case since the crisis, 
the same happens to r*.  
If b is the ratio of debt to income then its growth rate is given by r−g−s/b, where r is the ex post interest 
rate, g the growth rate of income and s the proportion of income used to pay off debt. So if g falls and r does 
not  either  debt  starts  rising  faster  than  income  or  debtors must  save  more; if  r and g  change  by  the  same 
magnitude b and s don’t have to.  
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  than  the  interest  rate,  and  therefore  when  servicing  debts  requires  much  more  of  their 
incomes than people had expected, that problems can arise4.  
When (mild) deflation doesn’t matter: a high neutral real rate 
I think you can see the importance of these considerations in the UK, both in recent history 
and, as it happens, over a much more distant period.  
In the second half of the 19th century, and up until the First World War, Britain and much of 
the  advanced  world  were  on  the  Gold  Standard:  the  price  of  gold  was  fixed  at  £3.83/oz. 
Deflation was commonplace. Discoveries of gold occurred only intermittently, and because 
the global economy – and therefore the demand for currency – was generally expanding, its 
real price often came under upward pressure. With the nominal price fixed, the only way that 
could  happen  is  if  the  denominator  of  that  real  price  –  the  price  of  goods  and  services  – 
declined.  Thus  UK  consumer  prices  fell  significantly  during  the  1840s,  for  example,  and 
again  in  the  late  1850s;  they  also  fell  through  the  1880s  (Chart  2).  And  although  real  pay 
tended  to  grow  over  time,  these  deflations  were  sometimes  severe  enough  to  mean  that 
nominal wages declined.  
 
Chart 2 Deflations common during Gold 
Standard 
Source: ONS and Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
   However, there’s no evidence this had an 
especially  severe  effect  on  the  economy. 
To be sure, lower inflation was associated 
with  weaker  GDP  growth,  lower  wage 
growth with higher unemployment (Charts 
3  and  4).  But  there  doesn’t  look  to  be 
anything  particularly  bad  about  negative 
inflation:  as  far  as  one  can  tell,  the 
economic  cost  of  moving  from  of  zero  to  
–1%  (say),  whether  in  price  or  wage 
space,  wasn’t  any  worse 
that 
involved  in  going  from  5%  to  4%  (for 
example5).  
One  reason  for  this  may  be  that  people 
were  adapted  to  the  regime  –  they  were 
used  to  the  idea  that  prices,  and  even 
nominal wages, occasionally declined, and 
because these things were therefore more 
flexible, it didn’t take an especially severe 
recession to get that to happen.  
than 
                                                
4  The  lower  bound  for  nominal  interest  rates  may  be  relevant  in  this  context  too:  in  the  United  States  wage 
growth averaged -13% between 1929 and 1932 and, by the time that deflation got going, it would have been 
impossible to cut interest rates to those sorts of levels. This led to dramatic rises in the burden of debt and 
rates of default.   
If deflations per se were costly you’d expect to see Charts 3 and 4 become shallower south of the origin.  
5 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 3 Those deflations no more costly than 
other disinflations… 
Chart 4 …same was true for wage growth 
Source: ONS and Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
 Chart 5 Interest rate unconstrained 
by zero bound 
Source: ONS and Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
  Source: ONS and Hills,Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
 But what must also have been important, it 
seems to me, is that the appropriate level of 
real  interest  rates  was  sufficiently  high 
through  the  period  that  monetary  policy 
never  had  to  contend  with  the  zero  lower 
bound on the nominal rate6. Chart 5 adds to 
Chart 2 the series for Bank Rate, in green. 
The real short-term interest rate – which we 
know,  after  the  event,  can’t  have  deviated 
that  much  from  the  level  necessary  to 
sustain  stable  growth  and  prices  (since 
that’s  what  generally  occurred)  –  averaged 
4%  between  1850  and  1914.  If  the  neutral 
real  rate  is  anything  like  that  high,  only  a 
very  severe  deflation  would  drag 
the 
appropriate nominal rate close to zero. As it 
was,  Bank  Rate  was  unconstrained  from 
responding to lower nominal growth7, when 
that occurred, and never fell below 2%. 
 
                                                
6  By “zero” I mean the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates; this may not be precisely zero.  
7 
I  say  “respond”  but,  as  a  broad  generalisation,  the  Gold  Standard  allowed  for  no  significant  degree  of 
monetary autonomy: there might be a number of explanations for the pro-cyclicality of real short-term interest 
rates but they were not, by and large, a matter of free choice of the central bank (Obstfeld et al (2005); for a 
recent and interesting discussion, see also Morys (2012)). My point is that, had there been a lower neutral real 
rate, the Gold Standard would have delivered a worse outcome in co-ordinated downturns because the lower 
bound may have been a constraint.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Perhaps the authorities of the time were just lucky not to have run into the zero lower bound. 
But  I  think  this  episode  illustrates  that  even  protracted  declines  in  prices  needn’t  be 
especially costly if, for whatever reason, the appropriate real interest rate is relatively high.  
Sustained deflation more costly when interest rates close to the lower bound  
Clearly, we are not in the same position today. Cuts in interest rates after the financial crisis 
were  crucial  in  preventing  a  much  worse  downturn.  They  depressed  the  real  short  rate, 
softening  what  might  otherwise  have  been  a  steeper  rise  in  the  saving  rate.  Matching  the 
decline in productivity and income growth (Chart 6), the resulting falls in household interest 
rates meant deleveraging could occur without a big jump in gross debt repayments8. Net of 
interest payments, growth of nominal incomes has been little different over the past six years 
than it was in the pre-crisis decade (Chart 7).  
But balance sheets and gross debts are clearly far larger now than in the late 19th century. 
Productivity and real income growth have been significantly lower and, partly for that reason, 
the neutral real interest rate fell steeply after the crisis and almost certainly into appreciably 
negative territory. So even without deflation, central banks have found themselves up against 
the zero lower bound and compelled to employ unconventional policy tools. As a result, there 
is now less room to deal with any entrenched and protracted deflation, in prices and wages 
alike, should that occur.  
 
Chart 6  Spread between nominal interest 
rates, income growth broadly stable 
Chart 7  Net of interest payments, nominal 
income growth little changed since crisis 
Source: ONS. 
  Source: ONS.  
 A good disinflation so far… 
What  are  the  chances  of  such  a  thing?  Certainly  what  we’ve  had  in  the  past  few  months 
doesn’t qualify. In fact, it’s been a largely positive story, because the fall in inflation has been 
                                                
8  Recall that the evolution of debt:income ratios depends on the gap between interest rates and income growth 
(footnote 3), i.e. the two lines in Chart 6. The fact this gap failed to widen didn’t prevent a significant impact of 
the  credit  crunch  on  spending:  that’s  effectively  because,  during  such  episodes,  the  maximum  allowable 
debt:income ratio declines. So spending is forced to contract even without any increase in (r-g).    
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  driven  not  by  the  declining  value  of  what  we  sell,  including  wages  –  though  weak  by  pre-
crisis standards, nominal income growth has actually risen slightly of late – but by a steep fall 
in the real price of something we buy9. This therefore counts as what the economist Michael 
Bordo calls a “good” disinflation, driven by an improvement in productivity or (as in this case) 
the  terms  of  trade.  In  the  year  to  2014Q4  real  per  capita  disposable  income  grew  at  its 
fastest rate for seven years; real income growth is likely to have picked up further in 2015Q1 
(Chart 8).  
There  is  evidence  this  has  already  fed  through  to  spending  and  to  household  confidence. 
Real household consumption too rose at its fastest pace for seven years during the course of 
2014. And this occurred despite a marked decline in survey measures of households’ near-
term inflation expectations (Chart 9) – little evidence here that weaker inflation expectations 
delay or depress consumer spending.  
 
Chart 8  Drop in commodity prices has 
boosted real per capita income 
Chart 9  Financial market measures of 
inflation expectations close to average 
 Source: Source: Bank of England, Barclays Capital 
Source: ONS; ex income from and consumption of imputed 
rents.  
 
In  truth,  I  don’t  think  we  should  be  terribly  surprised  by  this.  Theory  says  households  will 
raise consumption one-for-one with any increase in the level of real income deemed to be 
permanent. In practice people may take time to react to real income shocks; it’s also possible 
they expect some of the recent declines in energy prices to be reversed10. But, in the data, 
there’s  no  correlation  between  household  saving  rates  and  changes  in  real  energy  prices, 
either here or elsewhere in the OECD11. This suggests their effects on income are in general 
matched by equivalent shifts in real spending. Note that the UK is not the only place where 
consumer confidence has risen in recent months (Chart 10).  
                                                 
9  This point was made in a recent speech by the Governor (Carney (2015)) and, in an article, by Kristin Forbes 
(2015). 
10  Forward markets discount an oil price of $69/bl at the end of next year, quite a bit higher than the current spot 
price though still well below where it was in mid-2014 ($54 and $110 respectively). 
11  In regressions of changes in saving rates on the contribution to real income growth of energy and food prices, 
the estimated coefficient is close to zero and statistically insignificant in all 17 OECD countries for which we 
have data.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Nor  is  it  unusual  to  see  stronger  demand  at  a  time  when  these  survey  measures  of 
household inflation expectations are falling. Typically, these near-term expectations surveys 
track actual inflation12. And quite a bit of the high-frequency variation in the CPI arises from 
things that don’t directly affect nominal pay – taxes and import prices, for example – but do 
affect  its  real  value.  When  taxes  or  import  prices  go  down,  real  incomes  rise  (and  vice-
versa).  This  produces  a  negative  near-term  correlation  between  inflation  and  real  income 
growth;  controlling  for  nominal  pay,  there  is  also  a  clear  negative  correlation  between 
surveyed inflation expectations and household optimism (Chart 11).  
 
Chart 11  Surveyed household inflation 
expectations, optimism negatively 
correlated  
Chart 10  Consumer confidence has 
strengthened in US, Euro area  
Source: European Commission, Conference Board 
  
Source: ONS, Gfk/EC, Barclays Capital. 
Note: * after controlling for current wage growth.  
  
These results might give one pause about whether the “delayed consumption” channel really 
is that important, or whether the surveys of inflation expectations are really telling you about 
what  matters.  The  link  between  consumption  and  real  interest  rates  is  not  an  empirically 
strong one13. Other measures of inflation expectations – for example from financial markets – 
are less depressed (Chart 9). A recent study using US data found that, even controlling for 
nominal  income,  there  was  no  correlation  across  individuals  between  their  reported 
expectations of inflation and spending14. At the very least, the results are a reminder not to 
consider  current  inflation  or  survey  measures  of  household  inflation  expectations  on  their 
own, but in the context of what’s happening to incomes and interest rates. 
                                                
12  By contrast, they contain no significant information about future inflation beyond past inflation itself. In other 
words, in regressions of inflation on lags of itself and lagged expectations, the estimated coefficients on the 
latter are typically statistically insignificant.   
13  David  Miles  made  this  point  in  a  recent  speech  (Miles  (2015)).  To  take  a  few  of  many  studies,  see  also 
Hansen and Singleton (1982), Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and Canzoneri et al (2005).  
14  Bachmann et al (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  International experience: proper deflations are rare, especially in countries with 
floating currencies 
That  doesn’t  mean  we  can  rest  entirely  easy.  In  particular,  it  would  be  wrong  blithely  to 
assume that positive nominal income growth will continue, come what may. Deflations have 
to  start  somewhere  and  there  is  a  risk  that  falling  prices  will  beget  yet  weaker  or  even 
negative wage growth – that today’s “good” deflation will metastasise into something a good 
deal worse. Bordo classifies “bad” disinflations as those that coincide with recessions, “ugly” 
episodes as steep and generalised falls in nominal quantities, all the uglier in the presence of 
large gross debts.  
However, my own view is that the chances of such an outcome are relatively low. I say that 
partly  because  base  effects  will  naturally  give  a  big  positive  impetus  to  annual  inflation  in 
early 2016. “Core” inflation is still running at over 1% and, barring another steep decline in 
food and energy prices over the next year, headline inflation is likely to rise quite steeply in 
early 2016.  
I’m also struck by the rarity of persistent deflation in the past15, particularly amongst countries 
with  an  independent  monetary  policy.  As  we’ve  seen,  long  periods  of  falling  prices  were 
perfectly common during the Gold Standard. That’s inevitable under a commodity peg if, over 
any  period  of  time,  the  commodity  itself  is  in  fixed  supply.  The  same  was  true  in  other 
countries at the time and, infamously, during the Great Depression. It was only when Britain 
came off gold, in 1931, that its nominal income started to accelerate16.  
And since the Second World War, and the abandonment of commodity standards, positive 
inflation has been the norm – so much so, in fact, that the commonly cited example of the 
Japanese deflation is almost unique.  
 
Chart 12a  Deflation episodes are rare 
Chart 12b  Even rarer in countries with 
floating exchange rates 
Source: Bordo and Eichengreen, IMF and OECD 
Note: Sample 1960-2010; 3300 observations 
Source: Bordo and Eichengreen, IMF and OECD 
Note: Sample 1960-2010; 3300 observations. 
                                                  
15  A very recent paper by Claudio Borio and co-authors at the BIS makes the same point (Borio et al. (2015)); 
see also Broadbent et al (2010).  
16  For  more  on the contractionary  effect  of  the  Gold  Standard  during  the  Great  Depression,  see  Eichengreen 
(1996).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  The international data on consumer prices are relatively rich: we have annual numbers for 
over 70 countries, most of them back to 196017. In all, across countries and years, there are 
3,300 separate post-war observations. In only 70 of these – barely 2% of the sample – has 
inflation actually been negative (Chart 12a); the majority of these “deflations” (46 out of 70) 
have lasted no more than a year, many of these shorter episodes coinciding with falls in oil 
prices; of the 24 deflations lasting two or more years, 20 have been in economies with fixed 
exchange  rates,  most  of  those  emerging  economies;  among  countries  with  freely  floating 
exchange  rates,  only  Bahrain  and  –  somewhat  more  famously  –  Japan  have  experienced 
protracted deflations, both of them twice (Chart 12b). This is not a common occurrence. 
A credible monetary policy reduces the persistence of movements in inflation 
Why  might  deflations  be  rarer  in  countries  with  floating  exchange  rates,  and  in  emerging 
economies, and should this provide any reassurance today? Yes, I think – to a degree.  
One  plausible  reason  for  this  pattern  is  that  countries  with  fixed  exchange  rates  give  up 
autonomy to control their own rate of inflation. Instead, domestic inflation is determined by 
(i) inflation in the country to which their exchange rate has been fixed (most often the US) 
and  (ii)  forces  affecting  their  real  exchange  rate.  Those  forces  are  often  important  in 
emerging markets: their terms of trade move around more and they are also subject to more 
volatile  financial  flows  than  developed  countries.  Shocks  that  would  tend  to  depress  the 
nominal  exchange  rate,  were  it  free  to  fall  –  a  drop  in  the  terms  of  trade,  for  example,  or 
heightened risk aversion and capital flight – instead show up as negative inflation18.  
It’s not just the volatility that’s higher, however: it turns out that shocks to inflation are also 
more persistent in countries with fixed exchange rates (Chart 13; see also Monacelli and Gali 
(2005)). And while this may simply reflect the particular disturbances affecting the equilibrium 
real  exchange  rate  –  perhaps  they  play  out  only  over  time  –  it’s  also  possible  that  the 
persistence  of  inflation  owes  something  to  the  lack  of  a  stable  domestic  objective  for 
monetary policy.  
In  our  theories,  wage  and  price-setting  are  forward  looking:  high  (low)  expectations  of 
inflation over the future drag up (depress) actual inflation today. That’s precisely why central 
banks concern themselves with the stability of inflation expectations. It’s also why a credible 
inflation target is to some degree self-regulating. If people expect inflation generally to be on 
target, over the medium term, the central bank has to do less actively to ensure it. Notably, 
the  persistence  of  movements  in  UK  inflation  fell  sharply  after  the  introduction  of  inflation 
targeting in 1992 (Chart 14). To the extent this reflects improved credibility it implies less of a 
need for policy to respond to one-off hits to the price level.  
 
                                                 
17  Data from Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), updated from OECD and IMF sources. 
18  The capacity of fixed-exchange rate systems to experience genuinely inflationary shocks – those that move 
wage and price inflation jointly – is also evident in Chart 2. The correlation between wage and price inflation 
was +0.6 during the classical Gold Standard; under inflation targeting it’s been -0.2. That may also reflect a 
more volatile environment for real wages shocks (i.e. to the terms of trade and productivity). Nor are floating 
exchange  rates  a  guarantee  of  stable  inflation:  during  the  1970s  and  1980s,  when  there  was  no  stable 
nominal  target  at  all,  this  correlation  rose  to  0.9.  But  inflationary  shocks  appear  better  contained  with  a 
domestic inflation target than an exchange rate or commodity peg.    
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Chart 13 Inflation more persistent under 
fixed exchange rates 
Chart 14 UK inflation persistence fell after 
introduction of inflation targeting 
Estimated coefficient in regression of UK inflation 
on lagged inflation, 20 year rolling window 
Consumption deflator
GDP deflator
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0.0
Source: Bordo and Eichengreen (1999), IMF and OECD. 
Note: Blue shaded area represents +/- 2SD around diamond 
central estimate of a panel regression; sample 1960-2010.  
Source: ONS and Hills, Thomas, Dimsdale (2010). 
 1962
1972
1982
1992
2002
2012
Conclusion: policy should be flexible but don’t over-react to low inflation 
We’ve  heard  a  lot  about  the  risk  that  deflationary  expectations  persuade  people  to  defer 
spending. We’ll no doubt hear it again if inflation were to dip below zero over the next couple 
of months. But it’s at best a partial point. All else equal, the incentive to save depends not on 
inflation expectations per se but on how far away they are from the nominal interest rate, i.e. 
the real interest rate. By any measure – even if you use the near-term household surveys as 
measure  of  inflation  expectations  –  the  real  rate  is  extremely  low,  and  still  negative 
(Chart 15). The extensive empirical evidence for this “inter-temporal substitution” channel is 
in  any  case  relatively  weak  –  as  the  Governor  pointed  out  recently,  the  more  important 
threat, particularly in developed economies with large balance sheets, is debt deflation. And 
in that regard, it’s the gap between interest rates and nominal income growth that matters. 
Notably, nominal income growth has not declined of late. 
Real interest rates still need to be low. Our inflation target is 2% not zero: what makes the 
current position “good” is not low inflation per se but the fact that, in this particular instance, 
it’s been caused by something (a drop in oil prices) that improves real incomes. Even though 
the direct effect of that decline will drop out of the annual comparison later this year and in 
early 2016, there’s a risk that, by depressing wage growth, sub-target inflation could persist 
for longer than we expect. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 Chart 15 Real interest rates are low 
 in  a 
recent  speech, 
More  fundamentally,  as  I  sought  to 
explain 
the 
“neutral”  interest  rate  consistent  with 
stable  growth  and  inflation  seems  to 
have 
the 
fallen  significantly  over 
years,  both  before  and  since 
the 
financial  crisis.  That’s  why,  even 
without 
expectations, 
central  banks  came  up  against  the 
zero  lower  bound  for  interest  rates. 
And it’s that zero bound that ultimately 
makes deflations costly.  
 
deflationary 
 Source: BOE, Barclays Capital and own calculations. 
 
My  own  view,  however,  is  that  the  likelihood  of  a  broad  and  protracted  deflation,  afflicting 
wages as well as prices, is pretty low. The evidence suggests that asset purchases positively 
affect  nominal  growth  –  they  may  not  by-pass  the  lower  bound  on  interest  rates  but  they 
certainly soften it. My guess is that, with the financial system improving, and signs that the 
worst fears about the global economy may be subsiding, the neutral real interest rate is more 
likely to rise than fall over the next couple of years. Over that period, headline inflation will 
get a sizeable kick upwards, once the falls in food and energy prices drop out of the annual 
comparison. In the meantime, the UK labour market continues to tighten – low inflation won’t 
be the only influence on pay growth this year – and the boost imparted by lower commodity 
prices to real incomes is already apparent in higher consumer spending, here and in other 
countries too.   
Finally,  history  tells  us  these  episodes  are  rare –  rare,  in  the  case  of  developed  countries 
with floating exchange rates, almost to the point of uniqueness.  
Thank you.         
 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Bachmann R, Berg T and E Sims,  2015,  “Inflation  expectations  and  readiness  to spend: 
cross- sectional evidence”, American Economic Journal, 7(1), pp. 1–35. 
Bordo, M, Filardo A, Velasco, A and C Favero, 2005, “Deflation and monetary policy in a 
historical perspective: remembering the past or being condemned to repeat it?”, Economic 
Policy, Vol. 20, No. 44, pp. 801–844. 
Borio, C, Erdem M, Filardo, A and Hofmann B, 2015, “The costs of deflations: a historical 
perspective” BIS Quarterly Review, March. 
Broadbent B, Daly K and S Carlson,  2010,  “Global  economics  weekly”,  Goldman  Sachs 
Global Economics, No. 10/32. 
Campbell  J  Y  and  N  G  Mankiw,  1989,  “Consumption,  income  and  interest  rates: 
reinterpreting the time series evidence” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989, Volume 4, MIT 
Press. 
Canzoneri  M,  Cumby  R  and  B  Diba,  2005,  “Euler  equations  and  money  market  interest 
rates:  A  challenge  for  monetary  policy  models”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  No  54, 
pp. 1863–1881. 
Carney, M, 2015, “Writing the path back to target”, Speech at the Advanced Manufacturing 
Research  Centre,  Sheffield,  and  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Documents/speeches/2015/speech808.pdf. 
Forbes,  K,  2015,  op-ed  in  Evening  Standard,  http://www.standard.co.uk/business/markets/ 
kristin-forbes-zero-inflation-is-here--but-theres-no-need-for-soulsearching-10133157.html. 
Gali,  J  and  T  Monacelli,  2005,  Monetary  Policy  and  Exchange  Rate  Volatility  in  a  Small 
Open Economy, The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 72, No. 3 (Jul., 2005), pp. 707–734. 
Hansen,  L  and  K  Singleton,  1982,  Generalized  instrumental  variables  estimation  of 
nonlinear rational expectations models, Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 5, pp. 1269-1286. 
Hills S., R. Thomas and N. Dimsdale, 2010, “The UK recession in context – what do three 
centuries of data tell us?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 2010 Q4. 
Eichengreen  B,  1996,  “Golden  Fetters.  The  Gold  Standard  and  the  Great  Depression,  
1919–1939”,  NBER  Series  on  Long  Term  Factors  in  Economics  Development,  Oxford 
University Press. 
Miles  D,  2015,  “What  can  monetary  policy  do?”  Speech  given  at  University  of  Edinburgh 
Business  School,  Edinburgh  and  available  at  www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Documents/speeches/2015/speech791.pdf. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
