  Sabine Lautenschläger: Monitoring, regulation and self-regulation in the 
European banking sector 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the evening reception at the Deutsche Aktieninstitut, Frankfurt am Main, 21 April 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Mr Baumann, dear Mr Engels, ladies and gentlemen, 
My topic today, “Monitoring, regulation and self-regulation in the European banking sector”, 
cannot currently be discussed without asking ourselves the following questions. 
Do  we  need  to  do  more  to make  sure  that  we  never  have  to  experience  another financial 
market  and  banking  crisis  like  that  in  2008–09,  or  have  we  done  too  much  and  thus 
prevented  the  European  banking  industry from being  able to  offer financial  services  to the 
real economy? 
After a long phase of deregulation, a comprehensive re-regulation has been in vogue since 
2009. At the global, European and national level, we have tackled almost everything that can 
limit, reduce or prevent risks to and risks caused by banks. The general public, politicians, 
academics, supervisors and even bankers – simply everyone – called for comprehensive and 
tough rules for banks and for their close supervision. But the mood seems to have changed 
over  the  past  year.  In  Germany  and  Europe,  more  and  more  people  are  complaining  of 
overregulation. In the rest of Europe, a connection is being made between the words “credit 
crunch” and “regulation”. 
Many  people  yearn  for  a  pause  in  regulation,  would  perhaps  rather  leave  the  market  to 
regulate itself – rely on self-regulation. 
At the moment in Europe, we are a long way off from self-regulation. And I hope that it will 
stay  like  this,  even  if  people  like  to  quickly  forget  bad  memories.  I  do  not  believe  in  self-
regulation,  at  least  not  in  financial  markets.  You  cannot  have  stable  and  functional  banks 
without  comprehensive  regulation  and  energetic  supervision.  A  sustainably  stable  banking 
sector  demands  a  set  of  regulations  which  can  keep  up  with  the  innovativeness  of  the 
financial sector and progress in banking, but which sets adequate limits in order to uncover 
and correct abnormal trends and excessive risks in their business activities. To this end, the 
rules  have  to  be  adaptable  and  both  leave  room  for  discretion  and  provide  leeway  for  a 
clever supervisor with good judgement skills. 
A retrospective 
2. 
The past speaks for itself. A light touch in regulation and supervision, or even self-regulation, 
has  not  proven  to  be  a  convincing  solution.  Over  the  last  two  decades,  global  financial 
markets have been characterised by a high level of volatility, a series of rapid booms, major 
upheavals  and  severe  slumps.  The  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997,  the  dotcom  bubble  of 
1997–2000, the US subprime crisis as from 2007 and the European debt crisis are merely 
the  most  prominent  examples.  Looking  at  all  these  events,  there  is  a  recurrent  pattern: 
innovation  in  the  real  or  financial  economy  and  deregulation  measures  are  followed  by 
accelerated growth, which is accompanied by a very expansive lending policy on the part of 
banks. 
Sooner or later, the boom comes to an end and price corrections take place that often end in 
a  recession.  As  a rule, the  stronger  the  boom  is  at  the  start  of  the  cycle, the  larger  is the 
subsequent harm to the economy and to society. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This pattern is often complemented by another factor. Particularly, but not exclusively, in the 
financial  sector  –  a  sector  with  fierce  competition  between  regulated  and  non-regulated 
financial  market  participants  –  regulatory  loopholes  are  actively  exploited  in  order  to  gain 
competitive or other advantages. This is particularly well illustrated by the example of asset-
backed  securities  (ABSs).  From  the  middle  of  the  1990s,  the  originate-to-distribute  model, 
i.e. the securitisation and resale of loans, was seen by many as the financing model of the 
future,  not  just  in  the  United  States,  but  also  in  Europe  and  Germany.  Many  saw  it  as  a 
solution  to  economic  and  socio-political  problems  and  took  measures  in  favour  of  ABS 
financing in terms of regulatory requirements. Accordingly, banks were able, for example, to 
finance  their  ABS-based  special-purpose  vehicles  solely  through  short-term  credit  lines, 
credit lines that are in place “until further notice”. The “loans” to the special-purpose vehicle 
did  not  have  to  be  backed  by  equity  as  long  as  the  maturity  of  the  loan  commitments 
remained  under  one  year.  So  it  soon  became  standard  practice  among  banks  to  limit  the 
maturity of such credit lines to 364 days and to prolong them accordingly at maturity. The 
consequences of this practice became clear at the start of the subprime crisis in 2007 when 
German banks were among the first to run into difficulties because of these credit lines. 
• 
The past thus shows that financial markets do not always behave rationally. In fact, 
markets tend towards exaggerations even more than individuals; crowd psychology 
plays a significant role in pricing. 
Given  the  potential  for  damage  as  a  result  of  undesirable  developments  and  the 
incentives to which participants are exposed, it is obvious that self-regulation alone 
is not sufficient in financial markets. 
 Requirements to be met by regulation and supervision 
3. 
Against this background, the question is which regulatory or supervisory approach is the right 
one for a modern financial system. Should financial markets be subject to all-encompassing 
regulation in which every single activity is regulated down to the smallest detail? My answer 
is  “no”  –  because  this  would  not  have  a  satisfactory  outcome,  either.  Depending  on  its 
design,  such  a  rule  book  would  either  be  permanently  outdated  and  incomplete,  because 
legislators cannot keep up with the rapid pace of innovation within the financial sector with 
meticulous  regulation,  or  would  have  to  regulate  so  rigidly  that  it  would  impose  excessive 
restrictions on the functioning of the financial system. As is often the case, the most sensible 
option is in the middle. We need regulation based on principles which adapts to changes in 
banking  and  we  need  a  supervisory  authority  that  is  capable  taking  action.  Allow  me  to 
elaborate. 
• 
Good  regulations  must be  adaptable.  They  must  be  just  as  applicable  to  different 
business models as they are to different sizes of institution – they must fit large and 
small  institutions  alike.  Good  regulations  must  adapt  to  changing  circumstances 
without  legislators  having  continually  to  improve  on  them.  Accordingly,  the  rules 
must provide room for discretion in individual cases. 
Good regulations must, however, also ensure a minimum level of planning and legal 
certainty for banks; that is the only way in which banks operate properly and provide 
their  financial  services  over  the  long  term.  This  holds  particularly  true  of  Europe, 
where  banks  play  a  greater  role  in  financing  the  real  economy  than  the  capital 
markets.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  to  be  a  global  understanding  of  what 
regulation  means,  since 
the  global 
interconnectedness  of  financial  markets,  be  easily  leveraged  and  since  fair 
competition can only be assured when the rules of the game are the same. 
I remain convinced that regulation and supervision must be sensitive to risks. This 
means that the bank that takes greater risks and poses a greater threat to financial 
stability  must  also  be  subject  to  stricter  rules  and/or  limitations  on  its  business 
regulations  could  otherwise,  given 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    activities. If our set of rules was to treat different risk profiles in the same way, then 
we  would  subject  conservative,  low-risk  banking  business  with  low  yields  to  the 
same  requirements  as  high-risk  business  activities,  thereby  making  the  former 
uneconomical. In my view, that would be creating the wrong incentive. 
We need a shrewd supervisory authority that monitors compliance with the rules and 
supervises  banks  in  a  consistent  and  tough  but  fair  way.  It  needs  to  be  shrewd 
because  it  must  be  able  to  use  its  discretionary  powers  correctly  when  regulating 
matters  and  weigh  different  arguments  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  In  this  role, 
supervision  must  be  able  to  act  across  national  borders,  because  that  is  the  only 
way  to  ensure  that  large,  internationally  active  institutions,  too,  are  subject  to 
consistent and comprehensive control. 
These are stringent requirements which we can only honour with a consistent focus 
on the ultimate goal of regulation and supervision, namely a stable financial system. 
I  would  therefore  like  to  end  my  list  of  requirements  with  a  warning.  Under  no 
circumstances  should  regulation  be  misused  to  support  economic  development. 
That  would  blur  responsibilities  and  shift  tasks  from  the  political  domain  to 
supervision. New rules for the banking industry go hand in hand with burdens. With 
a multitude of new rules, the sum of those burdens can impair the banking industry’s 
ability to function properly. This must be taken into account and solutions must be 
found,  but  this  cannot  be  done  by  ignoring  risks.  The  past  has  shown  us  far  too 
often that there is no point in ignoring risks to banks – in the medium and long term, 
they always come back like a boomerang. 
Current status and further need for improvement 
4. 
Where do we currently stand in Europe in this respect? Do we need more regulation, or do 
we  need  less?  Since  2009,  the  regulatory  framework  has  undergone  further  extensive 
development  and  has  been  decisively  improved  upon  at  both  the  international  and  the 
European level. Let me mention just a few elements by way of a reminder: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
considerably more and higher-quality capital for banks; 
new standards for liquidity reserves and indebtedness in banks; 
considerably stricter risk management and governance requirements; 
the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) that marks significant progress 
in dealing with distressed institutions. 
Thanks  to  these  reforms,  the  regulatory  network  within  Europe  has  become  considerably 
tighter  and  more  balanced  in  recent  years.  It  has  developed  from  a  purely  capital-based 
system  into  a  set  of  diversified  standards.  This  has  made  it  more  difficult  to  circumvent 
individual  regulations.  It  requires  banks  to  give  due  consideration  to  a  broad  range  of 
relevant  factors  (capital,  liquidity,  leverage,  interconnectedness/systemic  significance  and 
structure) when designing their business models. 
Despite this progress, there is still work to be done here and there. 
• 
is  neither  an  obligation 
We must convincingly weaken the connections between a country and its banks in 
the long run. Government bonds continue to be considered by regulators as largely 
risk-free: 
is 
commensurate with the risks, nor are there rules that address concentration risks. 
This cannot be allowed. 
We must also improve the calculation of equity in individual banks. A great deal of 
confidence has been lost in this respect over recent years. Internal bank models are 
today seen by many to be a means for risky capital optimisation and not as a useful 
tool  for  bank  management  and  risk-based  supervision.  To  restore  confidence,  we 
to  have  capital  available 
there 
that 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   need  less  complexity  and  more  transparency.  Not  every  portfolio  or  risk  can  be 
modelled. For these portfolios, we must use simple, standardised approaches. We 
must reduce the complexity of the model-based approaches to a level which allows 
both  the  banks’  supervisory  bodies  and  the  supervisory  authorities  to  understand 
and  review  them  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time.  Standard  approaches  should 
also be used here as a control variable and indicator for capital savings. 
Given the great number of regulatory measures, it is important not to lose sight of 
the  bigger  picture.  We  will  therefore  carry  out  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  the 
overall  effect  of  regulatory  measures.  This  project  is  already  being  planned  and 
prepared by the Basel Committee. Such an exercise will do us good and will also be 
beneficial  to  the general  debate  on  regulation,  helping  objectify  it.  I  hope  that  this 
work will not only result a list of overlaps, duplication and other inefficiencies which 
we  would  subsequently  clear  up.  I  also  expect  that  we  will  address  unintended 
consequences of the new rules. 
In  supervision,  too,  much  needs  to  be  changed.  The  crises  of  recent  years  did  not  come 
about solely because there were weaknesses in the regulatory framework. The supervision 
of banks did not function optimally, either. The consequence of the crisis is therefore not only 
that  the  supervision  of  banks  has  shifted  from  the  national  level  in  the  euro  area  to  a 
European level, but also that supervision has changed in its basic approach and in what is 
expected of it and the supervised entities. 
• 
The SSM has allowed us to start afresh in our relationship with banks. It has broken 
with traditions and customs that were often no longer being questioned. Supervisory 
teams from  different  countries  see  the  banks  with  fresh  eyes  and  on  the  basis  of 
their common experience. This creates the necessary critical distance for sensible 
supervision. 
Banking supervision in Europe should take tough but fair action (the emphasis being 
on  “action”).  European  supervision,  the  SSM,  sees  itself  as  a  supervisor  which 
identifies  and  addresses  risks  at  an  early  stage,  and  thus  contributes  to  ensuring 
that  the  banking  system  is  able  to  function  properly.  A  light  touch  and  reactive 
supervision should belong to the past. 
European supervision should create a level playing field. That is why the first thing 
that  we  developed  in  the  SSM  was  a  consistent  supervisory  approach  with  a 
consistent  methodology  for  assessing  banks’  risks  and  governance  structures,  as 
well as their equity capital and liquidity positions. 
For the supervision of systemically relevant and large, internationally active banks in 
particular,  the  SSM  represents  a  quantum  leap  forward.  The  SSM  allows  us  to 
compare and adapt supervision across 19 countries, to identify best practices and to 
ensure that they are implemented consistently through effective quality assurance. 
There  are  now  completely  new  possibilities  for  comparative  and  cross-sectoral 
analysis  than  were  available  at  the  national  level.  For  our  tasks,  we  can  use 
information  and  insights  from  banks  with  very  different  business  models.  This 
enables us to identify risks and undesirable developments more clearly and at an 
earlier  stage,  and  to  take  suitable  countermeasures.  We  can  also  put  work  on 
banks’  internal  models,  which  have  a  significant  influence  on  a  bank’s  capital 
requirements,  on  a  new  footing.  We  will  use  the  opportunity,  given  the  improved 
level  of  data  and  insight,  to  implement  strict  rules  for  the  approval  and  ongoing 
supervision of internal models. 
   Despite this progress, there is still a lot to do in the further development of supervision. The 
effectiveness  and  efficiency  of  supervision  is  dependent  on  the  legal framework  it  applies, 
although this is not the sole determinant. Soft European standards or diverging national rules 
impair the SSM’s ability to take action and its effectiveness. And this does not just concern 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  national rules that affect the quality of banks’ equity. The SSM applies 19 different national 
legal frameworks and not only when, for example, we examine the professional suitability of 
managers in large, internationally active banks. Detailed rules on governance in banks and 
deliberations on transposing extensive rules on banks’ internal control systems into national 
law complicate or even prevent the desired level playing field of consistent supervision – they 
increase fragmentation. Moreover, European supervisory legislation provides more than 150 
options to choose from, options which have so far been exercised along highly different lines 
at the national level. Some are justified by local features – in this respect, the principle is that 
similar things should be treated similarly and dissimilar things should be treated dissimilarly. 
Many of the options are based rather more on tradition, and are in conflict with the principle 
of “same business, same risk, same rules”. The smaller proportion of these options remains 
national in character. Competence for the majority of the options – for over 100 – has been 
vested in the SSM since 4 November 2014. The ECB, together with the national supervisory 
authorities, has now begun to arrange for their consistent application. 
This process and the resulting adaptations will not always be simple or convenient, but the 
benefits of the outcome should outweigh the cost of adaption – not just in terms of financial 
stability, but also through more balanced competition and lower transaction costs. In some 
respects, we are still at the beginning of the road, but I am confident that the SSM has put us 
are on the right path towards achieving these objectives. 
Conclusions 
5. 
I  don’t  think  that  you  were  much  surprised  by  my  saying  that  I  don’t  think  much  of  lax 
regulation. Given the obvious tendency towards exaggeration and erroneous developments 
in financial markets, and the potential damage for the economy and society, good regulations 
are  an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  ensuring  that  the  financial  sector  is  able  to  function 
properly  in  the  long  term.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  consequences  of  regulation  and 
supervision for the banking industry’s ability to function should not be considered. The desire 
of some to make up for the rigour of the rules with less stringent supervision is something I 
reject. That would be the wrong approach. 
But what are required are not only good regulations, but also a well-functioning supervisor 
that  exercises  tough  but  fair  control  to  help  ensure  a  stable  banking  system  and  a  level 
cross-border playing field. A decisive factor for the success of the SSM will not just rest on 
banks  in  the  euro  area  being  subject  to  a  consistent  supervisory  approach.  Rather,  both 
supervisory legislation and the powers of European supervision must take further steps in the 
direction of harmonisation. 
Finally, it is not possible for every conceivable situation to be covered by regulations, nor can 
every  crisis  be  anticipated  from  a  supervisory  point  of  view.  Although  regulation  and 
supervision can ensure a certain measure of protection, or build a line of defence, as it were, 
they cannot and should not eliminate every risk. In this respect, banks and financial market 
participants  that  act  independently,  and  take  responsibility  for  their  actions,  remain  a 
prerequisite for a stable and secure system, even if it is well-regulated and supervised. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
