  Hendar: Increasing cooperation between Indonesia’s central bank and 
state police 
Speech  by  Mr  Hendar,  Deputy  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the  Signing  of  Work 
Guidelines  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  State  Police  of  the  Republic  of  Indonesia 
concerning  Procedures  for  Implementation  of  Securing  Bank  Indonesia  and  Escorting 
State-owned Valuables, Jakarta, 23 February 2015. 
 The Honorable, 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Head of Baharkam Polri, Komjen Pol Drs. Putut Eko Bayuseno, SH 
Head of Korps Brimob Polri, Irjen Pol Drs. Robby Kaligis 
Kadivkum Polri, Irjen Pol Drs. Moechgiyarto, SH, Mhum 
Departments’ Heads of Bank Indonesia, attendees and guests 
Assalamualaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh, 
Good day and Greetings to us all, 
1. 
First of all, I would like to ask us all to praise our gratitudes to Allah SWT, God the 
Almighty,  for  His  grace  we  could  attend  this  ceremony  of  the  Signing  of  Work 
Guidelines  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  the  State  Police  of  the  Republic  of 
Indonesia  (POLRI),  in  this  case  the  Brimob  (Mobile  Brigade)  Corps,  concerning 
“Procedures  for  Implementation  of  Securing  Bank  Indonesia  and  Escorting  State-
owned Valuables”. 
The  signing  of  this  Work  Guidelines  is  a  follow-up  of  the  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  signed  between  the  Head  of  the  State  Police  of  the  Republic  of 
Indonesia and the Governor of Bank Indonesia on “Cooperation in Order to Support 
the Duty Implementation and Authority of Bank Indonesia and the State Police of the 
Republic  of 
Indonesia”  on  1  September  2014,  particularly  which  governs 
“cooperation  in  the  field  of  securing  Bank  Indonesia  and  escorting  state-owned 
valuables”. 
The signing of this Cooperation Agreement constitutes part of a series of intensive 
discussions processes at technical level which took place earlier. Hence, on behalf 
of the Board of Governors, we would like to express our thanks for the support of 
Polri,  so  that  the  signing  of  this Work  Guidelines  can  be  realized.  This  cannot  be 
separated from the high commitment and support of Polri for the implementation of 
duty and function of Bank Indonesia. 
The importance of Security Aspect for BII 
Attendees, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
4. 
As  we  all  know,  as  a  strategic  state  institution,  Bank  Indonesia  has  an 
important function in the national economy. To run its function, Bank Indonesia 
owns a variety of important assets both in the form of hardwares and softwares which 
securities have to be assured. 
In implementing the function of cash payment system, Bank Indonesia has money 
storage treasury that highly needed for ensuring the availability of cash in sufficient 
nominal amounts as well as fractions to meet the public needs. This treasury is also 
2. 
3. 
5. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
 highly  required  for  storage  of  the  State  foreign  exchange  reserves  in  the  form  of 
gold. 
Meanwhile, to support non-cash payment system, Bank Indonesia also has various 
vital  payment  system  instruments  such  as  Real  Times  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS) 
system,  Sistem  Kliring  Nasional-SKN  (National  Clearing  System)  and  data  centre 
which must function safely, smoothly and efficiently. 
How important the roles of the various assets or system can be seen, among others, 
from the value of the transaction or money deposited. The RTGS system currently 
serves  transaction  settlements  with  an  average  value  of  Rp 469 trillion  per  day 
and  SKNBI  serves  banking  clearing  transactions  with  an  average  value  of 
Rp 11 trillion per day. Meanwhile, the amount of cash money ready for circulation 
both in the treasuries of Bank Indonesia’s head office and representative offices in 
the regions in the month of January has reached approximately 222 trillion. 
Another important activity of money circulation that requires escorting is the 
distribution of money. This activity includes among others the delivery of money fit 
for circulation from Peruri to Bank Indonesia’s Head Office and delivery  of money 
from  Bank  Indonesia  to  the  centres  of  public  economic  activities  such  as  clean 
money policy program or money distribution in order to maintain the availability of 
cash money in remote areas. 
Disruption  and  threats  against  various  assets,  system  and  smooth  distribution  of 
money, which naturally can harm the economy in the Republic of Indonesia. 
Therefore, Bank Indonesia requires personnel support from the State Police of the 
Republic  of  Indonesia  that  capable  to  implement  the  duties  of  securing  and 
escorting with qualification and competency in confronting disturbances and threats 
of  security  with  high  intensity,  which  in  this  case  owned  by  the  Brimob  (Mobile 
Brigade) Corps of Polri. 
This  good  cooperation  and  coordination  needs  to  be  poured  into  a  clear  and 
transparent mechanism, in accordance with the duty and authority of BI and Polri, 
and shall refer to the applicable laws and regulations by considering the principles of 
justice, benefit and legal certainty. 
We  welcome  the  signing  of  the  Work  Guidelines  concerning  the  “Procedures  for 
Implementation of Securing Bank Indonesia and Escorting State-owned Valuables”. 
This  work  guidelines  implementation  will  also  be  follow-up  through  cooperation 
between Bank Indonesia Representative Offices with the local Regional Police. 
BI Efforts in the Strengthening of Security System 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
13. 
We are aware that as a strategic institution, we must have a security system that 
can integrate and utilize both internal and external resources to ensure the smooth 
implementation of Bank Indonesia duties. At this time we continue to strengthen the 
security system of Bank Indonesia, commonly called Sispambi. 
Several security efforts referred to, among others are in the form of the division of 
security  area  classification,  i.e.:  limited,  very  limited,  prohibited  and  closed  areas. 
We  restrict  access  to  those  areas  both  by  access  rights  and  escort  officers. 
Gradually, we have modernized security system devices integrated with the building 
security. 
Related to HR, we also continue to improve their quality and skills through various 
training such as Reskrim/Intelkam (Detectives & Criminal / Intelligence & Security), 
14. 
15. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  SAR,  Fire  Fighters,  Security  for  VIP,  and  other  various  training  which  frequently 
conducted in cooperation with Polri. 
Expectation with the Signing of the Work Guidelines 
Attendees,Ladies and Gentlemen 
16. 
The  signing  of  the  Work  Guidelines  today  should  be  able  to  become  a  good 
communication  adhesive,  an 
intensive  coordination,  and  also  a  synergic 
collaboration  between  Bank  Indonesia  and  POLRI,  specifically  Korbrimob,  both  at 
central  level  and  regional  levels.  We  also  are  convinced  that  securing  Bank 
Indonesia  and  escorting  state-owned  valuables  can  be  run  more  smoothly  and 
effectively. 
Thus this speech, may Allat SWT be with us always, to bless and ease our step in 
the future. 
17. 
Wassalamualaikum Wr. Wb. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
