  Stephen S Poloz: Opening statement before the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Finance 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  before  the 
House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 28 April 2015. 
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Carolyn and I are happy to be here 
for  one  of  our  twice-yearly  meetings  on  our  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR). Today  we  will 
outline for you the Bank’s latest economic outlook, published in our MPR on 15 April. 
In  this  volatile  and  uncertain  environment,  it  is  helpful  to  maintain  a  historical  perspective. 
When  we  appeared  before  this  committee  a  year  ago,  the  price  of  Brent  crude  oil  was  at 
$100 per barrel. It had risen steadily for a decade, from $25 in 2002 to a peak of just over 
$110 in 2012. 
By November, when we last met with you, oil prices had fallen to what was then their lowest 
level  in  four  years. The average  price  of  Brent was  $90  per  barrel. It  was  clear  to  us  that 
while  lower  oil  prices  would  benefit  consumers,  the  net  impact  on  the  economy  would  be 
negative. Lower oil prices would reduce Canada’s terms of trade and domestic income and 
have  a  material  impact  on  investment,  activity  in  the  oil  sector,  and  the  associated 
manufacturing supply chain. 
All of that happened quite quickly over the next two months. By January, Brent prices had 
dropped to an average of $60. 
Oil prices are an important component of Canada’s terms of trade and one of the key drivers 
of movements in the Canadian dollar. As oil prices rose over the 2002–12 period, so did the 
value of the dollar, increasing from around 63 cents to above parity. 
Now, the fall in oil prices has set in motion complex dynamics, including sectoral and regional 
adjustments, which will take time to work their way through the economy. 
The  negative  effects  of  lower  oil  prices  hit  some  sectors  of  the  economy  right  away.  For 
example,  the  impact  of  lower  prices  on  income  and  wealth  has  already  led  to  a  fall  in 
household  spending.  The  various  positives  –  more  exports  because  of  a  stronger  U.S. 
economy  and  a  lower  Canadian  dollar,  and  more  consumption  spending  as  households 
spend  less  on  fuel  –  will  arrive  only  gradually,  and  are  of  uncertain  size.  Therefore,  in 
January  we  faced  a  risk  that  returning  the  Canadian  economy  to  full  capacity  and  stable 
2 per cent inflation would be delayed significantly. Accordingly, we took out some insurance 
against that risk, in the form of a 25-basis-point reduction in the policy interest rate. 
Our  interest  rate  cut  occurred  in  the  context  of  widespread  easing  in  financial  conditions 
around the globe. No fewer than 25 central banks eased their monetary policies in the early 
months of 2015. All of this monetary policy easing led to lower rates across the entire yield 
curve. 
What  was  behind  this  easing?  Many  central  banks  were  adding  stimulus  in  response  to 
persistent economic slack and below-target inflation. This easing, coupled with the positive 
implications of lower energy prices for world growth, should help the global economy pick up 
through  the  year.  The  Bank  expects  global  economic  growth  to  strengthen  and  average 
about 3 1/2 per cent over the 2015–17 period. 
Here  in  Canada  we  saw  that  some  of  the  effects  of  lower  oil  prices,  such  as  the  lower 
household spending I mentioned earlier, were clearly being felt in late 2014 and early 2015. 
Our updated forecast in the April MPR suggests that the Canadian economy saw no growth 
in the first quarter. While the impact of the oil price shock is happening faster than initially 
expected, it does not appear to be larger than we anticipated in January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Outside  of  the  energy  sector,  other  areas  of  the  economy  appear  to  be  doing  well.  The 
segments of non-energy exports that we expected to lead the recovery are doing so, and we 
expect this trend to be buttressed by stronger U.S. growth and the lower Canadian dollar. 
The results of our Business Outlook Survey suggest that capacity constraints are beginning 
to emerge for exporters, which is promising for new investment. And, although we still have 
material slack in our labour market, the market’s fundamentals have begun to improve. Even 
so, companies remain cautious about new investment and hiring intentions. 
Weighing  these  various  forces  acting  on  the  economy,  we  anticipate  a  partial  rebound  in 
growth  in  the  second  quarter,  and  a  move  to  above-trend  growth  thereafter,  for  annual 
growth of 1.9 per cent this year. This projected growth profile gets us back on track to absorb 
our excess capacity around the end of 2016, at which time inflation will settle sustainably at 
2 per  cent.  We  see  the  risks  around  this  projection  as  roughly  balanced,  but  they  will  be 
reassessed continuously as new data become available. 
The main risk to our outlook is the size and duration of the negative impact of the oil shock, 
weighed against the positive forces that are building in the non-energy sector. Our outlook is 
for  the  positives  to  begin  to  reassert  themselves  during  the  second  quarter,  and  to  do  so 
clearly in the second half of the year. The interest rate cut in January and the lower Canadian 
dollar are working to speed up the transition. 
Inflation, as measured by total CPI, is running at about 1 per cent, well below our 2 per cent 
target.  This  is  largely  due  to  the  drop  in  gasoline  prices,  a  temporary  effect.  Total  CPI 
inflation  would  be  quite  close  to  zero  were  it  not  for  exchange-rate  effects  and  some 
additional  one-time  factors.  Core  inflation  is  a  little  over  2  per  cent,  but  it  is  also  being 
boosted by exchange-rate effects and other one-time factors. In our projection, total inflation 
and  core  inflation  converge  on  2  per  cent  as  these  temporary  factors  dissipate  and  the 
economy reaches full capacity, around the end of 2016. 
Meanwhile, financial stability risks remain front-and-centre in our deliberations. These risks 
are  evolving  in  line  with  our  expectations.  The  level  of  indebtedness,  as  measured  by  the 
ratio of debt-to-disposable income, continues to edge higher. It is likely to rise further as the 
decline in gross national income caused by the drop in oil prices works its way through the 
system. 
On the surface, lower interest rates would be expected to promote more borrowing, which 
would  increase  this  vulnerability.  However,  in  the  near  term,  lower  borrowing  rates  will 
actually  mitigate  this  risk,  by  reducing  payments  for  mortgage  holders and  giving  us  more 
economic growth and employment gains. We believe that the best contribution the Bank can 
make  to  lowering  financial  stability  risks  through  time  is  to  help  the  economy  return  to full 
capacity and stable inflation sooner, rather than later. 
With that, Carolyn and I would be happy to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
