  G Padmanabhan: Musings of a departing forex market regulator 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Foreign 
Exchange Dealers Association of India Conference, Brussels, 3 April 2015. 
 The  assistance  rendered  by  Shri  H  S  Mohanty  in  the  preparation  of  this  address  and  important  comments 
provided by several colleagues are gratefully acknowledged. Errors, if any, are speaker’s own. 
Mr.  Gupta,  Chairman,  FEDAI,  Mr.  Vohra,  Mr.  Banerjee,  Vice-  Chairmen,  Mr.  Patwardhan, 
CEO, my banker friends, colleagues from the RBI, ladies and gentlemen, 
It gives me great pleasure to be here with you this morning. The Foreign Exchange 
1.  
Dealers’  Association  of  India  has  been  choosing  exciting  overseas  locations  for  its  annual 
conventions  these  days,  and  this  beautiful  city,  with  its  long  history  and  increasing  pre-
eminence  in  European  and  international  affairs  is  indeed  a  fine  choice.  The  Indian 
engagement  in  the  neighbourhood  diamond  centre  of  Antwerp  has  been  growing  over  the 
years and today Antwerp has perhaps the highest concentration of branches of Indian banks 
outside  a  global  financial  centre.  I  am  sure  the  aura  of  Brussels  will  provide  a  stimulating 
backdrop for the deliberations. 
2.  
Lewis Carroll’s immortal “Through the Looking Glass”. 
Mulling over what I should be discussing this morning, I remembered the lines from 
“The time has come,” the Walrus said, 
“To talk of many things: 
Of shoes – and ships – and sealing-wax – 
Of cabbages – and kings – 
And why the sea is boiling hot – 
And whether pigs have wings.” 
3.  
As some of you may be aware, my association with Reserve Bank comes to an end 
in  less  than  two  months  from  today  as  I  demit  office  on  the  last  day  of  May  this  year. 
Although  my  three-and-a-half-decade  long  association  with  Reserve  Bank  spans  a  wide 
range  of  functions,  I  shall  always  value  and  cherish  my  engagement  with  the  (foreign) 
exchange control and later, (foreign) exchange management functions for many reasons, the 
most important of which is the quantum and exciting changes in this area to which I was a 
ring-side  spectator  and  in  which,  I  too  played  a  small  role.  As  practitioners,  you  will 
appreciate that, the regulatory framework for management of the external sector is a work-in-
progress  and  it  will  traverse  many  a  winding  path  before  it  is  entrusted  entirely  to  market 
forces. The destination is well known, but how and when we reach there remains hazy even 
today. It is tempting to look back at how we reached here if for no other reason than in the 
hope that it would perhaps guide us in our unfinished journey and help us to chart our future 
course of action. That is what I intend to do and I am sure you will indulge me if sometimes 
my discussion is peppered with personal reminiscences. 
Foreign exchange: Control to management 
4.  
Where do we begin? A good place probably would be at the very beginning, when 
the exchange control itself started. In 1939, the then British Government imposed exchange 
control  as  a  part  of  their  war  effort  with  a  view  to  directing  foreign  exchange  to  nationally 
important  objectives.  Later,  after  the  war  was  over,  it  was  put  on  a  statutory  footing  with 
legislation in 1947. It is instructive to note that the 1939 order and the 1947 legislation were 
put in place in the United Kingdom as well and it will not be until 1979 that Britain removed all 
exchange  controls-  albeit  lock  stock  and  barrel  overnight  by  the  inimitable  Margaret 
Thatcher.  It  is  also  interesting  to  remember  that,  pegged  to  the  pound  sterling,  the  Indian 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Rupee was the legal tender in a large part of the Commonwealth, particularly in the Gulf and 
the Africa’s during the 1950’s and 1960’s. 
5.  
The seeds for a rigid exchange control, the shadow of which falls even today, were 
sown in the fifties. During the second five year plan, the emphasis of central planning shifted 
to heavy industries and there was an unintended neglect of agriculture. This and three wars 
in a span of a decade created an acute shortage of foreign exchange reserves the intensely 
of which was painfully felt because we needed foreign exchange to import basic food grains. 
In  this  background,  conserving  foreign  exchange  was  considered  a  national  priority  and 
using  this  precious  resource  for  mundane  purposes  was  blasphemous.  It  is  necessary  to 
understand  the  traumas  of  those  days  to  appreciate  how  a  framework  wrought  by  FERA, 
1973 could come into being. Though situation improved following the success of seed-water-
fertilizer technology in agriculture and the inward remittances from Indian brain and brawn, 
the exchange control regime meandered through the eighties with a relaxation here and a 
fine-tuning there. It took another crisis in 1990 to cause a paradigm shift in our approach. 
6.  
What  was  the  foreign  exchange  market  like  those  days?  The  market  participants 
today would hardly see any similarity between the market today and the market then. There 
are many reasons for the primitive nature of the market in the decades preceding the 1990’s. 
Firstly, the markets globally were characterised by the post Bretton Woods tranquillity of a 
fixed exchange rate regime. Though the Breton Woods arrangement broke down in the early 
1970’s,  we  in  India  continued  with  a  variant  of  fixed-exchange  rate  regime  for  two  more 
decades.  Secondly,  the  external  sector  engagement  was  trade-dominated.  International 
capital flows were rather thin. The license-permit regime made foreign exchange transactions 
rather straightforward in the sense that every transaction had to be backed by a license or a 
permit. Thirdly, the technology was pretty primitive. It is hardly believable today that when the 
Rupee was devalued on June 6, 1966, the forex markets were shut down for two days so 
that banks and firms could recalculate the impact. 
Talking  about  the  devaluation  of  1966  brings  to  my  mind  an  observation,  which 
7.  
though a digression, is too important to pass. You see, we have had two devaluations: the 
one I spoke about just now by a massive 57.4% and then again in 1991 when within a year 
the Rupee had dropped by 59%. On both occasions, the devaluations were sharply criticised. 
The  arguments  spanned  the  entire  spectrum:  from  surrendering  Indian  sovereignty  to 
external pressure to textured cynicism as to why devaluation will not be effective in narrowing 
the trade deficit because of the structural inflexibilities of the Indian exports and imports. Yet, 
statistics shows that on both occasions, the impact of the devaluation on trade deficit was 
phenomenal. The point that I wish you to ponder over is that devaluation, or depreciation in a 
flexible exchange rate regime, may be bad politics but often is good economics. The reason I 
ascribe great importance to this is that our approach to greater capital account openness in 
large measure will be tempered by our tolerance of exchange rate volatility and particularly, 
weakening of the Rupee. 
8.  
Even in a rather passive and archaic market those days, the banks showed great 
hesitation in participation. Till 1950s, only foreign banks were allowed to undertake foreign 
exchange  transactions.  With  the  gradual  entry  of  Indian  banks,  the  FEDAI  was  formed  in 
1956  basically  to  evolve  uniform  practices  for  interbank  transactions  as  well  as  banks’ 
transactions  with  the  public.  Its  functions  have  also  evolved  over  the  years  and  I  would 
particularly  like  to  mention  the  role  it  played  countrywide  during  the  transition  phases 
involving  both  fixed  to  floating  rates  and  from  FERA  to  FEMA  in  facilitating  the  change.  It 
played  an  important  role  as  an  educator  as  well  as  norm-setter.  In  mentioning  this,  I  am 
anticipating the far greater role, from a self regulatory perspective, that awaits it, in the time 
to come. 
Now  we  come  to  the  momentous  changes  that  the  1990s  decade  brought  about. 
9.  
The  events  leading  to  the  onset  of  economic  reforms  and  the  course  and  content  of  the 
reforms have been commented upon extensively and it has been so deeply accepted and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
absorbed  in  our  collective  discourse  that  any  discussion  is  superfluous.  What  made  the 
change  possible?  We  can  take  a  cue  from  the  words  of  Victor  Hugo  that  Dr.  Manmohan 
Singh quoted in his first budget speech: “no power on earth can stop an idea whose time has 
come.”  Dr.  Singh  had  applied  these  words  to  the  vision  of  emergence  of  India  as  an 
economic  power.  To  me,  these  words  apply  with  as  much  aptness  to  the  concept of  “free 
markets”. In a recent speech, Governor Rajan has eloquently dealt with the issue and I will 
strongly  urge  the  audience  to  reflect  on  his  discussion  as  well  as  the  works  he  bases  his 
discussion  on.  The  reforms  in  the  1990’s  in  India  and  elsewhere  were  facilitated  by  the 
dismantling  of  the  Soviet  Russia  and  the  Eastern  Bloc  countries  and  triumph  of  the  free 
market over central planning and control. 
10.  
A  critical  component  of  the  reform  process  was  introduction  of  flexible  exchange 
rate. It started with exchange rate adjustments in July 1991, continued with the introduction 
of Liberalised Exchange Rate Management System in March 1992 and by March 1993 we 
had put in place a completely market determined exchange rate system. This was a critical 
step indeed. I still recall the trepidation that prevailed when RBI took this step which involved 
the  central  bank  stopping  the  announcement  of  buying  and  selling  rate  every  morning. 
Everyone waited with bated breath as to how market will open on day one. It did and the rest 
as  they  say  is  history.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  move  did  have  a  salutary  effect  on  the 
trade deficit and by 1994, the trade deficit had shrunk to one-sixth of what it was in 1991. 
More  importantly,  it  paved  the  way  for  greater  openness  not  only  in  the  current  account 
which was achieved as early as 1994, but also in the capital account by removing one of the 
three constraints of the impossible trinity: the fixed exchange rate. 
11.  
Once  the  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  was  put  in  place,  the  next  step  was  the 
development of the forex market. It was not smooth in the beginning. The market participants 
were  as  hesitant  as  a  bird  that  had  been  released  from  its  cage  after  an  age  and  often 
reluctant  in  offering  two  way  quotes.  Besides,  they  also  probably  did  not  have  as  much 
regulatory  freedom  as  a  market-maker  would  require.  In  1994,  an  Expert  Group  (Sodhani 
Committee) went into this issue in great depth and detail and came out with a large number 
of  recommendations,  a  majority  of  which  was  implemented.  Implementation  of  these 
recommendations  gave  the  banks  as  well  as  business  firms  a  great  deal  of  freedom  to 
conduct their forex business in an efficient and cost-effective manner. The ones that were not 
considered  immediately  have  either  been  implemented  over  the  years  (e.g.  forex  clearing, 
offshore banking units, etc) or have become superfluous (e.g. authorised dealer license to 
DFIs). 
The  two  decades  of  flexible  exchange  rate  regime  has  been  marked  by  several 
12.  
episodes  of  disturbances  emanating  from  external  sources.  The  Asian  crisis  of  1997,  the 
post-Pokhran II sanctions, the unprecedented capital inflows of 2007–08, the post Lehman 
seizure of 2009, the Euro-Zone crisis, the US debt problem and the so called taper-fear have 
all affected the exchange rate and  elicited, amongst others, response that constrained the 
market and market participants at least temporarily. You will also notice that we are relatively 
more  affected  by  external  turbulence  now-a-days  as  compared  to  the  past,  which  is  quite 
intuitive in view of the increasing openness of our external sector in trade as well as financial 
channels. The future course of market development has to recognise this fact and develop 
an immune system, as it were, to deal with the onslaught and the fortitude not to fall off the 
cliff every time there is heightened volatility in the exchange rate. 
Some reflections 
13.  
The foreign exchange market today is fairly well developed. The liquidity as gauged 
in  terms  of  turnover  and  bid-ask  spread  is  quite  impressive.  There  is  a  wide  range  of 
products  available  for  firms  engaged  in  international  trade  and  commerce  to  hedge  their 
foreign currency risks. There is both an OTC as well an exchange-traded segment. But I do 
not intend here to patronisingly pat ourselves on what we have achieved in developing the 
market but rather reflect on what we haven’t and what lies ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
As  we  have  seen  earlier,  free  market  process  is  the  best  way  of  organising 
14.  
economic activity. Why then should this principle not extend to the foreign exchange markets 
and why should there be any regulation at all? It is well known that markets have limits and 
there are market failures. I am not talking about the moral limits of markets but limits coming 
from  factors  such  an  monopoly  or  non-competitive  markets,  externality,  information 
asymmetry,  etc.  And  then  there  are  financial  and  macro-economic  stability  issues,  which 
have come to the fore post the turbulence of past seven-eight years. Foreign exchange has 
of  late  come  to  emerge  as  an  asset  class  by  itself.  It  is  common  today  to  see  currencies 
being  described  as  “best  performing”,  “under-performing”  etc.  There  are  currency  trading 
desks with performance assessment, strategies and so on. Several banks and other financial 
institutions have brochures promoting investment in currencies as an asset class. Not only 
are currencies seen as assets, but as a Financial Times caption once brought out, it is an 
asset class that thrives on volatility. Currencies as assets generate a dynamics of their own. 
Currency flows are no longer adjunct to trade and investment, they exist for their own sake. 
But it has to be appreciated that currencies as assets, like fire, cannot exist on their own; just 
as fire needs a fuel, currencies require other assets classes –bank deposits, bills, notes or 
bonds and so on, and thus impact other markets as well. 
15.  
Most  of  the  regulatory  constraint  in  the  Indian  forex  markets  relate  to  the  foreign 
exchange derivatives both in terms of who can participate and what are the conditions for 
participation.  Derivatives  essentially  facilitate  inter-temporal  transfer  of demand  and  supply 
and therefore serve to express future expectations or views as traders call it. Moreover, the 
views  can  be  expressed  rather  cheaply  inasmuch  as  one  does  not  have  to  finance  a 
speculative inventory. This, in conjunction with what I have discussed a little earlier brings us 
to the inference that an unrestricted currency market can lead to volatility in exchange rate as 
well as currency inflows and outflows. 
16.  
The question that then arises is this. If we are to allow unfettered currency trading, 
are we prepared for the consequences? The first of these is volatility in the currency. The 
exchange rate is an important macro-economic variable that impacts a country’s trade and 
investment  directly  and  the  entire  macro-economic  condition  indirectly.  I  do  not  intend  to 
venture into the debatable territory of the magnitude, direction and exact nature of the impact 
of exchange rate movements: notice the debate on the impacts of a weak Euro or a strong 
Dollar.  But  that  there  is  an  impact  is  undeniable.  Equally  important  is  the  impact  on  the 
sentiments which often drive reactions in the public, the press and even among those who 
are supposed to know better. 
This brings us to the other impact, that is, on the monetary management of the 
17.  
economy.  The  Mundell-Fleming  “Trilemma”  is  well  known.  If,  with  an  open  capital 
account – which is what a free foreign exchange market shall mean – you intend to interfere 
with the market determined exchange rate, you will have to sacrifice your freedom to set the 
interest rate. Obviously this is not a viable choice. So what is a workable compromise? Some 
restriction  on  capital  account  which  translates  to  the  restrictions  on  the  foreign  exchange 
market seems the easiest of choices which several countries including India adopted. 
18.  
Let me now come to the derivatives in the Indian forex market. As I mentioned, there 
are  three  sets  of  restrictions:  on  products,  on  participants  and  on  participation.  Let  me 
comment on these aspects in reverse order. The access to the derivative markets is basically 
available  for  hedging.  All  economic  agents  –  residents  or  non-residents  –  who  have  an 
exposure arising out of any permitted transaction have access to the derivative market – both 
OTC as well as exchange traded – on the strength of such underlying exposure. Over the 
years, we have made this operationally as easy as possible and continue to smoothen the 
creases.  We  are  aware  of  the  expanding  Rupee  derivatives  market  –  necessarily  cash 
settled – in overseas locations and have been trying to provide easy access to the overseas 
entities  that  have  a  Rupee  exposure  to  the  entire  derivative  markets  onshore.  Short  of 
completely delinking the access to derivative markets from underlying exposure, our efforts 
to facilitate operationally easy and economically efficient hedging shall continue. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
This  brings  me  to  the  next  question:  what  derivative  products  are  necessary  to 
19.  
ensure efficient hedging? Ordinarily, as long as access is based on the principle I mentioned 
earlier, there should not be any restriction on the products that participants can transact. It is 
well known that a wider range of products helps market participants hedge their risk better. 
The  problem  arises  from  the  complexity  of  the  products  and  the  questions  as  to  whether 
those who use them fully understand their risk consequence and whether the products are 
appropriate for their risk profile and risk appetite. Memories of the Global Financial Crisis are 
too fresh to over-emphasise this aspect. Abuse of complex foreign exchange derivatives has 
happened in our markets as well and I am sure some of you present here will testify to this. 
Before we proceed further in our efforts to enrich the derivative products allowed, banks will 
have to put in place a framework for testing the appropriateness of the product used for their 
clients. FEDAI has an important role to play in this. The idea must be to prevent mis-selling 
rather than penalise such actions. Recently, it came as a great shock for me to learn that 
some  of  our  exchanges  do  not  have  systems  to  upfront  prevent  self  trades.  They  rather 
believed in tracking and penalising self trades. This to my mind is an inefficient approach to 
the issue. At least in the markets that RBI regulates, the principle shall be prevention is better 
than penalising. 
Unfinished agenda 
20.  
Let me now turn little futuristic. What is that needs to be done in proximate future? 
You may call it my perception of the unfinished agenda. Firstly, the scope of option products 
that  market  participants  can  contract  needs  to  be  expanded  beyond  the  plain  vanilla  now 
available. The motivation for this is that there is a growing concern these days about the risk 
of unhedged forex exposure in the books of corporates. At a micro level, individual entities 
may well be able to tide over any exchange rate stock, but at a macro level when everybody 
scurries  for  cover,  the  market  impact  may  be  unsettling.  Now,  what  is  the  incentive  for 
hedging? We must consider the facts that roughly, the Rupee has been depreciating at about 
5%  per  year  whereas  the  cost  of  a  swap  today  is  about  6–7%.  This  surely  acts  as  a 
disincentive.  There  is  a  need  to  align  individual  incentives  with  that  of  the  system.  Use  of 
options and what is called option trading strategies can contribute in this and therefore, the 
regime  has  to  consider  permitting  this.  Two  specific  enablements  that  we  are  actively 
considering in this direction are permitting covered option writing and relaxing the net worth 
criteria for using option strategies to hedge exposures. 
21.  
Secondly,  the  scope  of  participation  based  on  economic  rather  than  contractual 
hedging  needs  to  be  expanded.  Here  we  are  on  a  more  difficult  territory.  With  increased 
integration  of  the  Indian  economy  with  the  rest  of  the  world,  economic  exposure  affects 
virtually everybody in the tradable sectors and also outside. Today, even a banana grower 
from  Nagercoil  can  complain  that  her  business  is  affected  by  an  appreciating  Rupee.  To 
some  extent,  this  gets  addressed  by  the  no-underlying-required-hedging  that  has  been 
enabled both on the OTC as well on the exchange-traded segments. But there is also a need 
to take a re-look at the issues and widen the scope of the present regime and perhaps bring 
clarity  into  it.  For  instance,  can  we  think  of  permitting  corporates  to  access  forex  markets 
upto  a  multiple  of  exposures  to  be  contracted  during  any  year  without  any  documentation 
being insisted upon subject to necessary checks and balances to prevent outright punting? 
Can we redefine “exposure” to mean net exposure, i.e., net of payables and receivables for 
permitting outright purchase or sale with the temporal mismatches being managed through 
swaps? I would invite extensive debate on these issues. 
22.  
Another  issue  that  I  would  like  to  flag  is  the  need  to  rethink  on  the  entities  to 
participate in the forex market. Has the Indian forex market become a closed club where the 
behaviour  of  the  market  participants  is  getting  too  predictable?  Do  we  then  allow  new 
category  of  members  as  market  makers,  for  example,  the  stand-alone  primary  dealers  or 
select non-bank finance companies? Are we prepared for an open minded debate? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  
 
Now, I come to the second theme of my discussion, that is, opening up of capital 
23.  
account. Having declared complete openness on the current account as early as 1994, we 
thought that we can soon attain capital account convertibility as well. There have been two 
attempts in the past at charting a path to reach full capital account convertibility: in 1997 and 
again in 2007. The onset of the East Asian crisis of the late 1990’s and the Global Financial 
Crisis relegated our plans to the back burner. In the aftermath of the crisis, capital account 
convertibility  is  no  longer  seen  as  a  secular  objective  to  be  pursued  and  capital  account 
restrictions  are,  in  certain  situations,  seen  to  be  important  policy  instruments  to  promote 
financial  and  macroeconomic  stability.  Be  that  as  it  may,  in  the  current  discourse,  we  see 
opening up of the capital account as a process rather than as an event. Further, it is also 
recognised  that  unless  capital  account  liberalisation  is  accompanied  by  achievement  of 
certain “thresholds” and financial and institutional developments, the costs may far outweigh 
the benefits. 
24.  
Where  do  we  stand  in  this  regard?  For  the  real  sector,  there  is  almost  complete 
freedom as far as capital account transactions are concerned. In foreign direct investment, 
the restrictions mostly pertain to sectoral caps in a few sectors deriving more from strategic 
and social considerations rather than strictly economic ones. Portfolio investment is almost 
completely  open.  In  fact,  the  unrestricted  access  to  foreign  portfolio  investors  has  brought 
great buoyancy to the equity markets, but it also sometimes leads one to wonder whether we 
are  selling  our  equities  cheap.  Overseas  investment  by  Indian  enterprise  is  also  fairly 
permissive. As far as debt flows are concerned, it is true that there are various restrictions 
both  at  the  aggregate  levels  as  well  as  at  micro  level.  While  the  regime  for  regulation  of 
external debt has been progressively modified to cater to the emerging resource needs of the 
economy, there are still issues on which a comprehensive view needs to be taken. Let me 
elaborate. 
25.  
Regulatory regimes the world over frown upon debt inflows and time and again the 
external  sector  instability  has  been  found  to  be  rooted  in  indiscriminate  borrowing.  In 
countries with relatively higher inflation and therefore higher interest rates, foreign currency 
borrowing  in  low-interest  currencies  appears  attractive.  In  ideal  market  conditions,  there 
should  not  be  arbitrage  opportunity  between  the  costs  of  a  hedged  foreign  currency 
borrowing  and  an  onshore  domestic  currency  borrowing.  But,  given  the  imperfections  in 
Indian markets, cost of the former is likely to exceed the latter. The attractiveness of and rush 
for foreign currency borrowing therefore can be explained only by the inclination of borrowers 
to remain unhedged. As I have mentioned earlier, this surely raises systemic concerns. 
The  regime  for  foreign  currency  borrowing  so  far  has  been  anchored  on  three 
26.  
criteria:  the  use,  the  cost  and  the  tenor  of  borrowing.  These  are  sound  principles  indeed. 
There may be a case for doing away with the cost criterion since it is in a way superfluous in 
view of the other restrictions, including a loosely monitored aggregate cap. One view is that, 
if  it  is  mandated  that  all  foreign  currency  borrowing  should  be  necessarily  hedged,  all 
restrictions  can  be  dispensed  with.  But  then,  is  mandatory  hedging  the  most  appropriate 
policy? Given the already high cost of linear hedging products like forwards and swaps which 
will explode if all foreign currency borrowers seek mandated hedges, there may not be any 
foreign  currency  borrowing  at  all.  And  if  hedging  is  to  include  options  and  option-based 
structures, how effective will the hedging be then, given the borrowers’ incentive to minimise 
the cost of hedging? These are questions that need to be reflected upon. 
27.  
When  the  regulatory  regime  for  external  debts  was  born,  we  were  all  “original 
sinners”  of  contracting  debt  only  in  a  foreign  currency.  Of  late,  given  the  fact  that  India  is 
seen  as  a  growth  hub  of  the  future,  the  interest  of  foreign  investors  has  turned  to  Rupee 
debts as well, as evident from the recent interest shown in government and corporate bonds. 
Further, foreign investors are not shy of investing in rupee debts even in overseas locations, 
as the experience of IFC and ADB issues last year show. There is a need to appropriately 
incentivise the move away from foreign currency debts to Rupee debts even as the position 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
in respect of overall indebtedness in prudentially managed. We propose to pursue this matter 
further in a calibrated manner. 
28.  
Be it investment in equity or in debt, there is a need for removing the small prints 
and elements of discretion in the regulatory regime. As the Finance Minister observed in his 
budget  speech,  “Capital  Account  Controls  is  a policy  rather  than  a  regulatory  matter.”  It  is 
therefore necessary to clearly enunciate the ingredients of the policy which apply secularly 
and uniformly to all so that the elements of “regulation” are known unambiguously to all.  I 
have spoken on this subject at length elsewhere and I do not wish to repeat them here. 
29.  
The  case  for  a  principle  based  regulation  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  ways  of 
doing business are forever evolving and the ways of financing are evolving even faster. This 
is quite evident in say, infrastructure sector and the new technology start ups. It is difficult for 
a  rule-based  regulatory  framework  to  keep  pace  and  consequently,  it  is  likely  to  handicap 
many socially useful projects. Moreover, in the process, it is likely to be rendered a complex 
maze. But a principle based regulatory framework has certain preconditions. As Julia Black 
states, “PBR, both formal and substantive, and in both dyadic and poly-centric relationships, 
is predicated, however, on extensive trust between the actors in the regulatory regime.”1 If on 
the  other  hand  the  actors  start  playing  games,  it  leads  to  regulatory  dialectics  and  an 
intrusive and regulatory regime. Having said this, let me state that we are almost at the end 
stage of rewriting FEMA regulations making them simpler and more principle based. 
for 
the 
term 
financing,  particularly 
infrastructure  projects.  Notwithstanding 
To conclude 
30.  
Let me conclude. As will be seen from the foregoing, we have made considerable 
progress from where  we were. The fixed income  markets have registered good growth. In 
fact, we have started seeing the growth in corporate bond outstanding starting to outpace the 
bank credit growth. The forex market has also grown both onshore and offshore in keeping 
with  increasing  international  engagement.  The  growth  of  derivative  market  may  not  have 
been spectacular, but the market has indeed expanded in terms of products. In the hierarchy 
of priorities, the foremost perhaps is the development of a bond market, for its criticality of 
long 
the 
impressive growth over the last several years, there is a need for faster growth in issuances, 
increased liquidity in the secondary markets, expansion in the rating span of bond issuances 
and  so  on.  The  growth  of  this  segment  has  been  discussed  a  lot.  To  my  mind,  further 
vibrancy in this segment depends on growth in long term savings and directing the same to 
this segment in a framework of responsible and regulated portfolio management framework. I 
believe the corpus generated by the NPS will provide the necessary nudge. Directing of the 
foreign  long  term  savings  to  domestic  corporate  bonds  is  attractive,  and  indeed  the  gates 
have been opened fairly wide. But, at this stage how desirable is it to allow foreign investors 
total  freedom  to  access  the  domestic  debt  that  is  protected  against  credit  and  foreign 
exchange risk? Only for arbitraging on interest rates? Further, the Indian bond and currency 
markets are beset with many such structural frictions – large government borrowings, bank 
dominated  financial  intermediation,  capital  controls  etc.  In  the  face  of  this,  wisdom  lies  in 
proceeding  with  caution  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  No  doubt  perfect  and  seamless 
integration of market segments and removal of riskless arbitrage opportunities through inter-
linkages or “nexuses” is an ideal objective but is constrained by concerns for stability in a 
setting  of  narrowing  but  still  yawning  gulf  between  the  macroeconomic  conditions  of  India 
and the financially developed, capital-surplus nations. I am reminded of what Fisher Black is 
reported to have once remarked, “The markets look more rational from the banks of Charles 
than from the banks of Hudson.” 
                                                 
1   The Rise, Fall and Fate of Principles Based Regulation -Julia Black LSE Law, Society and Economy Working 
Papers 17/2010 London School of Economics and Political Science Law Department. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 b. 
 
 
This  brings  me  to  my  last  and  the  most  important  point.  The  role  of  Authorised 
31.  
Dealers and FEDAI in times to come. The Authorised Dealers led a very protected life in the 
FERA regime and never had to apply their mind to the permissibility of a foreign exchange 
transaction because it had to be based on an RBI permit or some other permit, for example, 
an import license. Today, it is not so. When FEDAI was formed in the 1950’s its role mostly 
evolved round computation of various forex rates and mostly interbank transactions. In the 
times  to  come,  both  Authorised  Dealers  and  FEDAI  will  have  to  play  an  active  role  in 
ensuring that customer transactions are compliant with the regulations. The more we move 
towards  a  principle  based  framework,  the  more  arduous  will  be  the  responsibility  of  the 
Authorised  Dealers.  This  includes  the  issue  of  fair  pricing  as  well.  Indeed,  our  success  in 
moving to a principle based framework will depend on the involvement of ADs. You will have 
to gear up for that responsibility. 
32.  
a. 
Finally, let me briefly recapitulate some of more important issues. 
In foreign exchange market, as in any other market, freedom is the default and any 
restraint by way of regulation has to justify itself. The regulation has to be based on 
sound economic principles and not on dogmas or evangelism. 
Though the superiority of free markets as a way of organising economic activity is 
well  recognised,  there  are  many  areas  where  the  limitations  of  market  have  been 
widely  discussed  in  the  literature  and  are  well  accepted.  There  is  no  accepted 
standard for optimum regulation which is often idiosyncratic. The regulation of forex 
markets has to be seen in that context. As Chesterton remarked, “Don’t ever take a 
fence down until you know the reason it was put up.” 
More  products  go  towards  market  completion  and  enable  better  hedging  against 
risks, but are limited by the wisdom of the participants to use them. 
Exact pace and content of capital account liberalisation will depend upon the future 
events,  but  the  regulatory  regime  has  to  be  clear  and  transparent.  A  regulatory 
regime  that  creates  uncertainty  and  obfuscates  imposes  tremendous  cost  on  the 
economy and the society. 
Finally, the issue of fair pricing. Forex customers, especially from small and medium 
enterprises  and  retail  segments,  have  approached  us  on  several  occasions 
highlighting  “high”  charges  levied  by  Authorised  Dealer  banks  on  their  forex 
transactions. Not only there appears to be a wide variation amongst the banks in the 
charges  levied  on  the  smaller  customers,  there  appears  to  be  a  complete  lack  of 
transparency regarding the information on charges levied for such customers. I am 
aware that FEDAI has issued a Special Circular in this regard but I once again urge 
all  banks  assembled  here  to  pay  due  attention  to  this  aspect  before  calls  for 
regulation of forex rates become more vocal. 
33.  
I wish the conference, whatever is left of it, all success. I also wish each one of you 
all success in the years to come. As I leave the stage, rather than singing along with Frost 
that  we  have  miles  to  go  before  sleeping,  I  would  rather  echo  Tennyson’s  brook  (read 
markets) that will surge along irrespective of men (like me or any other) who may come and 
go. I shall of course continue to watch the developments from the sidelines. Good bye. 
 
d. 
e. 
c. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
