  Ignazio Visco: Economic developments in the euro area and Italy, 
monetary policy, credit and banks 
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  21st  ASSIOM  (The 
Financial Markets Association of Italy) FOREX Congress, Milan, 7 February 2015. 
 The  positive  signs  emerging  from  the  global  economy  are  still  accompanied  by  marked 
uncertainty. While growth has accelerated in the United States, it remains weak in Japan and 
is slowing in China and in other emerging economies; in Russia it is contracting rapidly. The 
slump in oil prices may bolster economic activity in the advanced countries but it is also the 
result  of  weak  demand;  it  must  be  prevented  from  entrenching  expectations  of  deflation. 
Financial conditions are favourable, but market volatility is on the rise. 
Economic developments in the euro area and Italy 
The euro area is struggling to re-establish satisfactory rates of growth and unemployment is 
still very high. While consumption has picked up somewhat, domestic demand has been held 
down  by  investment,  which  contracted  in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2014.  The 
difficulties are widespread: average area-wide GDP growth is no higher than the modest rate 
recorded for the group of countries directly hit by the sovereign debt crisis. 
After a long series of unexpected drops in consumer price inflation, in December the twelve-
month variation was negative in eleven countries and, for the first time since October 2009, 
in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Nowhere  did  inflation  top  1  per  cent.  Preliminary  estimates 
indicate that in January consumer prices fell by 0.6 per cent, and by 0.4 per cent in Italy; this 
does not just reflect the drop in energy prices, as even without this component inflation has 
reached an unprecedented low of under 0.5 per cent in the euro area. Medium- and long-
term inflation expectations have been affected and this downward shift must be countered 
with  firmness.  In  the  first  week  of  February  the  expectations  implied  by  five-year  inflation 
swaps were still 0.7 per cent and those for the five to ten year horizon were 1.6 per cent. 
Italy  is  among  the  countries  that  are  struggling  hardest  to  make  a  start  on  the  road  to 
recovery. GDP has been declining almost without a break for three years and is expected to 
show  no  increase  in  the  last  quarter  of  2014,  mainly  owing  to  the  further  contraction  in 
investment, which is more than a quarter below the level of 2007. 
The latest data point to some encouraging developments for both the euro area and Italy. 
The  Bank  of  Italy’s  €-coin  indicator,  which  tracks  underlying  trends  for  the  euro-area 
economy, rose in December and January after falling steadily from May to November 2014. 
In  December  the  unemployment  rate  fell  marginally  in  the  euro  area  (by  0.1  percentage 
points to 11.4 per cent) and slightly more (by 0.4 points to 12.9 per cent) in Italy, where the 
number  of  persons  in  employment  rose  by  over  90,000  in  the  month.  Household  and 
business  confidence  has  been  picking  up  since  the  beginning  of  the  year.  These 
developments have likely been affected by the drop in oil prices and the changes in interest 
and exchange rates caused by expectations of expansionary monetary policy measures. 
A revival of capital expenditure is essential in order to consolidate growth. In many countries, 
especially  Italy,  the  uncertain  economic  outlook  has  led  firms  to  take  a  “wait  and  see” 
approach. In the December surveys conducted by the Bank of Italy almost half of the firms 
still expected their expenditure on investment to remain virtually unchanged in 2015. Signs of 
a possible resumption have emerged only in some branches of manufacturing. 
A suitable policy mix must contribute to reversing the trend in investment and strengthening 
consumption.  The  new  monetary  policy  measures  are  designed  to  defuse  the  risk  of  a 
negative  spiral  of  deflation  and  economic  stagnation.  Budget  policies  in  the  euro-area 
countries,  which  have  been  persistently  restrictive,  can  now  be  better  adapted  to  cyclical 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  conditions.  For  demand  stimulus  to  generate  lasting  growth,  measures  must  be  taken  to 
reform the economy’s capacity to respond to structural changes. 
Monetary policy 
On 22 January the ECB Governing Council announced a programme of purchases of bonds 
issued by euro-area public authorities and European institutions to supplement the existing 
ones for covered bonds and asset-backed securities. It is a far-reaching measure, broader 
than markets expected, to be rolled out immediately, and open ended. 
The  Eurosystem  will  buy  €60  billion  worth  of  bonds  a  month  from  March  this  year  until 
September 2016, for a total of €1,140 billion. The programme will in any event continue to 
run until a lasting change is achieved, with the trend of inflation returning close to 2 per cent. 
Intervention by the national central banks (NCBs) will be proportionate to their shares in the 
ECB’s capital; the Bank of Italy’s purchases of Italian government securities could be in the 
region of €130 billion. 
The  Council  viewed  the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  as  a  legitimate  tool  of 
monetary policy and voted by a large majority to deploy it immediately. Equal sharing of the 
attached risks would have been more consistent with the singleness of monetary policy. The 
decision to let the balance sheets of the single NCBs carry the risk of losses on government 
bond  purchases  reflects  a  concern  within  the  Governing  Council  that  in  the  present 
institutional framework such a monetary policy measure might lead to transfers of resources 
between  countries  without  the  approval  of  the  competent  bodies.  In  any  case,  the  more 
successful the programme proves to be in curtailing the macroeconomic risks faced by the 
euro-area countries, the more it will also reduce the risks to the NCBs’ balance sheets. 
Asset  purchases  can  transmit  effects  to  the  economy  through  a  variety  of  channels.  They 
exert  downward  pressure  on  medium-  to  long-term  interest  rates,  directly  for  the  assets 
included  in  the  programme,  and  indirectly  for  all  the  others  through  portfolio  reallocations. 
They encourage bank credit by making it relatively more profitable than buying government 
securities  and  by  reducing  the  cost  of  funding.  They  sustain  inflation  expectations  and 
confidence.  They  help  to  ensure  that  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  are  consistent  with 
cyclical developments: although the euro exchange rate is not a monetary policy objective, 
any  variations  linked  to  the  monetary  conditions  in  the  different  currency  areas  are  an 
important component of the transmission mechanism. The effects on financial asset prices 
and, looking ahead, on real asset prices can stimulate consumption. 
The risk that the programme could lead to excessive price increases for real and financial 
assets, such as to threaten financial stability, is limited in the current climate. There are no 
indications  that  any  widespread  imbalances  are  forming  in  the  euro  area  at  the  moment: 
credit  is  still  languishing,  assets  do  not  appear  to  be  generally  overpriced;  overall  the 
propensity to take risks is still low. Should tensions emerge in local market segments, they 
would  be  countered  by  the  national  authorities  with  targeted  macroprudential  measures 
(such  as  those  already  introduced  in  some  countries)  without  altering  the  expansionary 
stance of monetary policy. 
The purchase of government securities does not make the introduction of reforms to increase 
the growth potential of the euro-area countries any less necessary or likely. Indeed, it can 
foster them by improving the macroeconomic outlook and reducing its uncertainty. 
The effects of the programme have already been seen in part on the financial and currency 
markets.  Lower  interest  rates  and  the  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  could  bring  euro-
area inflation to levels more consistent with the definition of price stability towards the end of 
2016. By acting on demand, they will also help to raise GDP. For Italy, we consider that the 
effect on GDP could exceed 1 percentage point in 2015–16, other things being equal. About 
half of this effect was already factored into the forecasts published in the Economic Bulletin 
of  16  January,  which  took  account  of  the  trends  observed  following  the  communication  of 
November’s  Governing  Council  on  the  start  of  the  preliminary  technical  work  for  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  programme. The further variations in the interest and exchange rates deriving from the new 
measures could lead to higher GDP growth, currently estimated at more than 0.5 per cent 
this year and more than 1.5 per cent in 2016. 
These effects could be joined by those connected to the other transmission channels, which 
are more difficult to quantify but also potentially important. The forecasts remain, however, 
subject to a high degree of uncertainty, mostly connected with developments in geopolitical 
conditions  and  their  impact  on  world  trade,  the  price  of  oil  and  the  exchange  rates 
themselves. 
Other policies 
Monetary  stimulus  is  not  in  itself  enough  to  strengthen  the  signs  of  the  recovery.  Without 
parallel budgetary action the effects on demand may be limited; they will fade in the medium 
term  if  there  is  no  structural  intervention  on  the  economy’s  growth  potential,  using 
instruments  capable  of  increasing  both  productivity  and  employment,  creating  new  income 
and new demand. 
The  overall  stance  of fiscal  policies  in  the  euro-area  countries  was  still  restrictive  in  2013, 
basically  neutral  in  2014,  and  is  expected  to  remain  the  same  in  2015  despite  the 
unfavourable economic climate. When the crisis was at its height, the budgetary adjustments 
introduced  in  a  number  of  countries  bolstered  confidence  among  the  member  states  and 
reassured  the  markets.  Thanks  to  these  corrections,  as  well  as  to  the  strengthening  of 
Europe’s governance and the start of structural reforms, today there is scope for measures to 
support demand. Political and financial tensions can still affect market stability in the area, 
but the risks of contagion are fewer than in the recent past. 
The investment plan announced by the President of the European Commission at the end of 
last year marks the first attempt to organize a coordinated response at European level. The 
plan can be implemented rapidly, overcoming any difficulties in establishing new institutions 
and procedures and using all the sources of funding available. 
The Commission’s recent communication on flexibility in applying budgetary rules is another 
important signal, mainly with regard to the calibration of policies based on the output gap and 
the  treatment  of  national  contributions  to  the  European  investment  fund.  The  Commission 
has  explained  that  the  latter  will  not  affect  the  evaluation  of  countries’  structural  budget 
position nor – within certain limits – decisions relating to the excessive deficit procedure. 
The  Italian  Government,  while  confirming  its  commitment  to  continue  to  adjust  the  public 
finances, has adapted the pace to the economic outlook. The structural reform programme 
undertaken  in  recent  years  must  proceed,  in  particular  as  regards  implementing  decisions 
already taken. 
All in all, the measures introduced so far go in the right direction. Lastly – in the wake of the 
2012  reform  to  reduce  the  dualism  in  Italy’s  labour  market  –  the  first  two  implementing 
decrees of the Jobs Act have extended the protection provided by unemployment benefits 
and reduced the costs of procedures to terminate employment contracts and the uncertainty 
over their final outcome. The enabling law establishes that they shall be accompanied by an 
appropriate revision of active labour market policies. 
Improving  the  efficiency  of  the  public  administration  will  increase  the  competitiveness  of 
Italy’s productive system, which is a prerequisite for the effectiveness of all the other reforms. 
Measures have recently been adopted to promote public employee mobility. A draft enabling 
law  for  broader  reform,  centred  on  increased  transparency  and  simplification,  is  being 
discussed in Parliament. The success of the reform will depend on how the good principles 
underpinning the law are implemented in practice. 
By  international  standards  Italy’s  stock  of  human  capital  is  limited  and  inadequate  for  an 
advanced  country.  By  developing  the  right  skills  and  capabilities  through  better  education 
and training, the country could find its way back to a higher growth path. Corruption and the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  infiltration of the economy and society by organized crime remain unacceptably widespread. 
Guaranteeing observance of the law, partly through more effective administration of justice, 
enables  the  productive  economy  to  function  properly,  encourages  entrepreneurship,  and 
attracts human and financial resources to the country. 
Credit and banks 
Improvements in credit market conditions fostered by the new monetary policy measures must 
accompany a revival of investment. Although the trend in business lending is improving it is still 
negative, above all owing to weak demand but also because of residual supply-side strains. 
Banks’ caution in lending is mainly due to the high default risk generated by the protracted 
recession. In 2014 the flow of new bad debts decreased steadily from the peaks of mid-2013 
but it remains nonetheless high; according to the latest figures, in the third quarter the annual 
bad debt rate was around 2.5 per cent for total lending and 4.0 per cent for loans to firms. 
The  new  monetary  policy  measures,  which  reduce  macroeconomic  risk,  should  also  have 
beneficial effects on credit risk. 
At the end of September bad debts accounted for 10.6 per cent of the total customer loans of 
the leading banking groups while total non-performing loans amounted to 18.3 per cent. The 
still high proportion of the latter is partly due to the absence of a secondary market for these 
assets in Italy, as well as to the slow process of credit recovery. To date, transfers of these 
assets have been possible in just a few cases and at very low prices, incorporating not only 
normal  management  costs  and  the  risks  of  the  underlying  assets,  but  also  the  uncertain 
economic outlook for the country. 
Banks must  liquidate  their  non-performing  loans  in  order to  raise funds to finance the real 
economy.  Direct  state  intervention  –  within  a  framework  whereby,  in  accordance  with 
European rules on competition, banks participate fully in the costs of the operation and public 
support  is  suitably  remunerated  –  could  be  used  not  to  remedy  excessive  risk  taking  by 
single banks, but to respond to the deterioration in loan quality caused by the severity and 
length  of  the  recession  and  to  the  need  to  ensure  an  adequate  flow  of  financing  to  the 
economy. Appropriate tax relief or state guarantees on assets backed by bad debts would 
smooth the way for the creation of a private market in non-performing loans. 
With the conclusion of the comprehensive assessment of the balance sheets of the largest 
euro-area  banks,  regular  supervisory  activity  under  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  has 
commenced. All the significant banks supervised directly by the ECB, with the assistance of 
the national authorities, have been notified of capital adequacy targets based on an analysis 
of their respective risk profiles. This practice, which is specifically envisaged under the rules 
of the second pillar of the Basel capital accord, is similar to the one that the Bank of Italy 
followed  before  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  and  that  it  continues  to  use  for  the 
institutions  it  supervises  directly.  The  banks  for  which  the  assessment  identified  capital 
shortfalls have been assigned targets that are largely in line with the plans they presented 
following the exercise. 
In  recent  years  the  need  to  observe  more  stringent  capital  adequacy  requirements  has 
affected the banks’ propensity to lend during a cyclical downturn. Additional requirements for 
capital increases must be carefully calibrated so as not to undermine the signs of economic 
recovery.  More  generally,  in  the  new  context  of  Banking  Union,  a  clear  and  stable 
supervisory review process in the spirit of Basel rules will make it easier for banks to draw up 
long-term plans, improve market transparency, and limit the potential pro-cyclical effects. 
In  the  coming  months  single  supervision  will  also  focus  on  the  sustainability  of  banks’ 
business  models.  Lighter  cost  structures  and  business  models  that  can  adapt  promptly  to 
new technology will help banks cope with change more effectively. Italy’s banks have made 
progress in recent years, but there is still room for improvement. A review of production and 
distribution  processes  will  lead  to  efficiency  gains  and  cost  savings.  Profit  levels  could  be 
raised  through  greater  diversification  of  revenues,  which  could  include  helping  firms  to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  access markets directly. There is scope for mergers and acquisitions designed to rationalize 
corporate structures and modernize production and distribution processes. 
Appropriate  corporate  governance  structures  capable  of  increasing  firms’  resilience  and 
competitiveness  remain  essential.  The  Government  recently  announced  a  reform  of  Italy’s 
cooperative banks that responds to needs identified long ago – by us, by the International 
Monetary  Fund  and  by  the  European  Commission  –  and  now  made  more  pressing  by  the 
transition to single banking supervision. 
The reform would require the biggest cooperative banks to approve their transformation into 
joint  stock  companies,  an  ownership  structure that  gives  them  increased  access  to  capital 
markets. Broader participation by shareholders in general meetings would reduce the risk of 
power becoming concentrated in the hands of organized minority shareholder groups. There 
would be a greater incentive to monitor the conduct of management. The cooperative bank 
model could still be used by small and medium-sized intermediaries, thereby preserving the 
cooperative  spirit  of  those  local  communities  to  which  it  is  well-suited.  For  these 
intermediaries  too,  the  reform  aims  to  strengthen  several  aspects  of  governance  and  to 
increase the incentives to invest in their capital. 
In the mutual banking sector capital strengthening requirements can be hindered by these 
banks’ special legal form. Weaknesses stem from their at times extremely small scale, with 
implications  for  costs  and  innovation,  and  from  excessive  concentration  of  credit  risks. 
Greater  consolidation,  favouring  the  creation  of  groups,  can  improve  operational  efficiency 
and  recourse  to  the market for  aligning  capital  to  risks. These  objectives  can  be  achieved 
without sacrificing the mutualistic traits typical of the cooperative model. 
The  launch  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  was  accompanied  by  that  of  the  single 
mechanism  for  resolving  bank  crises.  European  legislation  in  this  area  has  already  been 
drawn up. Italy is behind in the transposition of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
(BRRD).  The  deadline  for  its  adoption  was  the  end  of  2014,  but  Parliament  has  yet  to 
approve the enabling law and establish the national resolution authority. 
 The monetary policy measures taken during the crisis, including the latest ones, the progress 
made  in  European  economic  governance,  and  the  efforts  of  national  governments  have 
reduced the uncertainty that in recent years has weighed so heavily on economic activity in 
the  euro  area.  This  progress  must  not  be  put  at  risk  but  rather  reinforced  by  laying  the 
institutional  foundations  needed  to  shelter  the  stability  of  monetary  union  once  and  for  all 
from turbulence originating at local level and to guarantee lasting prospects for growth. 
To strengthen monetary union permanently further steps must be taken towards political union, 
but the road ahead will be neither short nor smooth. In the immediate future, mechanisms can 
be identified to fill the gaps of an incomplete Union by bringing to a satisfactory conclusion the 
reforms already launched and exploiting fully the instruments to hand. 
Banking Union can be, as originally intended, an important factor of stability for the euro area 
so  long  as  we  succeed  in  striking  the  right  balance  between  the  need  to  safeguard  the 
stability  of  banks  and  that  of  enabling  them  to  support  the  economy.  Exploiting  fully  the 
flexibility allowed under the fiscal rules to finance reforms to correct structural weaknesses 
should  help 
their 
consequences. Over the longer term, a number of other areas for common action may also 
be identified, with a gradual, circumscribed pooling of financial resources. 
In  our  country  efforts  to  make  the  economic  environment  more  business  friendly  must  be 
pursued unstintingly. Any lasting recovery of investment requires savings to flow to firms not 
just through a fresh expansion of bank credit but also via increased direct access to capital 
markets, not confined to the largest firms. The most innovative sectors and those best able to 
create new jobs stand to benefit as a result. 
than  merely  controlling  and  managing 
to  prevent  crises  rather 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
