   S S Mundra: Financial education – basics and beyond 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Conference  on  Financial  Literacy,  organised  by the  College  of  Agricultural  Banking,  Pune, 
15 June 2015. 
 1.  Shri  P.  K.  Panda,  Principal,  CAB;  Shri  Sandip  Ghose,  Director,  NiSM;  delegates  to 
Conference; my colleagues at RBI and friends from the banking fraternity! It is a pleasure to 
be here this morning to deliver the keynote address at this Conference on Financial Literacy. I 
understand that it is quite a heterogeneous group with representation of various stake holders 
in the field of financial inclusion, literacy and consumer protection and hence, I believe you 
would have plenty of interesting things to discuss over the course of two days. 
2.  I  understand  that  this  National  Level  Conference  was  preceded  by  three  Regional 
Conferences at Hyderabad, Kolkata and Chandigarh and this is the culmination of the process 
of  extensive  consultations  amongst  the  stakeholders  which  would  lead  to  crystallization  of 
action points. I think such conferences should serve a far greater purpose than only discussing 
issues. They should lead identifying the challenges, working out some key action points and 
generation of ideas which could be discussed in other formal and informal interactions amongst 
the delegates. Let me now turn to the subject for the morning. 
3. As Central Bankers, very often, we talk about the impossible trinity, while discussing the 
larger monetary policy framework. Some of you would know the concept. But for the benefit of 
others, Impossible Trinity is a concept in macroeconomics which states that it is impossible to 
simultaneously  pursue  three  goals  that  of  a  stable  foreign  exchange  rate,  free  capital 
movement and an independent monetary policy. You must be wondering what this has to do 
with theme of the Conference. I am drawing reference to the “impossible trinity” just to begin 
talking about an essentially possible and feasible trinity and this  “possible trinity” is that of 
financial inclusion, financial literacy and the consumer protection. Together the three, form a 
triad that has a vital bearing on the stability of the financial system. That I think should be the 
overall theme of what we discuss today. On a broader level I would also like to mention that 
this entire subject has a much wider ramification. I would like to recall a declaration made 
seven  decades  ago.  This  was  a  very  important  declaration  by  the  International  Labor 
Organization  in  their  convention  held  at  Philadelphia  in  the  year  1944,  which  had  a  very 
significant and remarkable sentence. It stated, “Poverty anywhere is a threat to prosperity 
everywhere”. To eliminate or to  address the issue of poverty, financial inclusion is a very 
important means. Until and unless you have an inclusive society you cannot dream to address 
the  challenge  of  poverty.  Likewise,  if  universal financial  inclusion  has  to  become  a  reality, 
efforts to spread financial literacy have to be an essential pre-requisite. So that is what we are 
talking  about  here.  Financial  literacy  to  financial  inclusion  to  poverty  elimination,  this  is 
something very very important for the global stability. 
4. When I looked at the theme of this conference and as I pondered over what to speak, I 
actually started wondering about the nature of financial illiterates in the system. My own sense 
is that the “financially illiterate” can be broadly divided into five categories. Let me explain: 
5. The first form of financial illiteracy, I call “Wise Illiteracy” and people as “Wise Illiterates”. 
Now you must be wondering that how a person can be called wise and illiterate in the same 
breath. When I say “wise illiterates”, I am referring to the victims of Madoffs of the world or the 
people who happily submit to the financial scams – exchange scams, penny stock scams or 
exotic derivative products. This class does not only include individuals, but also corporates. 
They have all the resources at their command; they understand risks in all its dimensions and 
pros and cons of their actions but despite that with an unnerving regularity, keep falling into 
the trap of mega level of scams. This happens in India as well as elsewhere across the globe. 
So, these are the “wise illiterates” in my definition. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
6. The second category of financially illiterates I call them “Greed-driven Illiterates”. These 
are people who are well educated and well understand the risks involved in various financial 
decisions that they make. But in their case, greed overpowers sanity. Believe me in Reserve 
Bank of India, every day we keep receiving strange complaints or the grievances from people, 
who were offered a big sum of money from the British Government or a large corporate firm or 
someone has left them a big endowment. They are promised huge sums of money 5 million 
pounds or 10 million pounds, if they pay just a small fee. People end up paying once and then 
they fall into a trap. One payment call leads to another – for tax purpose or for clearance. 
These days, Reserve Bank’s name is also very liberally used. Payments are stated to have 
been assured by Reserve Bank’s Governor or sometimes even in my name. An email is sent 
out  stating  that  some fund  has  been  deposited on  your  behalf  and the money  is  sitting  in 
Reserve Bank of India which you can claim. Very recently, I came across a unique incident. 
An Indian lady came across a gentleman, claimed to be settled in UAE, through the portal of a 
marriage bureau. Their association grew and they decided to marry on an appointed date when 
the gentleman would arrive in India. On the appointed date, that lady received a phone call 
stating that the gentleman had arrived but since he had a huge amount of foreign currency and 
for which, there would be need to pay some duty, some registration charges etc. She paid Rs. 
55000. Next day, a call said that the person had been taken to Delhi where another clearance, 
a certificate from Reserve Bank of India was needed which could establish that it was not dirty 
money and so on. In each such instances that I am mentioning people have ended up paying 
at least five to seven lakh of rupees. Most of these are well educated people, many of them 
are professionals, doctors, doctorate by education, post graduates, lawyers. It is only after 
paying up a sizeable amount they smell the rat and come forward for grievance redressal. It is 
this category of people that I call the “greed driven illiterates”. There are several of them who 
have put their money in plantation schemes, emu farming, multi-level marketing schemes and 
have burnt their fingers. 
7. Let me now come to the third category – whom I have named “Information – deprived 
Illiterates”. There is rapidly growing middle class in the country. In addition, there is rapid 
urbanization and a large number of people migrate from the rural to urban areas. As the middle 
class  grows,  urbanization  increases;  so  do  the  financial  needs  of  the  people  –  these  are 
lifestyle needs for savings/credit/investments /retirement planning etc. The need may be for 
consumer goods, vehicles, house, investment requirement, mutual fund, insurance etc. The 
providers of these products/ services are becoming increasingly sophisticated by the day as 
they are in possession of more and more information and have the capability to apply more 
analytics. 
8. On the contrary, the consumers, the recipients of these services, are not really becoming 
financial literate in that sense, at the same pace. They do not have access to the level of 
information that the service providers have which has led to a wide gap, an asymmetry in 
information and knowledge between the service provider and service receiver. That is why I 
call  this  section  of  people  illiterate,  “information  deprived  illiterates”,  not  in  the  sense  of 
education, albeit in respect of the financial information they possess. 
9. The fourth category – I have named “Illiterate Illiterates”. These are the people who have 
just entered the formal financial system or formal banking system. Under the PMJDY, in the 
last one year almost fifteen crore new accounts have been opened. In three years before that 
under RBI’s financial inclusion push, another fifteen crore accounts had been opened. Initially 
villages up to a population of 5000, then 2000, then below 2000, were covered in a phased 
manner. The sum and substance is that in the last four – five years around thirty crore new 
people have entered into formal financial/banking system for the first time. We keep on hearing 
that there are not enough transactions in a large number of these “zero-balance” accounts. 
These people are the “illiterate illiterates”, – illiterate both in the sense of normal education and 
more so in respect of financial education. 
10.  I  am  in  a  dilemma  over  where  I  should  categorize  a  very  important  segment  of  the 
population that is “housewives”. Irrespective of whether they are clubbed under the category 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
of  “Information-  deprived  illiterates”  or  the  “Illiterate  illiterates”,  they  constitute  an 
extremely important target group for the viewpoint of success of financial literacy endeavor. I 
say this because apart from being recipient of financial education and improving their financial 
decision making capabilities; they have the potential to educate and influence other members 
in the household, especially their children. 
11. The fifth category of illiterates, I have named as “Kindergarten Illiterates”. These are the 
young students and justifiably many of them are financially illiterate. These are school children 
and it would be sometime before they enter the formal world of finance. But they are another 
very important target group, which is needed to be brought under the financial literacy drive. 
12. In my address, I would focus only on the last three groups. I do not intend to talk about the 
“wise illiterate” or the “greed driven illiterate” because what these people really need is some 
kind of goading from time to time, to curb their instinct and impulse for making quick money. 
13. Let us now delve into the kind of financial literacy drive that would be useful for these three 
groups of people. First of the three is the “information deprived illiteracy”. For this group – what 
is needed is education, to bridge the information gap between the service provider and the 
service receiver. Generally, whenever we meet in this kind of conferences, our attention is 
squarely focused on the new customers who have joined under the financial inclusion drive 
and  we  think  that  entire  financial  literacy  drive  should  be  focused  only  on  this  segment. 
Undoubtedly, this segment is important but we have this existing population group and growing 
every day that is increasingly using a number of banking and other financial services. In my 
opinion, our efforts should be equally focused on them. They should know their rights and 
responsibilities and be able to make informed financial choices. This kind of education can only 
be imparted through coordinated efforts from various agencies – the government, the financial 
institutions themselves will have to pitch in, the industry, the consumer associations have to 
play a role and the mass media – whether it is the internet, mobile, paper publication, specific 
publication,  classroom training.  All  these  tools  would  require  to  be  employed.  The  level  of 
awareness about simple things like need for timely payment of the bills, credit card dues etc. 
is absolutely low. People aren’t really aware about the penalties that they might end up paying 
for their failures to make timely payment of bills/ credit card dues. Not only the penalty could 
be severe, even more importantly, the bad credit behavior can feed into their credit history with 
credit bureaus which can serve as an impediment for their future credit requirement. These 
are the areas on which the literacy efforts for this group should focus on. 
14. Coming to the next category i.e. the “illiterate illiterate”. They would need to be educated 
on basic savings account, basic investment, insurance and pension needs. They have to be 
made aware about the lifecycle needs and the importance of financial savings to meet these 
needs.  These  lifecycle  needs  are  education  of  children,  health  requirement,  marriage  of 
children, building first house, preparing for the old age through pension contribution etc. On a 
very practical level, for people entering into the formal financial system at a late stage in their 
lives, it may not be a big motivation to save or invest since they might feel that these are not 
going  to  help  them  greatly  in  their  own  lives.  There  is  a strong  possibility  that  this kind  of 
reaction may come. So, it would be very important that when we do a literacy drive to this 
segment of people, we should send a strong message that whatever they start doing today 
would have a very significant impact on their next generation, on their children. By all these 
efforts their children can get better education, can lead a healthy life, can have a shelter over 
their head – this could be a proper motivation for them. On a larger scale; when these things 
are aggregated, the potential pay out for the economy can be really very, very big. That is 
where we need to concentrate our efforts for this segment. 
15. Another important thing about this segment is while we educate them, we give them all 
kinds of learning about the formal financial sector, they should also be made aware about the 
harmful side of financial inclusion efforts. What is the harmful side? Overzealous efforts by 
financial inclusion crusaders can result into over-indebtedness for this target group. Soon after 
entering into a formal financial system they could become a victim of predatory lending, high 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
interest rates, higher service charges etc. These people would need to be protected from such 
possibilities because, we must realize that this group has entered the formal system after lot 
of efforts and cajoling, and if for any reason if they  walk out feeling hurt, then it would be 
virtually impossible to bring them back. So this sensitivity has to be there. 
16. As far as the kindergarten illiterate I have already spoken enough before awarding the 
winners of the NCFLAT. But broadly under the FSDC and its Sub-Committee, a Technical 
Group is working on the Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy areas. This Technical Group 
has formulated the NSFE and efforts are on to introduce financial education as a part of formal 
curriculum under the various state boards, and the Central Board. While there has been some 
success but I think still lot of work is required to be done. Unfortunately I don’t see the same 
sense of urgency on part of various authorities in the education system to understand the 
importance of this drive or the requirement of this and move fast enough. But the efforts would 
need to continue. Quickly, I would like to cover at this point when we are talking about financial 
education and financial literacy a lot of efforts have already gone into addressing the supply 
side and the consumer protection issues. You all may be aware that recently Reserve Bank of 
India has come out with a charter of customer rights, where five basic rights of customers have 
been enshrined. We have granted twelve to eighteen months to the banks to voluntarily adopt 
this charter. We have simultaneously requested IBA and BCSBI to prepare a Model Code 
which  can  be  adopted  by  individual  banks. The banks  can  customize  it for  their  individual 
requirements  and  we  will  observe  for  the  next  twelve  to  eighteen  months  that  how  this  is 
shaping up. If we are not satisfied with the progress and find any need to intervene, we would 
do so. Similarly I have already mentioned about the FSDC Sub-Group and the Technical Group 
in which representatives of all financial sector regulators participate. In addition to Reserve 
Bank of India, SEBI is there, IRDA is there, PFRDA is there, so it’s a combined effort of various 
regulators, in the area of financial literacy. Then there is BCSBI, which is a voluntary body. All 
the banks have committed to abide by the codes prepared by BCSBI including one for MSME 
clients. I see that one of the panel discussions is focused on MSME, so I would not go into the 
details.  Then  there  is  RBI’s  Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme  where  customers  can  seek 
grievance redressal. Very recently we have also issued guidelines for each bank to appoint 
their own internal Ombudsman or basically what is called as the Customer Service or Customer 
Complaint Resolution Officer. Banks have practically in every district set up Financial Literacy 
and  Credit  Counseling  Centres  which  is  another  initiative  to  address  the  supply  side.  RBI 
website has material on financial literacy which is available in thirteen languages. In addition 
Reserve Bank has prepared some short films, cartoon literature, sixteen posters, which are 
aimed  towards  spreading financial  literacy  to  the  target  group.  And finally  very  soon  more 
players would be coming in the banking sector. There would be new entities in the form of 
small finance banks and payment banks. Also on the payment system side some players have 
been allowed to issue the pre-paid cards up to a certain extent. So these all are creating more 
enablers in the supply side. 
What are the challenges? 
17. Challenges exist on the demand side. There are certain barriers to demand side and they 
are important. Important because the customers who are financially literate would demand 
information and thereby play an important role in ensuring transparency among the financial 
institutions. The transparency in the market encourages institutions to compete on the basis 
of better products and services and at lower cost. That is what the informed customers bring 
into the market and ultimately it is beneficial because it expands the market and brings more 
and more new customers. 
Demand side barriers 
• 
What  are  these  demand  side  barriers?  The  first  demand  side  barrier  is  more  on 
personal level. A large number of people who have come into the financial system 
now  have  low  or  uncertain  incomes.  For  them,  any  high  fee  or  a  stipulation  like 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       
maintaining a minimum balance in the account it can become a barrier. This is what I 
call a personal barrier. 
The second is, of course, the low level of financial literacy. If they don’t have that level 
of literacy, then they would not know about the availability, neither can they judge the 
products’  suitability  nor  can  they  compare  various  products.  When  that  does  not 
happen for the new entrants to the financial system, it creates a trust deficiency. It 
does not break that hesitation to use the banking services. That is the second barrier. 
The third barrier is low social and technological inclusion. What is social inclusion? I 
did mention in the early part of my address about the rapid migration of people from 
rural  to  urban  area.  The  migratory  population  coming  into  the  towns  or  cities  find 
themselves  displaced  from  their  roots.  They  don’t  have  their  ecosystem  in  place, 
whereby something like obtaining an address proof or a simple introduction becomes 
a challenge. So, these are the social inclusion challenges. 
Similarly  on  technological  side,  the  hesitation  to  use  ATMs,  mobile  banking,  net 
banking etc. These are the kind of things which act as a technological barrier. I have 
seen in the programme schedule there is a session on this also. This should become 
an important part of the financial literacy drive that we are talking about. 
And finally the fourth barrier – the linguistic barrier. India is a diverse country. There 
are so many dialects, so many languages and until and unless players deal with the 
consumers in respective area in the local language; unless the literature, the material 
is  made  available  in  the  local  language,  the  efforts  towards  connecting  these 
consumers would never succeed. 
18. Effectively, we have so much of supply side infrastructure available and at the same time 
we do have these demand side barriers. So the challenge before us is how to break the barriers 
on the demand side and make effective utilization of infrastructure which is created. I think that 
conferences and seminars like this would serve a great purpose if these specific areas can be 
focused upon and a definitive strategy and specific action points be worked out for each area, 
each kind of illiteracy and each target group. The problem universally is that there is no dearth 
of policy. We have the best literature available which tell you what to do. You have consultants 
available who would also tell you what to do; you will also derive many conclusions from the 
conference and maybe list out dozens of what to do. The challenge is how to do it. So along 
with  each  what  to  do,  if  we  can  also  outline  how  to  do  it,  then  only  the  purpose  of  such 
conferences would be served. 
19. This becomes important win-win for both – for the consumer as well as the providers. If the 
consumers  get  service  suitably,  they  develop  the  confidence  and  subsequently  the 
requirement and the demand for this kind of product enhances. Consumers prosper and if they 
prosper they provide more business to the providers – it becomes a virtuous cycle. And then 
the industry and the service providers can reasonably expect to enhance their profitability and 
earnings by fair and transparent measures, rather than chasing profitability through all kinds 
of dubious means. Globally we have seen imprudent institutions getting into the mess and then 
requiring government bail outs. The regulators are forced to work hard to clear the left debris, 
when these unscrupulous players exit the scene. 
20. Before I conclude I would like to mention that just the other day I came across a paper 
titled “National Strategy for Financial Literacy-Count me in, Canada.” I found it to be quite a 
focused paper. The paper sets out goals and priorities to help Canadians better manage their 
finances and make appropriate decisions as their needs and circumstances change. It also 
calls on organizations to join efforts to help Canadians take action and make financial literacy 
a life-long journey. The strategy has clearly articulated three goals for the citizens: 
• 
• 
manage money and debt wisely 
plan and save for the future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   prevent and protect against fraud and financial abuse 
• 
21.  The  paper  also  details  three  priorities  for  achieving  concrete  actions  and  effective 
implementation of the strategy for achievement of the above policy goals: 
• 
collaborating  and  sharing  between  governments,  educators,  financial  service 
providers, employers and non-profit organizations, as well as individuals and families. 
tailoring programs and applying plain language principles 
reaching and engaging each and every Canadian 
• 
• 
22. Applying Plain language principle is absolutely important. I was also hinting at this earlier 
when I mentioned that our communication should be in a language and through a media which 
is understood by the receiver, otherwise it will not serve the purpose. 
23. So, the Canadian National Strategy for Financial Literacy lists out three goals, sets out 
three priorities for achieving concrete action and also makes a pitch for measuring the success 
periodically through a range of evaluation tools supported by research. Overall, the document 
is  very  focused  and  I  wish  if  we  could  come  out  with  a  blue  print  of  this  kind  after  the 
deliberations at this conference, which can serve as a national reference paper, that would be 
quite an achievement. I understand this cannot be the final word as several initiatives are being 
taken in this direction simultaneously. But this paper can certainly help in raising a healthy 
debate and ultimately help in further fine-tuning the approach for promoting financial literacy in 
the country. 
With that, I wish this conference all the success. 
Thank you very much! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
