  Klaas Knot: How Capital Markets Union can bolster Monetary Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank,  at  the  47th  International 
Capital Markets Association meeting and conference, Amsterdam, 4 June 2015. 
 Mr. Chairman,  
Your  Excellency  Minister  of  Finance,  Jeroen  Dijsselbloem,  Commissionner  Lord  Hill, 
Esteemed ICMA-members and conference participants, 
1. Thank you for this opportunity to share my views on the European Capital Markets Union. 
First, let me express my full support for the views expressed by his Excellency, the Minister 
of Finance. I, too, very much welcome the initiatives by the Commission geared at the further 
development  and  integration  of  European  capital  markets.  I  am  confident  that  through  the 
harmonization of regulation and the introduction of common standards we’ll be able to unlock 
important  new  ways  of  finance;  productive  ways  that  will  increase  the  resilience  of  the 
European economy, going beyond the traditional financing channels of banking. 
2.  It  is  true  that  in  the  euro  area,  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  are  still  very  much 
dependent on financing by banks. This implies that business investment in the euro area also 
depends  on the  availability  of  bank  credit.  And this  creates  vulnerabilities  to  the  European 
economy. For example, when banks need to deleverage in order to strengthen their balance 
sheets. 
3. The European bank-based financial system is often contrasted to the situation in the US, 
which is presumed to be more market-based. I should note that this difference is a bit more 
nuanced  than  is  commonly  acknowledged.  For  in  the  US  as  well,  SMEs  are  similarly 
dependent on bank financing, in particular the smallest of firms. To the extent that smaller 
firms  do  access  capital  markets,  this  is  mostly  confined  to  specific  sectors.  A  well-known 
example is the Silicon Valley industry, start-up tech-companies that are able to attract large 
sums of financing from venture-capitalists. 
4. This refinement notwithstanding, in general it has been shown that well-developed access 
to market financing can complement bank financing. And economic research confirms that 
this  can  improve  economic  performance.  The  Minister  has  eloquently  explained  how  this 
would  apply  specifically  to  the  European  economy  and  set  out  how  the  Capital  Markets 
Union relates to the recently established European Banking Union. In my address, I want to 
focus on yet another perspective. I will give you my views on why the completion of a true 
European Capital Markets Union is beneficial from a monetary policy perspective, for there 
are several reasons why better developed and integrated capital markets can make the lives 
of European central bankers much simpler. 
5. As you know, the Governing Council of the European Central Bank aims to maintain price 
stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  To  achieve  this,  the  ECB  conducts  monetary  policy. 
Based on the outlook for inflation, we set our policy rates to steer overall financing conditions 
for  households  and  firms  in  the  euro  area.  A  homogeneous  transmission  of  our  monetary 
policy decisions throughout the financial system enhances the appropriateness of our policy 
decisions. For the euro area as a whole, and for the participating Member States. That is why 
monetary policy benefits from a level-playing field in financial markets across countries. 
6.  Note  that  I  do  not  intend  to  suggest  that  all  economic  agents  should  be  able  to  lend 
against the exact same conditions. Actual financing conditions for individual households and 
firms  are  to  be  determined  by  the  market  and  not  by  the  ECB.  And  these  should 
appropriately reflect differences in earnings capacity and risk. 
7.  This  is  exactly  what  went  wrong  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis.  Lending  rates  converged 
throughout the euro area, and no longer reflected actual underlying risks. Several potential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  explanations have been put forward for this. One reason often mentioned is the search-for-
yield as a consequence of the low interest-rate environment. Or the fact that the no-bail out 
clause in the EU Treaty was perceived as not credible. Yet another explanation is that gaps 
in banking regulation were the primary cause of the mispricing of risks in the run-up to the 
crisis. In my view, all three explanations have been relevant. In fact, these factors are likely 
to have reinforced each other. 
8.  In  a  similar  way,  I  believe  that  a  lack  of  harmonization  in  regulation  and  common 
standards  in  euro  area  capital  markets  can  also  be  viewed  as  an  aggravating  factor.  For 
heterogeneity  and  inconsistencies  in  regulation  can  obscure  how  losses  will  be  distributed 
once  financial  risks  materialize.  And  this  can  exacerbate  the  mispricing  of  risk  in  financial 
markets. 
9. I think this is a key issue that the Commission agenda on Capital Markets Union should 
address.  In  my  view,  one  of  the  obstacles  to  be  tackled  is  the  lack  of  harmonization  in 
insolvency  laws  across  countries.  Unfortunately,  in  the  Commission’s  early  proposals 
initiatives to that effect do not feature very prominently. Yet, I nevertheless believe it could be 
an effective way for Capital Markets Union to contribute to consistent pricing of risk across 
countries.  For  it  will  help  ensure  a  homogeneous,  but  risk-consistent  transmission  of 
monetary policy decisions. 
10. But Capital Markets Union can deliver on more than just that. It can also greatly increase 
the  efficacy  of  monetary  policy.  Common  to  all  monetary  policy  decisions  is  that  their 
transmission  to  the  real  economy  is  sluggish  and  can  sometimes  be  incomplete.  For 
example,  the  extent  to  which  banks  are  able  to  lower  lending  rates  following  a  rate  cut 
depends on many factors beyond the control of monetary policymakers. One can think of the 
level of competition in the banking sector, or the health of bank balance sheets. A successful 
Capital Markets Union will open up entirely new channels for the transmission of monetary 
policy to the real economy, making central bankers much less dependent on a single sector 
for  the  transmission  of  its  policy  decisions.  In  that  sense,  central  banks  can  diversify  the 
channels through which they can influence the economy, adding to its effectiveness. 
11. Note that economic agents can benefit from Capital Markets Union in a very similar way. 
Households and firms can diversify their dependency on financing, if alternative sources of 
finance  are  in  abundance,  making  themselves  less  vulnerable  to  risks  stemming  from  a 
single  sector.  A  well-diversified  financial  structure  increases  the  resilience  of  the  balance 
sheets of households and corporations to shocks. And the resilience of the economy as a 
whole. And when an economy is better able to cope with external shocks, monetary policy 
will not get distracted from pursuing its primary remit: delivering price stability. 
12.  The  latter  is  even  more  relevant  for  monetary  policy  in  a  monetary  union.  Structural 
differences  between  national  economies  imply  that  the  euro  area  economy  is  prone  to 
asymmetric  shocks.  Private  sector  risk-sharing  across  countries  can  greatly  enhance  a 
smooth transmission of such shocks. This is what Capital Markets Union can accomplish, for 
an  increase  in  the  cross-border  holdings  of  financial  instruments  will  enhance  risk-sharing 
across the euro area, thus improving the functioning of the monetary union. 
13.  However,  Capital  Markets  Union  is  no  silver  bullet.  Clearly,  its  introduction  does  not 
absolve  us  from  pursuing  prudent  policies  in  other  policy  areas,  too.  Moreover,  it  will  take 
time before we can reap the full benefits of Capital Markets Union. But there can be no doubt 
that it will prove an important complement to Banking Union in enhancing the functioning of 
our monetary union. 
14. At the same time, Capital  Markets Union will also bring new challenges and risks. For 
example, as a result of the shift in the relative importance of the transmission channels of 
monetary policy. Interest-rate decisions may transmit to the real economy differently through 
markets than they do through the banking sector. This calls for careful analysis. And possibly 
a reassessment of the effectiveness of our monetary policy instruments. These instruments 
are 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  currently primarily geared at the banking sector. However, to be able to influence financing 
conditions beyond the banking sector we may need to introduce new instruments. 
15. Another possible consequence is that risks may shift to the shadow banking sector. A 
sector that is currently less transparent and less regulated than the traditional banking sector. 
It is yet unclear what could be the financial stability implications if such a development were 
to occur. In any case, it would warrant enhanced monitoring of developments in the sector. 
One could even argue that a more formalized supervisory framework should be put in place. 
Finally,  it  could  be  conceivable  that  macro-prudential  policy  measures  would  have  to  be 
applied beyond the banking sector. 
16. As for the potential risks associated with developing capital markets, let me highlight one 
more  issue.  Some  might  worry  that  by  developing  financial  markets  we  will  again  see  the 
introduction of complex financial instruments. The type of obscure instruments that according 
to many were the root cause of the global financial crisis. Here, I would like to reiterate firmly 
that this is clearly not what I envisage. Rather, the goal of Capital Markets Union is to create 
a level-playing field by  introducing simple standards that improve transparency. Only then, 
can  Capital  Markets  Union  foster  financing  flows  that  support  economic  growth  in  a 
sustainable way. 
Dear participants, let me wrap up my address. 
17. I presented to you a central banker’s view on Capital Markets Union, and why I think this 
a very important initiative. Today, the discussion on Capital Markets Union is still at an early 
stage.  The  agenda  is  being  set  as-we-speak.  Having  an  exchange  of  views  on  such  an 
important  topic  with  esteemed  members  of  the  capital  markets  community  could  not  have 
come at a better time. Therefore, I very much look forward to the discussions later today. I’m 
confident that this conference will yield many interesting insights. New ideas that will bring us 
closer to completing this important pillar of our Economic and Monetary Union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
