  Mario Draghi: Stability and prosperity in Monetary Union 
Opinion  piece  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  Project 
Syndicate, 2 January 2015. 
 There is a common misconception that the euro area is a monetary union without a political 
union. But this reflects a deep misunderstanding of what monetary union means. Monetary 
union  is  possible  only  because  of  the  substantial  integration  already  achieved  among 
European Union countries – and sharing a single currency deepens that integration. 
If European monetary union has proved more resilient than many thought, it is only because 
those who doubted it misjudged this political dimension. They underestimated the ties among 
its members, how much they had collectively invested, and their willingness to come together 
to solve common problems when it mattered most. 
Yet it is also clear that our monetary union is still incomplete. This was the diagnosis offered 
two years ago by the so-called “Four Presidents” (the European council president in close 
collaboration with the presidents of the European Commission, the European Central Bank, 
and  the  Eurogroup).  And,  though  important  progress  has  been  made  in  some  areas, 
unfinished business remains in others. 
But  what  does  it  mean  to  “complete”  a  monetary  union?  Most  important,  it  means  having 
conditions in place that make countries more stable and prosperous than they would be if 
they were not members. They have to be better off inside than they would be outside. 
In other political unions, cohesion is maintained through a strong common identity, but often 
also  through  permanent  fiscal  transfers  between  richer  and  poorer  regions  that  even  out 
incomes  ex  post.  In  the  euro  area,  such  one-way  transfers  between  countries  are  not 
foreseen (transfers do exist as part of the EU’s cohesion policy, but are limited in size and 
are  primarily  designed  to  support  the  “catching-up”  process  in  lower  income  countries  or 
regions).  This  means  that  we  need  a  different  approach  to  ensure  that  each  country  is 
permanently better off inside the euro area. 
This implies two main things. First, we have to create the conditions for all countries to thrive 
independently.  All  members  need  to  be  able  to  exploit  comparative  advantages  within  the 
Single Market, attract capital, and generate jobs. And they need to have enough flexibility to 
respond  quickly  to  short-term  shocks.  This  comes  down  to  structural  reforms  that  spur 
competition, reduce unnecessary red tape, and make labor markets more adaptable. 
Until now, whether or not to carry out such reforms has largely been a national prerogative. 
But in a union such as ours they are a clear common interest. Euro area countries depend on 
one  another  for  growth.  And,  more  fundamentally,  if  a  lack  of  structural  reforms  leads  to 
permanent divergence within the monetary union, this raises the specter of exit – from which 
all members ultimately suffer. 
In the euro area, stability and prosperity anywhere depend on countries thriving everywhere. 
So there is a strong case for sharing more sovereignty in this area – for building a genuine 
economic union. This means more than beefing up existing procedures. It means governing 
together:  shifting  from  coordination  to  common  decision-making,  and  from  rules  to 
institutions. 
The  second  implication  of  the  absence  of  fiscal  transfers  is  that  countries  need  to  invest 
more in other mechanisms to share the cost of shocks. Even with more flexible economies, 
internal  adjustment  will  always  be  slower  than  it  would  be  if  countries  had  their  own 
exchange rate. Risk-sharing is thus essential to prevent recessions from leaving permanent 
scars and reinforcing economic divergence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A key part of the solution is to improve private risk-sharing by deepening financial integration. 
Indeed,  the  less  public  risk-sharing  we  want,  the  more  private  risk-sharing  we  need.  A 
banking union for the euro area should be catalytic in encouraging deeper integration of the 
banking  sector.  But  risk-sharing  is  also  about  deepening  capital  markets,  especially  for 
equity, which is why we also need to advance quickly with a capital markets union. 
Still, we have to acknowledge the vital role of fiscal policies in a monetary union. A single 
monetary policy focused on price stability in the euro area cannot react to shocks that affect 
only  one  country  or  region.  So,  to  avoid  prolonged  local  slumps,  it  is  critical  that  national 
fiscal policies can perform their stabilization role. 
To  allow  national  fiscal  stabilizers  to  work,  governments  must  be  able  to  borrow  at  an 
affordable  cost  in  times  of  economic  stress.  A  strong  fiscal  framework  is  indispensable  to 
achieve this, and protects countries from contagion. But the crisis experience suggests that, 
in  times  of  extreme  market  tensions,  even  a  sound  initial  fiscal  position  may  not  offer 
absolute protection from spillovers. 
This is a further reason why we need economic union: markets would be less likely to react 
negatively  to  temporarily  higher  deficits  if  they  were  more  confident  in  future  growth 
prospects.  By  committing  governments  to  structural  reforms,  economic  union  provides  the 
credibility that countries can indeed grow out of debt. 
Ultimately,  economic  convergence  among  countries  cannot  be  only  an  entry  criterion  for 
monetary union, or a condition that is met some of the time. It has to be a condition that is 
fulfilled  all  of  the  time.  And  for  this  reason,  to  complete  monetary  union  we  will  ultimately 
have to deepen our political union further: to lay down its rights and obligations in a renewed 
institutional order. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
