  Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 15 July 2015. 
 Chairman  Hensarling,  Ranking  Member  Waters,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  am 
pleased  to  present  the  Federal  Reserve’s  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the 
Congress.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and  outlook 
before turning to monetary policy. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
Since  my  appearance  before  this  Committee  in  February,  the  economy  has  made  further 
progress  toward  the  Federal  Reserve’s  objective  of  maximum  employment,  while  inflation 
has  continued  to  run  below  the  level  that  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC) 
judges  to  be  most  consistent  over  the  longer  run  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  statutory 
mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. 
In the labor market, the unemployment rate now stands at 5.3 percent, slightly below its level 
at the end of last year and down more than 4–1/2 percentage points from its 10 percent peak 
in  late  2009.  Meanwhile,  monthly  gains  in  nonfarm  payroll  employment  averaged  about 
210,000 over the first half of this year, somewhat less than the robust 260,000 average seen 
in 2014 but still sufficient to bring the total increase in employment since its trough to more 
than  12  million  jobs.  Other  measures  of  job  market  health  are  also  trending  in  the  right 
direction, with noticeable declines over the past year in the number of people suffering long-
term  unemployment  and  in  the  numbers  working  part  time  who  would  prefer  full-time 
employment. However, these measures – as well as the unemployment rate – continue to 
indicate that there is still some slack in labor markets. For example, too many people are not 
searching for  a job  but would  likely  do  so  if  the  labor  market  was  stronger.  And,  although 
there  are  tentative  signs  that  wage  growth  has  picked  up,  it  continues  to  be  relatively 
subdued, consistent with other indications of slack. Thus, while labor market conditions have 
improved substantially, they are, in the FOMC’s judgment, not yet consistent with maximum 
employment. 
Even as the labor market was improving, domestic spending and production softened notably 
during the first half of this year. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is now estimated to have 
been little changed in the first quarter after having risen at an average annual rate of 3–1/2 
percent  over  the  second  half  of  last  year,  and  industrial  production  has  declined  a  bit,  on 
balance, since the turn of the year. While these developments bear watching, some of this 
sluggishness seems to be the result of transitory factors, including unusually severe winter 
weather,  labor  disruptions  at  West  Coast  ports,  and  statistical  noise.  The  available  data 
suggest a moderate pace of GDP growth in the second quarter as these influences dissipate. 
Notably, consumer spending has picked up, and sales of motor vehicles in  May and June 
were  strong,  suggesting  that  many  households  have  both  the  wherewithal  and  the 
confidence to purchase big-ticket items. In addition, homebuilding has picked up somewhat 
lately,  although  the  demand  for  housing  is  still  being  restrained  by  limited  availability  of 
mortgage loans to many potential homebuyers. Business investment has been soft this year, 
partly  reflecting  the  plunge  in  oil  drilling.  And  net  exports  are  being  held  down  by  weak 
economic growth in several of our major trading partners and the appreciation of the dollar. 
Looking forward,  prospects  are favorable  for further  improvement  in  the U.S.  labor  market 
and  the  economy  more  broadly.  Low  oil  prices  and  ongoing  employment  gains  should 
continue  to  bolster  consumer  spending, financial  conditions  generally  remain  supportive  of 
growth, and the highly accommodative monetary policies abroad should work to strengthen 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  global growth. In addition, some of the headwinds restraining economic growth, including the 
effects  of  dollar  appreciation  on  net  exports  and  the  effect  of  lower  oil  prices  on  capital 
spending,  should  diminish  over  time.  As  a  result,  the  FOMC  expects  U.S.  GDP  growth  to 
strengthen over the remainder of this year and the unemployment rate to decline gradually. 
As  always,  however,  there  are  some  uncertainties  in  the  economic  outlook.  Foreign 
developments,  in  particular,  pose  some  risks  to  U.S.  growth.  Most  notably,  although  the 
recovery in the euro area appears to have gained a firmer footing, the situation in Greece 
remains  difficult.  And  China  continues  to  grapple  with  the  challenges  posed  by  high  debt, 
weak property markets, and volatile financial conditions. But economic growth abroad could 
also pick up more quickly than observers generally anticipate, providing additional support for 
U.S.  economic  activity.  The  U.S.  economy  also  might  snap  back  more  quickly  as  the 
transitory influences holding down first-half growth fade and the boost to consumer spending 
from low oil prices shows through more definitively. 
As I noted earlier, inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, with 
the  personal  consumption  expenditures  (PCE)  price  index  up  only  1/4  percent  over  the 
12 months ending in May and the core index, which excludes the volatile food and energy 
components, up only 1-1/4 percent over the same period. To a significant extent, the recent 
low  readings  on  total  PCE  inflation  reflect  influences  that  are  likely  to  be  transitory, 
particularly the earlier steep declines in oil prices and in the prices of non-energy imported 
goods. Indeed, energy prices appear to have stabilized recently. 
Although monthly inflation readings have firmed lately, the 12-month change in the PCE price 
index  is  likely  to  remain  near  its  recent  low  level  in  the  near  term.  My  colleagues  and  I 
continue to expect that as the effects of these transitory factors dissipate and as the labor 
market  improves  further,  inflation  will  move  gradually  back  toward  our  2  percent  objective 
over  the  medium  term.  Market-based  measures  of  inflation  compensation  remain  low  – 
although  they  have  risen  some  from  their  levels  earlier  this  year  –  and  survey-based 
measures  of  longer-term  inflation  expectations  have  remained  stable.  The  Committee  will 
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. 
Monetary policy 
Regarding  monetary  policy,  the  FOMC  conducts  policy  to  promote  maximum  employment 
and  price  stability,  as  required  by  our  statutory  mandate  from  the  Congress.  Given  the 
economic  situation  that  I  just  described,  the  Committee  has  judged  that  a  high  degree  of 
monetary policy accommodation remains appropriate. Consistent with that assessment, we 
have continued to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent and 
have kept the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their current elevated 
level to help maintain accommodative financial conditions. 
In its most recent statement, the FOMC again noted that it judged it would be appropriate to 
raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the 
labor  market  and  is  reasonably  confident  that  inflation  will  move  back  to  its  2  percent 
objective  over  the  medium  term.  The  Committee  will  determine  the  timing  of  the  initial 
increase  in  the  federal  funds  rate  on  a  meeting-by-meeting  basis,  depending  on  its 
assessment  of  realized  and  expected  progress  toward  its  objectives  of  maximum 
employment  and  2  percent  inflation.  If  the  economy  evolves  as  we  expect,  economic 
conditions likely would make it appropriate at some point this year to raise the federal funds 
rate  target,  thereby  beginning  to  normalize  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Indeed,  most 
participants in June projected that an increase in the federal funds target range would likely 
become appropriate before year-end. But let me emphasize again that these are projections 
based on the anticipated path of the economy, not statements of intent to raise rates at any 
particular time. 
A decision by the Committee to raise its target range for the federal funds rate will signal how 
much progress the economy has made in healing from the trauma of the financial crisis. That 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  said,  the  importance  of  the  initial  step  to  raise  the  federal  funds  rate  target  should  not  be 
overemphasized. What matters for financial conditions and the broader economy is the entire 
expected path of interest rates, not any particular move, including the initial increase, in the 
federal  funds  rate.  Indeed,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  will  likely  remain  highly 
accommodative for quite some time after the first increase in the federal funds rate in order 
to support continued progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent 
inflation.  In  the  projections  prepared  for  our  June  meeting,  most  FOMC  participants 
anticipated  that  economic  conditions  would  evolve  over  time  in  a  way  that  will  warrant 
gradual  increases  in  the  federal funds  rate  as  the  headwinds  that  still  restrain  real  activity 
continue  to  diminish  and  inflation  rises.  Of  course,  if  the  expansion  proves  to  be  more 
vigorous  than  currently  anticipated  and  inflation  moves  higher  than  expected,  then  the 
appropriate path would likely follow a higher and steeper trajectory; conversely, if conditions 
were  to  prove  weaker, then  the  appropriate trajectory  would  be  lower  and  less  steep than 
currently projected. As always, we will regularly reassess what level of the federal funds rate 
is consistent with achieving and maintaining the Committee’s dual mandate. 
I  would  also  like  to  note  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  continued  to  refine  its  operational 
plans pertaining to the deployment of our various policy tools when the Committee judges it 
appropriate  to  begin  normalizing  the  stance  of  policy.  Last  fall,  the  Committee  issued  a 
detailed  statement  concerning  its  plans  for  policy  normalization  and,  over  the  past  few 
months,  we  have  announced  a  number  of  additional  details  regarding  the  approach  the 
Committee intends to use when it decides to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. 
Federal reserve transparency and accountability 
These statements pertaining to policy normalization constitute recent examples of the many 
steps the Federal Reserve has taken over the years to improve our public communications 
concerning monetary policy. As this Committee well knows, the Board has for many years 
delivered an extensive report on monetary policy and economic developments at semiannual 
hearings such as this one. And the FOMC has long announced its monetary policy decisions 
by issuing statements shortly after its meetings, followed by minutes of its meetings with a 
full account of policy discussions and, with an appropriate lag, complete meeting transcripts. 
Innovations  in  recent  years  have  included  quarterly  press  conferences  and  the  quarterly 
release of FOMC participants’ projections for economic growth, unemployment, inflation, and 
the  appropriate  path  for  the  Committee’s  interest  rate  target.  In  addition,  the  Committee 
adopted a statement in 2012 concerning its longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy 
that  included  a  specific  2  percent  longer-run  objective  for  inflation  and  a  commitment  to 
follow a balanced approach in pursuing our mandated goals. 
Transparency  concerning  the  Federal  Reserve’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  desirable 
because better public understanding enhances the effectiveness of policy. More important, 
however,  is  that  transparent  communications  reflect  the  Federal  Reserve’s  commitment  to 
accountability  within  our  democratic  system  of  government.  Our  various  communications 
tools  are  important  means  of  implementing  monetary  policy  and  have  many  technical 
elements. Each step forward in our communications practices has been taken with the goal 
of enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy and avoiding unintended consequences. 
Effective  communication  is  also  crucial  to  ensuring  that  the  Federal  Reserve  remains 
accountable,  but  measures  that  affect  the  ability  of  policymakers  to  make  decisions  about 
monetary policy free of short-term political pressure, in the name of transparency, should be 
avoided. 
The  Federal  Reserve  ranks  among  the  most  transparent  central  banks.  We  publish  a 
summary of our balance sheet every week. Our financial statements are audited annually by 
an outside auditor and made public. Every security we hold  is listed on the website of the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  And,  in  conformance  with  the  Dodd-Frank  Act, 
transaction-level  data  on  all  of  our  lending  –  including  the  identity  of  borrowers  and  the 
amounts  borrowed  –  are  published  with  a  two-year  lag.  Efforts  to  further  increase 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  transparency,  no  matter  how  well  intentioned,  must  avoid  unintended  consequences  that 
could undermine the Federal Reserve’s ability to make policy in the long-run best interest of 
American families and businesses. 
Summary 
In  sum,  since  the  February  2015  Monetary  Policy  Report,  we  have  seen,  despite  the  soft 
patch in economic activity in the first quarter, that the labor market has continued to show 
progress toward our objective of maximum employment. Inflation has continued to run below 
our  longer-run  objective,  but  we  believe  transitory  factors  have  played  a  major  role.  We 
continue to anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds 
rate  when  the  Committee  has  seen  further  improvement  in  the  labor  market  and  is 
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium 
term.  As  always,  the  Federal  Reserve  remains  committed  to  employing  its  tools  to  best 
promote the attainment of its dual mandate. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
