  Jacqueline Loh: Technology and innovation as the next phase of growth 
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore, at the Opening of Metlife LumenLab, Singapore, 16 July 2015. 
 Mr Blair Hall, Deputy Chief of Mission of US Embassy of Singapore 
Her Excellency, Ms Heather Grant, High Commissioner at the High Commission of Canada 
Mr Chris Townsend 
Mr Zia Zaman 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very pleased to join you this afternoon at this wonderful location for the official opening 
of MetLife’s LumenLab. 
MetLife and LumenLab 
Lumenlab represents a significant milestone for MetLife and Singapore. As MetLife’s first and 
only global innovation centre established in Singapore, LumenLab will shine the light forward 
on innovative and impactful solutions in health, wealth and longevity that are developed in 
Asia, for Asia, and for the rest of the world. 
insurance  sector 
is  no  exception.  Specifically,  new 
Technology and innovation trends in the global insurance industry 
Technology and innovation is fundamentally changing the game for many industry verticals. 
The 
innovation  and  disruptive 
technologies  are  expected  to  transform  the  insurance  industry  in  three  areas:  Distribution, 
Data Analytics, and Dynamic Products. 
Firstly,  distribution.  Today,  the  agent-broker  paradigm  is  being  challenged  by  the  digital 
consumer, who is empowered by technology to conduct research and purchase directly from 
the  product  provider  online.  Here  in  Singapore,  MAS  started  this  journey  ourselves  with 
CompareFirst,  which  allows  consumers  to  compare  and  purchase  simple  life  insurance 
products  over  the  internet.  But,  more  than  this,  the  digital  consumer also  demands  choice 
and personalisation, transacts with a swipe of their fingers at any time of the day 24/7, and 
judges products based on peer reviews. Digital consumers are set to grow in significance, 
especially in Asia. In China, the online insurance market doubled in 2014 to US$14 billion, 
representing over 4% of total insurance premiums.1 The Boston Consulting Group estimates 
that the online insurance market in India will grow by more than 20 times to hit US$2.4 billion 
by 2020.2 
Second, data analytics. Advancements in technology have allowed insurers to unlock new 
data and greatly improve their ability to assess and price risks. Motor insurance is a case-in-
point. In the past, insurers have traditionally relied on historical accidents and claims data to 
establish  premiums  and  policy  conditions.  Today,  telematics3  technology  has  allowed 
insurers  to  use  real-time  data  to  differentiate  between  drivers’  behaviours  and  better  price 
risks.  However,  even  as  we  shift  from  using  historical  data  to  using  real-time  data  today, 
                                                 
1   China: Regulator says online insurance mart lacks variety, Asia Insurance Review eDaily (2015). 
2  
3   Telematics is the technology integrated with computers and mobile communications technology in automotive 
Insurance @ Digital-20x by 2020, The Boston Consulting Group (2014). 
navigation systems, which allows efficient real-time transmission of information over networks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
driverless  vehicles  are  already  under  trial  in  Singapore4  and  elsewhere,  with  the  help  of 
environmental  sensors  and  navigation  systems.  This  implies  that  in  the  future,  behaviour 
may no longer be sufficient indicators of risk, and motor insurance may well shift to become 
liability insurance bought by car manufacturers. 
Third, dynamic products. The global insurance industry today, has shrunk in terms of its 
percentage of global economic activity insured; some estimates put the figure at as little as 
10%  of  global  corporate  risks  covered  by  insurance.  Clearly,  risks  landscapes  are  rapidly 
changing and insurers must look beyond traditional products, and innovate to address new 
and  emerging  risks.  Yet,  innovation  eschews  the  traditional,  and  thus  one  of  the  most 
significant challenges of established insurers in this area comes from small challengers with 
big  ideas:  start-ups.  Start-ups  are  nimble,  hungry,  and  more  often  than  not,  represent  the 
very consumers they seek to solve problems for. In the insurance space, these players are 
moving  to  directly  address  the  consumer’s  problem,  which  at  its  core,  is  one  of  managing 
risk, and not simply monetary coverage. We already see this happening in health insurance, 
where  start-up  insurers  are  creating  new  tools  such  as  doctor  and  drug  research,  fitness 
tracking, and telemedicine5 tools6 that can interface with each other. In return, policyholders 
are rewarded with an effective, convenient and holistic healthcare package alongside their 
health insurance policy. 
Seizing opportunities using technology and innovation 
With  the  digital  revolution  rapidly  underway,  insurers  must  adapt  quickly  to  transform  their 
mind-sets  and  business  models.  More  often  than  not,  established  players  run  the  risks  of 
being too focused inwards, on issues such as process efficiency, scalability; and miss such 
opportunities that start-ups can quickly exploit. The challenge now is for the incumbents to 
show  that  they  are  fully  capable  of  developing  solutions  to  meet  the  needs  of  tomorrow’s 
consumers.  They  need  to  do  this  by  looking  both  inwards  and  outwards,  and  seize  new 
opportunities using technology and innovation. 
(Inwards) Insurers must look inwards to transform themselves, to embrace innovation at all 
levels, and create an environment where staff are empowered to be like start-ups: nimble, 
flexible, and creative. This is necessary to allow incumbents to compete on an equal footing 
with  new  challengers  who  are  not  bogged  down  by  pre-conceived  notions.  Moreover,  the 
very  notion  of  an  innovation  lab  signifies  the  value  of  experimentation.  It  should  be 
recognised  that  every  success  will  likely  be  accompanied  by  several  failures,  and  lessons 
learnt  from  failed  projects  must  contribute  to  a  blueprint  that  ultimately  diagrams  how 
success will look like. 
(Outwards) Insurers must also look outwards to seek collaboration. Collaboration will be the 
crux  to  unlock  new  and  non-traditional  sources  of  talent  and  partnership  outside  of  the 
financial  sector.  Through  collaboration,  insurers  can  gain  access  to  potentially  disruptive 
ideas  and  new  technologies.  Meanwhile,  start-ups  gain  access  to  the  scale  of  established 
players  to  accelerate  the  development  of  solutions  and  test  them  in  a  commercial 
environment.  I  understand  LumenLab  already  has  an  existing  relationship  with  NUS,  and 
aims  to  seek  more  partnerships  across  industry  sectors  such  as  data  analytics,  market 
research, pharmaceutical, and technology, to explore new business opportunities. LumenLab 
is a prime example of how a large enterprise can create an environment like this within its 
                                                 
4   The LTA and A*STAR has been working on the Singapore Autonomous Vehicle Initiative (SAVI) since August 
2014, and has successfully rolled out Autonomous Vehicle (AV) trials in One-North in March 2015. 
5   Telemedicine is the use of telecommunications and IT to provide remote clinical healthcare. 
6   Oscar Health is a New York-based start-up that provides policy holders with telemedicine tools, enables drug 
and doctor searches, price comparison for healthcare services, and rewards policy holders for hitting activity 
goals. Obamacare start-up Oscar Health hits a $1.5 billion valuation, Forbes (2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
structure,  to  foster  a  culture  of  innovation  and  entrepreneurship,  and  partner  with 
organisations across industry sectors and academia in Singapore to identify opportunities for 
innovation and growth. 
Singapore as a smart financial centre 
Singapore,  too,  needs  to  position  ourselves  for  this  new  future.  We  had  set  our  vision  to 
become a Smart Nation that harnesses technology to discover breakthrough solutions in the 
areas of ageing, mobility and transportation, and importantly, develop a safe and secure data 
marketplace.7 Likewise, MAS seeks to create a Smart Financial Centre, where technology is 
used pervasively in the financial industry to increase efficiency, create opportunities, allow for 
better management of risks, and improve lives. 
To that end, the MAS will pursue a holistic developmental path that is underpinned by smart 
regulatory  and  developmental  policies  that  are  conducive  to  innovation.  A  balanced 
regulatory  approach  must  encourage  financial  institutions  to  thrive  on  innovation,  yet  keep 
risks in check, to maintain the safety and stability of our financial system. 
Our  development  strategy  will  entail  close  partnership  between  MAS  and  industry,  to 
promote a culture of innovation in our financial sector. We have embarked on a number of 
key  initiatives  to  develop  new  capabilities,  infrastructure  and  talent  in  technology  and 
innovation. Financial services will feature strongly in our national SkillsFuture effort, and MAS 
will work with industry, the Institute of Banking and Finance, as well as educational institutes 
to build capabilities in financial technology and innovation. MAS also recently launched the 
Financial Sector Technology & Innovation (FSTI) scheme, to support the creation of a vibrant 
innovation ecosystem in Singapore. 
The  opening  of  LumenLab  today  bears  testimony  to  MetLife’s  confidence  in  Singapore’s 
proposition as a leading insurance market and our vision to be an innovation hub for new and 
emerging  insurance  risks.  LumenLab  is  an  enlightened  response  to  Asia’s  healthcare  and 
retirement  needs  in  the  next  decade,  and  is  well  aligned  with  MAS’  strategy  to  have 
innovation-led growth drive our next phase of development as a global insurance market. 
Conclusion 
Congratulations to MetLife and LumenLab. I look forward to continued partnership with you in 
Singapore. 
Thank you. 
 
                                                 
7   Transcript  of  Speech  by  Prime  Minister  Lee  Hsien  Loong  at  Founders  Forum  Smart  Nation  Singapore 
Reception, Prime Minister’s Office Singapore (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
