  Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: The insurance broking sector – threshold of 
an exciting but challenging future? 
Keynote address by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank 
of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  3rd  Asia  Insurance  Brokers’  Summit,  Kuala 
Lumpur, 3 March 2015. 
 It is my great pleasure to be a part of this 3rd Asia Insurance Brokers’ Summit which is being 
held for the first time in Malaysia. I would also  like to take this opportunity to congratulate 
MITBA as they celebrate 40 years in service of insurance and takaful brokers in Malaysia. In 
that time, the domestic insurance industry has seen significant change – beginning with an 
overhaul  of  the  legal  and  regulatory  framework  when  the  industry  was  brought  under  the 
regulatory  oversight  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  followed  by  a  series  of  successive  reforms 
that have served to strengthen the industry and promote its healthy development to first and 
foremost meet the needs of individuals and businesses. This continues to be a journey that 
the  Bank  and  industry  are  committed  to  taking  forward,  mindful  that  as  the  Malaysian 
economy  is  progressively  transformed,  so  too  will  demands  of  the  industry  evolve. 
Throughout this journey, associations like MITBA have played an  important role in helping 
members  adjust  to  the  changing  environment,  by  providing  a  platform  to  examine  issues, 
make representations, communicate with stakeholders, and implement collective responses. 
It must be recognised that many individual companies would have neither the resources nor 
the inclination to pursue these actions on their own. Yet such actions can shape policy, be a 
force for change, and build reputational capital and credibility with long lasting payoffs for the 
industry at large. 
As the broking and insurance community come together today, the questions that are being 
asked will almost certainly include: What lies ahead for the insurance broking industry? What 
are  the  key  challenges  that  will  face  the  industry?  How  will  the  landscape  continue  to 
change?  Where  will  new  opportunities  lie?  Where  will  new  threats  come  from?  And 
ultimately, how confident is the industry of its future? 
I am sure these questions will all be addressed in some way over the course of this Summit. 
A sampling of what has already been said and published on this subject would indicate that 
insurance  broking  is  at a  crossroad  of  critical  strategic  business  decisions  that  will  have  a 
significant impact on its future prospects. We often hear this at different periods in time, and 
each time there is a sense that this will be the defining moment for the industry. I would like 
to suggest however, that this sense is more palpable in the current environment for a number 
of reasons that I would like to explore this morning. 
Let me begin with the Global Financial Crisis. While it is largely associated with a banking 
crisis,  its  implications  have  spread  far  beyond  the  banking  sector.  The  insurance  industry 
found itself in a position of having to defend its activities from being subjected to the same 
fate of the wide-ranging regulatory reform that has consumed the banking sector following 
the crisis. The loss of confidence in financial intermediaries has been particularly damaging. 
Consumer  confidence  and  trust  in  financial  intermediaries  have  fallen  to  all-time  lows  and 
continuing discoveries of misconduct have done little to restore confidence. Consumers are 
unfortunately  prone  to  painting  all  intermediaries  with  the  same  broad  brush  and  asking 
themselves how far they can trust their financial service providers. 
As  a  result,  conduct  issues  are  coming  under  significant  scrutiny  globally,  and  the 
expectation  of  professional  conduct  is  no  longer  taken  for  granted  by  consumers  and 
regulators alike. This general shake-up of the industry that followed the crisis has meant that 
insurance brokers, swept up in the tide, must confront the very basic ethos of their business. 
They must make serving the real economic interests of businesses and helping individuals 
secure their financial futures the heart of their business. They need to be concerned about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the social and environmental impact of the business decisions that they make. And they must 
commit  to  providing  a  fair  deal  to  their  customers  and  building  enduring  long  term 
relationships. The environment has become far more unforgiving of anything less. 
A second reason that insurance broking is at a critical crossroad is the accelerated pace of 
change  that  is  occurring  in  Asia  and  the  business  implications  that  this  will  have  for  the 
region. Asia is the most dynamic and fastest growing region in the world today. The region 
recorded economic growth of over 7 percent in the past decade, higher than global growth of 
4 percent. The IMF’s latest forecast projects growth for Asia at 6.4 and 6.2 percent in 2015 
and 2016 respectively, in sharp contrast with anaemic growth in more advanced economies. 
Reflecting its growing contribution to global growth, Asia accounted for approximately 28% of 
the world’s premiums, after Europe (35%) and North America (30%).1 Coupled with a high 
population  growth  rate,  there  are  projections  that  Asia  will  overtake  North  America  as  the 
second largest contributor to world insurance premiums in several years. 
The  establishment  of  the  ASEAN  Economic  Community  at  the  end  of  2015  will  create  a 
single  large  market  and  production  base  with  freer  flow  of  goods,  services,  investment, 
skilled  labour,  and  capital;  opening  up  huge  opportunities  for  business  growth  from  a 
combined GDP of over USD2 trillion and population of 600 million people. Services have also 
become a more important component of trade across the region. This has obvious strategic 
implications for the insurance broking sector to capture the significant growth opportunities 
that will emerge. It is therefore not surprising to find that more companies already have, or 
are developing, ASEAN-oriented strategies to position themselves for an integrated ASEAN 
environment. These companies are quickly internalising new economic realities which call for 
a fundamental re-orientation of business and operating models. A clearly defined and well-
executed strategy for capturing new growth opportunities in the region is more than likely at 
this critical juncture to reap significant payoffs over the next few decades. 
A third reason that this period is significant for the insurance broking sector is the intensity of 
focus that is now being directed at the effects of climate change. Globally, catastrophes are 
increasing in frequency and intensity. The cost of catastrophes is estimated to have risen by 
USD870 billion in real terms between 1980 and 2011. In 2013 alone, global economic losses 
due to natural catastrophes amounted to USD131 billion. Only about a quarter of this was 
insured. According to a report released last week by the United Nation Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and Pacific, more than half of the world’s 226 natural catastrophes last 
year  occurred  in  the  Asia  and  Pacific region.  Floods  account for  about 40%  of  the  natural 
hazards affecting the region. Some 80 million people were affected by natural disasters, with 
economic  losses  tallying  up  to  nearly  USD60  billion.  The  region  was  found  to  be  largely 
unprepared in its response to widespread floods and landslides. Despite the recurring nature 
of these events, only a fraction of properties and assets are fully protected against risks. 
The  question  that  is  being  asked  with  increasing  urgency  is  “How  can  the  financial  sector 
play a more significant role in supporting disaster risk reduction strategies?” Along with this 
focus  has  been  a  growing  call  for  actors  in  the  financial  sector  to  do  more  to  reduce 
vulnerabilities  to  climate  and  disaster  risks,  including  through  better  analytics,  professional 
advice,  providing  or  supporting  effective  risk  mitigation  solutions,  and  by  conducting  their 
business in a socially and environmentally responsible manner. Going forward, society will 
be  more  demanding  of  financial  service  providers,  including  brokers,  to  discharge  these 
responsibilities  with  much  greater  diligence,  and  those  that  do  not  are  likely  to  bear  more 
severe consequences. 
The  fourth  reason  that  insurance  broking  is  finding  itself  at  a  critical  crossroad  is  a  more 
obvious one – the technology revolution. This phenomenon is hardly new and we continue to 
experience  new  technological  revolutions  at  an  unrelenting  pace.  The  challenge  is  in 
                                                
1   Swiss Re, Sigma No. 3/2014: “World Insurance in 2013”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  understanding  and  anticipating  how  evolutions  such  as  aggregator  capabilities,  internet-
based insurance, and big data are impacting insurance broking business models. 
So  far,  brokers  appear  to  be  taking  some  comfort  in  views  expressed  that  technology  is 
having  the  biggest  impact  on  the  more  commoditised  market  for  personal  insurance  lines, 
while brokers will continue to retain their share in the corporate insurance placements. While 
this may be a legitimate view, technology will nevertheless have an important impact on the 
kind of services that brokers are offering their corporate clients and what clients are prepared 
to pay for such services. In many emerging markets, the technology revolution is starting to 
gain more traction in the delivery of financial services, including insurance, following greater 
stability in internet connections, advancements in security and payments infrastructure and 
strengthened data protection frameworks in these markets. Correspondingly, brokers need to 
strategically review the strength of their value propositions in this changing environment and 
actively seek to lift their own services by leveraging on technology. 
These four reasons are just a few that should prompt the insurance broking community to re-
evaluate their business and operating strategies going forward. All of them – the fallout from 
the  global  financial  crisis,  Asia’s  growth  trajectory,  the  focus  on  climate  risk,  and  more 
entrenched technological revolution in the delivery of financial services – are converging to 
re-define expectations, possibilities and risks in the insurance broking sector in a profound 
way that will determine if a firm will thrive or be marginalised in the coming decade. 
Going  forward,  brokers  will  be  expected  to  play  a  far  more  significant  role  in  delivering 
innovation  and  choice  by  developing  deep  knowledge  of  the  industries  that  their  clients 
operate in, and working with insurance providers to bring new products into the market that 
are meeting the changing needs of businesses. Brokers will be called on to provide expertise 
and  advice  in  managing  a  more  complex  set  of  risks  that  will  include  environmental, 
geopolitical,  supply  chain  and  cyber  risks  in  a  more  interconnected  global  and  regional 
economy.  In  other  words,  the  traditional  information  function  of  brokers  will  expand 
significantly. 
An area that will grow in importance for brokers is the SME sector. SMEs are a significant 
part of economies in Asia, driving growth and employment. In Malaysia, SMEs account for 
about  one-third  of  Malaysia’s  GDP  and  59%  of  employment.  Within  five  years,  the 
contribution  of  SMEs  to  GDP  is  targeted  to  increase  to  41%.  Their  importance  to  the 
economy  however,  remains  disconnected  with  the  extent  to  which  these  businesses  are 
effectively  managing  their  risks  through  insurance  solutions.  A  significant  majority  of  small 
businesses  continue  to  be  either  not  insured,  or  have  inadequate  insurance  to  secure  the 
prospects of survival following business disruptions due to a natural disaster or other event. 
Among  the  most  important  reasons  for  this  are  cost  and  products  offered  by  insurance 
providers  that  fail  to  reflect  the  specific  risks  that  SMEs  face.  This  is  more  acute  for 
businesses  at  the  lower  end  of  the  spectrum  that  operate  with  tight  margins,  have  limited 
resources  dedicated  to  formal  risk  management  programs  and  are  more  vulnerable  to 
business  disruptions.  There  is  substantial  scope  in  the  region  for  brokers  to  better 
understand the risk profiles of SMEs – specifically how they are affected by loss events and 
what it would take for them to recover – and to work with insurance providers to lower the 
costs of insurance through innovative solutions and better data. 
A  key  focus  of  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  in  the  coming  years  will  be  to  provide  an  enabling 
environment  for  insurance  brokers  in  Malaysia  to  develop  the  technical,  financial  and 
operational  capacity  that  will  enable  them  to  effectively  support  businesses  in  both 
mainstream  and  niche  areas  under  the  new  economic  landscape.  In  this  connection,  the 
Bank  will  be  introducing  new  measures  to  foster  greater  competition,  and  expand 
opportunities for brokers to forge strategic partnerships for long term growth. This will include 
specific measures with respect to foreign participation in the insurance and takaful broking 
industry  in  line  with  the  recommendation  of  the  Bank’s  Financial  Sector  Blueprint  2011  – 
2020. The Bank expects to make further announcements on this in due course. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The evolution of insurance broking also raises important questions for managing conflicts of 
interest. Insurance brokers are often well placed to offer a broad range of services that may 
go beyond advising on and securing insurance solutions. These include an expanded role in 
risk  consulting  and  management,  the  administration  of  employee  benefit  schemes,  and 
claims  handling  services  provided  for  a  fee.  The  diversification  into  a  broader  range  of 
activities however increases the potential for conflicts to arise between the interests of clients 
in a traditional broking context, and that of the broker which may seek to protect relationships 
with  insurers  that  it  has  dealings  with  in  a  different  context.  Brokers  engaged  in  risk 
consulting  activities  may  also  have  strong  incentives  to  increase  commission  revenue  by 
inappropriately influencing clients to purchase more insurance than they need or  which do 
little to provide meaningful protection. 
In  Malaysia,  these  issues  are  coming  into  greater  focus  with  growing  demand  for  value-
added  services  that  brokers  can  provide.  We  do  not  believe  that  disclosures  alone  are 
sufficient  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  conflicts.  We  have  presently  required  brokers  to  limit  the 
revenue earned from these activities to 20% of total revenue in the previous financial year. 
We  are  also  insisting  on  strengthened  procedures  and  controls  within  brokers  to  manage 
conflicts. And we are asking brokers that engage in additional activities to demonstrate to us 
that their core broking responsibilities have not been compromised – including in terms of the 
adequacy  of  competent  resources  performing  core  broking  functions,  the  quality  of 
infrastructure  supporting  core  broking  activities  and  the  outcomes  produced  for  broking 
clients. 
This is also a time for the industry to come together collectively to raise the bar on standards 
of professional ethics and conduct that must be demonstrated towards clients. Such a code 
needs to clearly address new business realities and changing expectations of the industry. 
And  it  should  have  credibility  by  ensuring  swift  and  effective  mechanisms  for  addressing 
complaints on breaches and the ability of the profession to act against errant members. In 
Malaysia,  avenues  for  customers  to  address  disputes  with  insurance  brokers  are  being 
enhanced with establishment of a Financial Ombudsman Scheme that will include insurance 
and takaful brokers as members of the Scheme in the later part of this year. 
In closing, the insurance broking sector finds itself today at the threshold of an exciting, but 
also challenging, new era in which solutions of the past are unlikely to be adequate for the 
demands of the future. The stakes are higher, and the time is ripe for insurance broking in 
this region to do its part to contribute to sustainable growth. 
Thank  you  very  much  and  I  wish  you  all  very  constructive  and  enlightening  discussions 
ahead. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
