  Kikuo Iwata: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kikuo  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Sapporo, 27 May 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in this region. I would like to take this chance to express my 
sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan, particularly of 
the Sapporo Branch and the local office in Asahikawa. 
Today, I would like to have your views on the actual situation of the local economy as well as 
your candid opinions about the Bank’s policies and activities. 
Before exchanging views with you, I will briefly explain the recent economic developments at 
home and abroad, and then touch on some points regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
The current situation of and outlook for Japan’s economy 
I. 
Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately in a situation where a virtuous cycle 
from income to spending has been operating in both the corporate and household sectors. In 
the  following,  I  would  like  to  elaborate  on  the  background  to  this  assessment  and  on  the 
outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  in  terms  of  the  corporate  sector  –  including  exports  and 
production  –  and  then  in  terms  of  the  household  sector  –  such  as  the  employment  and 
income situation and private consumption. 
Corporate sector 
A. 
Exports  have  been  picking  up  recently  owing  to  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  and 
support from the effects of the depreciation of the yen (Chart 1). In particular, exports to the 
United States have continued to see a marked increase since capital goods and parts have 
increased,  reflecting  the  recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  in  the  United  States,  and 
since motor vehicles and their related goods have picked up. 
The global economy, which is the key to projecting the  outlook for exports, is expected to 
moderately increase its growth rate as advanced economies continue to see firm recovery 
and its positive effects gradually spread to emerging economies. According to the April 2015 
World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  last 
month,  global  economic  growth  is  projected  to  accelerate  moderately  on  the  whole:  after 
registering 3.4 percent in 2014, it is projected to be 3.5 percent in 2015 and 3.8 percent in 
2016 (Chart 2). 
Looking specifically at the developments by region, in the United States, which is expected to 
be the driving force of global growth, the real GDP growth rate for the January-March quarter 
has  decelerated  considerably,  due  in  part  to  effects  of  adverse  weather  conditions. 
Nevertheless,  the  economy  continued  its  robust  recovery  trend  supported  by  household 
spending  –  as  seen  in  private  consumption  rebounding  from  a  fall  in  winter  –  against  the 
background  of  the  favorable  employment  and  income  situation  in  particular.  The  U.S. 
economy is expected to continue to see growth led mainly by private demand, starting from 
firm  household  spending. In  addition,  the  European  economy,  in  which  the momentum for 
recovery had been weak, has recently been seeing a clear increase in private consumption, 
reflecting the effects of the decline in crude oil prices and of a rise in stock prices. It also has 
been  seeing  a  pick-up  in  business  sentiment  and  production  activity  resulting  from  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 in 
fixed  asset 
investment  and  continued 
 
 
improvement  in  exports  and  corporate  results  due  to  the  depreciation  of  the  euro.  Going 
forward, the European economy is expected to continue to see moderate recovery with the 
permeation  of  the  effects  of  depreciation  of  the  euro  and  those  of  the  monetary  easing 
measures by the European Central Bank (ECB). Meanwhile, turning to emerging economies, 
the growth momentum of the Chinese economy has been sluggish against the backdrop of 
the  deceleration 
inventory  adjustments. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  likely  to  follow  a  generally  stable  growth  path  as  there  are  likely  to  be 
effects of the authorities’ policy measures to support economic activity, although the pace of 
growth  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  reduced.  Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-
exporting economies have continued to lack momentum on the whole, but are expected to 
gradually  increase  their  growth  rates,  mainly  as  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies 
spreads to them. 
In  sum,  the  global  economy  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  is  expected  to  continue 
recovering moderately, and against this backdrop, Japan’s exports are expected to increase 
moderately.  Of  course,  various  uncertainties  –  including  the  pace  of  growth  in  the  U.S. 
economy,  the  prospects  regarding  the  European  debt  problem,  including  developments  in 
Greece,  developments 
the  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  and 
geopolitical risks – continue to call for close attention. 
In  a  situation  where  exports  have  been  picking  up  and,  as  I  will  explain  later,  private 
consumption  has  been  resilient,  production  has  been  picking  up.  Corporate  profits  have 
increased  to  historical  highs  and  business  sentiment  has  generally  stayed  at  a  favorable 
level  (Chart  3).  Under  these  circumstances,  with  regard  to  firms’  business  plans  for  fiscal 
2015, shown in the March Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), 
corporate  profits  as  a  whole  are  projected  to  continue  improving  and  a positive  stance  on 
business fixed investment has been maintained for this time of year. In this way, a virtuous 
cycle in the corporate sector – in which business fixed investment will continue its moderate 
increasing trend amid a continued improvement in corporate profits – is expected to operate 
going forward. 
in 
Household sector 
B. 
Next, turning to the household sector, positive developments in the corporate sector have led 
to  a  tightening  in  labor  market  conditions  and  to  an  improvement  in  the  employment  and 
income situation in accordance with that tightening. The unemployment rate has declined to 
around  3.5  percent,  and  judging  from  firms’  view  on  employment,  the  labor  shortage  is 
growing  further  (Chart  4).  Reflecting  this  tightening  in  labor  market  conditions,  nominal 
wages have increased moderately, albeit with fluctuations. In this way, since nominal wages 
have been rising and the number of employees has been increasing, employee income has 
been increasing moderately. 
An  improving  trend  in  private  consumption  is  becoming  evident  gradually  amid  steady 
improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation,  although  some  areas  had  been 
sluggish.  Such  firmness  in  private  consumption  was  also  confirmed  by  the  GDP  statistics 
released  last  week,  which  showed  that  private  consumption  has  increased  for  three 
consecutive quarters. In addition, a pick-up in consumer sentiment is becoming evident. As 
for  the  outlook,  the  employment  and  income  situation  is  likely  to  continue  to  see  steady 
improvement as many firms will increase wages, including base pay, which will be raised to a 
larger  extent  than  last  year  in  the  annual  labor-management  wage  negotiations  in  spring 
2015; in this situation, private consumption is expected to remain resilient. 
As I have explained, a virtuous cycle from income to spending is likely to continue operating 
in both the corporate and household sectors, since domestic demand is likely to be resilient 
and exports are expected to increase moderately. Against this backdrop, Japan’s economy is 
likely to continue growing at a pace above its potential from fiscal 2015 through fiscal 2016. 
Thereafter,  through  fiscal  2017,  the  economy  is  projected  to  maintain  its  positive  growth, 
although with a slowing in its pace to around a level somewhat below the potential growth 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
rate.  The  slowdown  is  due  mainly  to  (1)  the  effects  of  a  front-loaded  increase  and 
subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike planned in April 
2017  and  (2)  cyclical  deceleration.  In the  Bank’s  April  2015  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity 
and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the real 
GDP growth rate were around 2 percent for fiscal 2015, around 1.5 percent for fiscal 2016, 
and in the range of 0.0–0.5 percent for fiscal 2017 (Chart 5). 
Conduct of monetary policy and price developments in Japan 
II. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  touch  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  price  developments  in 
Japan. 
Change in policy regime 
A. 
The Bank is pursuing policy measures that aim at converting people’s deflationary mindset, 
which  has  been  formed  firmly  amid  the  prolonged  period  of  deflation,  to  one  that  expects 
moderate inflation. That is, preparing a platform on which people can act on the assumption 
that prices continue to rise moderately. 
To begin with, in January 2013, the Bank set the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of 
the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI;  in  other  words,  the  introduction  of  “inflation 
targeting.” 
With  a  view  to  achieving  this  price  stability  target,  the  Bank  has  been  implementing  an 
aggressive  monetary  easing  measure  called  quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing 
(QQE) since April 2013, and expanded the measure in October 2014 (Chart 6). 
By implementing such bold policy measures, the Bank has intended to clearly indicate to the 
public that the basic thinking behind its monetary policy – that is, the policy regime – has 
changed, and also to encourage them to change their behavior in view of such change. In 
other words, this is the Bank’s declaration that “the rules of the game have been changed.” 
B. 
Commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time 
Before the introduction of QQE, the Bank had pursued various monetary easing measures 
that were considered unconventional, such as the introduction of the zero interest rate policy 
and  quantitative  easing,  and  this  made  the  Bank  a  forerunner  in  monetary  policy  history. 
Although each of the measures on their own could have been a quite powerful policy tool, it 
turned out that they were not effective enough to overcome deflation. 
While  a  variety  of  analyses  attempted  to  explain  why  the  Bank  was  not  successful  in 
overcoming deflation, a major reason, in my view, was that the Bank’s faith that “deflation 
can be overcome through monetary policy” was not strong enough, and that its commitment 
to  achieving  this  aim  was  insufficient;  in  other  words,  the  policy  regime  was  not  changed 
considerably. Thus, the mindset of private economic entities such as households, firms, and 
financial institutions was not converted. 
Based on this bitter experience, when QQE was introduced in April 2013, the Bank entered a 
new phase of monetary easing by adopting a large-scale measure and made clear the time 
frame  for  achieving  the  target  –  namely,  that  it  will  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of 
2 percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time,  with  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years.  The  Bank 
showed its commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time in a 
stronger manner than ever, by stating that it was putting forth a specific time horizon of about 
two years, rather than simply adopting a stance of achieving it at the earliest possible time. 
As I will discuss later, the Bank currently expects that the CPI inflation rate is likely to reach 
around 2 percent around the first half of fiscal 2016. This timing is somewhat delayed from 
the  previous  projection.  However,  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  itself  has  been  rising 
steadily with the mechanism of QQE working as envisaged, and at this moment the Bank has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
no intention of changing its commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest 
possible time. 
Consumption tax hike 
Why has the CPI inflation not reached 2 percent yet? 
C. 
Looking at developments in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food), or the core inflation rate in Japan, it had hit a bottom of minus 0.5 percent immediately 
before  the  introduction  of  QQE,  and  thereafter,  excluding  the  direct  effects  of  the 
consumption tax hike, followed a steady rising trend until it reached 1.5 percent in April 2014. 
This means that QQE had pushed up the core inflation rate by 2.0 percentage points in about 
one year. During this period, the effects of QQE were clearly confirmed on the price front. 
Nevertheless,  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  has  not  been  achieved  yet.  The  core 
inflation  rate  peaked  in  April  2014,  and  then  followed  a  gradual  declining  trend.  It  has 
recently been about 0 percent (Chart 7). In my view, there are two major factors behind the 
decline in the inflation rate. 
1. 
The first factor is negative effects on demand of the consumption tax hike in April 2014. 
Although the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption 
tax hike had been expected, the degree of the decline had not been projected to be as large 
as the decline associated with the April 1997 hike, when the consumption tax rate rose from 
3 percent to 5 percent. 
However, the actual negative effects exceeded most of the projections, and were protracted. 
There  are  various  reasons  for  this,  but  here  I  would  like  to  point  out  an  increase  in  low-
income  households  due  to  the  protracted  sluggish  employment  situation  as  well  as  an 
increase  in  the  number of  pensioners  reflecting  the  aging  of  the  population  as  part  of the 
background. 
That being said, as I have explained, with the steady improvement in the employment and 
income  situation  and  in  corporate  profits  continuing,  a  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to 
spending  has  been  operating firmly  in  both  corporate  and  household  sectors.  Against  this 
backdrop, the downward pressure on demand exerted by the consumption tax hike has been 
dissipating. 
2. 
The other factor behind the recent decline in inflation rates is a rapid and substantial fall in 
crude oil prices that has occurred since last summer. 
It  should  be  noted  that  the  effects  of  falling  crude  oil  prices  may  be  assessed  differently 
depending on the time  horizon that you have in mind. To be more specific, the decline in 
crude oil prices will result in lower costs for various economic activities, and thereby exert 
wide-ranging  positive  effects  on  the  real  economy.  From  a  longer-term  perspective,  it  will 
push up prices as the aggregate demand increases. However, from a short-term perspective, 
until effects of an increase in the aggregate demand are manifested on the price front, the 
direct effects of falling energy prices exceed those of an increase in demand. Thus, there is 
temporary downward pressure on prices. 
The short-term effects of the decline in crude oil prices are expected to dissipate gradually 
from the second half of fiscal 2015, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from 
around  the  recent  level,  though  the  timing  of  this  depends  on  developments  in  crude  oil 
prices. 
Decline in crude oil prices 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Underlying trend in inflation 
D. 
The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is projected to be about 0 percent for the time 
being, with negative contributions of energy-related items offsetting positive contributions of 
other items. 
However, as I have explained, the underlying trend in inflation is likely to rise steadily, and 
the inflation rate is projected to accelerate toward the target level of 2 percent as the effects 
of the decline in crude oil prices dissipate. 
In assessing the underlying trend in inflation, it is necessary to take into account factors such 
as the following: (1) the output gap that is the difference between the aggregate demand and 
the  supply  capacity  of  the  economy  as  a  whole;  (2)  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations; and (3) the extent to which a future increase in prices will be taken into account 
in wage and price settings. 
To begin with, let me discuss the first factor, the output gap. Private consumption is expected 
to remain resilient with the improvement in the income situation against the background of 
tightening  in  labor  market  conditions,  together  with  manifestation  of  positive  effects  of  the 
decline in energy prices on real income. Business fixed investment is projected to continue a 
moderate increasing trend as corporate profits improve. Exports, which have been picking up 
recently,  are  expected  to  increase  moderately  against  the  background  of  the  recovery  in 
overseas economies and of underpinning effects of the depreciation of the yen. As such, the 
improving trend in the output gap will continue with the aggregate demand in the economy as 
a whole expanding, and upward pressure on prices is expected to increase gradually. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  second  factor,  inflation  expectations.  Judging  from  indicators  that  are 
observable  in  the  market  and  analyses  of  various  survey  results,  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole,  despite  the  recent  decline  in  the 
inflation rate. Going forward, the observed inflation rate is likely to accelerate. That will bring 
about a rise in inflation expectations, and such expectations are expected to remain firm. 
Moreover, as I have mentioned earlier, as a result of the annual labor-management wage 
negotiations in spring 2015, many firms will increase wages, including base pay, which will 
be raised to a larger extent than last year. The business model of firms seems to be in a 
process of transformation from one of the deflationary type – that is, one in which firms adopt 
a lower price-setting strategy through cutting expenses mainly in labor costs – to one of the 
innovative  type  –  that  is,  one  in  which firms  do not  resort to  lower  prices  but  devote  their 
efforts to developing new products and services that can enhance customer satisfaction. In 
this situation, some firms have been shifting their price-setting strategy to one of raising sales 
prices while increasing value-added. 
In  this  way,  the  mechanism  of  inflation  accelerating  moderately  accompanied  by  wage 
increases  has  continued  to  operate,  and  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  steadily 
improved. In the April 2015 Outlook Report, the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the year-
on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) were 0.8 percent for fiscal 2015, 
2.0 percent for fiscal 2016, and 1.9 percent for fiscal 2017 (Chart 5). Although the timing of 
reaching around 2 percent depends on developments in crude oil prices, it is projected to be 
around the first half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately from 
the recent level. Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is likely to be around 
2 percent on average. 
Concluding remarks 
In conclusion, let me touch on the economy of Hokkaido Prefecture. 
The  economy  has  been  recovering  moderately,  although  some  weakness  has  been 
observed in some aspects, such as the public construction sector, which largely affects small 
firms.  Turning  to  final  demand,  there  are  somewhat  weak  developments  in  terms  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
decline in public investment, but a marked increase in the number of foreign visitors to Japan 
has been underpinning demand. Moreover, over the period of more than a year since the 
consumption tax hike, even durable consumer goods and housing investment have started to 
level  off.  Meanwhile,  as  seen  in  the  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation, a virtuous cycle from income to spending has been operating in the region in the 
same way as in Japan as a whole. 
In Hokkaido Prefecture, there are plenty of topics associated with encouraging tourism. For 
example,  Yoichi  city  became  the  setting  for  Massan,  a  morning  drama  serial  by  Japan 
Broadcasting Corporation (Nippon Hoso Kyokai, NHK). In addition, the Hokkaido shinkansen 
will commence its operation by March 2016, and it is scheduled to be extended to Sapporo 
city. These topics show that Hokkaido Prefecture will receive further attention going forward. 
Moreover, Sapporo city has announced its intention to bid for the 2026 Winter Olympics, and 
this will increase the opportunity for Hokkaido Prefecture to display to the world its appeal. 
Other than tourism, Hokkaido Prefecture has strength in the food industry on the back of its 
abundant  agricultural  and  fishery  resources.  I  have  heard  that  Hokkaido  Prefecture  now 
faces problems such as lower production of raw milk resulting from increasing abandonment 
of farming as well as slack in unloading in the fishing industry, but I expect that production of 
higher value-added goods will be promoted through efforts such as Healthy-Do, which is the 
certification  system  of  functional  food  that  the  Hokkaido  government  is  making  efforts  to 
popularize. 
Other  initiatives  include  promoting  Hokkaido  Prefecture  as  a  back-up  base  for  the 
metropolitan area and Honshu – the main island of Japan – since Hokkaido Prefecture faces 
less  natural  disasters.  This  initiative  has  actually  led  to  attracting  firms  to  Hokkaido 
Prefecture, and I have heard that even some export-related manufacturers, such as those in 
transportation  equipment,  in  which  Hokkaido  Prefecture  had  been  facing  a  disadvantage, 
have  been  lured.  I  believe  this  will  largely  contribute  to  reinforcing  Hokkaido  Prefecture’s 
industrial infrastructure. 
As common issues across the country, the population decline as well as declining birth rate 
and  an  aging  population  have  been  pointed  out,  and  in  this  region  these  issues  have 
progressed faster than in Japan as a whole. Therefore, I expect that, with cooperation among 
industry, academia, the government, and finance, the region will overcome this problem by 
promoting vitalization of the local economy ahead of other regions in Japan and developing 
business  models  that  would  apply  for  Japan  as  a  whole.  The  Bank’s  Sapporo  Branch  will 
conduct  analyses  of  the  regional  economy  so  as  to contribute to  such  efforts  as much  as 
possible. 
In closing, I wish all the best for the further development of the regional economy. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
