  Koji Ishida: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Koji Ishida, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Kanagawa, 26 February 2015. 
 I.  
Developments in economic activity and prices 
Overseas 
A.  
I would like to start my remarks with a look at developments in economic activity and prices, 
in and outside Japan. 
On  overseas  economies  –  mainly  advanced  economies  –  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  current 
assessment is that they have been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen 
in part. The average of real GDP growth rates of major countries and regions, weighted by 
value of exports from Japan, has been posting higher growth, due mainly to a pick-up in the 
U.S. economy, after decelerating to 1.7 percent in the January-March quarter of 2014. 
As for the outlook, the projections of global economic growth, released by the International 
Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  have  been  revised  downward  repeatedly,  but  the  projection  of  the 
growth  rate  gradually  accelerating  toward  2016  is  unchanged.  The  Bank  likewise  expects 
that  the  overall  global  economy  will  moderately  increase  its  growth  rate,  as  advanced 
economies will continue to enjoy a recovery and the positive effects will gradually spread to 
emerging economies. 
Taking  a  closer  look  at  developments  by  region,  the  U.S.  economy  has  continued  to  see 
solid  recovery,  led  mainly  by  private  demand.  According  to  U.S.  employment  statistics  for 
February 2015, the number of employees has been increasing by more than 200 thousand 
people on a seasonally adjusted month-on-month basis for eleven consecutive months, and 
the  unemployment  rate  has  been  hovering  at  a  low  level.  In  this  situation,  consumer 
sentiment has been on an improving trend. Although wage increases have been somewhat 
weak,  the  economy  is  likely  to  continue  to  see  solid  recovery,  as  private  consumption 
continues to increase on the back of the improvement in the employment situation and of low 
gasoline prices. 
The euro area economy has maintained its moderate recovery, as seen in the fact that the 
real GDP growth rate has been positive for seven consecutive quarters, and the slowdown in 
its growth momentum observed since spring 2014 has come to a halt. As for the outlook, the 
economy  is  likely  to  maintain  its  recovery,  albeit  at  a  moderate  pace,  mainly  because  the 
depreciation of the euro and monetary easing by the European Central Bank (ECB) are likely 
to  contribute  to  underpinning  the  economy,  although  close  attention  should  continue  to  be 
paid to factors such as the risk of low inflation becoming protracted and the effects of the 
situation in Ukraine and Russia. 
As  for  the  Chinese  economy,  the  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  for  the  October-
December  quarter  of  2014  was  7.3  percent,  unchanged  from  the  previous  quarter.  The 
economy has generally maintained its stable growth, although its momentum has somewhat 
slowed due to downward pressure associated with structural reforms. As for the outlook, the 
Chinese economy is likely to basically continue to grow stably, although attention should be 
paid  to  an  overhang  in  supply  capacity  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and  to  the  adjustment 
pressure in the real estate market, mainly in local cities. 
Emerging  economies  as  a  whole  have  remained  lackluster  in  terms  of  growth.  Looking  at 
developments in the East Asian region, which is closely tied with Japan’s economy, while the 
NIEs have been improving on the whole, mainly due to a pick-up in domestic demand, the 
ASEAN  economies  have  been  lacking  growth  momentum.  As  for  the  outlook,  emerging 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
economies  as  a  whole  are  likely  to  gradually  increase  their  growth  rates  as  advanced 
economies, particularly the United States, have positive effects on them, triggering a pick-up 
in domestic demand. 
Japan 
Current situation 
B. 
1. 
Now I will discuss developments in economic activity and prices in Japan. 
The  Bank’s  current  assessment  is  that  the  economy  has  continued  its  moderate  recovery 
trend.  The  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  for  the  October-December  quarter  turned  positive, 
registering  2.2  percent  on  an  annualized  quarter-on-quarter  basis,  following  the  negative 
growth for two consecutive quarters after the consumption tax hike in April 2014, mainly due 
to  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  tax  hike  and  to 
adverse weather conditions. A look at developments in each demand component shows that 
business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  while  exports  have 
been  picking  up  noticeably  and  private  consumption  has  remained  resilient  in  a  situation 
where  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  demand  following  the  front-loaded  increase  have  been 
dissipating. Given these developments, I hold the view that, having emerged from the pause 
in  the  first  half  of  fiscal  2014,  the  economy  has  started  to  show  signs  of  returning  to  a 
moderate recovery path. 
Although  a  limited  number  of  economic  indicators  has  been  released  with  regard  to 
developments since the beginning of 2015, real exports for January showed a clear pick-up 
of 5.0 percent from the previous month, mainly due to an increase in exports of automobiles 
to the United States. Meanwhile, as for private consumption, the number of new passenger-
car registrations for January declined slightly, while indicators of consumer sentiment, which 
had been relatively weak since 2014, have been bottoming out recently. 
With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for 
all items less fresh food, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is around 
0.5 percent. The rate of increase has recently been slowing, mainly due to a fall in the prices 
of petroleum products caused by the decline in crude oil prices. On a basis excluding food 
and energy, the rate of increase in the CPI had been slowing marginally, mainly reflecting the 
weakness  in  consumption  during  the  summer  of  2014,  but  for  December,  it  is  unchanged 
from the previous month. 
2.  
Japan’s economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery trend. On the price front, the 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  likely  to  slow  for  the  time  being,  reflecting  the 
decline  in  energy  prices.  Meanwhile,  risks  to  the  outlook  include  developments  in  the 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  the  prospects  regarding  the  debt  problem 
and the risk of low inflation rates being protracted in Europe, and the pace of recovery in the 
U.S. economy. 
The Bank compiles and releases the Policy Board members’ forecasts for economic activity 
and prices on a quarterly basis. Looking at the medians of the members’ forecasts released 
in  January  2015,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  is  projected  to  be  minus  0.5  percent  for  fiscal 
2014, 2.1 percent for fiscal 2015, and 1.6 percent for fiscal 2016. The year-on-year rate of 
increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption 
tax  hike,  is  projected  to  be  0.9  percent  for  fiscal  2014,  1.0  percent  for  fiscal  2015,  and 
2.2 percent for fiscal 2016. Compared with the forecasts made in October 2014, real GDP 
growth will likely be lower for fiscal 2014, but higher for fiscal 2015 and 2016, due mainly to 
the  positive  effects  from  the  substantial  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the  government’s 
economic  measures.  With  regard  to  the  CPI,  the  outlook  for  the  underlying  trend  is 
unchanged; the year-on-year rate of increase will likely be lower toward fiscal 2015, due to 
Outlook 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Keys to assessing the outlook 
Effects of the decline in crude oil prices 
 
 
the significant decline in crude oil prices, but that for fiscal 2016 will likely be more or less 
unchanged at above 2 percent, due mainly to the waning of downward pressure. 
3. 
Thus far, I have briefly outlined the current situation of and outlook for economic activity and 
prices. In what follows, I will discuss the three keys to assessing the outlook. 
a. 
The first is the effects of the decline in crude oil prices on the global economy and prices. 
Although  crude  oil  prices  have  been  rising  slightly  recently,  they  have  generally been  at  a 
level substantially below their peak observed around June 2014. The following factors have 
been pointed to as the background to the substantial decline in crude oil prices: oil supply 
factors,  such  as  the  decision  of  a  group  of  major  oil-exporting  countries  to  maintain  their 
production levels despite the rise in production of other oil, such as shale oil in the United 
States; and a decline in demand for crude oil due to economic deceleration in emerging and 
European economies, for example. These factors combined are likely to have had an impact 
on the decline in crude oil prices. 
In terms of the effects of the decline in crude oil prices on Japan’s economy, as is being 
discussed  widely,  I  believe  that  the  net  effect  of  this  is  likely  to  be  positive  in  terms  of 
economic  activity,  brought  about  by  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  a  rise  in 
households’  real  purchasing  power.  On  the  price  front,  the  price  declines  in  energy  – 
including  the  drop  in  the  price  of  crude  oil  –  are  likely  to  exert  downward  pressure  on 
general prices in the short term. From a relatively longer-term perspective, however, they are 
likely to push up general prices through an improvement in the output gap. In other words, I 
basically consider that the decline in crude oil prices will bring about positive effects on both 
economic activity and prices over time, but at the same time, I also consider that attention 
should be paid to its effects on certain areas of the economy. 
I mentioned earlier that the projections of global economic growth released by the IMF have 
been revised downward repeatedly, and I consider that this itself suggests the existence of 
vulnerable areas in the world economy despite the global recovery trend. In this situation, the 
decline in crude oil prices is likely to exert adjustment pressure on capital investment by the 
energy and resources sector, which is said to account for approximately 40 percent of such 
investment on a global basis. Attention should be paid to the possibility that this in turn will 
exert  downward  pressure  on  orders,  production,  and  exports  of  Japan’s  capital  goods,  in 
which the country has a competitive edge. 
b.  
The second key is developments in real wages. Since the turn of fiscal 2014, the year-on-
year rate of change in real wages has been negative, due in part to the substantial increase 
in the rate of change in the CPI including the effects of the consumption tax hike. Meanwhile, 
there  has  been  a  somewhat  weak  recovery  in  consumption  from  the  decline  following  the 
front-loaded  increase  prior  to  the  consumption  tax  hike.  I  believe  that  the  decline  in  real 
wages,  in  addition  to  the  effects  of  irregular  weather,  largely  accounted  for  the  weak 
recovery. Therefore, for private consumption to pick up clearly and maintain an increasing, 
albeit moderate, trend in fiscal 2015 and beyond, I consider it necessary that nominal wages 
rise firmly and that wages in real terms – adjusted for inflation – start rising on a year-on-year 
basis. 
On this point, let us look at recent developments in Japan’s economy. Corporate profits as a 
whole have been increasing, with some differences observed in the business performance 
between exporting firms – which benefit from the yen’s depreciation – and domestic demand-
oriented  firms  –  against  which  the  yen’s  depreciation  acts  as  a  headwind.  In  view  of  the 
continued tight employment situation and of developments in prices, it is my consideration 
that the conditions are being prepared for wages to start rising in the form of increases in 
base pay and bonus payments. Household income, I believe, will be a great driving force for 
Developments in real wages 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Developments in exports 
 
 
supporting a virtuous cycle in the household sector from fiscal 2015 if, as a result of wage 
negotiations in spring 2015, nominal wages improve to an extent that will bring about a rise in 
real wages; however, attention should be paid to the effects, for example, of the introduction 
of the macroeconomic slide formula to the pension system in Japan from fiscal 2015. 
c.  
The  third  key  is  developments  in  exports.  Real  exports  had  been  sluggish  despite  the 
substantial  depreciation  of  the  yen  since  the  introduction  of  quantitative  and  qualitative 
monetary easing (QQE) in April 2013. A range of factors have been pointed to regarding the 
slow emergence of the J-curve effects; namely, cyclical factors such as the sluggishness in 
emerging  economies  and  structural  factors  such  as  the  increase  in  the  relocation  of 
production overseas by Japanese manufacturers. Given these circumstances, unlike in the 
past, it has become quite difficult for exports to act as the driving force of Japan’s economy 
even amid the situation of the yen’s depreciation. 
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  real  exports  have  started  to  rise  noticeably  recently. 
Moreover, an increasing number of firms has announced plans to expand domestic business, 
as some manufacturers have been shifting their production back to Japan and making import 
substitutions.  Amid  the  situation  of  the  yen’s  depreciation,  developments  that  will  yield  a 
virtuous cycle in the economy are beginning to be observed steadily, and I believe they will 
continue  to  gradually  strengthen  as  the  yen  stabilizes.  In  determining  the  outlook  for 
production and exports, it is also necessary to observe such changes in corporate behavior. 
II.  
The Bank’s monetary policy 
Expansion of QQE 
A.  
Next, I would like to discuss the Bank’s monetary policy. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014, the Bank decided to expand QQE, 
which it introduced in April 2013. The specific measures of the expansion were as follows. 
First, the Bank decided to accelerate the pace of increase in the monetary base it provides 
from “an annual pace of about 60–70 trillion yen” to “an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.” 
Second,  it  decided  to  raise  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Bank’s 
holdings  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  from  “an  annual  pace  of  about  50  trillion 
yen”  to  “an  annual  pace  of  about  80  trillion  yen.”  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  decided  to 
extend the average remaining maturity of its JGB purchases from “about seven years” to a 
flexible  range  of  “about  seven  to  ten  years.”  And  third,  it  decided  to  purchase  exchange-
traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts 
outstanding  would  be  tripled  to  annual  paces  of  “about  3 trillion  yen”  and  “about  90  billion 
yen,” respectively. 
Around  the  time  of  the  Bank’s  expansion  of  QQE  in  October  2014,  somewhat  weak 
developments in demand following the consumption tax hike and the substantial decline in 
crude oil prices had been exerting downward pressure on prices. The Bank considered that, 
if  such  downward  pressure  remained,  albeit  in  the  short  term,  there  was  a  risk  that  the 
emergence  from  the  deflationary  mindset,  which  had  been  progressing  steadily,  might  be 
delayed. To preempt the manifestation of this risk and to maintain the improving momentum 
of expectation formation, the Bank decided on the expansion of QQE. 
Enhancement of other fund-provisioning measures 
B.  
Prior  to  the  introduction  of  QQE,  the  Bank  established  –  on  its  balance  sheet  –  the  Loan 
Support Program, with the aim of making the effect of monetary easing permeate the entire 
economy. The program consists of two measures – namely, the fund-provisioning measure 
to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth  (hereafter  the  Growth-
Supporting  Funding  Facility)  and  the  fund-provisioning  measure  to  stimulate  bank  lending 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
(hereafter  the  Stimulating  Bank  Lending  Facility)  –  and  had  been  providing  support  for 
private financial institutions’ efforts to these ends. 
In January 2015, the Bank decided to extend the application period of the program by one 
year. It also decided, with regard to the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, to increase the 
maximum amount of funds that it can provide to each financial institution from 1 trillion yen to 
2 trillion yen, and also to increase the maximum amount outstanding of its fund-provisioning 
as  a  whole  from  7  trillion  yen  to  10  trillion  yen.  Moreover,  the  Bank  further  enhanced  the 
program by introducing a new framework for enabling financial institutions that do not have a 
current  account  at  the  Bank  to  use  the  Growth-Supporting  Funding  Facility  and  the 
Stimulating Bank Lending Facility through their central organizations. 
The  Bank  also  decided,  in  January  2015,  to  extend  the  application  period  of  the  funds-
supplying  operation  to  support  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  affected  by  the  Great 
East Japan Earthquake by one year. 
Through  these  enhancements  of  the  existing  measures,  the  Bank  will  further  promote 
financial institutions’ lending, as well as stimulate firms’ and households’ demand for credit 
and continue to support the efforts of financial institutions in disaster areas toward rebuilding. 
Financial Conditions 
C. 
As I have described, the Bank has been implementing large-scale monetary easing through 
various measures. In this situation, interest rates in financial markets have been hovering at 
extremely low levels. Yields on 10-year JGBs are currently in the range of 0.3–0.4 percent, 
although there have been relatively large fluctuations recently. While the U.S. dollar/yen rate 
has been moving within a narrow range of 115–120 yen, the Nikkei 225 Stock Average has 
been in the range of 18,000–19,000 yen. 
Financial  conditions  have  continued  to  be  accommodative.  The  average  contract  interest 
rates on new loans and discounts and the issuance rates for CP and corporate bonds have 
been at low levels. Firms’ perception of financial institutions’ lending attitudes and financial 
positions of firms, including those for small firms, have been improving. 
Future Conduct of Monetary Policy 
The decline in crude oil prices and the conduct of monetary policy 
D. 
1. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  highlight  two  points  regarding  the  Bank’s  future  conduct  of  monetary 
policy and then conclude my remarks. 
The  first  is  the  relationship  between  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  In  the  Bank’s  interim  assessment  in  January  2015  of  the  October  2014 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), the forecasts for the 
year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  have  been  revised 
downward  toward  fiscal  2015  from  those  presented  in  the  October  2014  Outlook  Report. 
From a somewhat longer-term perspective, the decline in crude oil prices – the main factor 
behind this downward revision – will exert upward pressure on the underlying trend in prices 
by  producing  stimulus  effects  on  the  economy.  In  a  situation  where  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation expectations among households and firms have been stable according to a number 
of surveys, as long as the path for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI to rise again 
toward  around  2  percent  is  in  sight,  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices  should  not  pose  any 
particular concern in terms of the conduct of monetary policy. 
In terms of grasping price developments, it has become difficult to determine the underlying 
trend  of  the  CPI,  due  to  the  large  fluctuations  in  crude  oil  prices.  The  basic  approach  to 
assessing  this  trend  is  to  make  a  comprehensive  examination  of  a  range  of  indicators  – 
particularly the CPI for all items less fresh food. Given the current situation, it is appropriate 
for  the  time  being  to  make  an  assessment  by  also  taking  account  of  the  contribution  of 
energy items to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food). The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 The continuation of QQE 
 
 
Bank’s decision to release an estimate of this contribution for the price outlook through fiscal 
2016 was based on such thinking. 
On this point, one view is to examine the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items 
less  food  and  energy,  or  the  core-core  CPI,  in  particular.  However,  when  identifying  the 
underlying trend in prices, I personally consider that it also is important to examine the price 
index  that  includes  food,  given  that  food  expenditures  in  Japan  account  for  a  larger 
proportion of household expenditures than in other countries – such as the United States – 
and that the rise in the prices of daily necessities has been weighing on consumer sentiment 
since 2014. 
Furthermore, I place importance on the CPI for all items less imputed rent, which is used in 
the  calculation  of  such  items  as  real  wages.  Imputed  rent  is  an  expenditure  that  is  not 
actually paid in the market. It has long been on a declining trend, and if this trend continues, 
this will exert strong downward pressure on the CPI for all items, particularly in the phase 
when the rate of increase in the prices of goods and services accelerates. If this turns out to 
be the case, various problems may arise from a gap between the rise in prices perceived by 
households and the rise in the CPI, or in assessing the rate of wage increase. 
2.  
The second point is the continuation of QQE. Almost two years have passed since the Bank 
introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  So  far,  the  Bank  has  committed  to  continuing  with  QQE, 
aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary to maintain 
the target in a stable manner. It also has committed to examining both upside and downside 
risks to economic activity and prices, and making adjustments as appropriate. 
As for the Bank’s outlook for prices, looking at the medians of the Policy Board members’ 
forecasts, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is projected 
to remain at 1.0 percent for fiscal 2015 due to the substantial decline in crude oil prices, but 
to reach 2.2 percent for fiscal 2016. If economic activity and prices develop as projected, the 
achievement  of  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  will  become  more  in  sight  over  time. 
Although it is premature to discuss an exit strategy at this stage, if the year-on-year rate of 
increase in the CPI accelerates in accordance with the Bank’s forecast I just mentioned, the 
Bank at some point will need to gradually slow the pace of QQE from the current full-speed 
operation. From this viewpoint, it will become all the more important for the Bank to carefully 
grasp and assess prevailing economic developments and the underlying trend in prices, and 
thereby accurately determine their outlook, in the process of preparing the Outlook Report 
every April and October, and of conducting the interim assessment thereof every July and 
January. 
With respect to the wording “make adjustments as appropriate” used to describe the Bank’s 
monetary  policy  stance,  my  understanding  is  that  these  adjustments  will  only  be  made  in 
response to, from a longer-term perspective, a heightening of risks to achieving sustainable 
economic  growth  with  price  stability,  such  as  an  emergence  of  economic  and  financial 
imbalances, and should not be made in response to changes in the timing for achieving the 
2 percent price stability target or in the pace at which this target will be achieved. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
