Patrick Honohan: Currency choices in Ireland past and present 
Presentation  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  Queen’s 
University, Belfast, 31 March 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank Ireland’s website. 
 Introduction 
A certain nostalgia has recently been evident, south of the border, for the sterling link period 
before 1979, when Bank of England notes circulated alongside the Irish pound. But are those 
traditionalists  looking  at  history  through  rose-tinted  lenses?  The  financial  crisis  has  certainly 
highlighted weaknesses in the European economic and monetary union, but previous currency 
arrangements were not trouble-free either. Irish financial affairs suffered setbacks in the 1950s 
and 1980s also, which I would like to recall to you today. With careful attention to appropriate 
fiscal  and  financial  policies,  recovery  from  Ireland’s  recent  difficulties  within  the  euro  area 
should continue to strengthen. 
Currency  arrangements  in  Ireland  over  the  past  couple  of  centuries,  though  mercifully  less 
colourful than in many other countries, have been distinctive to say the least.1 Despite the Act 
of  Union,  the Irish  pound fluctuated  considerably  against  sterling  in  the  early  decades  of the 
19th Century until the two currencies were unified in 1826 (Figure 1).2 
Sterling link 1826–1979 
Even  after  the  Irish  and  British  pounds  were  unified,  the  Bank  of  England’s  commanding 
banking position in England did not extend to Ireland, which relied on the Bank of Ireland and 
on an expanding group of its competitors, some headquartered in Belfast, some in Dublin and 
some in London, to ensure the payments system, including with their own banknotes (though 
the  Bank  of  Ireland’s  monopoly  on  notes  did  not  apply  outside  most  of  a  50-mile  radius  of 
Dublin). A handful of spectacular, but isolated, bank failures in the 19th Century only served to 
emphasise the overall stability of the banking system that emerged in those years and which 
arguably  inculcated  a  degree  of  complacency  about  banking  and  a  disregard  of  its  fragility 
when carelessly managed or supervised. 
This  system  worked  so  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  establishment  that  few  voices  were 
raised  against  its  substantive  continuation  into  the  period  of  the  Irish  Free  State.  North  and 
south of the border, the notes of the various banks continued to circulate at par alongside those 
of the Bank of England and, when a national currency commission was established in Dublin in 
1927 – albeit shortly after the unfortunate repegging of sterling to gold at its pre-war level – its 
notes  were  explicitly  expressed  as  payable  in  sterling.  Indeed  the  words  “sterling  payable  to 
bearer on demand in London” were printed on these Irish notes into the 1950s. By 1979, the 
one-for-one no margins peg with sterling had persisted for over 150 years. No better evidence 
of the financial conservatism of the political and business elite in this period could be desired. 
But was the sterling link a good system for the Republic? One political argument for retaining it 
was  to  ensure  that  currency  distinction  would  not  exacerbate  the  economic  barriers  resulting 
from  partition  in  the  1920s.  However,  as  has  been  well  documented,  the  intensity  of  North-
South  commercial  and  economic  interactions  was  rather  modest  in  subsequent  decades,  so 
                                                
1  A longer historical time period is covered in Honohan (2002). 
2  The fluctuations prompted the famous Parliamentary Irish Currency Report of 1804 (cf. Boyle and Geary, 2004). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
this can hardly be thought a decisive consideration. Besides, the idea of “breaking the sterling 
link” had an attractive political ring to it for some of those keen to sever links with Britain. 
On the other hand, trading links across the Irish Sea remained remarkably strong for the early 
decades of independence. As late as 1960 almost three-quarters of the Republic’s exports went 
to  the  UK  and  almost  half  of  her  imports  came  from  the  UK.  Even  after  six  years  of  EEC 
membership had contributed to geographic diversification of Irish exports, the UK accounted for 
about a half of both exports to and imports from Ireland. Of course gravity retained its pull. But 
the lack of a need to set up foreign exchange hedging or even foreign exchange purchase and 
sales procedures when exporting to (or importing from) Britain may was sometimes thought to 
have been an inertial factor slowing the diversification of Irish export trade into more dynamic 
parts  of  the  European  and  world  economy  –  though  export  diversification  was  certainly  in 
progress. 
The openness of the capital account vis-à-vis Britain and the conservatism of the Irish banks, 
perhaps attributable to few sound lending opportunities presented to them, resulted in a large 
accumulation  of  liquid  banking  assets  in  the  London  money  market  in  the  early  decades  of 
independence (Figure 2). Quite the opposite to what happened later, then, in this regard. 
Not surprisingly, interest rates too tended to track those in London. But there were two notable 
exceptions. The first was in 1932 with the formation of a Fianna Fáil government, in apparent 
response  to  which  the  Irish  banks,  seemingly  fearful  of  radicalism,  widened  their  lending 
spreads over the London bank rate (cf. Ó Gráda, 1994). The other notable exception was in the 
mid-1950s  when,  in  a  mistaken  presumption  that  some  monetary  independence  could  be 
retained despite the exchange rate peg, Irish official and bank lending rates were held down 
despite increases in London. This latter episode was marked by an outflow of funds for which 
the adopted remedy was an overdose of fiscal austerity (as it would be termed now) associated 
with a recession and a surge in emigration. The power of the financial markets in influencing 
fiscal policy was thus displayed earlier than many may realise. 
Inflation too tracked that in the UK rather closely in the sterling link decades, except during the 
period  of  wartime  price  controls.  The  pass-through  was  not  immediate  or  exact,3  but,  taking 
one-year  with  the  next,  it  was  inescapable.  To  that  extent,  the  sterling  link  imported  to  the 
Dublin-based authorities the credibility of the London authorities in regard to inflation, though by 
the 1970s, this was nothing to write home about (Figure 3). 
So,  for  three-quarters  of  a  century  after  Independence,  Ireland  maintained  a  one-to-one  peg 
with sterling. At first, this was not an unusual position for a post-colonial country. But, one-by-
one, each of the former countries of the sterling area abandoned such a link, typically very soon 
after  independence  (Honohan  and  Lane,  1999).  Some  countries  were  motivated  either  by 
economic nationalism or a desire to exploit the apparent pro-growth potential of an autonomous 
currency.  The  break  in  other  countries  was  driven  by  unsustainable  expansionary  money-
financed  fiscal  policy.  By  1978  only  Sierra  Leone  and  Ireland  were  left  as  members  of  the 
sterling area. 
Exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System 1979–1993 
Ireland had begun to toy with a break in the arrangement from at least as early as 1976, when 
sterling  took  an  alarming  slide  against  the  US  dollar  (and  against  the  currencies  of  the 
European  “snake”  linked  to  the  Deutsche  Mark),  triggering  Irish  inflation.  The  strongest 
economic arguments for a break were (i) the fact that the currency link to what had been the 
epitome  of  financial  strength  no  longer  provided  financial  stability,  combined  with  (ii)  a 
perception  that  the  long-period  of  relative  economic  decline  for  the  UK  would  continue  and 
                                                
3  For  example,  the  standard  deviation  of  inflation  in  Ireland  minus  inflation  in  the  UK  in  this  period  approached 
2 percentage points – even when the war years are excluded. Gerlach and Stuart (2014) discuss Irish monetary 
and price data for those years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
would  augur  poorly  for an  economy  too  closely  linked  with  it.  Yet,  lacking  a  clear  alternative 
policy, and fearful of switching to too tough a regime, the Irish authorities had left any decisive 
step to change currency policy on the long finger.4  
Suddenly the landscape changed when, triggered by the French Government’s desire to rejoin 
the currency “Snake” arrangement according to which continental currencies maintained a joint 
float  against  the  US  dollar  (the  chart  of  exchange  rate  movements  thus  tracing  a  snake-like 
appearance), a movement among leading European politicians to create a ‘zone of monetary 
stability in Europe’ forced the Irish Government to make a choice. A new type of exchange rate 
regime, tying Ireland into the seemingly more vigorous, less volatile, continental economies with 
their recent record of lower inflation seemed to be on the cards. 
Should the Irish government join the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of this new European 
Monetary System (EMS), even at the risk of having to break the sterling link (if the UK did not 
join)?  Perhaps  the  new  arrangement  really  would  represent  something  different  and  more 
acceptable that the austere Snake – tougher than the sterling link, but weaker than the latter. 
After  some  initial  hesitation,  largely  motivated  by  the  fear  of  the  regime  being  too  strict,  but 
eased  by  some  ad  hoc  European  subsidies  (also  granted  to  entrants  Italy  and  Denmark), 
Ireland joined the ERM, while Britain stayed out. 
The outcome did not correspond to expectation. The ERM proved to be a much softer or more 
lax exchange rate regime for Ireland than the sterling link. Not only did sterling – still the main 
trading partner currency – strengthen as a result of North Sea Oil and the anti-inflation policies 
of the Thatcher Government, but the ERM itself failed to live up to its branding as a zone of 
monetary stability. In particular, with its many realignments, the ERM lacked a “nominal anchor” 
which  would  ensure  price  stability.  This  allowed  less  disciplined  member  states  frequent 
opportunities to offset wage competitiveness drift with adjustments to the peg. Devaluations of 
the Irish pound against the DM – core currency of the ERM – were thus more frequent than had 
been  envisaged,  occurring  about  once  a  year  in  the  first  eight  years  of  the  system.  This 
includes  three  big  Ireland-specific  devaluations,  in  1983,  1986  and  1993.  Furthermore, 
fluctuations against sterling were high – much higher than during the Napoleonic suspension 
(Compare Figure 4 with Figure 1). 
No longer constrained by the discipline of the sterling peg Irish inflation soared at first in the 
ERM  (Figure  3),  though  it  came  under  control  by  the  mid-1980s.  The  inflation  surge  can  be 
largely  attributed  to  the  soaring  budget  deficit  (and  accompanying  relaxed  national  pay 
agreements)  1977–1981,  accommodated  and  reinforced  by  the  sharp  weakening  of  the  Irish 
pound against sterling in the first years of the new system. This experience presaged the deep 
fiscal crisis of the 1980s. That crisis, which was exacerbated by the UK recession, can hardly 
be blamed on the change in exchange rate regime. The growing reliance on foreign borrowing 
by the Government was already well under way in the final years of the sterling link and there is 
no suggestion that access to foreign borrowing was eased or necessarily hampered by entry 
into the ERM. Indeed, the decoupling of the Irish pound from sterling arguably somewhat eased 
the  economic  pressures  of  adjustment  by  allowing  Ireland  to  retain  a  degree  of  international 
competitiveness through that difficult decade. 
But  the  heightened  uncertainty  about  inflation,  exchange  rate  developments  and  the  budget 
resulted in high nominal and real interest rates. Short-term interest rates, over-compensating 
for  the  risk  of  realignment,  did  not  fall  to  German  levels  but  averaged  over  2½  percentage 
points  higher  in  real  ex  post  terms  (Figure  5;  Conroy  and  Honohan,  1994).  Clearly  markets 
were not convinced about the conduct of macroeconomic policy in general, and imposed that 
penalty. 
                                                
4  This discussion follows that of Murphy and Honohan (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
There is little evidence of the downward trend in the UK’s share of Irish exports being either 
accelerated or slowed by ERM membership (Figure 6a), though the share of imports coming 
from the UK did finally begin to decline (Figure 6b)5. The long-hoped for participation of the UK 
in the system finally occurred in October 1990, only for sterling to exit again within two years as 
the system fell apart in the crisis of 1992–1993. 
Managed float 1993–1998 
The  kind  of  adjustable  peg  currency  regime  at  the  heart  of  the  EMS  subsequently  became 
largely  discredited  (Fischer,  2001).  With  the  ERM  fluctuation  margins  widened  after  the  
1992–1993 crisis to an undemanding 15 per cent, there followed a curious interval during which 
a  seemingly  rather  under-defined  policy  actually  resulted  in  considerable  exchange  rate  and 
inflation stability. 
The  policy  regime  was  described  as  a  managed  float  (within  the  wide  ERM  bands6)  with  a 
general objective of price stability. That objective was not quantified, however. Achievement of 
the objective was said to be “predicated on maintaining a firm exchange rate vis-à-vis other low 
inflation  countries”  (Central  Bank  Annual  Report  1996)  –  so  there  was  an  exchange  rate 
objective,  though  again  unquantified.  Forex  intervention  was  undertaken  to  smooth  the 
exchange rate, and the exchange rate objective was “supported by changes in interest rates as 
required”. 
Despite  the  seeming  vagueness  and  ad  hoc  nature  of  this  policy  regime,  the  five-and-a-half 
years  that  it  covered  enjoyed  more  inflation  stability  than  the  subsequent  era,  with  the  four-
quarter  moving  average  staying  almost  wholly  within  a  1–3  per  cent  band.  The  ex  post  real 
interest rate differentials also narrowed significantly in this period. Furthermore, helped by the 
maintenance of international wage and price competitiveness, the mid-1990s was (as we must 
remember)  a  period  of  rapid  employment  and  output  growth  and  of  substantial  budgetary 
consolidation with an international balance of payments surplus. To an extent, this favourable 
experience is likely to have been facilitated by the determination to adhere to the convergence 
criteria established for entry to the single currency. 
Nevertheless, the chequered history of exchange rate volatility since the end of the sterling link 
meant that, when EMU finally got under way in 1999, it was ironically with some sense of relief 
that,  less  than  20  years  after  breaking  the  link between  the  Irish  pound  and  sterling,  Ireland 
abandoned currency autonomy in favour of the euro. 
The euro since 1999 
It  is  fashionable  now  to  decry  the  initial  design  of  the  euro  as  if  its  travails  were  easily 
foreseeable  or  indeed  inevitable.  Certainly  important  improvements  in  euro  area  institutional 
structures  have  been  launched  post-crisis,  especially  the  creation  of  bailout  funds  and  a 
centralised bank supervision mechanism. But it is equally true that sufficient existing national 
policy tools were available to have enabled the regime to survive its first 16 years without the 
trauma  that  has  been  experienced.  All  that  was  needed  was  disciplined  national  economic 
policy,  supplemented  where  necessary  by  sufficient  common  surveillance  of  participating 
countries’ policies. 
True,  when  countries  like  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal  got  into  trouble,  the 
traditional safety valve of devaluation was no longer available. But, one needs to recall that it 
                                                
5  By 1994 trade with the UK was well below that predicted by a simple gravity model (such as that of Brülhart and 
Kelly, 1999). But Thom and Walsh (2002) argue persuasively that the decline in Irish-UK trade was driven by 
factors other than the ending of the sterling link. 
6  Though  there  was  one  discrete  realignment  (involving  an  appreciation  of  the  15%  band  for  the  Irish  pound 
against the DM) in March 1998 as the start of the euro approached. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
was the systematic tendency to over-use that lever that had resulted in the inflationary stop-go 
of the 1970s and 1980s which was the major backdrop to the determination of many countries 
to  “import  the  credibility  of  the  Bundesbank”  by  signing  up  for  the  euro.  The  absence  of  a 
devaluation lever must be considered as a feature, not a bug, in the system. 
The fault, I am thus arguing, lies not so much in the system’s design as in the inadequacy of 
national economic and financial policies to take account of the risks that were still associated 
with  the  euro. There  is another  dimension  worth  mentioning.  And that  is  the  complacency of 
financial markets, which assumed that policies would in the end prove adequate (or, if not, that 
failing policies would be compensated by bail-outs) and accordingly did not provide to national 
authorities until it was too late the uncomfortable warning signals for which bond markets are 
notorious.  Indeed,  as  had  been  foreseen,  for  the  entire  decade  before  the  crisis  broke,  the 
single  currency  removed  the  risk  premium  in  wholesale  Irish  interest  rates,  an  achievement 
which was hailed at the time. 
With  the  Irish  economy  booming  already  from  1994  and  continuing  to  grow  rapidly  after  the 
start  of  the  euro,  low  interest  rates  were  not  exactly  what  was  needed  to  restrain  what  was 
obviously a somewhat overheated economy. But fiscal policy could have taken the strain – as 
could macroprudential policies. 
The creation of a sovereign wealth fund (the National Pension Reserve Fund) can be thought of 
as a step in this direction, though the annual 1 per cent of GDP contribution to it did not take 
enough  spending  power  out  of  the  economy.  Personal  savings  were  also  incentivised  by  a 
remarkably generous special savings scheme introduced in 2001, but this scheme disgorged 
the savings five years later, with the economy still in its boom phase. And fiscal incentives for 
the already over-dimensioned construction sector continued for far too long. While the overall 
headline  figures  for  the  Government’s  finances  showed  a  comfortable  position,  and  the  debt 
ratio fell to 25 per cent of GDP, stable sources of revenue had been displaced by volatile ones, 
and large expenditure commitments were undertaken making the future evolution of the public 
finances over-dependent on a continuation of the housing boom. 
Getting the public finances back on track after the collapse of the property boom would have 
been painful enough, but the added borrowing resulting from the bank failures (and from the 
assumption  by  Government  of  banking  debts)  was  the  straw  that  broke  the  camel’s  back, 
triggering a loss of access to international financial markets as awareness grew of the scale of 
the losses. Quick action to negotiate a programme of financial assistance from the IMF, and 
from  official  EU  lenders,  stabilised  the  situation  and  eventually  enabled  the  Government  to 
finance much of the additional borrowing on favourable terms. 
The very fact that the most significant banking failures outside of Ireland in this crisis occurred 
in non-euro area countries (Iceland, Latvia, the UK, the US) does help to emphasise that the 
Irish crisis was not a creation of the euro area. True, there were major banking failures in euro 
area  countries  too,  Spain,  Netherlands,  Belgium,  Germany,  France  and  so  on.  Banking 
excesses  were  essentially  a  global  phenomenon  in  the  first  decade  of  the  2000s.  Yes,  Irish 
banks probably found it that bit easier to access foreign funds when no account needed to be 
taken of exchange rate risk. But Iceland’s banks also sourced international funds without much 
difficulty. 
In the past, exchange rate regimes did not come complete with specific external supervision of 
domestic  policies.  To  be  sure,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  has  conducted 
surveillance  of  its  members’  fiscal  policies  for  decades,  regardless  of  their  exchange  rate 
regime.  Ireland’s  peg  to  sterling  was  of  course  not  accompanied  by  banking  supervision 
conducted  by  the  Bank of  England.  Nor  did  the  European  Monetary  System  have  a  banking 
supervision arm. And that was the decision also when the euro area was established: creation 
of something like what has now been established as the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
would have been seen as a step too far by anti-federalists. Still, in its enthusiasm for forging an 
understanding of the euro area as the most relevant policy unit for its actions, the ECB may 
have gone too far in the other direction of failing to appreciate the dangers posed by intra-euro 
area capital flows, especially through the banking system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  IMF  did  not  foresee  the  Irish  banking  meltdown,  and  this  realisation  may  induce  some 
scepticism  about  the  ability  of  external  surveillance  to  prevent  such  problems.  However,  the 
SSM’s analysis and engagement is much more intense, and it has the full powers of a modern 
banking regulator. 
Fluctuations in sterling also contributed to overall economic performance in Ireland during the 
financial  crisis.  Sterling  weakened  sharply  in  2007–2008  pushing  the  bilateral  nominal 
exchange rate for Ireland vis-à-vis the UK to all-time record levels (Figure 7). This surge was 
largely maintained during the worst of the crisis, though it has since fallen back – though not yet 
(March 2015) to the levels of mid-2007. 
Concluding remarks 
Each of Ireland’s three currency regimes has seen periods of relative prosperity and of crisis 
and  recession.  This  should  not  surprise  us.  The  textbooks  have  struggled  to  determine 
unambiguously what type of exchange rate regime works best in all environments for different 
types  of  country.  Poor  economic  policies  and  bad  luck  are  more  reliable  determinants  of 
episodes of poor economic performance than choice of exchange rate regime. 
During  the  1970s  the  sterling  link  in  practice  tended  to  export  Britain’s  relatively  lack-lustre 
economic performance to Ireland in a way which was only partially offset by domestic policies. 
The greater flexibility  of  the  ERM  could  not  insulate  the  economy  from  the  consequences of 
fiscal  collapse  and  fiscal  correction  in  the  1980s.  And  policy  inattention  to  the  heightened 
vulnerabilities of the single currency meant that Ireland was one of the worst performing euro 
area countries in the downturn of 2008–2012. 
Should we not conclude that the choice of exchange rate regime for a country like Ireland is of 
second order importance for national welfare relative to the quality of domestic policy choices 
and  implementation?  If  so,  focussing  on  these  domestic  policy  issues  is  what  is  needed  to 
ensure that Ireland can reach its full potential in the euro area. 
References 
Boyle, G.E. and P.T. Geary. 2004. “The Irish Currency Report of 1804.” Central Bank of Ireland 
Quarterly Bulletin (Spring): 107–127. 
Brülhart, Marius and Mary J. Kelly. 1999. “Ireland’s Trading Potential with Central and Eastern 
European Countries: A Gravity Study.” The Economic and Social Review 30(2): 159–174. 
Fischer,  Stanley.  2001.  “Exchange  Rate  Regimes:  Is  the  Bipolar  View  Correct?”  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives 15(2):3-24. 
Gerlach, Stefan and Rebecca Stuart. 2014. “Money, Interest and Prices in Ireland, 1933–2012.” 
Central Bank of Ireland Technical Paper 07/RT/14. 
Honohan, Patrick. 1997. “Currency Board or Central Bank? Lessons from the Irish Pound’s Link 
with Sterling, 1928–79”. Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review 200: 39–70. 
Honohan,  Patrick.  2002.  “Using  Other  People’s  Money:  Farewell  to  the  Irish  Pound.”  History 
Ireland 10(1): 34–37. 
Honohan, Patrick and Charles Conroy. 1994. Irish Interest Rate Fluctuations in the European 
Monetary System. (Dublin: Economic and Social Research Institute). 
Honohan, Patrick and Gavin  Murphy. 2010. “Breaking the Sterling Link: Ireland’s Decision to 
Enter the EMS.” IIIS Discussion Paper No. 317, Trinity College Dublin. 
Ó  Gráda,  Cormac.  1994.  Ireland:  A  New  Economic  History  1780–1939.  (Oxford  University 
Press). 
Thom, R. and B. Walsh. 2002. “The Effect of a Currency Union on Trade: Lessons from the 
Irish Experience,” European Economic Review 46, 1111–1123. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
  8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  