  
 
Haruhiko Kuroda: Moving forward – Japan’s economy under Quantitative 
and Qualitative Monetary Easing 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society, New 
York City, 26 August 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to speak at the Japan Society today. 
More  than  two  years  have  passed  since  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  Quantitative  and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. Let me 
briefly  look  back  at  these  two  years.  In  the  first  year,  Japan’s  economy  improved 
impressively,  registering  both  rising  growth  and  inflation.  Real  GDP  growth  in  fiscal  2013 
exceeded 2 percent and annual CPI inflation (consumer price index, all items less fresh food) 
increased from minus 0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE to 1.5 percent in April 
2014 (Chart 1). 
In contrast, in fiscal 2014, the second year after the introduction of QQE, Japan’s economic 
performance  was  a  little  disappointing.  One  reason  is  that  the  negative  impact  of  the 
consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014  was  larger  than  expected.  The  tax  hike  brought  about 
swings in demand and a decrease in real income, both of which resulted in sluggish private 
consumption, in particular of durable goods such as automobiles. On the inflation front, crude 
oil prices declined substantially from the beginning of autumn. Although the oil price decline 
should have a favorable impact on economic activity in the longer term, in the short term it 
has a downward impact on inflation through the decline in energy prices such as gasoline 
and electricity prices. As a result, annual CPI inflation rapidly declined toward the end of last 
year and has been about 0 percent this year so far. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  not  surprising  that  some  wonder  whether  the  Bank’s  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  can  really  be  achieved.  Has  the  trend  toward  overcoming 
deflation come to an end? This is far from the case. 
What I would most like to stress here is that the two factors – the consumption tax hike and 
the substantial decline in oil prices – only temporally have a downward impact on inflation. 
The  growth  and  inflation  figures  were  strongly  affected  by  these  factors  and  were  indeed 
disappointing, but if we take a closer look at the underlying trends, we find that significant 
changes that were not observed during the deflationary period are taking place. 
Let  me  highlight  two  of  these  changes.  The  first  is  that  Japanese  firms  are  seeing  record 
profits  and their  investment  stance  has  become  increasingly  positive.  The  other  change  is 
that wages have clearly risen for the first time in two decades, reflecting that the tight labor 
market has brought about “full employment” – that is, a situation in which, from a statistical 
perspective,  there  is  no  unemployment  other  than  that  due  to  the  frictional  mismatch 
between job openings and job applicants. 
What I would like to focus on today are the remarkable changes that have been taking place 
in Japan’s economy during the past two years  under QQE. I would also like to review the 
transmission mechanism of QQE and how QQE has brought about those changes. I believe 
that at the end of my speech you will share our outlook for Japan’s economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 I. 
Changes in Japan’s economy 
 Record profits and firms’ positive investment stance 
I would like to start by touching on the improvement in the corporate sector. As I mentioned, 
Japanese  firms  have  been  making  record  profits.  In  fact,  their  profits  have  considerably 
exceeded those around 1990 at the peak of the bubble economy (Chart 2). 
Let me briefly review what has happened in Japan’s economy over the past several years. 
Japan’s economy was hit much harder than the U.S. economy by the global financial crisis 
triggered by the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008, even though the United States had been 
the  epicenter  of  the  crisis  caused  by  subprime  mortgages.  In  fiscal  2008,  industrial 
production  in  Japan  fell  by  more  than  10  percent  and  real  GDP  contracted  by  about 
4 percent. There were a number of reasons why Japan’s economy was hit particularly hard. 
One notable factor is that, since Japanese products and technologies play an essential part 
in global supply chains, the decline in global final demand affected Japanese firms especially 
severely. Subsequently, in 2011, Japan was hit by the Great East Japan Earthquake, which 
caused widespread damage to people and facilities. The situation was further exacerbated 
by the sharp appreciation of the yen. In sum, Japan’s economy was confronted with a series 
of  adverse  shock  during  these  years. In the face  of this  adversity, firms  made  progress  in 
improving  their  efficiency  and  profitability  through  a  wide  range  of  efforts  such  as 
reorganizing  production  and  shifting  operations  overseas.  Having  survived  the  hardship  of 
the recent past, Japanese firms improved their profitability considerably. 
Under Abenomics, the excessive appreciation of the yen has been corrected. This correction 
has not only improved Japanese firms’ export profitability, but also raised the yen value of 
the profits generated through foreign subsidiaries and other overseas-related business. The 
latter effect is larger than in the past because of the expansion of firms’ overseas operations 
in recent years. In addition, the decline in oil prices since last autumn has been pushing up 
profits in a wide range of sectors in Japan’s economy, which is almost completely dependent 
on imports for crude oil supply. Meanwhile, despite of the correction of the yen’s excessive 
appreciation,  the  recovery  in  exports  –  compared  to  past  recovery  phases  –  remained 
sluggish due to the expansion of Japanese firms’ overseas production. However, since the 
July-September 2014 quarter, exports have clearly been picking up, rising for three quarters 
in a row before registering a small decline in the latest quarter. 
Looking  ahead,  corporate  profits  are  expected  to  remain  high.  According  to  the  Bank  of 
Japan’s  June  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan),  firms  have 
revised their fiscal 2014 profits upward and the outlook for fiscal 2015 remains strong. Given 
this favorable profit situation, firms are more confident about their business outlook and the 
recovery  in  business  fixed  investment  is  becoming  more  pronounced.  A  particularly 
significant change is that, after prioritizing overseas investment in the past few years, firms 
are  turning  to  domestic  investment  in  response  to  the  correction  of  the  yen’s  excessive 
appreciation. 
There  has  been  some  concern  over  the  weakness  in  exports  and  production  in  recent 
months,  but  we  see  this  as  temporary,  mainly  reflecting  the  sluggishness  of  the  U.S. 
economy  in  the  January-March  quarter  and  the  recent  slowdown  in  Asian  economies. 
Indeed, in the recent Tankan, business sentiment has remained favorable, and firms expect 
corporate  profits  to  remain  high  and  plan  to  increase  business  fixed  investment  further  in 
fiscal 2015. Moreover, leading indicators such as machinery orders and construction starts 
also point at an increase in business fixed investment. At the same time, due attention needs 
to  be  paid  to  risks  such  as  the  situation  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies 
and recent developments in global financial markets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Full employment and the positive feedback between wage increases and inflation 
Another significant change is that, with the economy virtually at full employment, wages have 
increased  for  the  first  time  in  two  decades.  There  now  is  a  positive  feedback  mechanism 
operating between wage increases and moderate inflation. I would like to elaborate on this 
point since it is the key to overcoming deflation. 
Japan’s  economy  was  mired  in  deflation  –  a  persistent  decline  in  prices  –  for  more  than 
15 years,  starting  in  the  mid-1990s.  A  key  feature  of  deflation  is  that  it  tends  to  become 
entrenched in a self-fulfilling manner once the economy falls into it. Under deflation, people 
engage in economic activities based on the expectation that prices will continue to decline in 
the  future  or  that,  at  least,  prices  will  not  increase.  The  decline  in  prices  of  goods  and 
services  in  turn  results  in  a  decline  in  firms’  sales  and  profits,  leading  to  stagnant  wages. 
Households become cautious in their consumption, since they do not expect their wages to 
increase. As a result, the economy falls into a vicious cycle of sluggish demand and a decline 
in  prices  of  goods  and  services.  John  Maynard  Keynes  argued  that  during  a  recession 
downward  rigidity  in  nominal  wages  would  cause  unemployment  to  increase.  However,  in 
Japan, downward rigidity in nominal wages, which was widely considered rock-solid, started 
to disappear in the mid-1990s and the economy fell into an equilibrium with declining wages 
and prices (Chart 3). 
Under deflation, there were various changes in economic and social practices that had been 
built  on  the  assumption  that  prices  would  rise.  For  instance,  in  Japan,  workers  and 
management engage in wage negotiations every year called shunto or the spring offensive, 
which take place collectively across industries in early spring. Until the mid-1990s, base pay 
increases, that is, across-the-board wage increases reflecting inflation, were common as part 
of  the  shunto.  In  the  late  1990s,  such  base  pay  increases  disappeared.  Another  long-
standing tradition in Japan was that prices of a wide range of goods and services were raised 
at the beginning of each fiscal year in April. This practice also disappeared. 
In  order  to  escape  from  this  deflationary  equilibrium,  it  was  necessary  to  dispel  the 
deflationary mindset – that is, the entrenched view that prices will not rise – and achieve a 
state in which firms and households act based on the assumption that prices will continue to 
rise moderately in the future. In the economics jargon, inflation expectations needed to be 
raised. In plain English, this means that we have to change firms’ and households’ views on 
prices, which form the basis for their economic activities. 
In this context, there have been  very encouraging changes since the introduction of QQE. 
The practices that disappeared in the deflationary period have come back. 
First, in the shunto last year, base pay was increased for the first time in two decades. And in 
the shunto this year, base pay was raised for the second year in a row and at many firms the 
increases  were  larger  than  last  year.  In  addition,  base  pay  increases  have  become 
widespread across industries and firms of different size. 
The practice of hiking prices at the beginning of the fiscal year also seems to have returned 
this year. Let me provide you with some evidence. First, looking at the items that make up 
the CPI (all items less fresh food), the share of items whose prices rose minus the share of 
items  whose  prices fell  has  risen  markedly  since  the  beginning  of this fiscal  year  and  has 
reached the highest level since the early 2000s (Chart 4). Second, daily and weekly indices 
of the prices of food and daily necessities – namely, the University of Tokyo Daily Price Index 
and the SRI-Hitotsubashi Consumer Purchase Price Index – since April this year also point 
at clear price increases on a year-on-year basis. Moreover, the rate of increase shown by 
these  indicators  has  continued  to  go  up.  Many  firms  attempted  to  raise  their  prices  at  the 
beginning  of  the  last  fiscal  year  as  well,  but  this  coincided  with  the  consumption  tax  hike, 
which was followed by a decline in demand. Firms were therefore forced to quickly take price 
rises  back.  The  price  changes  this  year  present  a  clear  contrast  with  those  last  year.  For 
example, in April this year, the price of ketchup was raised for the first time in 25 years – I 
should note that this price hike was not due to purchases by the Bank of Japan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The simultaneous comeback of these practices – base pay increases in the shunto and price 
hikes at the start of the fiscal year – is by no means a coincidence. Workers have demanded 
increases in base pay, since they expect the rising trend in prices to continue and want to 
avoid a decline in real  wages. On the other hand, firms’ management has agreed to such 
demands,  since  they  expect  that  the  wage  increases  can  be  absorbed  by  raising  sales 
prices.  The  government’s  initiative  at  the  joint  meeting  of  representatives  from  the 
government, labor unions, and firms’ management may have facilitated these developments, 
but it is clear that a positive feedback loop between wage increases and moderate inflation is 
now firmly in place. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  tight  labor  market  conditions  behind  these  wage 
increases. Japan’s unemployment rate, which was above 4 percent before the introduction of 
QQE, has declined to a range of 3.0–3.5 percent (Chart 5). The decline in the unemployment 
rate has been accompanied by  increases in both the labor force participation rate and the 
number of employees. Based on the relationship between job openings and job applicants in 
the  past,  the  current  unemployment  rate  of  3.0–3.5  percent  can  be  regarded  as 
corresponding to “full employment,” that is, the remaining unemployment is solely due to the 
mismatch  between  job  openings  and  job  applicants  and  there  is  no  excess  labor.  In  the 
United States, against the background of higher-than-normal long-term unemployment, there 
has been intense debate on the degree of slack in the labor market. In contrast, in Japan, all 
relevant indicators strongly suggest that labor market conditions are very tight. For example, 
the broadly-defined unemployment rate, which counts so-called marginally attached workers 
as  unemployed  and  corresponds  to  U-6  in  the  United  States,  has  declined  to  about  6 
percent, which is low compared to past levels. 
Transmission mechanism of QQE 
II. 
As I just explained, remarkable changes have been taking place in Japan’s economy in the 
last two years. Of course, these changes cannot entirely be attributed to the effects of QQE 
implemented by the Bank of Japan. However, it can be judged that QQE has been producing 
its  intended  effects  through  the  transmission  mechanism  envisioned  at  the  time  of  its 
introduction. Let me review the transmission mechanism of QQE. 
Japan’s monetary policy has been constrained for a long time by the zero lower bound on 
short-term  nominal  interest  rates.  In  this  situation,  QQE  aims  to  achieve  further  easing 
effects by reducing long-term real interest rates. Specifically, the mechanism is as follows. 
The Bank raises inflation expectations through a strong and clear commitment to achieving 
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  and  large-scale  monetary  easing  to  underpin  the 
commitment  (Chart  6). At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  exerts  downward  pressure  on  nominal 
interest  rates  across  the  entire  yield  curve  through  massive  purchases  of  Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs).  As  a  result,  long-term  real  interest  rates  decline.  With  private 
demand  being  stimulated,  the  output  gap  improves,  and  actual  inflation  rates  rise 
accordingly.  Once  people  actually  experience 
inflation 
expectations rise, further reinforcing this process. 
The changes we have witnessed since the introduction of QQE are broadly consistent with 
this transmission mechanism. Nominal long-term interest rates have declined, with yields of 
10-year  JGBs  down  by  about  0.3  percentage  point.  Medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations seem to have increased by about 0.5 percentage point. The combined effects 
of  these two  factors  – the  decline  in  nominal  long-term  yields  and  the  increase  in  inflation 
expectations  –  have  brought  about  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates  by  slightly  less  than 
1 percentage point. Studies for the United States and Europe suggest that the effects of a 
downward  shift  of  the  entire  yield  curve  –  i.e.,  including  long-term  interest  rates  –  on 
economic activity and prices are several times larger than those of a decline in short-term 
rates under conventional monetary policy. Along similar lines, empirical research by our staff 
suggests that the effects of QQE are roughly equivalent to those arising from lowering the 
short-term  policy  rate  by  2  percentage  points. Given  how  powerful monetary  easing  under 
increases 
inflation, 
their 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  QQE  has  been,  it  is  no  wonder  that  Japan’s  economy  has  been  experiencing  the  drastic 
changes I mentioned. 
The former Fed Chairman, Ben Bernanke, is quoted to have said, “The problem with QE is it 
works in practice but it doesn’t work in theory.” The effectiveness of QE likely differs across 
economies, depending on economic conditions and financial structures, and academics have 
not reached a consensus on how effective QE is. However, in the case of Japan, we believe 
that  it  is  possible  to  explain  how  QQE  works  in  theory,  and  QQE  has  been  working  as 
envisaged. 
Based  on  this  belief,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  steadily  pursue  QQE  to  achieve  the  price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  at  the  earliest  possible  time.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and 
downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments without hesitation if 
necessary. 
Conclusion 
With  the  prospect  of  overcoming  deflation  in  sight,  efforts  to  raise  the  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s  economy  should  gather  steam.  The  government  is  currently  implementing  various 
regulatory and institutional reforms as part of its growth strategy. I am aware that many have 
found previous proposals to raise Japan’s growth potential disappointing. In hindsight, it is 
clear that there has been a lack of sufficient incentive and impetus to make change happen. 
Firms had few incentives to grow and simply removing obstacles to growth had little effect. 
Partly  because  of  this,  the  political  will  to  remove  such  obstacles  was  also  weak.  But  this 
time is different. Since Japanese firms now believe that deflation is over, there will be strong 
incentive for change. Under deflation, sticking to the status quo was a reasonable business 
strategy. This is no longer the case and, aware of the drastic changes that have occurred in 
the  domestic  business  environment,  a  growing  number  of  Japanese  firms  are  now  taking 
action.  This  should  be  a  major  driving  force  for  removing  regulatory  and  institutional 
obstacles. For instance, low labor participation by women has long been an issue for Japan’s 
economy;  however,  faced  with  a  tight  labor  market,  firms  have  recently  made  efforts  to 
promote labor participation by women. At the same time, the government has also tried to do 
so by incorporating institutional reforms in the growth strategy. As a result, labor participation 
by women has finally increased. The key to raising the growth potential is “action” and there 
is no better time than now to move forward. The Bank of Japan will contribute to raising the 
growth potential of Japan’s economy by achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the 
earliest  possible  time  through  QQE  and  dispelling  the  deflationary  mindset  that  has  taken 
hold of Japan. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   6 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
   8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
