  Dennis Lockhart: A potentially momentous year for policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Dennis  Lockhart,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Atlanta, to the Rotary Club of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, 12 January 2015. 
 Key points 
• 
Atlanta  Fed  President  and  CEO  Dennis  Lockhart,  in  a  January  12  speech  at  the 
Rotary Club of Atlanta, reviews the growing strength of the economy, the economic 
outlook for the year ahead, and the monetary policy outlook. 
Lockhart stresses that the policy “liftoff” decision will be data-dependent. 
Lockhart expects the annual rate of GDP growth for the second half of the year to be 
around 4 percent, which is strong growth. 
Another reason for optimism, says Lockhart, is that there was more improvement in 
labor  markets  in  2014  than  in  any  other  year  of  the  recovery.  He  thinks  the 
momentum  evident  in  the  second  half  of  2014  will  carry  over  into  2015,  and  the 
ongoing outlook will remain solid. 
Lockhart feels the Fed is nearing the end of its job as defined by the extraordinary 
circumstances  of  the  financial  crisis  and  deep  recession.  He  is  looking  for  a  new 
phase of policy to commence in 2015. 
   As  I  look  back  on  2014  and  look  ahead  to  2015,  I  can  comfortably  assert  that,  more  and 
more, the U.S. economy is hitting on all cylinders. The recovery that began in 2009 is well-
advanced,  and  we  are  getting  closer  to  a  point  where  the  Fed’s  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC),  the  body  that  formulates  monetary  policy,  can  begin  a  process  of 
normalizing the interest-rate environment. That process will begin with so-called “liftoff” – that 
is, the first increase in the policy rate. 
Chair Yellen, speaking for the Committee, has stressed that the liftoff decision will be data-
dependent.  That  means  we  will  be  closely  monitoring  evidence  of  the  performance  of  the 
economy as the year proceeds, and we will be assessing what the stream of economic data 
seem to indicate regarding the outlook. 
So, today I want to present my forecast of how this potentially momentous year is likely to 
play out. I’ll do this in terms of both the vital economic signs and policy. I want to give you a 
sense of what factors could materially change – even derail – that scenario. And I want to 
convey a sense of the basis on which important policy decisions ahead will be made. 
This is my eighth annual address to this club. As always, you will be hearing my personal 
views. I am not speaking for the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. My colleagues may 
not agree with what I have to say. 
Current state of economy and outlook 
So let’s start with the current economic situation. I’ll do a short-form version of this focused 
on three key elements of economic performance – growth, employment, and inflation. 
After negative growth (contraction) in the first quarter of 2014 that was largely explained by 
bad  weather,  the  economy  experienced  strong  and  accelerating  growth  through  the  third 
quarter. 
Growth in the fourth quarter is likely to be slower than the very strong third quarter. We are 
still  working  with  very  preliminary  measures  of  fourth-quarter  performance.  At  the  Atlanta 
Fed,  we  expect  the  fourth-quarter  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  rate  to  come  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  around 3 percent (annualized). That would produce an annual rate of growth in the second 
half  around  4  percent.  This  is  strong  growth,  and  we  believe  there  is  solid  momentum 
carrying  over  into  2015.  Notwithstanding  the  equity  market  volatility  of  last  week,  we’re 
starting the year on an optimistic note in terms of real economic activity. 
Growth  of  consumer  spending  appeared  to  accelerate  toward  the  close  of  2014.  Personal 
consumption  expenditures  rose  at  an  annual  rate  of  9.2  percent  in  November,  raising  the 
year-over-year  rate  to  2.8  percent growth.  Roughly  half  of  the  strong  November  growth of 
consumption  was  auto  purchases,  but  other  categories  of  spending  accelerated  as  well. 
People  seem  to  be  more  prepared  to  open  their  pocketbooks.  The  University  of  Michigan 
consumer sentiment index for December reached its highest reading since January 2007. 
Another reason for optimism is that 2014 was a year of significantly improved employment 
conditions. Payrolls increased by almost 3 million, the strongest reading since 2000, and the 
gains were spread across a wide range of industries. The headline unemployment rate fell by 
more than a percent over the year. The long-term unemployment rate, defined as 27 weeks 
or more, also declined meaningfully. 
Also,  we  saw  the  smallest  decline  in  five  years  in  the  participation  in  the  labor  market  of 
working-age  people.  We  believe  this  indicates  increasing  confidence  in  labor  market 
prospects. 
Over the last year as the labor market has improved, we’ve paid special attention to trends in 
wages.  Growing  wages  would  validate  tightening  employment  conditions  and  would  also 
support  growth  of  consumer  activity  and  prices.  Both  are  highly  desirable  in  current 
circumstances. 
The  recent  evidence  on  wages  has  been  mixed.  A  number  of  measures  of  wage  growth 
remained well below historical norms throughout most of last year, while others did tick up 
slightly in the second and third quarters. 
Based on research, my team has advanced the thesis that the elevated number of people 
working part-time involuntarily is restraining wage growth. There are about 6.8 million such 
workers as of December. It’s encouraging that the number of involuntary part-time workers 
declined by almost a million over the past year, four times the decrease in 2013. 
Overall, there was more improvement in labor markets in 2014 than in any other year of the 
recovery.  Employment  conditions  are  improving,  and  improving  faster,  and  prospects  of 
continued progress are encouraging moving into the new year. 
The  behavior  of  wages  and  prices,  in  contrast,  remains  less  encouraging,  and,  frankly, 
somewhat puzzling in light of recent growth and jobs numbers. 
Most  recent  readings  of  inflation  remain  considerably  below  the  Fed’s  notion  of  a  healthy 
rate, that is, 2 percent. In spite of extremely accommodative interest-rate conditions, inflation 
readings have tracked well short of the 2 percent target for the past two years. 
At  the  Atlanta  Fed,  we  don’t  rely  totally  on  any  single  measure  of  inflation.  We  use  a 
dashboard approach to tracking and assessing the broad inflation picture. The components 
that typically make up a traditional inflation forecast (including, for example, producer prices 
and  commodity  prices)  are  showing  readings  toward  the  lower  end  of  their  longer-term 
ranges. 
Let  me  summarize  in  captions.  Solid  growth.  Improving  employment  conditions.  Stronger 
consumer activity. But mixed wage growth and weak inflation readings. 
Taking  account  of  all  this,  I  see  a  positive  outlook  for  2015.  I  expect  GDP  growth  to  be 
around  3  percent  for  the  year.  I  expect  continued  robust  job  creation  accompanied  by 
growing  wages.  And,  while  acknowledging  some  room  for  skepticism  about  the  inflation 
picture, I’m looking for inflation to rise gradually through year-end. There will almost certainly 
be  weak  inflation  readings  early  in  the  year  influenced  by  energy  prices.  But  once  that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  influence has passed, I expect inflation to move toward the Fed’s targeted longer-term run 
rate. 
Potential headwinds and downside risks 
What could derail or materially undermine this scenario? There are certainly risk concerns, 
whether we characterize them as potential headwinds or more serious downside risks. The 
most  concerning  is  a  soft  global  growth  outlook.  We’re  observing  a  rather  sharp  contrast 
between  U.S.  economic  prospects  and  those  of  much  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  jittery 
financial markets last week probably can be explained, at least in part, by an interpretation of 
falling oil prices as reflecting weak global demand, deflation data in Europe, and a resulting 
flight of capital to safety. 
I’m sure the question of the broad economic effects of falling oil prices is on your mind. I am 
of  the  view,  based  on  a  preliminary  assessment  by  Atlanta  Fed  economists,  that  lower  oil 
prices  will  be  a  net  benefit  to  the  U.S.  economy.  I  expect  a  decline  in  energy-sector  new 
investment and some falloff in employment to be more than offset by a boost to consumer 
activity. Also, the lower cost of oil imports should positively affect the net exports component 
of the GDP growth calculation. 
The appreciation of the dollar since last summer will likely affect the export sector, to some 
extent. My view is that the impact of the dollar’s more expensive exchange value and, for that 
matter,  the  direct  impact  of  lower  oil  prices  on  the  energy  sector  are  not  severe  for  the 
national  economy  as  a  whole.  But  whenever  two  major  world  “prices”  adjust  so  markedly, 
unanticipated second- and third-order effects could result. Geopolitical event risk connected 
to the rapid adjustment of these globally high-impact prices cannot be dismissed. Analytical 
humility is a sensible posture. 
Policy outlook 
These  are  concerns,  not  my  base-case  scenario.  As  I  said  earlier,  I  think  the  momentum 
evident  in  the  second  half  of  2014  will  carry  over  into  2015,  and  the  ongoing  outlook  will 
remain solid. 
If that is indeed the case, I believe the first action to raise interest rates will in all likelihood be 
justified by the middle of the year. 
The phrase “middle of the year” is admittedly not very precise. That’s purposeful on my part. 
Understandably, some financial market participants are fixated on what exact month the first 
move will occur. Perhaps it’s easy for me to say, but I don’t think the exact timing of liftoff is 
the most important concern. A couple of years hence, whether the first rate increase came at 
a particular meeting or another – whether a bit earlier or later than expected – isn’t going to 
make a great deal of difference for the real, Main Street economy. 
The key liftoff decision criteria ought to be closely linked to the FOMC’s two principal policy 
objectives  –  maximum  employment  and  low  and  stable  inflation.  In  my  view,  the  biggest 
factor influencing the actual timing of a liftoff decision should be the Committee’s confidence 
that  these  objectives  will  be  achieved  in  an  acceptable  timeframe  and,  especially,  that 
inflation will move at deliberate speed toward the target of 2 percent per annum. 
Inflation readings and forecasts may be pivotal in deciding when to begin adjusting policy. As 
already explained, we are, at present, experiencing inflationary trends well below target, and 
our readings are complicated by more-than-normal noise associated with the drop in oil and 
gasoline  prices,  falling  import  prices,  and  softening  of  some  measures  of  inflation 
expectations. 
It’s quite possible there will be considerable ambiguity in the picture presented by data in the 
first half of the year. Beyond the noise in inflation numbers, it’s obvious there is simply a lot 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  moving  around  at  this  time  –  oil  prices,  the  dollar,  even  quarterly  growth  numbers,  in  all 
likelihood. 
Noisy,  jumpy  data  affect  my  confidence  in  the  outlook.  I’m  likely  to  decide  what  policy 
decision to support based on where I think things are headed. When the numbers come in 
noisy, it’s just harder. 
If the early months of this year bring mixed news on the economy, the risk manager in me 
will lean to preferring a later date for the first policy move to an earlier one. That said, after 
six  years  of  recovery  and  considering  all  that  that  has  both  transpired  and  been 
accomplished, I don’t think we policymakers should get too rigid about liftoff a little earlier or 
later. My preferred timing may not be the Committee’s consensus decision. 
Just as I think it’s appropriate to downplay the exact timing of liftoff, I think it’s important to 
understand that a decision to raise rates will not constitute the throwing of a switch from easy 
money conditions to tight. The rate environment will remain stimulative, even as the policy 
rate gradually rises, as I expect. The pace of rate increases will not be preordained. The path 
of policy will depend on the ongoing performance of the economy. 
At the recent meeting of the FOMC in December, the Committee made an adjustment of its 
forward guidance by introducing the theme of patience in beginning to normalize the stance 
of  policy.  I  supported  and  expect  to  continue  to  support  a  patient  approach,  one  that  is 
relatively cautious and conservative as regards the pace of normalization of rates. 
Conclusion 
Now let me offer a few closing thoughts. I hope you will take away from this talk a distinct 
sense of satisfaction and optimism regarding the recent and prospective performance of the 
American economy. 
The  financial  crisis  of  2007  and  2008,  the  deep  recession  that  followed,  and  the  sluggish 
recovery after that presented extraordinary challenges, and the response involved the use of 
extraordinary  policy  measures.  I  feel  the  Fed  is  coming  nearer  to  the  end  of  our  job  as 
defined  by  those  extraordinary  circumstances,  and  anticipation  of  the  normalization  of 
monetary policy – interest rate policy – is appropriate. In that sense, I look for a new phase of 
policy to commence in 2015. 
Leaders of the Federal Reserve – both Ben Bernanke and Janet Yellen – have repeatedly 
emphasized that the Fed’s monetary policy is not a panacea, not a cure-all for all the nation’s 
economic challenges. In my opinion, many underlying fundamentals of the economy remain 
to be adequately addressed. When I use the word “fundamentals,” I have in mind concerns 
such  as  the  long-term  fiscal  balance;  the  strength  and  prospects  of  the  middle  class;  the 
skills,  capacity,  and  health  of  the  workforce;  the  quality  of  infrastructure;  and  funding  and 
incentives for continuing innovation. Addressing these really big challenges is not the work of 
monetary policy, but monetary policy can be a facilitator and shape a supportive environment 
for other actors – in the public sector, the private sector, and civil society – to tackle the hard 
work of strengthening these fundamentals. There’s still work to be done. 
I will end with that thought – a call to action for everyone in the room. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
