  Mugur Isărescu: The single currency – a central banker’s viewpoint from 
an EU Member State outside the euro area 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
2015 COFACE Country Risk Conference, Bucharest, 29 April 2015. 
 Dear Professor Issing, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  honour  of  opening  this  conference,  the  more  so  as  this  is  an 
opportunity  to  meet  Professor  Issing  again  –  the  similarity  of  our  surnames  brought  us 
literally  side  by  side  at  many  events  over  the  years.  Professor  Otmar  Issing’s  career  is 
stupendous,  but  it  is  only  natural  that the  general  public  has  been  remembering  him  as a 
prominent figure  of  the European  Central  Bank,  whose  inaugural  chief  economist  he  was, 
and as a key contributor to the building of the Economic and Monetary Union. 
Euro adoption by Romania: between desirable and feasible 
I. 
My intention today is to speak about the issue of the single currency from the viewpoint of a 
central banker in an EU Member State still outside the euro area. During my address, it is 
inevitable to touch upon various opinions which our distinguished guest has expressed over 
the years. 
I start by recalling what Otmar Issing said back in 2006, in a dinner speech occasioned by his 
leaving the ECB: “We were all privileged to participate in a historically unique experiment: the 
creation of a new currency for Europe. We had to manoeuvre through uncharted waters and 
we may not yet have arrived in the Promised Land”. I take these words as a prophecy, made 
in those heydays, when things seemed to move into the right direction all by themselves. The 
outbreak of the global crisis had not yet exposed the fracture lines of the European construct, 
which originated in the  incomplete institutional architecture of the Economic and  Monetary 
Union,  as  reflected  by  the  weakness  of  fiscal  rules  and  the  absence  of  transnational 
instruments  to  monitor  cross-border  private  capital  flows.  Many  a  times  I  heard  Professor 
Issing  talk  about  the  need  to  address  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  monetary  union  project, 
particularly  in  the  area  of  public  finance,  where  monetary  policy  more  than  often  overlaps 
politics. 
To what extent the Eurozone is now closer to the Promised Land than in 2006 is debatable. 
On  the  one  hand,  euro  area  enlargement  continued  at  a  sustained  pace,  so  that  it  now 
encompasses 19 countries from 12 originally. On the other hand, for the non-euro area EU 
Member  States,  recent  experience  has  made  the  benefits  of  euro  adoption  become  less 
visible  than  its  costs.  Thus,  in  the  pre-crisis  period,  euro  area  membership  was  seen  as 
automatically delivering lower risk premiums, thereby helping achieve faster growth rates. In 
retrospect,  the  then  benefit  should  not  be  viewed  otherwise  than  as  a  consequence  of 
improper  risk  assessment  –  financing  costs  for  several  euro  area  member  countries  have 
been exceeding those of some non-euro area Member States, Romania included. 
Obviously,  not  only  the  developments  in  the  Eurozone,  but  also  the  progress  in  non-euro 
area countries contributed thereto. As for Romania, I cannot refrain from underscoring that, 
while in 2008 the country did not fulfil any of the Maastricht criteria (the only indicator below 
the  reference  value  was  that  on  government  debt,  which  is  part  of  the fiscal  sustainability 
criterion), today it is a frontrunner in terms of macrostability. This refers to the fulfilment of the 
nominal convergence criteria and the observance of the reference values in the scoreboard 
for  the  surveillance  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  (net  international  investment  position  is 
the only indicator in excess of the reference value, the same as in all new Member States). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This is the right time to reassess the schedule for euro adoption, especially in the context of 
the governance framework reform that is underway in the euro area and of the wait-and-see 
approach  of  other  non-euro  area  Member  States  (I  am  referring  to  Central  and  Eastern 
European  countries,  namely  Bulgaria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Croatia,  Poland  and  Hungary). 
We should ask ourselves whether setting a target date is a good idea. The answer would be: 
yes, to the extent that it helps reach political consensus, while also providing a policy anchor 
by rendering macroeconomic policies more coherent and acting as a catalyst for structural 
reforms. However, in case the target date turns unrealistic or the formal commitment is not 
accompanied  by  a  roadmap  with  clearly  defined  intermediate  objectives,  the  credibility  of 
euro adoption is rightfully questioned and the process loses its positive features mentioned 
above. 
We cannot speak of euro adoption and sustainable nominal convergence without referring to 
real convergence as well. Even though the latter lacks a clear-cut definition and quantitative 
benchmarks, attaining a sufficient degree of real convergence is an important parameter for 
successful euro area membership, since it minimises the risks associated with abandoning 
monetary policy independence. This is all the more important as euro adoption implies, in the 
words of Professor Issing, a “permanent commitment”. From this perspective, the two types 
of  convergence  are  mutually  reinforcing:  nominal  convergence  provides  the  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  that  fosters  real  convergence,  while  the  latter  lays  the 
groundwork  for  sustainable  nominal  convergence  by  reducing  the  economy’s  exposure  to 
asymmetric shocks and containing differences in the transmission of symmetric shocks. It is, 
however, of the essence that the pursuit of real convergence gains should not be governed 
by  a  short-term  vision,  in  which  case  they  would  come  at  the  cost  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances. 
Is Romania prepared for ERM II? 
II. 
Professor Issing is going to speak today about the global currency war, about whether we 
are indeed witnessing a genuine clash of currencies, as well as about the consequences of 
the massive exchange rate swings. It is a topical issue, also relevant to Romania, because 
the reshaping of the relations among major global currencies – including on the background 
of the ECB’s recent quantitative easing – complicates the task of identifying the equilibrium 
exchange rate of the leu suitable for ERM II entry and thereafter for euro adoption. 
Technically,  the  adoption  of the  single  currency  as  of  1  January  2019  would  imply  joining 
ERM II in 2016 H1 and the minimum two-year stay. Aside from the difficulty of setting the 
central parity, ERM II participation calls, however, for a certain preparedness of the economy 
as  well,  considering  the  risks  inherently  posed  by  a  target-band  regime.  The  need  to 
minimise  such  risks  and  the  requirement  to  fulfil  the  Maastricht  criteria  by  the  end  of  the 
second year of ERM II participation render all the more important the completion of major 
economic  policy  adjustments  ahead  of  adopting  this  exchange  rate  regime.  I  am  mainly 
referring  to  removing  the  sources  of  repressed  inflation  (the  relevant  example  being  the 
completion of the energy market deregulation), of quasi-fiscal deficits (by restructuring loss-
making state-owned enterprises), as well as other sources of future budgetary pressure (for 
instance,  the  unavoidable  expenditures  to  modernise  road  infrastructure).  There  are  also 
monetary adjustments that need to be carried out ahead of ERM II entry, namely finalising 
the process of bringing minimum reserve requirement ratios in line with euro area levels. The 
large volumes implied by the cut in reserve ratios and the potential impact on the exchange 
rate call for a gradual approach to this process, possibly spanning one year to one year and 
a half, which is yet another reason why ERM II entry in 2016 and hence euro adoption in 
2019 are highly ambitious goals. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 III. 
The rationale behind other EU Member States’ wait-and-see approach to euro 
adoption 
 In fact, Romania is the only non-euro area EU Member State that has set a target date for 
the  adoption  of  the  single  currency.  The  other  countries  show  a  prevailing  wait-and-see 
approach,  driven  not  necessarily  by  the  difficulty  to  observe  the  limits  provided  for  by  the 
nominal  convergence  criteria  (generally  achieved  or  within  reach),  but  rather  by  a 
fundamental  change  in  the  overall  approach  to  euro  adoption.  This  occurred  amid  the 
benefits of euro adoption becoming less obvious and the costs more apparent. 
I have already pointed out at the beginning of my speech the fading benefits that euro area 
membership  provided  in  terms  of  financing  costs.  Additionally,  the  benefits  of  trade 
integration, previously deemed as irrefutable, have been drastically diminished by the weak 
euro area growth. 
As  for  the  costs  of  euro  adoption,  Central  and  Eastern  European  economies  with  floating 
currencies  went  through  relatively  milder  economic  contractions  than  those  with  fixed 
exchange rate regimes, which highlighted the relevance of this element of policy flexibility. It 
has  become  clearer  than  ever  that  early  euro  adoption  is  undesirable,  at  least  from  this 
standpoint. 
Furthermore, direct costs have emerged in relation to euro area membership, arising from 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  the  establishment  of  resolution  mechanisms.  Bearing  such 
costs entails not only additional financial efforts. It is politically difficult to justify to the general 
public  the  need  for  financial  contributions  to  mechanisms  that  richer  countries  currently 
benefit from (the collapse of the Radičová Cabinet in Slovakia in 2011 is illustrative in this 
respect). 
Another argument for the reluctance to set a target date for euro adoption is also linked to 
the  fact  that  the  euro  area,  unlike  the  European  Union,  appears  not  to  have  been  a 
convergence  club  for  its  members.  Hence,  the  standard  deviation  of  GDP/capita  at  PPS 
relative to the group average indicates higher disparities among countries part of the initial 
euro area setup, while homogeneity in terms of income has been increasing across the EU. 
In my opinion, this state of affairs does not rule out the success within the euro area, but 
merely  highlights  that  it  can  be  achieved  only  under  certain  circumstances  (the  prior 
achievement of a sufficiently high economic development level and coherent macroeconomic 
policies). The thorough preparation of euro adoption is therefore essential, so as to ensure 
the  sustainable  compliance  with  nominal  convergence  criteria,  because  a  single  currency 
area is no place for economies with competitiveness issues or rigid markets. 
Last  but  not  least,  the  changes  to  the  euro  area  governance  framework  for  solving  the 
deficiencies  highlighted  by  the  crisis  need  to  stand  the  test  of  applicability.  Only  one  year 
ago,  Professor  Issing  insisted  that  the  euro  area  prosperity  was  conditional  on  the 
observance of the rules of the club by its members. The turn that the Greek crisis has taken 
is  relevant  for  the  effectiveness  of  the  new  institutional  architecture  of  the  euro  area. 
Unfortunately,  the  expectations  that  the  Riga  Summit  should  bring  us  closer  to  an  orderly 
resolution have not been confirmed. 
IV. 
Should we be concerned, should we think positively or should we use our 
sense of humour? 
Currently, the debates over the present and future of the euro area are dominated by the 
assessment  of  the  situation  in  Greece.  For  us,  as  EU  members  having  not  yet  joined  the 
euro  area,  these  debates  also  raise  the  question  of  whether  we  should  be  very  much 
concerned  or  take  a  positive,  constructive  approach.  Although  the  trials  and  tribulations 
caused  by  the  situation  in  Greece  have  often  been  described  as  a  conflict  between  two 
totally  different  mentalities  –  namely,  the  Teutonic  strictness  versus  the  Levantine 
easygoingness – my view is that it is an overstatement, just like any generality. I remember 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
the speech our distinguished guest delivered at the end of his ECB tenure and the fact that 
the  closing  remarks  showed  not  only  a  good  sense  of  humour,  but  also  a  subtle 
comprehension of the manner in which physical distances and especially distances in time 
alter the assessment of individuals and, if I may add, of events. Please allow me to read the 
final part of the aforementioned speech, which presents the timeline of the news published 
by Le Moniteur concerning the return of Napoleon from his exile on Elba Island: 
10 March – “The Corsican ogre has landed at Cape Juan”; 
11 March – “The tiger is in Gap. Troops are on their way and will stop him. He will end his 
miserable adventure as a homeless refugee in the mountains”; 
12 March – “The monster succeeded in proceeding to Grenoble”; 
13 March – “The tyrant is now in Lyon. Horror has caught the people”; 
18 March – “The usurper is some days’ march distant from Paris”; 
19 March – “Bonaparte approaches in a hurry, but he will not succeed in advancing to Paris”; 
20 March – “Napoleon will be in Paris tomorrow”; 
21 March – “Emperor Napoleon is in Fontainebleau”; 
22  March  –  “Yesterday  evening  His  Majesty  celebrated  his  arrival  in  Paris.  The  jubilation 
cannot be described”. 
At the end of his speech, referring – with an irony that shows a keen sense of human nature 
– to how the public might change its future perception on his activity, Professor Issing added: 
“I can only hope that in my modest case the reversal of the sequence of events does not end 
where the news on Napoleon started”. 
For me,  a  European  of Latin  origin  living  at  the  gates  of the Orient,  this  excerpt  does  not 
reflect the so-called German rigidity whatsoever, but rather a healthy, accommodating sense 
of humour, which is part, I hope, of the new European culture. 
Turning  back  to  the  euro  area  tensions  generated  by  the  situation  in  Greece,  the  future 
definitely holds new surprises in store for us. One never knows who the next ogre may be… 
No  matter  how  much  uncertainty  surrounds  any  prediction,  I  would  rather  conclude  my 
presentation  today  on  a  positive  note,  by  recalling  the  words  of  Jean  Monnet,  one  of  the 
founding fathers of the EU project, who thought that “Europe will be forged in crises, and will 
be  the  sum  of  the  solutions  adopted  for  those  crises”.  I  only  hope  that  policymakers  in 
Europe have learned their lessons well enough from treading the desert of the crisis so that it 
has  taken  us  closer  to  that  Promised  Land  Professor  Issing  was  mentioning.  If  I  may 
continue along the lines of the Bible, as the Tablets of Law preceded the arrival in Canaan, 
we should not forget that we will get there no sooner than all club members have not only 
formally accepted, but also made their own, the rules underlying the monetary union. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
