  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Progress and challenges in the Philippine 
financial system 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  General  Membership  Luncheon  Meeting  of  the 
American Chamber of Commerce of the Philippines, Manila, 3 June 2015. 
 It’s a pleasure to address the Chamber during your General Membership Meeting, at a time 
such as this, when we are seeing US economic growth continuing to gain traction, US labor 
conditions improving and the USD sustaining its appreciating trend. Even in Europe, there is 
emerging  optimism  that  economic  conditions  are  beginning  to  show  improvement.  Will  all 
these  developments,  there  is  indeed  much  to  discuss  regarding  the  implications  of  recent 
events for the Philippines. 
I’ve been requested to share with  you my thoughts on the progress and challenges in the 
Philippine Financial System. 
Let  me  start  by  saying  macroeconomic  stability  hinges  on  the  strength  of  the  financial 
system.  This  is  for  certain.  You  cannot  have  a  strong  macroeconomy  when  your  financial 
system is in disarray. In the most basic of modern economics, the financial sector is the life-
force  of  any  economy.  It  allocates  resources  to  productive  sectors  and  in  the  process, 
promotes investment and job creation. In the advent of increased cross-border transactions 
and heightened interconnectedness of economies, however, this very same financial system 
which  enables  economic  growth  could  also  be  the  channel  for  transmitting  vulnerabilities. 
Financial  systems  have  become  a  way  by  which  contagion  is  amplified.  Indeed,  this 
feedback  loop  relationship  has  never  been  more  evident  than  during  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis and its aftermath. 
As we all know, the Philippine economy survived the GFC relatively unscathed. That, in large 
part,  was  due  to  our  sound  and  stable  financial  system.  Seven  years  since  the  GFC,  the 
Philippine banking system continues to stand strong. And, since 2012, the Philippines has 
been the only jurisdiction whose banking system has been given a positive rating outlook by 
Moody’s Investor Ratings Services. In fact, the only one from among the 69 jurisdictions it 
rated in 2014. 
The metrics that describe the banking system which are shown in this slide are among those 
often cited by credit rating agencies – steady growth of resources, healthy balance sheets 
with NPL ratios for U/KBs down to under 2 percent, capital at 16.2 percent that more than 
meets the  national  requirements  of  10 percent  and  is  more than  2x  the  Basel  standard of 
8 percent, and healthy increase in loans going to the key productive sectors which stands at 
around 15 percent. Our survey of Senior Loan Officers has consistently indicated also that 
the lending standards of banks have not been weakened by the global trend toward “search 
for yield.” 
Friends, this position of strength which we now enjoy did not materialize overnight. It is the 
product  of  a 
the 
institutionalization  of  risk-based  banking  supervision,  the  calibrated  adoption  of  global 
reforms,  the  raising  of  the  standards  for  disclosure,  risk  management  and  governance  of 
banks  especially  with  respect  to  the  expectation  for  the  banks’  boards  of  directors.  At  the 
same  time,  we  are  also  fully  aware  that  this  strength  is  not  absolute  nor  is  it  permanent. 
Therefore we continue to be watchful and anticipate changes that are likely to occur moving 
forward. 
With this in mind, I’d like to spend the next few minutes to look at three key risk factors that 
could challenge our position of relative strength: 1) divergent monetary policy in advanced 
economies, 2) weaker growth prospects in Asia, and 3) volatility in oil prices. 
to  progressive  structural  reforms 
firm  commitment 
include 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  First  risk  is  the  market  interpretation  of  the  Fed’s  actions.  Of  course  the  Fed’s  action  is 
important. But often, it is the knee-jerk reaction by the market that complicates matters. The 
US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates. The market, analysts and other policy makers 
are  in  agreement  on  this.  However,  as markets  vacillate  between  1)  complacency  as  data 
releases  are  mixed,  raising  the  specter  that  the  Fed  might  hold  off  raising  rates  and 
2) “waiting-game fatigue” as the market sees the Fed shifting from forward guidance towards 
greater flexibility and data dependence. This could trigger higher market volatility, raising the 
risk  of  disorderly  adjustments,  and  the  possibility  of  a  sudden  liquidity  squeeze  wherein 
markets retreat during the transition period. 
Our experience from the taper tantrum episode of May 2013 was that fickle funds can quickly 
retreat  away  from  EMEs  (including  the  Philippines)  with  even  the  slightest  hint  of  Fed 
tightening. The QE by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) could 
somehow mitigate the resulting tight conditions. Nevertheless, these liquidity infusions from 
the other AE central bank are not expected to fully offset the impact of Fed tightening, given 
the dominant share of USD in trade and external debt financing, and the soft pegs of many 
EM  currencies  to  the  USD.  As  portfolios  rebalance,  EMEs,  including  the  Philippines,  can 
experience  capital  flow  reversals,  strong  currency  depreciation  pressures,  and  a  shake  in 
market confidence. This is the first major risk our financial system faces. 
Second, the possibility of getting stuck in what the IMF calls the “New Mediocre” referring to 
economic growth. As China has become central in Asian trade, any significant slow down in 
the Chinese economy would cast a cloud on its trading partners’ growth. China’s economic 
slowdown could have a  knock-on impact on Asia (including the Philippines) through trade, 
investment  and  financial  linkages  with  the  region.  Although  the  People’s  Bank  of  China 
(PBOC) has announced a series of easing measures, financial conditions in China appear to 
remain fairly tight due to the effects of reforms on credit growth. 
Third,  the  uncertainty  in  the  path  of  oil  prices.  Lower  oil  prices  have  provided  a  boost  to 
Asia’s overall growth (including that of the Philippines’) because most countries in the region 
are  net  oil  importers.  But  a  prolonged  period  of  cheap  oil  combined  with  an  already  low 
global  inflation  environment  begets  expectations  of  increased  deflationary  risk.  Such  a 
scenario could render global economic recovery difficult. On the other hand, there is also the 
risk that oil prices could reverse in the same speed at which they fell. If the reversal is rapid, 
that could dislodge inflationary expectations. 
Like most economies in Asia, the Philippines is in a good position to withstand these risks, 
particularly, should the market respond by way of capital outflows. 
Our  mantra  in  the  BSP,  particularly  since  the  GFC,  has  been  to  “keep  our  own  house  in 
order”.  To  operationalize  this,  we  have  kept  our  ears  close  to  the  external  world,  and  our 
eyes on our primary mandate. In other words, we are mindful of what is happening in our 
neighborhood, but at the same time vigilant to watch out for stresses within. 
Our improved fundamentals and ongoing reform efforts have anchored investor confidence, 
and  helped  us  achieve  investment  grade  status.  As  you  can  see  from  the  slide,  we  have 
been  able  to  manage  our  external  liquidity  position.  We’ve  been  running  current  account 
surpluses  for  over  10  years  now.  We  have  FX  reserves  that  are  ample  by  traditional 
yardsticks. And short-term external debt-to-foreign reserve ratios have remained healthy in 
recent years. 
All that said, you may be asking yourself, what can go wrong? Friends, the Philippines has 
come a long way and we want to go farther, higher. We want to be a stronger, more inclusive 
economy. Surely, the report on the 5.2 percent Q1 GDP growth came as a surprise to many 
of us here – is this cause for worry? I would tend to agree with what Sec. Balisacan said that 
it’s too early to abandon our 7–8 percent growth target. After all this is just one data point. 
From the side of the BSP, we see that with sufficient liquidity, and as domestic credit remains 
healthy, there are developments that should boost economic performance going forward. For 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  instance,  spending  for  the  forthcoming  election  should  boost  growth.  The  government 
initiatives to mitigate El Niño can push agriculture, FDI inflow associated with liberalized entry 
of foreign banks and their corporate investors should boost manufacturing, construction. The 
government  has  also  vowed  to  utilize  the  fiscal  space  that  is  available  to  it  and  ramp  up 
investments  in  infrastructure.  And  on  the  demand  side,  sustained  growth  in  remittances 
should support domestic consumption. 
Let’s  not  forget  that  despite  this  surprise  to  the  downside,  the  reality  is,  the  economy 
continues on a sound growth path and we remain one of the faster growing jurisdictions in 
Asia. What is even more noteworthy is that this growth has been happening in a low inflation 
environment. A positive convergence indeed. This slide shows that in the last 6 years, the 
BSP has been able to keep average inflation within the government’s target range. This year, 
we are again looking at within-target inflation. With inflation expectations well-anchored, and 
the  risks  to  this  forecast  broadly  balanced,  we  foresee  average  inflation  at  lower  than  the 
midpoint of our target range of 2–4 percent. 
What more can the Chamber expect the BSP to do to lessen our vulnerability and ensure 
that we are on a higher growth trajectory? 
The BSP will continue to utilize the tools in its expanded toolkit and sharpen its surveillance 
capacity. Over the course of the crisis, we learned that relying on the interest rate instrument 
alone could lead to perverse results and unintended consequences. For example, keeping 
rates low for too long could lead to excesses in certain segments of the market. While, we 
will make sure policy rate settings are pre-emptive and calibrated, we will also continue to 
use  the full  range  of macroprudential  measures available  to  us to  enhance  the  economy’s 
resilience against systemic shocks and deter the build-up of aggregate risks. 
At the moment, our assessment is that there is no compelling reason to shift the stance of 
monetary policy, with growth still on a positive path and inflation expectations well anchored. 
The BSP will continue to be reform-minded, adopting global standards as appropriate to the 
unique  domestic  conditions  and  pushing  forward  with  the  capital  market  reforms  that  are 
already in the pipeline. 
The  BSP  will  vigorously  leverage  off  technology  to  improve  the  reach  of  our  financial 
services, strengthen consumer protection and deepen financial education. After all they say, 
“technology  is  the  great  equalizer”.  Next  month,  we  will  launch  the  National  Strategy  for 
Financial Inclusion, which is envisioned to be a platform for inter-agency collaborative work 
between the public and the private sectors to achieve a truly inclusive eco-system. We are 
excited about this, and we hope that when we begin to invite the private sector to pledge its 
support,  we  would  see  the  Chamber  among  those  who  would  partner  with  us  in  this 
endeavor. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  said  earlier  on  that  the  financial  sector  provides  the  life-blood for 
economic  growth.  In  reality,  however,  the  sound/solid  macroeconomic  picture  I  presented 
also supports the development of the financial sector. Clearly, the causality is two-way. 
I also said at the top of my remarks that the financial system has a double-edged role. The 
main challenge therefore that faces us right now is ensuring that the wheels of the Philippine 
financial  system  continue  to  run  smoothly  and  that  the  economy  stays  in  the  course  of 
healthy expansion. 
Key to this is striking a balance between encouraging financial innovation, which is critical for 
economic  advancement,  and  curtailing  excessive  financial  risk-taking.  There  are  no  rule 
books for this, however, for this is both an art and a science. 
The  BSP  has  laid  down  some  of  the  groundwork  in  this  area  through  years  of  pursuing 
relevant reform initiatives. But despite the gains achieved thus far, there is always room for 
more and better things to do to ensure that the domestic financial system remains responsive 
to an ever-evolving financial landscape. It is our hope that in this effort of building a more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  inclusive  and  stable  economy,  we  could  continue  to  look  to  the  strong  support  of  the 
AMCHAM. 
Thank you for your attention and good afternoon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
