  Philip Lowe: The transformation in maturity transformation 
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to Thomson 
Reuters’ 3rd Australian Regulatory Summit, Sydney, 27 May 2015. 
 I would like to thank Fiona Price and Carl Schwartz for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. 
Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  be  part  of  Thomson  Reuters’  Third  Australian 
Regulatory Summit. 
There is no shortage of things to talk about at such a summit. As you are all too aware, there 
has  been  a  large  wave  of  new  regulatory  requirements  over  recent  years.  The  task  of 
adjusting to these new requirements has been a time-consuming one for many of you and 
that task is not yet over. 
This  wave  of  regulation,  of  course,  has  not just  materialised  out  of  thin  air.  Rather,  it  has 
been  in  response  to  the  lessons  learnt from  the  financial  crisis. That  crisis  was  extremely 
damaging  for  the  citizens  of  many  countries  and  the  subsequent  spotlight  on  financial 
institutions has highlighted not just poor risk-management practices but also some serious 
lapses in governance and ethics. As the various problems have emerged, they have strained 
the  bonds  of  trust  that  are  so  important  in  finance.  In  response,  regulators,  and  financial 
institutions themselves, have sought to reduce the probability of a repeat of the crisis and to 
rebuild trust in finance. On both accounts, there is still some way to go. 
If we look through all the detail of the various regulatory initiatives – and there is certainly a 
tremendous  amount  of  detail  –  many  of  the  specific  measures  stem  from  the  desire  to 
address risks that arise when the financial system undertakes maturity transformation – that 
is, when it transforms illiquid longer-term assets into liquid assets. So today, rather than go 
through the long list of regulatory reforms, I would like to focus my remarks around the way in 
which the financial system undertakes maturity transformation. 
Maturity transformation and the banking system 
The  transformation  of  claims  over  fundamentally  illiquid  assets  into  claims  that  are  highly 
liquid  is  one  of  the  critical  functions  that  the  financial  sector  provides  for  the  community. 
Without such transformation, it is difficult to see how modern economies would  work. This 
transformation  has  been  critical  to  the  accumulation  of  physical  capital  in  our  societies  as 
well as the operation of our modern payment systems. 
The  best,  and  most  obvious,  example,  of  this  type  of  transformation  is  an  at-call  bank 
deposit.1 The holder of a deposit has a completely liquid claim on the bank – the full face 
value of the deposit can be drawn on at any time, for any purpose. Yet deposits are primarily 
invested in assets, namely bank loans, which, typically, are not particularly liquid and have 
long  maturities.  And,  in  turn,  these  bank  loans  fund  the  creation  of  real  assets  in  the 
economy, which themselves are also not particularly liquid. 
Of  course,  banks  are  not  the  only  institutions  that  facilitate  maturity  transformation.  Many 
collective investment vehicles offer a degree of liquidity to investors, but invest in assets that 
are not particularly liquid. A mutual fund that invests in real estate is a good example of this. 
Another example of sorts is the listed equity market. Share investors hold equity claims over 
                                                
1   The term bank is used for simplicity, though in the Australian context this applies to authorised deposit-taking 
institutions, encompassing banks, building societies and credit unions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
firms’ assets. Under a range of conditions, these claims can be traded for cash at relatively 
short notice, even though the underlying assets are not particularly liquid. 
So, in a sense, both these examples share a similarity with bank deposits. Both are ways of 
giving savers relatively liquid claims on what are often intrinsically illiquid assets. 
There is, however, at least one very important difference. And that is that the bank promises 
to  pay  back  the  deposit  in  full.  In  contrast,  in  the  other  two  examples,  there  is  no  such 
promise and the value of the investment moves up and down  with the performance of the 
underlying assets. 
For  bank  deposits  (and  other  short-term  bank  liabilities),  this  combination  of  maturity 
transformation and the promise to redeem at par sets up a potentially unstable situation. You 
can  think  of there  being  two  possible  states  of  the  world.  In  the  first  –  and  usual  –  state, 
depositors  have  confidence  that  the  bank  is  able  to  meet  its  liabilities  and  everybody  is 
happy. In the second, there are concerns about the ability of the bank to meet its promise to 
repay  in  full  and  on  demand,  and  depositors  seek  to  withdraw  their  funds.  Under  some 
circumstances,  this  may  force  the  bank  to  liquefy  its  assets,  potentially  at  fire-sale  prices, 
which can then worsen the bank’s financial position. A fire-sale in one class of assets can 
also cause stress to be transmitted across the system, with liquidity drying up in other asset 
classes amid a general rise in uncertainty. 
These risks are more than just theoretical possibilities. We saw these dynamics play out in a 
number of countries during the financial crisis in 2008. We saw some bank runs and, more 
importantly,  runs  by  holders  of  short-term  bank  paper.  We  saw  institutions  trying  to  sell 
assets  in  a  hurry,  sometimes  at  substantial  discounts  to  their  earlier  prices.  And  we  saw 
markets freeze. 
In Australia, fortunately,  we did not experience  the severe problems witnessed elsewhere. 
However, when global markets froze, the Australian banks, like banks right around the world, 
could not access those markets. And while we had no high-profile depositor runs, we did see 
a general increase in nervousness by depositors, resulting in a significant lift in the demand 
for banknotes (Graph 1).2 Both these issues were ultimately addressed with a public-policy 
intervention during the peak of the crisis in October 2008. The first was with the government 
being  prepared  to  guarantee  bank  wholesale  funding  for  a  fee.  And  the  second  was  an 
enhancement of depositor protection arrangements through a guarantee of bank deposits of 
up to $1 million. These actions followed similar steps to reassure investors and depositors in 
a number of other countries. 
This whole experience, both in Australia and elsewhere, has rightly shone the spotlight on 
the  risks  associated  with  maturity  transformation.  Prior  to  the  crisis,  many  people  were 
working  under  the  implicit  assumption  that  markets  would  always  remain  open  and  that 
financial assets could always be traded at reasonable prices. This assumption turned out to 
be  incorrect.  And,  in  response,  it  is  entirely  appropriate  that  stronger  and  more  resilient 
arrangements be put in place. 
The various efforts have focused on two main areas. The first is strengthening bank balance 
sheets by increasing the amount and quality of capital in the banking system. By doing so, 
investors should have greater confidence that banks will be able to meet their liabilities under 
a  broad  range  of  adverse  scenarios.  The  Australian  banking  system  is  part  of  this  global 
trend  to  higher  and  better  quality  capital,  with  an  increase  in  common  equity  lifting  the 
aggregate capital ratio from around 10½ per cent prior to the crisis to around 12½ per cent at 
end 2014 (Graph 2). The recent capital announcements by some of the large banks will see 
this ratio rise further. 
                                                
2   See Cusbert and Rohling (2013). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The second, and obvious, area of regulatory focus has been on liquidity management. Here, 
there have been two main initiatives. 
The first is the introduction of a Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) which, from the start of this 
year, has required banks to hold enough high-quality liquid assets to meet a stress scenario 
that lasts for 30 days.3 The challenge for the Australian banking system has been that the 
supply of such assets is limited due to the stock of government bonds on issue being small 
relative to the overall size of the financial system. To overcome this challenge, the RBA has 
provided banks with a Committed Liquidity Facility (CLF) under which it will make available 
sufficient liquidity (against eligible collateral) to address the shortfall in required holdings of 
high-quality liquid assets. The pricing of the CLF is aimed at replicating the cost of holding a 
sufficient  volume  of  these  assets,  were  they  to  be  available  in  the  marketplace.4  APRA 
administers the decisions as to which banks access the program, and the maximum amount 
available to each bank. 
The second initiative is the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which has a longer-term focus. 
It will establish a minimum amount of stable funding based on the liquidity characteristics of 
an institution’s assets and activities over a one-year horizon. The new requirement here will 
not come into effect until January 2018. 
This  increased  focus  on  liquidity  is  clearly  evident  in  the  balance  sheets  of  the  Australian 
banks. On the assets side, holdings of liquid assets have increased substantially, after they 
declined  for  many  years  (Graph  3).  Australian  dollar  denominated  liquid  assets  are  now 
equivalent to about 7 per cent of banks’ total assets, up from around 1 per cent in early 2008 
(Graph 3). If the CLF is added in, the current figure is around 15 per cent. 
There have also been significant changes on the liabilities side of the balance sheet. The 
most  noticeable  has  been  a  shift  away  from  short-term  wholesale  debt  towards  deposits 
(Graph 4). In early 2008, deposits accounted for around 40 per cent of the Australian banks’ 
total funding. Today, that figure is just a little below 60 per cent. In part, this switch has been 
driven by the judgement that the risk of a run by depositors is less than the risk of a run by 
investors  in  short-term  wholesale  debt.  To  the  extent  that  this  judgement  is  correct,  this 
switch has increased the effective maturity of banks’ liabilities in a stress event, even if it has 
not increased the contractual maturity. 
There  has  also  been  some  lengthening  in  the  average  contractual  maturity  of  the  various 
types of liabilities. The share of deposits at the major banks with a maturity of less than three 
months has declined since 2007, although this share has increased a little more recently as 
competition for term deposits has waned (Graph 5). Similarly, there has been a noticeable 
increase  in  the  maturity  of  banks’  other  debt  liabilities  since  2007  (Graph  6).  Of particular 
note, the share of other debt liabilities with maturities of less than three months has declined 
substantially. 
Taken as a whole, these measures have made the system more resilient. We are, though, 
yet to see how these various changes play out over the medium term. There is no doubt that 
they have increased the cost of financial intermediation somewhat. They have also increased 
the likelihood that such intermediation will take place outside the banking sector. After all, to 
some extent this is what was intended. So we need to keep a close eye on how the overall 
system  responds  and  make  sure  that  in  addressing  the  very  real  risks  associated  with 
maturity transformation, that we don’t create a new set of risks. This is likely to be an ongoing 
challenge for us all. 
It is also important to point out that while the various measures have made the system more 
resilient,  they  do  not  guarantee  stability.  Because  of  the  very  nature  of  the  business  that 
                                                
3   See APRA (2013) and APRA (2014) for further details on the LCR. 
4   See Debelle (2014) for further details. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
banks undertake, they can still find themselves in a liquidity crisis. Here the role of the central 
bank acting as a lender of last resort is critically important. 
A central bank has the unique ability to effectively liquefy assets so that a bank can meet its 
liabilities  (so  long  as  its  assets  exceed  those  liabilities).  Provided  appropriate  collateral  is 
taken  and  appropriate  haircuts  are  in  place,  it  can  do this  without  incurring  material  credit 
risk. In so doing, the central bank can provide society with an efficient and low-cost form of 
insurance against a liquidity crisis in the banking system. Indeed, it is a longstanding role of 
central banking to do exactly this. And it is a role that the RBA can, and is, prepared to play. 
Maturity transformation in the asset management industry 
But  as  I  said  before,  banks  are  not  the  only  institutions  that  undertake  maturity 
transformation. Understandably, the sharper focus on liquidity risks has led to the question of 
whether the maturity transformation that is undertaken elsewhere in the system raises similar 
concerns. And the focus here has fallen very much on the asset management industry and 
its involvement in financial markets.5 
This focus reflects a couple of factors. 
The  first  is  a  structural  one.  And  that  is  that  the  pool  of  assets  managed  by  the  asset 
management  industry  has  grown  substantially  relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy.  In 
Australia, for example, in the early 1990s the assets in managed funds were equivalent to 
around 40 per cent of GDP (Graph 7). Today, the figure is 125 per cent. And globally, asset 
managers  are  estimated  to  have  around  US$76  trillion  in  assets  under  management, 
equivalent to around 55 per cent of global banking assets.6 So the industry is very large, and 
it is getting larger. Long-term forces, such as ageing populations and increased wealth, are 
important factors here, though the changes in the banking system that I have just spoken 
about have played a role more recently. 
The second factor has a more cyclical element to it. And that is a concern about the possible 
fallout  from  the  search  for  yield  that  has  resulted  from  the  very  low  global  interest  rates. 
Money has flowed into collective investment vehicles that invest in a range of higher-yielding 
assets,  including  those  in  emerging  markets.  Many  of  these  vehicles  allow  investors  to 
redeem  their  funds  at  short  notice,  even  though  the  underlying  assets  are  not  particularly 
liquid, and are likely to be even less liquid at a time when there are large-scale redemptions. 
This has occurred at a time when liquidity has declined in some markets, partly in response 
to a lower appetite for risk and tighter financial regulation.7 This combination of developments 
raises the question of what might happen in stressed conditions. 
This increased focus on the asset management industry has seen a number of bodies either 
commission  or  issue  reports  on  the  industry  over  recent  times.  These  bodies  include  the 
International Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Board and the International Organization 
of Securities Commissions, and the US Financial Stability Oversight Council.8 It has become 
quite a crowded field! 
The underlying concern is not that these vehicles will be unable to meet their obligations to 
their  investors,  but  rather  that  they  could  serve  to  spread  distress  across  the  broader 
financial system. Two features of these vehicles, in particular, have drawn attention. The first 
                                                
5   A fuller discussion of these issues can be found in Price and Schwartz (2015). 
6   This estimate of assets under management, taken from IMF (2015), is based on the world’s top 500 asset 
managers  at  the  end  of  2013.  It  includes  some  double-counting  due  to  cross-investment  among  asset 
managers. 
7   See Cheshire (2015). 
8   See FSB & IOSCO (2015), FSOC (2013) and IMF (2015). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
is the ease of redemptions even when the underlying assets are illiquid. And the second is 
the possible misalignment of incentives between the portfolio manager and the end investor, 
which  could  amplify  shocks.  These  concerns  have  sparked  a  lively  debate  as  to  what,  if 
anything, should be done. 
This is an area where Australia does have some relevant experience. 
In  particular,  in  the  past  25  years  we  have  had  two  episodes  where  there  have  been 
significant runs on collective investment vehicles. 
The first was in the early 1990s and initially involved a run on mortgage trusts operated by 
Estate  Mortgage.  It  followed  a  boom  and  subsequent  emerging  bust  in  the  commercial 
property  market.  The  run  came  to  an  end  when  redemptions  were  frozen  by  the  National 
Companies  and  Securities  Commission,  a  forerunner  of  ASIC.  Subsequently,  there  were 
runs  on  a  number  of  unlisted  property  trusts  operated  by  other  non-banks,  with  investors 
seeking to withdraw their funds prior to the periodic (and downward) reduction in unit prices. 
These runs eventually spread to trusts operated by banks. This led to fears that suspensions 
in these bank-operated trusts would spark a generalised loss of confidence in the banking 
system,  which  at  the  time  was  already  under  some  strain.  In  response,  the  Australian 
Government announced a 12-month freeze on all redemptions from unlisted property trusts.9 
The second episode is much more recent and occurred during the peak of the financial crisis 
in  2008.  Again,  it  involved  property-related  trusts.  As  uncertainty  rose  and  conditions  in 
property  markets  deteriorated,  investors  began  to  withdraw  funds.  These  redemptions 
accelerated in mid-October 2008 after the announcement of the guarantee on bank deposits. 
In  response,  most  mortgage  trusts  froze  redemptions,  with  estimates  of  up  to  $30  billion 
being  affected  by  freezes  at  that  time.  Subsequently,  ASIC  worked  with  the  funds’ 
administrators to provide limited withdrawals for investors in hardship cases. 
Looking back at these experiences and the current international discussions, there are five 
brief observations that are perhaps useful to make. 
The first is the importance of investors understanding the nature of the liquidity promise that 
is being made. In normal conditions, many collective investment vehicles have the ability to 
offer a high degree of liquidity despite the bulk of the underlying assets being illiquid. But in 
stressed conditions, this ability can disappear quickly. This needs to be clearly understood by 
both investors and fund managers. This has not always been the case. 
The  second  is  the  benefit  of  clear  rules  around  the  process  for  freezing  redemptions, 
including who is responsible for making these decisions. After the early 1990s experience, 
there  was  a  change  in  legislation  in  this  area.  Under  the  current  Corporations  Act  2001, 
responsible  entities must  suspend  withdrawals  from  a retail fund  if  “liquid  assets”  are  less 
than  80  per  cent  of  total  assets,  which  should  help  to  guard  against  fire-sales.10 While  in 
some other countries, responsible entities have a similar ability to freeze redemptions, it is 
not always compulsory for them to do so. 
The  third  is  the  importance  of  appropriate  separation  between  bank-managed  investment 
funds  and  the  bank  owners.  APRA  has  prudential  requirements  for  banks  to  address 
potential contagion risk between other members of the group. This includes clear disclosure 
that the group member is not a bank, and that the bank does not stand behind the group 
member – unless there is a formal legal agreement that is prominently disclosed. APRA also 
reserves the right to require an entity not to use a particular brand name if it would give rise 
                                                
9   This account is drawn from Gizycki and Lowe (2000). 
10   “Liquid  assets”  refers  to  assets  including  cash,  bills,  marketable  securities  or  other  property  that  the 
responsible entity reasonably considers able to be realised for its market value within the period provided for 
in the scheme’s constitution for satisfying withdrawal requests. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
to  prudential  concerns.  Clear  disclosure  and  branding  reduces  the  probability  that  a 
redemption freeze in a bank-related investment fund would cause depositors to worry that 
their deposits will also be frozen. In Australia, the fund management arms of the major banks 
now largely have separate brands, but this is not always the case in other countries. 
The fourth observation is the importance of frequent updating of unit prices. The early 1990s 
experience illustrated the problems that can arise when there is a lag between changes in 
the value of the underlying assets and in unit prices, thereby creating an additional incentive 
to  redeem  in  a  falling  market.  Over  time,  there  has  been  a  move  to  much  more  frequent 
updating of prices in Australia, with funds now typically updating prices daily. 
The  fifth  and  final  observation  is  that,  at  least  in  these  two  examples,  the  runs  and 
subsequent freezes did not lead to systemic problems in the financial system. In neither case 
was there a significant fire-sale of assets. The unit prices declined and investors experienced 
losses as the value of the underlying assets declined. This did not lead to stability issues in 
the broader system, although the freezes did cause hardship for some individual investors. 
So our own experience is that these types of disruptions in the asset management industry 
can  be  managed.  However,  the  degree  to  which  this  lesson  can  be  applied  more  broadly 
remains to be seen. 
Globally, there is considerable effort being devoted to understanding the nature of the risks in 
this  area,  including  whether  these  risks  are  any  different  to  those  that  would  arise  if 
investment portfolios were managed directly by the individual investors themselves, without 
the  input  of  an  asset  manager.  A  related  stream  of  work  –  which  in  some  way  parallels 
similar  work  for  the  banking  industry  –  is  to  examine  what  role  regulation  should  play  in 
addressing  the  various  risks  and  what  role  the  central  bank  should  play.  Relevant  issues 
here  include:  how  prescriptive  any  liquidity  regulations  should  be;  what  are  the  merits  of 
alternatives  to  fund  freezes,  such  as  exit  fees  and  liquidity  gates;  and  what,  if  any,  role 
should  the  central  bank  play  when  markets  freeze  and  normally  liquid  assets  cannot  be 
traded. 
These are all difficult issues to deal with and perspectives range widely. I am sure that they 
will keep many of us busy over the years ahead. 
On  that  note,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for  listening  and  I  would  be  happy  to  answer  any 
questions. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
in 
No 
APRA 
14.22, 
Release 
Available 
Australia”, 
Discussion 
November. 
Paper,  May. 
References 
APRA  (Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority)  (2013)  “Implementing  Basel  III  liquidity 
reforms 
Available 
at 
http://www.apra.gov.au/adi/PrudentialFramework/Pages/Implementing-Basel-III-liquidity-
reforms-in-Australia-May-2013.aspx. 
APRA  (2014),  “APRA  Finalises  Implementation  of  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  in  Australia”, 
Media 
at 
http://www.apra.gov.au/MediaReleases/Pages/14_22.aspx. 
Cheshire J (2015), “Market Making in Bond Markets”, RBA Bulletin, March, pp 63–73. 
Cusbert  T  and  Rohling  T  (2013),  “Currency  Demand  during  the  Global  Financial  Crisis: 
Evidence from Australia”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2013–01. 
Debelle  G  (2014),  “Liquidity”,  Speech  at  the  27th  Australasian  Finance  and  Banking 
Conference, Sydney, 16 December. 
International Monetary Fund (2015), The Global Financial Stability Report, Chapter 3, April. 
Available at https://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2015/01/index.htm. 
Financial  Stability  Board  and  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions (2015), 
Assessment  Methodologies  for  Identifying  Non-Bank  Non-Insurer  Global  Systemically 
Important  Financial 
Institutions’,  consultative  document  (2nd),  March.  Available  at 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/2nd-Con-Doc-on-NBNI-G-SIFI-
methodologies.pdf. 
Gizycki M and P Lowe (2000), “The Australian Financial System in the 1990s”, in D Gruen 
and S Shrestha (eds), The Australian Economy in the 1990s, Proceedings of a Conference, 
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 180–215. 
Price F and C Schwartz (2015), Recent Developments in Asset Management, RBA Bulletin, 
June, forthcoming. 
United States Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) commissioned: Office of Financial 
Research  (2013),  “Asset  Management  and  Financial  Stability”,  September.  Available  at 
http://financialresearch.gov/reports/files/ofr_asset_management_and_financial_stability.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
