  Mark Carney: Writing the path back to target 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  University  of  Sheffield  Advanced  Manufacturing  Research  Centre, 
Sheffield, 12 March 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
It is a great pleasure to be in the City of Steel to honour both its historic role in forging the 
industrial  foundations  of  modern  Britain  and  its  current  leadership  in  promoting  advanced 
manufacturing for the post-industrial age. 
This city has been at the very forefront of innovation for hundreds of years. In the 18th Century 
Sheffield revolutionalised steelmaking with the discovery of the crucible steel process. By the 
mid-19th Century the city  represented almost half of Europe’s total steel output. Since then, 
Sheffield has remained fleet of foot through hard work and innovation. 
The University of Sheffield’s Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre is a prime example 
of that spirit. No one knows better than you that manufacturing needs to become ever-more 
productive  to  prosper  in  a  world  of  steadily  falling  prices  and  relentless  international 
competition. 
Prices for advanced manufactured goods fell on average by around 1 per cent a year during 
the decade prior to the crisis. They also have dropped steadily relative to those of simpler 
manufactured  products  –  by  30  per  cent  over  the  last  two  decades  –  reflecting  superior 
productivity  growth.1  Your  customers  and  society  as  a  whole  are  the  beneficiaries  of  your 
doing much more with less. The strong recovery of UK manufacturing over the past year – 
with growth stronger than at any point in the decade prior to the crisis – is a testament to the 
sector’s focus on continual improvement. 
Manufacturing  punches  well  above  its  weight  in  spending  on  research  and  development. 
Manufactured  products  R&D  has  grown  by  a  quarter  since  the  mid-1980s  and  currently 
accounts 
innovation.  Advanced 
manufacturing sectors, including pharmaceutical, aerospace and automotive, represents well 
over half of this amount. 
Such  contributions  are  crucial  for  the  UK’s  prosperity  because  our  long-run  economic 
performance  hinges  on  productivity  growth.  Productivity  is  the  ultimate  determinant  of 
people’s  incomes,  and  with  it  the  capacity  of  our  economy  to  support  health,  wealth  and 
happiness. 
The best contribution the Bank of England can make to these goals is to maintain monetary 
and financial stability. 
Our remit for monetary stability is simple: achieve 2% CPI inflation by setting Bank Rate, the 
fulcrum  around  which  all  other  interest  rates  in  the  economy  pivot,  and,  as  necessary, 
conducting large-scale asset purchases to affect overall financial conditions. Our monetary 
policy framework is known as Inflation Targeting. 
total  UK  spending  on 
for  well  over 
two-thirds  of 
                                                
1   Based  on  ONS  producer  price  indices.  More  advanced  includes:  printing  and  recording,  chemicals, 
pharmaceuticals, computing, electrical, machinery, motors and equipment. Less advanced includes: textiles, 
products of wood, paper, rubber, basic metals, non-metals, other materials and other manufactured goods. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Over  the  past  two  decades,  Inflation  Targeting  central  banks  have  established  good  track 
records of keeping inflation from being too high. It has brought tangible benefits to the UK, 
particularly lowering the volatility of both inflation and of income growth.2 
But now those central banks, including the Bank of England, are being tested by inflation that 
is too low. 
Inflation has fallen globally (Chart 1) and is below target in 16 of 18 Inflation-Targeting major 
economies (Chart 2). 11 of those countries have inflation rates below 1%.3 
Today I will discuss the consequences for the UK of persistently low global inflation, why it 
matters, and what the Bank of England can do about it so that businesses and households in 
Sheffield and beyond can focus on what really matters to them. The bottom line is that there 
is a risk that the combination of persistently low global inflation and the strength of sterling 
could  weigh  on  prices  here  for  some  time.  But  despite  these  headwinds,  a  solid  UK 
expansion,  underpinned  by  strong  domestic  demand  growth,  leaves  us  on  track  to  return 
inflation to target within the next two years. To deliver that outcome, a gently rising path for 
Bank Rate is likely to be required over the next few years. 
On “lowflation” and deflation 
1. 
Why  do  we  target  the  low,  but  positive,  inflation  rate  of  2%  rather  than  a  zero  or  even 
negative rate? 
The  simple  answer  is  because  it’s  our  job,  given  to  us  by  the  democratically  elected 
representatives of the British people. We are accountable to Parliament for meeting it. On the 
occasions when inflation moves by more than 1 percentage point away from the target, we 
are  required  to  explain  publicly  why  that’s  happened  and  what  we’re  doing  about  it  in  an 
open letter to the Chancellor. Before this year, that had happened 14 times in the past when 
inflation has been too high. 
The particularly subdued January inflation rate meant I had to write the 15th open letter, the 
first to address these points with respect to very low inflation. It is likely that I will have to 
write a few more of these over the course of the year. 
Our  remit  for  2%  inflation  reflects  the  lessons  of  the  past,  including  the  fight  against  high 
inflation in the 1970s and 1980s, as well as the deflationary disasters that have followed past 
financial crises. 
Low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  helps  to  stabilise  households’  and  firms’  expectations 
about  future  price  increases.  That  helps  them  plan  their  spending,  investment  and  hiring 
decisions. In short, the Bank of England worries about inflation so that everyone else doesn’t 
have to. 
High  inflation  damages  growth,  in  part,  because  high  inflation  also  tends  to  be  volatile, 
generating uncertainty that makes important economic decisions more difficult. 
In contrast, a little inflation “greases the wheels” of the economy, helping it to absorb shocks. 
One example of that is in the labour market, where workers usually resist reductions in their 
cash wages when economic conditions deteriorate. This behaviour can prevent the inflation-
adjusted  value  of  wages  from  declining  when  demand  for  labour  is  weak,  leading  to 
                                                
2   The volatility of inflation fell by around four-fifths in the Inflation Targeting (IT) era compared to the pre-IT era. 
The volatility of real GDP growth fell by around one-quarter. See also King, M (2007), “The MPC ten years 
on”. 
3   The UK’s CPI inflation rate of 0.3% is accompanied by PCE inflation of 0.2% in the US and HICP inflation of –
0.3% in the euro area. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  unemployment. If that is the case, it may be better for the economy as a whole if firms’ real 
labour costs can adjust over time through increases in prices – a little inflation – instead.4 
A  positive  average  inflation  rate  also  gives  monetary  policy  space  to  respond  to  negative 
shocks by cutting interest rates. 
That’s because in normal times the “equilibrium” level of interest rates at which the economy 
would  tend  to  settle  without  generating  inflation  reflects,  broadly,  the  rate  of  underlying 
growth in the economy plus the inflation target. The lower is average inflation, the less scope 
there would be for monetary policy to reduce interest rates in response to shocks before they 
approach zero. Because the equilibrium rate is so central to monetary policy I will come back 
to discuss it further in a few moments. 
Persistently low inflation can be difficult. Deflation proper – by which I mean a persistent and 
generalised decline in prices – is potentially dangerous. During the Great Depression, sharp 
falls in prices reinforced collapsing output and skyrocketing unemployment. 
To consider how susceptible we might be to it, it is helpful to review why such deflationary 
spirals are potentially dangerous. 
A  commonly  cited  reason  is  that  falling  prices  prompt  households  and  firms  to  delay 
spending and investment. The subsequent reduction in demand causes further reductions in 
prices through higher unemployment. That further reduces incomes and spending, drawing 
the economy into the vortex. 
The  relevance  of  that  dynamic  depends  on  households’  willingness  and  ability  to  delay 
consumption. 
There are limits to the ability of households to delay consumption of some items, however, 
like food. And the psychology of instant gratification – the tendency for all of us to discount 
the future  heavily  relative  to the  present  – mutes  the  willingness  of  households  to  wait for 
lower prices. It’s fair to say that thus far there’s no evidence as yet of delayed gratification 
taking hold in the UK.5, 6 
There would be, however, a more clear and present danger arising from the balance sheets 
of  households  and  firms  should  deflation  persist.  This  is  a  concern  across  the  advanced 
                                                
4   See  Tobin  (1972),  “Inflation  and  unemployment”,  American  Economic  Review,  62.  The  idea  is  that  if  the 
economy  is  hit  by  a  shock  which  requires  real  wages  to  fall  (like  a  negative  productivity  shock),  this  can 
happen  through  either  (a)  keeping  prices  fixed  (i.e.  zero  inflation)  and  cutting  money  wages,  or  (b)  fixing 
money  wages  and  increasing  the  price  level  (i.e.  positive  inflation).    The  first  path  may  involve  significant 
unemployment  when  money  wages  are  downwardly  rigid.  The  second,  by  contrast,  may  deliver  the  same 
reduction in the real wages at a unemployment lower cost. See also e.g. Kim, J and F Ruge-Murcia (2009), 
“How much inflation is necessary to grease the wheels?”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 56. 
5   Retail sales grew by 2.3% in the three months to January, the fastest since April 2002. Consumer confidence 
in  the general economic  situation  is  currently  over  1  standard  deviation above its  historical  mean and  from 
mid-2014 has been around its highest level since May 1998. 
6   More broadly, the evidence for consumption delay is not compelling. Bachmann et al (2015) find for the US 
that a one percentage point increase in expected inflation during the recent zero lower bound period reduces 
households’ probability of having a positive attitude towards spending by about 0.5 percentage points. Hori 
and  Shimizutani  (2005)  find  some  evidence  of  lower  price  expectations  being  correlated  with  consumption 
delay in Japan, but the effects do not look large. Finally, consumption delay is less compelling for households 
who are financially constrained and whose consumption varies more strongly with current income. Benito and 
Mumtaz  (2009)  estimate  between  20–40%  of  UK  households  display  such  “excess  sensitivity”.  See 
Bachmann,  R,  Berg,  T  and  Sims,  E  (2015),  “Inflation  expectations  and  readiness  to spend:  cross-sectional 
evidence”,  American  Economic  Journal:  Economic  Policy,  7(1);  Hori,  M  and  Shimizutani,  S  (2005),  “Price 
expectations and consumption under deflation: evidence from Japanese household survey data”, International 
Economics and Economic Policy, 2; Benito, A and Mumtaz, H (2009), “Excess sensitivity, liquidity constraints, 
and the collateral role of housing”, Macroeconomic Dynamics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  world,  where  private  debt  levels  remain  very  high  relative  to  history,  including  the  UK 
(Chart 3). 
When  a  household  takes  out  a  mortgage  or  a  firm  secures  a  loan,  the  amount  owed  is 
denominated in cash terms – that is, not adjusted for inflation. Unexpected, generalised, and 
persistently falling prices then mean the real value of debt increases: the same amount of 
money  is  owed,  but  that  money  now  buys  more  goods  and  services.  As  a  result,  more 
consumption or investment needs to be foregone to service the debt. 
This debt-deflation dynamic was at the core of the Great Depression7 and in the Japanese 
malaise  following  the  collapse  of  the  asset  bubbles  of  the  1980s.  It  would  be  a  particular 
concern if the pace of wage growth were to follow prices down. There is no evidence of that 
in the UK, where wage growth has picked up over the past six months. And more broadly, 
following  the  2008  financial  crisis  debt  deflation  has  been  the  dog  that  hasn’t  barked 
(Chart 4).8  But  we  shouldn’t  rest  too  easy  –  there  are  several  reasons  why  the  dog might 
have just been sleeping, and central banks need to be vigilant against the risk that recent low 
inflation stirs it from its slumber. 
Global factors and domestic inflation 
2. 
Low global inflation matters for the UK because we are an open economy. 
Around  one-third  of  the  goods  and  services  consumed  by  UK  households  are  imported, 
creating a direct channel from global influences to UK prices. 
And the UK’s exports are around 30% of GDP, opening an indirect channel through which 
global activity affects costs and prices in the UK through demand for our products. 
The  importance  of  these  channels  has  waxed  and  waned  over  decades,  with  changes  to 
both the degree of global integration and the conduct of monetary policy. 
Under  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  fixed  exchange  rates  prevailing  until  the  early  1970s 
relatively  closed  financial  and  goods markets may  have  contributed to  lower  cross-country 
co-movements between inflation rates (Chart 5 (a) – see annex). 
After  Bretton  Woods  collapsed,  countries’  inflation  rates  became  more  highly  correlated 
across the advanced world as they lacked the strong nominal anchors necessary to manage 
global cost shocks and subsequent attempts at disinflations (Chart 5 (b) – see annex).9 
That  situation  persisted  until  the  early  1990s  ushered  in  the  era  of  Inflation  Targeting 
(Chart 5 (c) – see annex). Central banks took greater, though not total, mastery over their 
monetary destinies. With increased global integration of capital, goods, and labour markets, 
inflation stabilisation has faced powerful countervailing forces. Perhaps as a result, advanced 
economy  inflation  rates  have  moved  more  closely  together  under  Inflation  Targeting  than 
under Bretton Woods. 
The correlations between inflation rates in major economies grew in the wake of the crisis 
(Chart 5 (d) – see annex). As they have written their monetary scripts, central banks have at 
the very least had an editor. If they are not careful, they could become ghost writers. 
                                                
7   First identified by Irving Fisher (1933), “The debt-deflation theory of great depressions”, Econometrica. 
8   See IMF (2013), World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3, April. 
9  
In the UK, “the framework for monetary policy was, at best, opaque”, according to King (1997), “The Inflation 
Target five years on”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Why is inflation low globally? 
3. 
Of  course,  an  important  global  factor  behind  current  low  headline  inflation  has  been  the 
sharp fall in the price of oil, which has been driven primarily by large increases in its actual 
and potential supply. This means that while it’s been a short-term drag on inflation, it’s good 
news for growth. The Bank estimates that lower oil prices will boost the level of UK-weighted 
global GDP by a little under 1 percentage point over the next three years, with a consequent 
boost in demand for UK exports of around 2 ½ %. 
Lower  oil  prices  will  also  boost  UK  domestic  demand  directly  as  households  spend  their 
windfall. Our forecast conservatively assumes that they save 40 pence in every pound of that 
amount. On balance, there is likely upside risk to growth and inflation from this assumption. 
Oil  isn’t  the  only  reason  why  inflation  is  low  globally.  Measures  of  inflation  that  strip  out 
volatile factors – so-called “core” inflation – have been trending down as well (Chart 6). 
Core inflation rates in the euro area, the US and the UK have declined by between ¾ and 
1 percentage points since 2012. Core inflation in the UK, currently around 1.4%, is likely to 
decline further in the coming months, reflecting sterling’s past strength and muted domestic 
cost growth. 
The weakness in core inflation across the globe reflects the shortfall of global demand below 
global supply (Chart 7).10 
In some major economies there are additional disinflationary forces. For example, in the euro 
area,  a  series  of  necessary  internal  devaluations  are  weighing  on  wages  and  prices.  In 
China, a rebalancing of investment and consumption risks generating further disinflation. The 
producer  price  inflation  rate  has  been  negative  for  35  months  in  a  row,  reflecting  long-
standing  overcapacity  in  industries  such  as  concrete  and  steel,  while  the  more  recent 
weakness in the property market could further increase excess capacity in related sectors. 
All  this  suggests  a  persistent  period  of  low  inflation  globally  is  a  possibility,  and  as  I 
mentioned  a  few  moments  ago,  could  itself  create  a  self-fulfilling  fear  of  a  bad  outcome. 
Concerns  that  household  or  government  debt  will  weigh  on  demand  could  cause  firms  to 
delay further their already weak investment spending (Chart 8 – see annex). Such rational 
corporate  caution  is  consistent  with  the  behaviour  of  many  financial  asset  prices,  which 
appear  to  be  pricing  the  possibility  of  material  downside  tail  risks,  such  as  that  economic 
weakness and persistently low global inflation become mutually reinforcing.11 
This  fear  of  fear  itself  might  be  reflected  in  other  asset  prices  too;  in  particular  those  that 
measure  or  are  influenced  by  inflation  expectations.  Along  with  measures  from  household 
surveys, some of these have fallen in recent months.12 Those expectations matter as they 
feed into the wage and price setting processes that ultimately determine inflation. That is why 
central  banks  are keenly  alert  to  the  possibility  that  low  inflation  could de-anchor  medium-
term inflation expectations, increasing the persistence of inflation. 
                                                
10   In UK-weighted terms, global output is estimated at 2% below potential. 
11   Yields on sovereign bonds remain exceptionally low. In the six months to January, estimates of the equity risk 
premium rose by over 100bps in the UK and the euro area back to levels last seen in the heart of the crisis – 
December 2008 for the UK and June 2012 for the euro area. In addition, the probability of large declines in 
equity  prices  implied  by  options  prices  rebounded  during  2014.  Discussed  in  Carney,  M  (2015),  “Fortune 
favours the bold”,  Lecture  to honour  the  memory of  The  Honourable  James  Michael  Flaherty,  P.C., Iveagh 
House, Dublin. 
12   Interpreting  these  trends is  not  straightforward.  Household  surveys may  reflect  consumers’ assessments  of 
the  most  frequently  purchased  items,  for  example,  rather  than  the  whole  CPI  basket.  And  financial  market 
measures  reflect  not  only  expectations  about  future  inflation,  but  also  investors’  required  compensation  for 
inflation risk – the inflation risk premium – and, in the UK, the wedge between CPI and RPI inflation rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  What if inflation is slow to return to target abroad? 
4. 
Protracted  global  weakness  could  heighten  the  challenge  of  returning  inflation  quickly  to 
target  in  the  UK.  That’s  because  weak  global  conditions  would  tend  to  push  down  on  the 
equilibrium interest rate that would maintain demand in line with supply and inflation at the 
target. 
This  equilibrium  rate  has  likely  been  falling  for  the  last  three  decades  and  turned  sharply 
negative  in  the  downturn.13  This  meant  central  banks  had  to  turn  to  unconventional  policy 
tools to stimulate their economies in order to return inflation to target. In the cases of the UK 
and  the  US,  these  measures  have  been  effective  in  supporting  domestically  generated 
inflation.  Although  the  equilibrium  rate  might  be  turning  positive  in  the  UK  as  domestic 
headwinds have abated, it’s likely still to be negative in many countries, reflecting an excess 
of  saving  over  investment,  in  particular  in  the  euro  area.  In  this  regard,  the  ECB’s  recent 
moves to reduce its main refinancing rate to 0.05%, its deposit facility rate to –0.2%, and to 
commence large-scale asset purchases are both timely and welcome. 
In an environment of low rates everywhere, even Bank Rate of ½% might look high-yielding. 
And the fear of a bad outcome abroad could trigger safe-haven capital flows into the UK that 
push  the  value  of  sterling  higher,  making  exporting  more  challenging,  with  knock-on 
implications for wages and prices here. 
That would come against the backdrop of a 5 ½ per cent sterling appreciation on a trade-
weighted basis in the last year (Chart 9), which has extended the currency’s appreciation to 
around  17  per  cent  since  its  trough  two  years  ago.  These  moves  are  reinforcing  the 
disinflationary impulse from abroad, which could take a while to pass through to the sterling 
prices in the shops.14 
Getting back to target in the UK 
5. 
All of this puts a premium on generating the domestic inflation necessary to return inflation to 
the target. 
We are on track to do that. 
The UK economy is performing well. UK growth is solid, unemployment is coming down, and 
jobs have risen by 600,000 in the past year. Wage growth is showing signs of picking up, 
rising to 3% for the economy as a whole at the end of last year, and to 3.3% in the private 
sector.15  Average  hours  worked  continue  to  recover  on  a  strong  upward  trend.  And  firms’ 
labour costs grew an estimated 1.3% in the last quarter of 2014, close to core inflation. 
Consumer confidence and retail sales growth are at their highest in over decade. Similarly 
real  income  growth  is  on  course  to  be  the  strongest  for  more  than  a  decade.  Firms’ 
investment intensions are robust. Surveys point to solid growth consistent with trend. There 
is little evidence of a deflationary mindset setting in. 
                                                
13   That reflects an excess of saving over investment. That in turn reflects a combination of factors including the 
protracted process of balance sheet repair in both public and private sectors, and more secular factors like 
demographics (ageing and slower population growth), the higher steady state costs of financial intermediation 
relative to the pre-crisis period, and, possibly, lower productivity growth, as a consequence of lasting scars 
from the crisis. See Carney, M (2013), “The spirit of the season” at The Economic Club of New York; and box 
on page 42 of Bank of England (2014), Inflation Report, August. 
14   Protracted  pass-through,  generated  by  stickiness  in  the  domestic  price  of  imported  goods,  challenges  the 
classical view that the exchange rate provides an efficient shock-absorber in the face of foreign shocks. 
15   These figures refer to the quarter-on-quarter annualised growth rate of the Average Weekly Earnings series. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With  domestic  demand  growing  at  around  3%  in  2014,  the  fastest  for  ten  years,  all  these 
factors will underpin the momentum needed to bring domestic cost growth back to up to a 
rate consistent with the inflation target. 
The fall in inflation we’ve experienced is in large part down to falling energy prices. It is not 
generalised “deflation” proper. The proportion of prices that are falling is consistent with the 
average over the past decade. The Bank will be vigilant in monitoring inflation expectations. 
Declining headline inflation seems likely to have cooled households’ inflation expectations as 
the prices of the goods they buy frequently – like fuel and food – have declined markedly. On 
balance,  however,  inflation  expectations  remain  broadly  consistent  with  the  2%  inflation 
target.  As  the  MPC  noted  in  our  February  Inflation  Report,  we  retain  considerable  policy 
options in the event that downside risks materialise. 
Conclusion 
6. 
The Bank of England’s inflation target is symmetric. We care as much about inflation below 
target  as  above.  With  inflation  below  target  and  unemployment  above  its  long-run 
sustainable rate, we are aiming to return inflation to target as quickly as possible. 
In our most recent forecast, The Bank expects to return inflation to target within two years 
and to make limited and gradual increases in Bank Rate over the next three years in order to 
achieve that in a sustainable manner. 
The pace and degree of these increases will be affected by a variety of factors, including the 
evolution of foreign prices and our exchange rate, as well as domestic cost pressures. While 
the MPC can be expected to look through one-off shocks, it may be appropriate to take into 
account  persistent  external  deflationary  forces  arising  from  the  combination  of  continued 
foreign low inflation and the protracted effects of sterling’s strength on the prices facing UK 
consumers if those forces were to intensify. 
Cities like Sheffield have shown that in a rapidly changing global economic landscape, hard 
work, clarity of purpose, and fleetness of foot grant manufacturing the freedom to write its 
future. The MPC also faces global risks as it seeks to return inflation to target. But we remain 
the author of our nominal destiny. The MPC has the responsibility to return inflation to target 
in a timely manner and we will seek to write the next chapter that does so. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
