  Paul Fisher: Confronting the challenges of tomorrow’s world 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Insurance  Supervision  of  the  Bank  of 
England and Deputy Head of the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), at the Economist’s 
Insurance Summit 2015, London, 3 March 2015. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  speak  to  you  today.  As  many  of  you  will  know  I  have  been 
covering  as  Executive  Director  of  Insurance,  in  addition  to  my  responsibilities  as  Deputy 
Head  of  the  PRA,  since  August  last  year  whilst  a  search  was  made  for  a  permanent 
appointment. At long last I will be passing the baton over to Sam Woods at Easter. So this is 
likely to be my final speech made as Insurance Director. 
I would like to take the opportunity to offer up some personal observations about the current 
and prospective state of the insurance industry, as well as comment more generally on the 
role regulation will play in “confronting the challenges of tomorrow”. 
The insurance sector, by absorbing and laying off risk, plays a fundamental role in fostering a 
stable economy. A successful industry is therefore key to achieving the Bank of England’s 
financial and monetary stability objectives. And as society and its economy evolve, it is vital 
that the insurance sector also responds to that changing environment. 
Tomorrow’s world inevitably brings change. Some changes can be forecast, or guessed by 
extrapolating  from  what  we  know  today.  But  there  are,  inevitably,  the  unknown  unknowns 
which  will  help  shape  the  future.  That  means  that  a  successful  industry  needs  to  be  both 
dynamic and robust. 
Uncertainty  generates  challenges  but  also  represents  opportunity.  I  want  to  discuss  these 
risk/reward trade-offs and the importance of understanding the potential for new exposures 
that changing risk profiles can bring. 
Insurance  fulfils  important  social  functions:  the  provision  of  income  security  in  retirement; 
income  protection  whilst  in  work;  funding  for  health  care  services  and  preserving  the 
continuity of businesses subject to unexpected shocks. Indeed, in some areas, insurance is 
compulsory  such  as  with  motor  insurance  and  employers’  liability.  Disruption  to  these 
functions is unlikely to be tolerated by wider society, not only because of the social benefits, 
but  because  risk  transfer  and  pooling  are  crucial  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and 
development. It is for this reason that the need to protect the interests of policy holders and 
to preserve long-term critical cover is so important. 
Although one cannot be sure what the future may bring, we can learn from past mistakes to 
avoid their repetition. That is particularly apposite given that the residual effects of the great 
financial crisis are still being felt across the global economy. One of the things we appreciate 
very well at the PRA is that insurance business is very different to banking, and I have seen 
that at first hand over the past six months or so. I have also seen that there are lessons to be 
learnt from the banking crisis that can directly read across to the world of insurance. 
Let me express a clear personal opinion; financial crises of the past were often, in large part, 
created  by  the  people  at  the  top  making  poor  decisions  –  people  not  possessing  the  right 
information;  not  having  due  regard  for  risk;  not  being  properly  incentivised.  Significant 
failures have often had their roots in poor governance with insufficient checks and balances 
to  the  decisions  of  powerful  individuals.  Strong,  effective  systems  of  oversight  and  risk 
management are paramount in meeting the PRA’s objectives for the safety and soundness of 
firms  and  insurance  policyholder  protection.  Not  surprisingly,  governance  issues  are 
consistently  at,  or  near  the  top,  of the  PRA’s  agenda  whether for  banks  or  insurers. I  can 
safely predict that this focus is not about to lessen any time soon. Firms in tomorrow’s world 
need to aim for governance best practice. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  recent  banking  crises  further  illustrated  that  one  of  the  most  obvious  ways  in  which 
financial  stability  can  be  undermined  is  through  disorderly  firm  failure  and  the  consequent 
disruption of financial services. The PRA’s stance is that unsuccessful business models need 
to be allowed to fail, but that failure should be in an orderly manner so as not to disrupt the 
provision of core financial services. And I think we would all agree that the taxpayer should 
not be asked to bail out a failed firm. 
One  difference  from  banking  is  that  failing  insurers  usually  do  exit  in  an  orderly  manner. 
Actually,  about  a  third  of  the  PRA’s  authorised  firms  are  in  run-off.  But  that  is  in  part  a 
testament to the successful regulatory regime that the UK has been running for the insurance 
sector.  And,  whatever  the  regime,  we  cannot  be  certain  this  will  be  the  case  in  every 
conceivable  circumstance.  For  this  reason,  the  PRA  continues  to  place  the  resolution 
arrangements for insurers on both the domestic and international agendas. 
The banking crisis further taught us all that we need to be looking at potential storms ahead 
and not to be misled by periods of fair weather. For the PRA this means it will assess firms 
not just against current risks, but also against those that could plausibly arise in the future, 
carrying  out  increased  business  model  analysis.  For  insurers,  this  involves  monitoring 
emerging risks and taking preparatory steps to deal with what may result, with firms holding 
capital  commensurate  to  their  evolving  risk  profile.  This  approach  is  embedded  as  part  of 
Solvency  II,  for  example  with  the  requirement  for  each  undertaking  to  conduct  a  forward 
looking assessment of its own risk and solvency needs. 
The fallout from the global financial crisis has accentuated the need for an open, two-way 
dialogue  between  regulator  and  regulated.  This  is  especially  true  in  times  of  change  or 
stress. To ensure policyholder protection, regulators need to be alert to emerging risks and 
this is best achieved through a “cards on the table” approach. Indeed, where the PRA judges 
it is necessary to intervene, we will seek to do so at an early stage. Firms should be open 
and straightforward in their dealings with the PRA and we in turn will take a risk-based and 
proportionate approach. 
This  is  being  put  into  practice.  For  example,  enhanced  communication  is  particularly 
pertinent  as  we  transition  to  the  Solvency  II  world.  From  April,  firms  will  be  able  to  make 
formal  applications  and  we  don’t  need  a  crystal  ball  to  predict  a  very  busy  year  for  both 
regulator and regulated. The PRA has had an extensive on-going dialogue with firms, giving 
detailed  feedback  on,  for  example,  their  internal  model  developments  or  their  matching 
adjustment  applications.  Just  over  a  week  ago we  issued  guidance  on how  equity  release 
mortgages might be structured for use in the matching adjustment. Right now, the PRA is 
aiming to provide both general and individual firm feedback, recognising the importance of 
timely communication allowing firms to prepare thoroughly. 
As a consequence of the financial crisis, financial regulation in all its forms has been through 
a major transition. In the UK we have seen the split of prudential and conduct regulation, the 
establishment  of  a  single  Insurance  Directorate  at  the  PRA  with  an  insurance  specific 
secondary  objective,  and  we  have  moved  forward  in  our  application  of  “judgement-based 
regulation”.  The  next  few  years  will  be  about  embedding  this  new  approach  through 
Solvency II. 
I  would  like  to  move  on  now  from  regulation  to  a  number  of  other  developments  and 
challenges that are currently on the horizon and to discuss the possible impacts these could 
have on insurers’ business models. 
The  nature  of  insurance  and  the  risk  transfer  role  it  provides  means  that  insurance  cuts 
across  all  aspects  of  society;  whether  providing  at  retirement  solutions  to  pensioners  to 
insuring the latest iPhone. It is for this reason that insurers find themselves innovating in step 
with wider society. As insurers are directly exposed to social changes, the changing world is 
the very stuff on which they should thrive. There are a number of such societal, regulatory or 
environmental changes currently at play such as global warming, globalisation, digitisation, 
demographic changes and cyber risk to name but a few. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Societal and environmental changes 
A topical environmental change that is quickly moving up the agenda for insurers is that of 
climate change. 
Climate  change  impacts  insurers  on  both  sides  of  their  balance  sheets.  Insurers  may  be 
impacted  by  increased  claims  experience  –  particularly  so  given  the  London  Market’s 
prominence in areas like catastrophe risk. But it appears that the asset side may also give 
rise to unexpected risks. 
Let’s take these in turn. 
We are seeing evermore frequent “record” weather events; storms; floods; hotter summers; 
intense  rainfall;  not  to  mention  global  concerns  such  as  higher  sea  levels.  Insurers  are 
having to respond to these shifts. However, increases in catastrophic risk events can provide 
both an opportunity and a threat to insurers. 
There  is  an  opportunity  for  growth  in  underwriting  new  products.  But  the  combination  of 
concentrated exposures to large catastrophe losses, inadequate risk management and/or the 
potential for mis-pricing could undermine the sustainability of businesses. 
The  insurance  industry  is  already  taking  steps  to  stay  ahead  of  the  climate  curve  on  the 
liability  side  with  the  establishment  of  Flood  Re;  ClimateWise  forums;  more  sophisticated 
underwriting  techniques;  the  development  of  climate  change  products  and  carbon  offsets. 
However,  it  is  worth  bearing  in  mind  that,  even  though  the  full  impacts  of  climate  change 
often may not be visible in the short term, it is well worth insurers being alert to the emerging 
risks, including those emanating from policy makers. 
But  insurers,  as  long  term  investors,  are  also  exposed  to  changes  in  public  policy  as  this 
affects  the  investment  side.  One  live  risk  right  now  is  of  insurers  investing  in  assets  that 
could  be  left “stranded” by  policy  changes  which  limit  the  use  of fossil  fuels.  As  the  world 
increasingly limits carbon emissions, and moves to alternative energy sources, investments 
in fossil fuels and related technologies – a growing financial market in recent decades – may 
take a huge hit. There are already a few specific examples of this having happened. 
The Bank of England has been carrying out analysis to better understand these risks. The 
Bank  of  England  voluntarily  accepted  DEFRA’s  invitation  to  compile  a  Climate  Change 
Adaptation Report, due for delivery later this year. A project team was established to inquire 
into the topics of climate change and stranded assets. We are seeking to understand how 
these  changes  may  impact  upon  the  PRA’s  objectives  and  how  that  could  shape  our  role 
going forward. 
We have noted that change to an insurers’ business model can be driven from many sources 
– which include changing consumer expectations. 
Today  the  consumer  demands  more  control,  flexibility  and  automatism  having  become 
accustomed to interactive, accessible and digitised services. Increasingly consumers – that’s 
you  and  I  in  our  personal  lives  –  expect  the  same  digitised  experience  for  all  their  buying 
needs, including insurance. 
Digitisation and the prominence of “smart tech” cannot be ignored and already innovation in 
technology  is  leading  insurers  to  do  business  differently.  This  shift  can  be  felt  across  the 
value-chain,  whether  it  be  changes  in  distribution  channels  and  use  of  cloud-based 
infrastructure, to enhanced underwriting processes and use of “black boxes”. 
For the most part, digital includes putting the customer experience at the centre of insurers’ 
strategies.  Whilst  positive,  as  with  any  shift  in  business  model  and  strategy,  business 
developments need to be carefully managed and monitored to ensure the core objectives of 
enhancing the customer experience are indeed achieved. And new IT systems don’t come 
cheap, nor are they riskless. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Digitisation  and  enhanced  technology  can  be  a  double-edged  sword.  Technological 
enhancements bring new opportunities to businesses but the pace of innovation must be met 
by the pace of corresponding safeguards to deal with the risks. In particular, the risk of cyber-
attack is a great concern. The pace here is really changing very rapidly. 
As with the other risks, insurers are affected for both good and ill: with ever more frequent 
and  increasingly  sophisticated  cyber-attacks  on  businesses  and  individuals,  insurers  are 
being relied upon more and more for protection. A new business opportunity for sure. But, 
unlike most other insured risks, insurance firms could themselves be significant victims. 
It is difficult to predict how cyber-crime – or even cyber accidents – will evolve, and it is very 
challenging to obtain data for losses that arise out of cyber-events. This makes it all the more 
difficult to quantify reserves, models and prices as well as develop operational safeguards 
internally. 
An Insurer wishing to expand into any new business area needs to demonstrate to the PRA 
that new risk exposures are well understood and that the required capital for an altered risk 
profile  has  been  fully  considered.  As  stated  previously,  business  model  analysis  forms  an 
important  part  of  the  PRA’s  supervisory  approach  and  a  focus  for  its  supervisory  activity. 
Insurers will need to deal with the PRA in an open, co-operative and constructive manner to 
allow  us  to  understand  whether  the  business  model  is  sustainable  and  to  identify  key 
vulnerabilities.  This  will  ensure  a  more  informed,  focussed  and  proportionate  supervisory 
approach. 
Into the unknown 
Over the past 25 years we have seen: the introduction of the Euro; break-up of the Soviet 
Union; a shift from West to East; the introduction of the world wide web to ordinary life; and 
smart technology – so what will happen over the next 25 years? 
As an ex-forecaster I can tell you confidently that the only thing we can be certain of is that 
there will be changes that no one will predict. 
I did not think, some six years ago, when sat at the table of the Monetary Policy Committee 
for my first meeting, that Bank Rate would continue to be 0.5% this far down the line. One 
can never be sure what tomorrow will bring and interest rates is a case in point. 
The low level of real interest rates today is, in large part, a product of spare capacity in the 
real  economy  and  low  levels  of  growth  and  productivity  across  the  developed  world.  This 
presents a number of issues for insurers who rely on interest income from their assets as 
part  of  their  basic  business  model,  especially  where  these  returns  back  contractual 
guarantees.  Without  making  any  implied  comment  about  monetary  policy,  just  looking  at 
today’s  yield  curve,  it  is  not  plausible  for  insurers  to  expect  high  nominal  or  real  rates  of 
return in the near future from low-risk assets. Firms relying on high income streams from their 
assets may find themselves taking ever greater risks to their balance sheets. 
Earlier on I mentioned the importance of governance in the work of the PRA. It is one thing 
that  can  help  generate  robustness  in  the  face  of  these  uncertain  developments.  Good 
governance should lie at the heart of every organisation. It is not just about the role of the 
board  but  includes  management,  controls,  oversight  and  management  information.  Good 
governance encourages better business practices and outcomes. Of course, well intentioned 
people can make sub-optimal structures work – just as good structures can be run poorly. 
But a better structure gives a firm a better chance of avoiding a big business mistake and of 
surviving an unexpected shock. 
Insurance retains highly talented and competent individuals. However, I have observed that 
the sector can be a bit of a “closed field”. I hear some firms – not all – talk of the difficulty in 
being  able  to  appoint  successful  executives  and  even  more  difficulty  in  finding  qualified, 
independent non-executives. Insurers also talk about the challenges of attracting young and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  ambitious  individuals  to  supply  the  talent  of  the  future.  These  people  issues  become 
particularly  relevant  in  an  environment  under  the  Solvency  II  regime  when  the  system  of 
governance  will  be  given  even  more  prominence.  I  hope  that  the  new  Senior  Insurance 
Managers  Regime  will  be  seen  as  both  appropriate  and  proportionate  to  the  needs  of  the 
industry and policy holders alike. To be clear, the Senior Insurance Managers Regime should 
not be operated in such a way so as to put good people off. The desired outcome is that of 
effective governance, not enforcement. 
Insurance innovation and regulation 
Preparedness for what tomorrow’s world may bring will likely involve a degree of change – 
greater risk-awareness, ensuring good governance, collaboration with the regulator – but is 
the insurance industry capable of that change? 
The insurance industry has been founded upon taking the long term view. This is a concept 
that  perhaps  evokes  a  perception  of  consistency  rather  than  innovation.  However,  the  UK 
industry  has  traditionally  not  shied  away  from  changing  with  the  times,  with  the  London 
market being a particular example. 
Already,  in  response  to changes  on  the  horizon,  we  are  seeing  shifts  in  business  models. 
Insurers are refreshing their product offerings, altering operational structures and enhancing 
distribution channels. The PRA has an important role to play in this so let me return to the 
subject of regulation. 
To be clear, regulators have no intrinsic reason to stifle innovation. Far better to supervise a 
successful,  profitable,  innovating  enterprise  than  a  declining  out-dated  one.  Underpinning 
that view, I would say that there should not be a prohibitive trade-off between insurers’ ability 
to innovate versus their ability to manage risks. 
Instead, the PRA will need to work with its regulated entities closely and early in the process 
of innovation. Let’s be clear that the business model and the risk are owned by the firm – the 
PRA’s job is make sure that a firm’s approach to risk management is sound and that their 
policy holders are adequately protected. 
I believe Solvency II will help to do this. It will introduce greater risk-sensitivity; co-operation 
across  jurisdictions;  and  consistency  in  approach.  Being  a  risk-based  regime  means  that 
insurers should be able to evolve and adapt to capture all risks they are exposed to and the 
qualitative risk assessment introduced under Pillar II will further support this move towards a 
more  responsive,  reflective  and  adaptable  solvency  regime.  This  in  turn  will  mean  that 
insurers  will  need  to  think  carefully  about  the  risks  they  are  exposed  to  and  how  this  is 
captured and managed. This does not mean that Solvency II should dictate firms’ business 
models. Rather, market forces and expectations of policy holders will inform insurers’ pricing 
and strategies. 
As  referred  to  earlier,  there  is  much  we  can  do  to  prepare  for  the  future  by  learning  from 
mistakes of the past. One such area where this should be borne in mind is in the use of risk 
models  which  will  play  a  huge  role  in  Solvency  II  for  the  larger,  more  complicated  firms. 
Firms  need  to  be  able  to  understand  their  models  and  their  limitations,  and  be  able  to 
challenge  them.  As  the  Governor  said  last  year:  “The  dangers  of  using  poorly  designed 
models were made all too clear in the banking sector. So the Bank won’t hesitate to withhold 
approval of inadequate or opaque models”. 
There are many things I could say about Solvency II, but I want to concentrate on what it 
means for the future. One particular aspect is that it sensibly allows for a smooth transition, 
over a period of 16 years in some cases. It is recognised that for insurers (particularly life 
insurers),  Solvency  II  with  the  introduction  of  a  “going  concern”  regime,  is  a  considerable 
shift. In particular, firms will have to hold a risk margin to ensure that the insurance liabilities 
reflect the value for which they could be transferred to a third party. To allow for the gradual 
introduction of the risk margin, firms will be able to make a transitional deduction from their 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  technical  provisions.  Together,  the  various  transitional  measures  within  Solvency  II  should 
ensure a smooth progression, avoiding the market dislocation, volatility and increased costs 
that could result should a number of firms have to augment their capital base at the same 
time. They rightly recognise that the underlying risks have not changed overnight, even if the 
regime has. 
Firms making use of transitional measures will be afforded time to reach the level of financial 
resources required by the full Solvency II regime. In the meantime we can be sure that the 
transitional  deduction  from  technical  provisions  will  not  result  in  a  firm’s  resources  falling 
below  those  required  under  the  existing  UK  regime.  This  is  because  Solvency  II  caps  the 
amount of transitional benefit a firm may derive. Bearing in mind this cap, and the benefits to 
be gained from a smooth transition, the take-up of transitional measures should be seen as a 
viable option for firms to take to assist with their capital planning, and are a feature that the 
UK authorities strongly supported during the development of Solvency II. They are there to 
be used where appropriate. 
As we shift to a Solvency II world, I think it is worth bearing in mind that, like a smartphone, 
regulation  tends  to  get  new  “updates”  and  “apps”  in  response  to  changes  in  the  external 
environment.  Indeed,  the  path  of  the  future  is  in  global  policy  development,  including  the 
insurance capital standard (ICS) under the aegis of the International Association of Insurance 
Supervisors (IAIS) which will look to develop risk-based global standards. 
Insurance business is fast becoming globalised and interlinked. It naturally follows that so too 
should  regulation.  Introducing  global  capital  standards  would  enhance  global  cooperation, 
ensure a level playing field and limit regulatory arbitrage. 
For  this  reason,  the  PRA  supports  the  development  of  global  capital  standards  and  the 
establishment of a long term vision in order to achieve a single insurance capital standard 
predicated on a single valuation basis which is genuinely comparable across jurisdictions. 
Concluding remarks 
Insurance  sits  at  frontline  of  innovation  and,  as  seen  with  climate  change  and  digitisation, 
insurers can be directly  exposed to changes in regulation, public policy  and other shifts in 
society. This is because insurance forms one of the foundations to our daily lives, providing a 
risk transfer role for all facets of human activity. Risk transfer allows society as we know it to 
function  effectively  and  as  such,  insurers  oil  the  wheels  for  the  engine  of  the  economy  to 
function. On the basis of what I have seen since last August, the UK insurance industry is 
one of the most advanced and successful in the world. The key to meeting the challenges of 
tomorrow’s world is for the industry and regulator to continue to develop and work together. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
