  Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Living with capital flows – an emerging market 
perspective 
Speech  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  School  of 
International  and  Public  Affairs,  Columbia  University  and  School  of  Management,  Yale 
University, New Haven, USA, 13–14 April 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Being  amongst  and  having  the  opportunity  to  interact  with  young  scholars  such  as  you  is 
refreshing.  These  days  I  spend  much  of  my  time  in  meetings  with  senior  policymakers 
discussing problems and challenges facing Thailand and the world economy. Many of these 
challenges are structural, having been accumulated over a long time. They are legacies 
of past steps and missteps of the generation before us. 
So it is fitting to be able to speak to you today, as some of you will certainly inherit and 
have  to  deal  with  problems  that  are  being  created  now,  largely  inadvertently.  I  am 
reminded  here  of  a  marketing  line  by  the  Swiss  watchmaker,  Patek  Phillipe,  which  goes 
something like “You never really own a Patek Philippe. You merely look after it for the next 
generation.” 
Let me then take this opportunity on behalf of policymakers the world over to tell you that we 
mean well and sorry for any troubles that we may pass onto you. The fact is that real-time 
policymaking is hard. Apart from serious data limitations, the world keeps changing rapidly 
and  our  knowledge  often  does  not  keep  up.  Today  I  will  talk  about  an  area  where  these 
challenges  apply  forcefully.  That  is the impact of financial integration and how to deal 
with cross-border capital flows. 
Over  the  past  two  decades,  the  level  of  financial  integration  across  countries  has 
increased rapidly. If we take the total stock of external assets and liabilities relative to world 
GDP as a gauge of financial integration, in 1980 this stood at around a quarter, roughly equal 
to  the  ratio  of  global  trade  to  world  output.  By  2010,  global finance  was  nine  times  global 
trade. For emerging and developing countries, gross international assets and liabilities have 
increased by more than fivefold in the past ten years alone. For advanced economies, the 
expansion has been even more rapid. 
Accompanying  the  trend  increase  in  financial  integration  has  been  a  large  expansion  in 
gross  capital flows as well  as  an  increase in  the  volatility  of  those  flows.  Periods  of 
synchronized  asset  price  volatility  across  countries  and  regions  have  become  more 
prevalent.  There  is  increasing  talk  of  a  global  financial  cycle  driven,  in  part,  by  US 
monetary policy. This has led to an active debate about the impact of financial integration on 
individual countries’ ability to manage domestic financial conditions. Does increased financial 
integration  limit  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  control?  How  should  countries  respond  to 
increased capital flows? Is there room for policy coordination? 
Let  me  say  at  the  outset  that  there  are  no  clear  cut  solutions.  There  is  a  large  academic 
literature that discusses the pros and cons of various instruments, such as capital controls 
and macroprudential measures. I will not discuss these at length. Rather, I will draw from our 
collective experience of dealing with capital flows and offer some guiding principles from 
an emerging market point of view. 
Let’s begin with a broad perspective of the impact of financial integration. 
Some of you may have seen the film Red Cliff directed by John Woo based on a historical 
battle in China around the early third century. On one side was the northern warlord Cao Cao 
(โจโฉ)  with  numerically  superior  forces  who  commanded  thousands  of  ships  to  attack  the 
southern  warlord  Sun  Quan.  In  what  is  known  as  the  Battle  of  Red  Cliffs,  Cao  Cao  had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
chained his battleships together to make them more stable and prevent his men from 
getting  seasick.  Observing  this,  Sun  Quan’s  generals  sent  unmanned  fire  ships  towards 
Cao  Cao’s  fleet  and  set  it  ablaze.  Unable  to  separate from  each  other,  the flames quickly 
swept across the entire fleet and Cao Cao was defeated. 
This story reflects well the double-edged sword of financial integration. On the one hand, 
connectivity acts as a shock-absorber. They help to distribute and diversify risk, raising 
economic efficiency and contributing to system stability. Cao Cao’s men did not get seasick. 
But  when  a  sufficiently  large  shock  hits,  connectivity  may  instead  act  as  a  shock 
transmitter.  Risk-sharing  becomes  risk-amplifying.  The  system  transforms  into  a  network 
incendiary device. A globalized financial system has a split personality. It is at once calm and 
turbulent, stable yet unpredictable, robust yet fragile. Lately, the “dark side” of financial 
integration has increasingly come into focus. 
The global financial crisis was a vivid demonstration of what happens when the system flips 
over from stable to instability. And the prescribed treatment has created increasingly serious 
side-effects  ever  since. With  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies  having  been  kept  at 
ultra loose levels for over 5 years and still further unconventional monetary stimulus being 
embarked upon in some cases, the repercussions on the rest of the world are testing the 
limits of macroeconomic management, especially for emerging market countries. 
Large capital inflows have lowered long-term yields and compressed risk spreads across 
a wide range of asset classes, contributing to increased risk-taking. The marked rise in the 
co-movement  of  asset  prices  across  countries,  particularly  in  bond  yields,  is  making  it 
harder  for  policies  to  achieve  desired  financial  conditions  domestically.  At  the  same  time, 
upward  pressure  on  exchange  rates  risks  undermining  export  competitiveness, 
complicating the trade-offs between macroeconomic stabilization and financial stability. And 
should  inflows  reverse  abruptly,  the  resulting  asset  price  and  exchange  rate  swings  could 
induce broad contagion effects that prove disruptive to economic activity. 
In  all  this,  the  underlying  concern  is  that  integration  has  amplified  the  vulnerability  of 
domestic  financial  conditions  to  external  shocks,  while  limiting  the  effectiveness  of 
the  tools  that  policymakers  have  for  addressing  those  shocks.  This  is  not  solely  an 
emerging market problem. Indeed, the degree of co-movement in bond yields appears to be 
even  stronger  for  advanced  economies.  Nevertheless,  there  are  important  reasons  why 
capital  flow  volatility  and  exchange  rate  fluctuations  may  present  more  challenges  for 
emerging market countries. 
For one, less developed and relatively shallow financial markets means that asset prices 
will move more in response to capital flow volatility. Secondly, greater reliance on exports 
as an engine of growth implies more susceptibility to currency movements. Thirdly, many 
emerging  market  countries  have  had  a  long  history  with  fixed  exchange  rates,  which 
translates both into less familiarity with hedging instruments as well as greater political 
pressure  in  the  face  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  Finally,  weaker  governance  and 
institutions  means  that  inflows  may  be  more  likely  to  cause  imbalances  during  booms. 
These very same weaknesses also tend to make investors more fickle to exit when things 
turn sour. 
Of course none of this is entirely new. Dealing with capital flow waves or “bonanzas” have 
been  a  perennial  challenge  for  emerging  market  countries.  It  is  old  wine  in  a  new  bottle. 
What is new this time around is that the degree of financial integration across countries 
is unprecedented, as is the global monetary policy context characterized by advanced 
economies  simultaneously  pushing  the  accelerator  to  the  floor  and  keeping  it  there. 
There are legitimate concerns whether the bottle will break this time around. 
Which brings me to the question of how to deal with these challenges. 
If  you  were  an  alien  observing  all  this  from  Mars,  it  might  seem  obvious  that  there  are 
important  coordination  failures  at  the  global  level.  With  each  central  bank  focusing  on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  their own domestic mandates, financial conditions collectively for the world as a whole can 
be  suboptimal.  Global  credit  and  monetary  expansion  seems  to  be  precariously 
unanchored.  Given  the  complexity  of  cross  border  interactions,  the  expansion  of  central 
bank balance sheets the world over has implications for the system as a whole that are by no 
means  clear.  This  is  especially  worrying  given  that  existing  facilities  for  international 
liquidity support is inadequate for absorbing a large international crisis should one occur. 
In a highly integrated global economy, the need for collective action is inescapable. But 
progress in achieving this with respect to the international monetary and financial system so 
far is very limited. As with all common goods, achieving political will to further the collective 
interest is extremely difficult. Thus while we can hope for greater international coordination, 
we can certainly not plan on one. Instead, countries are left to fend for themselves. Here, 
the experience of Asia offers some guiding principles. 
In  many  ways,  Asian  countries  have  been  pioneers  in  terms  of  policy  responses  to 
dealing  with  capital  flows.  This  often  entailed  going  against  prevailing  wisdom  and 
convention.  In  1998,  facing  intense  speculative  flows  from  hedge  funds,  the  Hong  Kong 
Monetary Authority purchased stocks to counter the steep fall in equity prices. In the same 
year, Malaysia introduced capital controls amidst the Asian financial crisis to stem the decline 
of  its  currency.  In  both  cases,  there  were  harsh  criticisms  by  the  international  community, 
which deemed the measures as undermining the benefits of free markets. 
Fast  forward  to  2008,  a  generalized  downward  spiral  in  asset  prices  and  abrupt  market 
seizures  were  contained  by  extraordinary  interventions  of  major  central  banks,  particularly 
the Federal Reserve. The interventions were far reaching, ranging from loans to banks and 
non-banks to direct support of private securities, such as commercial paper and mortgage- 
backed securities. In effect, central banks became market makers in some segments of 
the market. These interventions were widely applauded. 
What a difference a decade makes! In the wake of the global financial crisis, an emerging 
consensus is that market interventions in certain circumstances are justified. No more 
is  this  evident  than  with  respect  to  the  use  of  capital  flow  measures,  or  CFMs.  It  is  now 
generally accepted that CFMs targeted at tilting the composition of inflows away from 
debt,  especially  short-term  ones,  can  be  beneficial.  More  generally,  macroprudential 
measures have become an important part of policymakers toolkit, with increasing theoretical 
support for their use in a counter-cyclical manner. 
A similar reassessment has occurred with respect to foreign currency intervention, which 
is  increasingly  being  recognized  as  a  useful  and  justifiable  complementary  tool.  Also,  the 
large  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves  that  was  once  criticized  is  now  credited  with 
helping to mitigate the impact of the global financial crisis on emerging market countries. 
Thus  much  of  what  Asia  was  doing  before  on  the  fringe,  so  to  speak,  have  now  become 
mainstream. Beyond the starkly different receptions, however, all these interventions share a 
commonality:  they  were  unconventional  and  innovative  initiatives  geared  to  the  specific 
context  at  hand.  They  highlight  the  virtues  of  being  practical  and  pragmatic,  of  the 
willingness  to  question  conventional wisdom,  and  of  tailoring  solutions  to  the  local 
context. Countries will do well in heeding these principles when dealing with the challenges 
arising from financial integration. 
From  a  longer-term  perspective,  however,  the  focus  needs  to  move  beyond  the 
judicious use of well-timed policy interventions. This requires a particular mindset. 
When  people  think  of  the  Netherlands,  the  image  of  windmills  comes  to  mind.  Apart  from 
being picturesque, they are actually a reflection of the extraordinary way in which the Dutch 
people  have  adopted  to  their  geography  for  over  thousands  of  years.  Despite  being  a 
coastal nation, the Netherlands has created new land from the North Sea through the 
use  of  dykes  and  other  ocean  barriers.  Windmills  have  been  pumping  water  out  off 
reclaimed land since the fourteenth century. Today, nearly one-third of the Netherlands lies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  below  sea  level.  “Floating  homes” can  now  be  found  in  Amsterdam  and  elsewhere.  Some 
would be on dry land and float up when flooded; others are built over water but could cope 
with its changing levels. 
The important lesson from the Dutch solution to floods is clear: live with the water, 
don’t fight it. The need and benefits of living on reclaimed land have been accepted and the 
focus is on strengthening the infrastructure to sustain this. Similarly, financial integration is a 
choice. Countries decide to become financially integrated because the perceived benefits of 
doing so outweigh the costs. Moving forward sustainably requires going beyond coping 
with capital flows to living with them. 
This involves developing and leveraging on fundamental economic strengths to enhance 
countries’  resilience  to  external  shocks.  A  diversified  export  base  focused  on  high 
value-added  products  and  services  translates  into  higher  margins  and  pricing  power,  and 
hence less sensitivity to swings in the exchange rate. At the same time, developing a firm 
domestic  consumer  base  will  solidify  economies’  internal  strength  and  lessen  the 
dependence on external demand. 
Much can also be done on the financial side. Deep and liquid markets would help to absorb 
swings  in  capital  flows  without  overly  large  price  movements.  The  availability  and 
widespread  usage  of  risk  management  instruments,  particularly  foreign  currency 
hedging,  would  mitigate  the  negative  repercussions  from  asset  price  volatility.  Outward 
capital flows by domestic investors can enhance stability as international asset holdings can 
provide an important buffer during periods of volatility. Last, but not least, limiting leverage 
in the banking system can go a long way in cushioning the economy from external shocks. 
In  most  cases,  exchange  rate  flexibility  will  be  an  indispensible  part  of  living  with 
capital  flows.  While  there  are  certainly  grounds  for  limiting  exchange  rate  fluctuations  to 
prevent temporary misalignments, targeting exchange rates is likely to be counterproductive 
in  the  long-run.  Doing  so  requires  policymakers  to  choose  a  level  of the  exchange  rate  to 
stabilize  around.  This  can  be  very  difficult  to  implement  in  practice,  not  least  because  the 
target  would  change  over  time  as  fundamentals  evolve.  Importantly,  there  is  little  that 
monetary policy can do to influence real exchange rates in the long run. Past attempts 
to give the exchange rate more weight in monetary policy decisions tended to generate more 
interest rate volatility, with little lasting effect on the real exchange rate. 
Here,  I  should  note  that  emerging  markets  are  generally  better  placed  than  in  past 
cycles  to  withstand  capital  flow  volatility.  Key  areas  where  progress  has  been  made 
include:  more  flexible  exchange  rates,  clearer  monetary  policy  frameworks,  larger  foreign 
reserve  cushions,  generally  moderate  external  debt  levels,  improved  fiscal  discipline,  and 
better  capitalized  banking  systems,  supported  by  stronger  supervisory  and  regulatory 
frameworks. Moreover, the general shift away from debt-based finance towards equity and 
foreign  direct  investment,  which  together  now  account  for  two-thirds  of  emerging  market 
financing, is significant from a stability perspective. 
Nevertheless, I want to stress that there is an enormous amount of heterogeneity among 
emerging  market  economies.  The  underlying  strengths  and  weaknesses  in  terms  of 
institutions and economic capabilities of Thailand and Brazil, for example, are very different. 
The destinies of emerging markets are not tightly bounded to each other like General 
Cao  Cao’s  battleships.  The  more  the  international  investment  community  succeeds  in 
differentiating  each  country’s  prospects,  the  better  the  outcome  will  be,  both  for  investors’ 
returns as well as the countries involved. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have spent much of my remarks talking about the challenges of financial integration. It is 
important, however, not to lose sight of the bigger picture. The benefits of being part of an 
open and integrated global economic and financial system are immense and should 
be embraced. The question is not whether to be integrated, but how to best do it in a way 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
that avoids a drift towards financial protectionism. Success on this front ensures that the 
legacy we leave for the generations behind us is one of opportunities rather than problems. 
In choosing the appropriate strategies, a balance has to be struck between boldness and 
humility. We should be bold in our willingness to question conventional wisdom and try 
new initiatives. But in a constantly evolving global economy, we must remain humble about 
our understanding of how things work and be acutely aware of the limits of our knowledge. 
As Albert Einstein once said “The difference between genius and stupidity is that genius 
has its limits.” At an institution for learning such as this, I think it is fitting to end with that 
quote. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
