  James McAndrews: Student debt and higher education financing – a 
public finance perspective 
Remarks  by  Mr  James McAndrews,  Executive  Vice  President  and  Director  of  Research of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the National Association of College and University 
Business Officers, at the Waldorf Astoria, New York City, 5 February 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Good afternoon. I’m happy to be here and to have the opportunity to share with you some 
thoughts  on  the  subject  of  financing  higher  education  in  the  United  States.  The  remarks  I 
make reflect my own views, and not those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or of 
the Federal Reserve System. 
Some of you may be wondering why the research director of a central bank is particularly 
interested in the way we as a nation pay for college. The answer, of course, is that we are 
gaining  an  increasing  understanding  that  how  we  finance  post-secondary  education  has 
important effects on a variety of critical economic outcomes, including economic growth and 
inequality.  It’s  this  realization,  combined  with  the  fact  that  the  outstanding  student  debt 
balance has now surpassed $1 trillion, which has brought increased attention and discussion 
to the question of education finance. 
First,  I’d  like  to  acknowledge  the  work  and  research  of  Meta  Brown,  Rajashri  Chakrabarti, 
Andrew Haughwout, Donghoon Lee, Joelle Scally, and Wilbert Van der Klaauw in preparing 
these remarks. 
I’m an economist, so I’d like to start by discussing the economics of higher education finance 
as I see them. 
The first thing to make clear is that the evidence strongly supports the view that a college 
degree, while expensive, is a worthwhile investment not only for the individual receiving the 
education but also for society as a whole. 
For  individuals,  the  expected  benefit-cost  ratio  of  a  college  degree  is  well  over  1.0  and 
growing. Indeed, while more people are attending college over the last thirty years, college 
graduates on average earn 80 percent more than those without a college degree, and are far 
less likely to be unemployed, regardless of the phase of the business cycle. Of course both 
effort  and  what  we  might  call  academic  acumen  are  likely  to  play  a  role  in  a  prospective 
student attending a better college, and whether the student completes a degree, and so this 
figure  may  overstate  the  value  of  college  itself  to  any  particular  prospective  student.  But 
careful work in economics has demonstrated that even after we control for talent, college is 
worth it for most, but not necessarily all, students. 
Part of the reason for the increasing importance of college is a result of what economists call 
skill-biased  technological  change.  The  idea  is  that  the  kinds  of  technologies  that  are 
increasingly  influencing  the  workplace  tend  to  favor  people  with  more  education.  The 
personal computer, for example, is a great tool that enhances the productivity of people with 
lots of education, while it may actually be a substitute for unskilled labor. In addition to its 
effect  on  earnings,  higher  education  improves  one’s  quality  of  life  by  improving  other 
outcomes, like health. 
Even  when  the  large  net  benefit  of  college  attendance  is  accurately  perceived,  there  are 
significant financial constraints on many families’ ability to finance a college education. After 
all, the costs of college are concentrated in a few years at the very beginning of a career, 
while the benefits are spread out over a long period that comes later. Borrowing is a natural 
solution  to  problems  like  these,  but  there  is  limited  enforceability  of  uncollateralized  debt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  contracts and the private sector may be willing to provide less than the optimal amount to 
support good educational outcomes. 
In  this  environment,  even  optimal  private  debt  contracts  will  not  account  for  the  second 
important  part  of  the  benefit  of  higher  education:  that  which  accrues  to  society  as  whole. 
Better-educated  workers  are  higher  paid  and  so  pay  more  taxes,  and  they  have  a  lower 
incidence of dependency on programs like unemployment compensation and welfare. There 
are  positive  spillovers  from  educated  workers  to  others,  raising  aggregate  productivity. 
Better-educated  workers  produce  more  innovation  and  are  more  civically  engaged.  In  a 
democracy  we  are  all  better  off  when  our  fellow  citizens  understand  the  issues  facing  the 
country. 
Overall,  a  more  skilled workforce  is  beneficial  to  us  all. In  addition,  higher  education  is  an 
important  export  industry  in  which  the  US  holds  a  significant  comparative  advantage. This 
produces a better understanding among foreigners of the US and vice versa. 
All  of  these  social  benefits  mean  that  there  is  an  appropriate  role  for  the  public  sector  in 
helping  to  finance  higher  education.  The  best  policy  would  align  the  social  and  private 
benefits  of  attending  college,  and  would  find  a  way  to  relieve  the  liquidity  and  credit 
constraints  that  families  face.  Finally,  the  best  policy  would  direct  scarce  educational 
resources toward those matches between student and institution that are likely to yield the 
best educational outcomes. The best matches avoid regrettable dropouts or degrees granted 
with  little  to  show  in  the  way  of  educational  attainment  or  career prospects,  or  similar  bad 
outcomes. 
In  considering  what  the proper  public  role  should  be,  it’s  useful to  think  about  an  extreme 
case.  In  Europe,  higher  education  has  traditionally  been  essentially  100  percent  publicly 
funded. This  result  is  big subsidies for  people  –  mostly  wealthy  people  –  who  would  have 
gladly paid for college if they had to. Making college free also means that there will likely be 
excess demand for the fixed number of seats at high quality institutions. Either this demand 
has to be rationed, or quality will have to fall. Neither choice is particularly attractive. In fact, 
excess  demand  and  growing  costs  have  put  severe  pressure  on  the  European  model  for 
financing higher education, and European countries are now gradually moving away from the 
old system, introducing income-based tuition fees and loans to help restrain rising costs and 
expand access to higher education to more social groups. 
In the US, we’ve used a more complicated system that has several major elements. First, we 
have public universities whose tuitions are less than the full cost of providing the education, 
with the difference made up by state taxpayers. This can align the public and private benefits 
in the long run, but won’t by itself mitigate the liquidity constraints that families face. Also, as I 
will discuss in more detail later, it puts public universities at the mercy of the business cycle. 
Second, we offer Pell grants to families with limited means to pay for college. We also use 
the income tax system to reduce the cost of attending up to four years of college for people 
with incomes below a certain threshold. These subsidies, which operate like vouchers since 
they  can  be  used  at  lots  of  different  colleges  and  universities,  serve  to  align  private  and 
social returns and relieve liquidity constraints. Because they are related to income, they also 
potentially have the additional important benefit of reducing inequality. 
The final major element of our system is loans. These relieve the liquidity constraint, but they 
don’t necessarily contribute to aligning the private and social returns to higher education. 
Since student loans are currently receiving a huge amount of attention, and since the New 
York Fed has been a leader in providing information about the sector, I’d like to spend the 
rest of my time discussing what I see as the main issues with student debt and what to do 
about them. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Issues with student debt 
Student loans seem like a good part of the solution, but over the past decade our reliance on 
loans for funding higher education has increased and we are learning that they have many 
problems  and  implications  we  had  not  sufficiently  understood  or  considered.  As  shown  in 
Chart 1, between 2004 and 2014, the total student debt in the US tripled from $364 billion in 
2004 to $1.16 trillion in 2014. Expressed in annual terms, this means student debt increased 
by an average of 13 percent per year. As shown in the chart, among the various types of 
household  debt,  student  debt  is  unique.  While  balances  on  all  forms  of  household  debt  – 
including  mortgages,  credit  cards,  auto  loans,  and  home  equity  lines  of  credit  –  declined 
during and after the Great Recession, student debt has steadily risen. In 2010, student debt 
surpassed  credit  cards  to  become  the  second  largest  form  of  household  debt  after 
mortgages whereas prior to 2008, student debt was the smallest form of household debt. 
Our research indicates that this increase in aggregate debt was due to increases in both the 
number  of  borrowers  as  well  as  increases  in  the  average  balance  per  borrower.  Between 
2004 and 2014, the number of borrowers increased by 92 percent from 23 million borrowers 
to 43 million. In the same period, average debt per borrower increased by 74 percent, from 
about $15,000 to $27,000. With respect to the rise in the number of borrowers, we find that a 
steadily increasing share of young people are taking out student loans: in 2004, only about 
27 percent of 25 year olds had student debt while 9 years later, in 2013, the proportion of 
25 years olds with student debt had increased to about 45 percent. 
There  are  several  explanations  for  these  increases.  First,  more  people  are  attending 
college1.  Second,  students  are  staying  in  college  longer  and  attending  graduate  school  in 
greater numbers, and loans to finance graduate study have become more readily available. 
Third, competing non-education sources of credit such as home equity loans and credit card 
debt have imposed tighter underwriting standards, and generally have become less available 
since 2008. A fourth reason is the slow repayment rate on these loans, which I will discuss in 
more detail a little later. But another important reason for the increase in overall student debt, 
which I will discuss first, is the significant growth in the cost of a college education during the 
period2. 
Federal and State funding of subsidized higher education is heavily reliant on tax revenues 
and competes with other forms of public spending, and within education budgets competes 
with  pre-school,  elementary  and  secondary  education  spending.  During  the  recession  we 
saw severe revenue declines at the federal and state levels. Being highly credit constrained, 
with university subsidies being part of operating budgets which must be funded with current 
tax revenues, many states cut planned education funding while allowing public universities to 
increase  tuition  levels.  This  in  turn  contributed  to  a  significant  shift  of  education  cost  to 
students and parents. 
In research conducted at the New York Fed, we found that since 2007 those states with the 
largest  funding  cuts  also  had  the  highest  tuition  increases,  with  an  average  annual  tuition 
growth rate of 3.4 percent. As shown in Chart 2, this compares to an annual average tuition 
growth rate of 1.7 percent during the 2007–2010 period for all other states combined. That is, 
we  observe  an  economically  meaningful  relationship  between  public  funding  and  public 
institution tuition changes since 2007. 
Higher tuition has forced many students to take on larger student loans. Student debt and 
tuition  increases  were  not  limited  to  public  institutions.  Research  conducted  at  the  NYFed 
found that over the same period there was even larger tuition and student loan growth at for-
profit institutions. [Chart 3] Despite larger average support through Pell grants, with tuition 
                                                
1  National Center for Educational Statistics, 2012. “Digest of Education Statistics”. 
2  College Board, 2013. Trends in College Pricing, last accessed February 5, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  levels  more  than  double  those  at  public  institutions,  average  net  tuition  and  average  loan 
sizes were considerably higher at for-profit educational institutions. In addition, a much larger 
proportion of students at for-profits took out subsidized direct loans. [Chart 4] 
Returning now to the surge in aggregate student debt, an increase in borrowing for college is 
not  by  itself  a  concern, given  the  high  average  lifetime  payoff  to  college.  In fact,  in  part the 
increase  in  debt  reflects  an  arguably  sensible  increase  in  educational  investment  during  a 
period  of  weak  labor  market  opportunities.  However,  the  growth  in  debt  has  important 
implications for the overall economy, and there are several worrisome aspects of the increase 
in student debt.  Many of these problems have to do  with the high rates of delinquency and 
default on student debt, and the generally low repayment rates on these loans. 
Over the past eight years there has been a considerable increase in payment difficulties for 
student loan borrowers. The most common measure of inability to meet the debt obligation is 
the proportion of borrowers 90 days or more past due on their payments. We refer to this as 
the  “measured  delinquency  rate.”  As  of  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  about  17  percent,  or 
7.3 million borrowers, were 90 days or more delinquent on their student loan payments; see 
the left panel of Chart 5. There was a strongly increasing trend in delinquency between 2004 
and 2014, with measured delinquency rising from an overall rate of less than 10 percent in 
2004 to 17 percent in 2014. 
The  measured  delinquency  rate  on  student  debt  is  currently  the  highest  of  any  consumer 
debt product, although for most of the last decade credit card delinquency was even higher. 
Nonetheless,  the  measured  delinquency  rate  is  somewhat  misleading,  and  the  effective 
delinquency  rate  as  we  define  below,  on  student  debt  is  even  higher.  As  noted  above,  in 
2014 the measured delinquency rate among the 43 million borrowers  was 17 percent. But 
many of the remaining 83 percent in fact were not paying down their loan balances. While 
37 percent  did  reduce  their  balance  from  the  previous  quarter  by  at  least  one  dollar, 
13 percent of borrowers had the same balance as the previous quarter. A full 33 percent of 
borrowers actually saw an increase in their balance. In other words, 46 percent of borrowers 
were neither delinquent nor paying down their loans. 
Those borrowers whose balances did not decline are likely not yet in the repayment cycle, 
meaning that they were either still in school, in deferral, or in a forbearance period delaying 
their  regular  payments.  This  group  may  also  include  some  borrowers  who  participate  in 
income-based repayment plans and make only small payments, which are often insufficient 
to  cover  the  accumulated  interest.  In  order  to  have  a  more  accurate  picture  of  the 
delinquency rate, we calculate the “effective delinquency rate” by excluding this 46 percent of 
borrowers  not  in  repayment;  the  result  is  shown  in  the  right-hand  panel  of  Chart  5.  This 
effective delinquency rate is nearly double the measured delinquency rate, with almost one-
third of borrowers in repayment being delinquent on their debt. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  because  of  the  unique  character  of  student  debt,  an  increasing 
delinquency rate defined either way does not necessarily imply that a greater percentage of new 
borrowers are falling behind on repayment. Borrowers who became delinquent in the past and 
remain so  are  included  in  the delinquency  rate. Some  may  also  default, which  is  defined  as 
being more than 270 days past due in the case of federal loans. Because student debt is not 
generally  dischargeable,  even  in  bankruptcy,  the  delinquency  rate  may  continue  to  increase 
even when the percentage of borrowers becoming newly delinquent remains constant. 
We therefore also computed the proportion of borrowers in repayment who became newly 
delinquent  on  a  quarterly  basis.  As  shown  in  Chart  6  in  2005  about  6  percent  of 
nondelinquent  borrowers  in  repayment  transitioned  into  delinquency  each  quarter,  on 
average.  By  2012,  that  rate  had  increased  to  almost  9  percent.  This  confirms  that  indeed 
there was an increasing trend of borrowers becoming newly delinquent over time. 
Our delinquency numbers may seem higher than those reported elsewhere. One reason for 
this is that our data allow a more comprehensive description of student debt delinquency and 
repayment rates than was previously possible. Our data come from consumer credit reports 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  for a 5 percent random sample of the population – that is for 12 million individuals aged 18 
and older. Instead, existing knowledge of student federal loan defaults is based mainly on the 
three-year cohort default rates computed and released by the Department of Education each 
year.  An  institution’s  cohort  default  rate  is  calculated  as  the  percentage  of  borrowers  in  a 
cohort who default before the end of the second fiscal years following the fiscal year in which 
the borrowers entered repayment. 
In research that will be released later this month in a series of blog postings on our Liberty 
Street  Economics  blog,  we  use  our  data  and  a  slightly  different  definition  to  compute 
comparable 3-year cohort default rates. Importantly, we find that three years out, we haven’t 
seen the full picture of borrowers who will default. Our calculations indicate that the 3-year 
default  rate  for  the  2009  cohort  rises  by  more  than  a  third  by  year  5.  This  is  also  true  of 
earlier cohorts. The 2005 cohort had a 3-year default rate at 13 percent – but this is only half 
of the defaults that we see nine years out. Taken together, these findings indicate that the 
student loan delinquency problem is much worse than currently understood. 
Another  way  to  look  at  borrower  difficulty  in  loan  repayment  is  to  consider  the  state  of 
repayment by the end of 2014 for all student loan borrowers we observe finishing their new 
loan accumulation, between 2005 and 2010. High rates of delinquency and default, and the 
high  prevalence  of  participation  in  repayment-delaying  programs  such  as  deferments, 
forbearances and income based repayment, lead to a lower rate of balance reduction in the 
years after student loan borrowers leave school. In order to understand the magnitude of this 
delay, we investigate the extent of student loan repayment that recent school-leaving cohorts 
have achieved by 2014. 
For the blog series, we calculated the outstanding balance of each of the 2005–2010 school-
leaving cohorts as of the second quarter of the school-leaving year. For each cohort, we then 
recorded the share of the original student loan balance that remained as of the end of 2014. 
For  example, for the  2010  cohort  91  percent  of  the  original  balance  remained  unpaid  four 
and a half years later, at year-end 2014. This is typical of all the cohorts we examine, from 
2005 forward. 
So  what  accounts  for  the  high  default  rates  and  low  repayment  rates  of  recent  cohorts? 
Undoubtedly  the  weak  labor  market  conditions  for  entering  college  graduates  played  an 
important role in explaining defaults and low loan repayment rates. As the youth unemployment 
rate continues to improve, we would expect repayment rates to gradually improve. 
However, while the available data limits deeper analysis of this issue, it seems reasonable to 
suspect that high college dropout rates contributed to loan repayment problems. As is well 
known, approximately 40 percent of college students drop out of college before finishing their 
degree. Among low-income students two-thirds don’t complete their degree, with rates also 
varying  across  institutions  and  majors.  While  the  average  wage  returns  to  college  remain 
high,  for  the  substantial  share  of  student  loan  borrowers  who  drop  out  of  college,  the  net 
returns are likely to be small or negative. 
Returns  are  also  likely  to  be  small  for  those  who  attended  a  set  of  for-profit  institutions. 
Enrollment at those institutions surged during the recession. While our data don’t allow us to 
investigate the returns for these groups of students, their especially low loan repayment rates 
(as  reported  elsewhere)  are  consistent  with  low  post-college  employment  and  earnings, 
suggesting that eventual returns to these educational investments may be low. 
The  increase  in  defaults  and  decline  in  repayment  may  also  reflect  a  change  in  the 
composition of college entrants during the recession, where even those with relatively low, or 
even negative returns to college, enrolled in order to qualify for grants and loans as a source 
of income. 
The individual and macroeconomic implications of growing student debt go well beyond the 
high  default  rates  and  may  not  have  been  sufficiently  anticipated  and  understood.  Our 
research suggests that the sharp buildup of student debt has contributed to large behavioral 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  changes among the Millennial generation. First, among those with student debt, a growing 
share  continues  to  live  with  their  parents.  For  example,  we  see  that  states  that  have 
experienced sharper climbs in average student debt per graduate since the recession have 
also shown steeper growth in the rate at which 25 year olds live with their parents. Similarly, 
our  research  suggests  that  student  debt  has  contributed  to  a  decline  in  home  and  car 
purchasing. As shown in the next chart [Chart 7], the proportion of 30 year olds with a home 
mortgage and the share of 25 year olds with a car loan have dropped much faster among 
those with SL debt. 
More  serious  econometric  research  indicates  that  the  relationships  between  increased 
student debt and both higher coresidence with parents and lower home buying at age 30 are 
in fact causal and exist whether or not one controls for educational attainment. Holding other 
factors  constant  we  find  that  in  states  with  larger  increases  in  student  debt  per  graduate 
there was a greater decline in home buying by young individuals. Overall, the high level of 
existing  debt  and  the  apparent  new  norm  for  college  financing,  have  important  long-term 
implications for the housing market. With new cohorts continuing to leave college with high 
debt  levels  and  entering  the  housing  market  at  older  ages,  we  can  anticipate  an  overall 
persistently lower home ownership rate than in the pre-recession period. 
So  what  is  causing  the  withdrawal  from  home  and  car  purchase  markets?  It  is  likely  that 
rising student debt and an uncertain economic outlook have depressed demand. But most 
likely,  declines  in  credit  supply  play  an  important  role  as  well.  Our  analysis  shows  that 
average credit scores have fallen for student debt holders relative to those with no student 
debt.  Clearly  for  the  substantial  and  growing  group  of  student  loan  borrows  who  are 
delinquent  or  have  defaulted  on  their  debt,  access  to  credit  is  reduced  through  potentially 
long-lasting negative effects on credit scores. Better data is required to evaluate the extent to 
which the decline in car and home loan originations is concentrated among those delinquent 
on  their  student  loans  and  those  who  dropped  out  of  college,  or  whether  it  is  more 
widespread among all those with student loans. 
The fast growth of student debt and delinquencies, and the associated withdrawal of student 
loan borrowers from mortgage and other credit markets have led to a renewed policy debate 
about  the  viability  and  optimality  of  our  higher  education  funding  model.  Some  call  for 
increased federal and state support for higher education to reverse the recent trend towards 
shifting the cost of higher education to students and parents. Others talk about a new debt 
bubble of uncollateralized loans provided to ill-prepared students who are unlikely to see any 
real  returns  to  their  investments,  calling for  better  oversight  and  underwriting  of  loans.  Yet 
others point to the persistent high returns to a college education and argue that the current 
situation represents primarily a repayment crisis rather than a debt crisis. 
In my view, all these policy ideas deserve serious consideration. Some scholars argue that 
the current system turns reasonable levels of debt into crippling payment burdens that can 
prevent young workers from attaining financial independence and stability.3 They propose a 
single,  simpler,  income-based  repayment  system.  Such  a  program  would  undoubtedly 
benefit many borrowers, allowing them to better smooth consumption. However, the very low 
cohort  repayment  rates  we  see,  even  ten  years  after  entering  repayment,  suggest  that 
realized labor market returns to these higher education investments appear to be lower than 
one would expect. While these returns may gradually increase as the labor market improves, 
for some the returns may in fact stay low, especially among college dropouts and those who 
attended some for-profit institutions. 
Even  if  the  average  returns  to  a  college  education  remain  large,  or  even  grow,  students 
generally  have  a  larger  amount  of  debt  to  pay  off.  As  mentioned  earlier,  in  response  to 
                                                
3  Dynarski, Susan and Daniel Kreisman, 2013. “Loans for Edicational Opportunity: Making Borrowing Work for 
Today’s Students,” Hamilton Project Working Paper, October. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reduced state and federal subsidies, educational institutions raised tuition, leaving students 
and  their  parents  paying  a  greater  share  of  the  cost  of  higher  education,  thereby  leaving 
students less of the surplus and a lower net return on their investment. 
There are therefore reasons to be concerned about the viability of the current system (with 
various  income-based  repayment  programs)  as  well  as  an  alternative  income-based 
repayment system. The high delinquency rate and very low repayment rates among recent 
cohorts have implications for the sustainability of higher education financing more generally. 
While  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  ultimate  amount,  it  appears  likely  that  a 
significant portion of the outstanding federal student loans in income-based repayment-type 
programs will ultimately be charged off after 20 or 25 years. 
Another  potential threat to the  sustainability  of  the  current  system,  especially  visible  in  the 
current  low  interest  rate  environment,  represents  the  entry  of  private  lenders  engaged  in 
cream skimming, providing loans that slightly undercut the administratively set interest rate 
on federal loans for those enrolled in high-return and low-risk programs towards business, 
medical and law degrees at top ranked institutions. There is a risk given the rapid growth of 
this industry that this could have a considerable impact on the average quality of loans held 
by the federal government. 
A  primary  policy  challenge  in  higher  education  financing  is  to  increase  access  to  higher 
education to more people through grants and loans but in such a way that the private and 
social net returns remain positive. This requires a combination of financial support but with 
sufficient likelihood of success/ability to repay/for positive return. 
The  low  returns  to  some  students’  experience  with  higher  education,  evidenced  by  high 
dropout and default rates, point to significant heterogeneity in outcomes for college students. 
An individual making the joint decision of whether to enter college and which college to enter 
faces  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  outcome  of  the  educational 
experience. Tuition subsidies funded by state taxes and Pell grants funded by federal taxes 
work to distribute this risk over a wide pool of people. However, individuals with good college 
outcomes enjoy the private benefits that accrue to their higher-earning power. As a result, it 
is  likely  that  the  best  type  of  financing  arrangement  would  require  at  least  some  tuition 
payments from students. 
To overcome the liquidity constraint faced by families whose members are entering college, it 
makes sense to have a loan program. Importantly, the financial system, whether private or 
public,  should  direct  scarce  resources  to  highly-valued  investments.  Given  the  wide 
heterogeneity  of  educational  outcomes  by  type  of  student  and  type  of  institution,  any  loan 
program  should  take  careful  account  of  the  expected  quality  of  the  match  between  the 
prospective student and the educational institution. This is a type of underwriting that could 
be employed much more extensively in the federal student loan program, to the benefit of 
both borrower and lender. In addition, by restricting the availability of loans to those matches 
that are likely to succeed, the social benefits will be achieved at lower cost. 
While  there  is  currently  little  underwriting  of  student  loans  in  terms  of  individual  or  family 
wealth  –  which  is  as  it  should  be  –  better  underwriting  of  loans  may  result  in  higher 
preparedness standards for students. Just as importantly, it will require evidence, provided 
by the institution, of sufficient success in graduating students of a specific preparedness level 
and placing them into viable jobs with sufficient income to permit repayment of the loans. 
This  unfortunately  contrasts  with  the  current  student  loan  system.  We  see  evidence  of 
problems associated with the lack of careful underwriting standards for educational matches 
that  are  supported  by  student  debt.  For  example,  current  performance  for  some  degree 
programs  and  some  universities  are  problematically  weak,  in  terms  of  degree  completion 
rates and loan repayment rates. There have been reports of some schools in cities with large 
minority populations and low-income residents who tried to build enrollment by encouraging 
academically  under-qualified  students  to  apply  for  loans  that  they  would  be  unlikely  to  be 
able  to  repay,  especially  if  they  received  a  substandard  education.  These  practices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  undermine  our  commitment  to  financing  effective  higher  education  matches,  and  it  is 
important that they be addressed. 
Conclusion 
Nothing in the analyses I discussed with you undermines the strong case for completing a 
college degree for prospective students who match well with a particular college. Rather we 
see our evidence as suggesting that the way we as society finance those degrees – with an 
increasing reliance on debt held by the students – has costs to both borrowers and lenders 
that are only now becoming clear. Given the social benefits of an educated population, we 
see  a  strong  case  for  some  public  role  in  financing  college.  Nonetheless,  there  are  many 
private  benefits,  including  higher  lifetime  earnings  to  be  had  by  the  successful  college 
graduate. Therefore it is likely that the best system of finance also includes a tuition payment 
by the student. 
Because many prospective students are credit and liquidity constrained, and because of the 
limited enforceability of debt, we outlined the case for a government-supported student loan 
program to support the payment of tuition. However, we see a case for stronger underwriting 
standards that would assess the likely quality and outcome of the education match between 
a prospective student and the educational institution, which would better deliver resources to 
high potential educational matches, and avoid encouraging poor ones. 
We’ve learned a lot over the past several years about how student loans are affecting individual 
borrowers, the taxpayers and the aggregate economy. We’ve by no means answered all the 
relevant  questions,  and  with  over  a  trillion  dollars  in  outstanding  debt  and  the  future  of  our 
workforce at stake, I consider these issues to be of first-order importance to the nation. 
We at the New York Fed will continue to search for new facts to put on the table and push 
the debate forward. 
Charts 
8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      11 
