   Yves Mersch: On European unity – economic and institutional 
challenges facing Europe 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
discussant  Prof.  Hannah  Scobie,  Chairman,  European  Economics  &  Financial  Centre, 
European Economics & Financial Centre, London, 25 June 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
David Laidler, the English economist and one of the foremost scholars of monetarism, once 
stated that “transparency is an asset that depreciates very rapidly, so communication has to 
be ongoing, and if it is to enhance accountability, it must be a two-way process as well”. 
As  a  central  banker,  I  fully  concur  with  this  assessment.  To  explain  our  monetary  policy 
measures  –  and  to  defend  them  when  challenged  –  has  become  the  state  of  the  art  in 
contemporary central banking communication. 
The exchange with academia, financial market participants and the general public is the litmus 
test  for  how  we  succeed  in  managing  expectations.  This  holds  in  particular  for  times  of 
heightened uncertainty and complexity. 
That is why I consider seminars like this one an important part of my professional duty – it 
provides an opportunity to explain the actions of the European Central Bank (ECB), to answer 
your questions and also to ask some questions of you, in order to benefit from your wealth of 
experience. 
The euro area in particular has faced many questions since its inception and – as one of the 
foremost euro area institutions – the ECB has increasingly been drawn into debates that go 
beyond a very narrow definition of monetary policy. As a result, a criticism that is sometimes 
levelled at us is that we spend too much time talking about policies which are outside our 
mandate – namely structural reforms and euro area governance – and too little time focusing 
on  actually  delivering  that  mandate,  i.e.  returning  inflation  from  its  current  low  levels  back 
towards below, but close to 2%. 
You will not be surprised that I do not share this view. But the fact that it persists in some 
quarters suggests that there is a need to explain our position more clearly. Namely, to underline 
why the ECB has acted in the way it has in response to low inflation, and why we have insisted 
on others acting in their domains of responsibility as well, both at national level and European 
levels. 
This is what I would like to do in my remarks today. There are three points in particular that I 
would like to address. 
Implementing large-scale asset purchases 
The first point relates to our monetary policy and our decision to enter into our APP in January. 
While in some quarters this was seen as excessive activism, in others – often on this side of 
the Channel – it was seen as excessively hesitant. The argument was that as a price stability-
oriented central bank with a symmetric mandate, we should have followed other major central 
banks and deployed asset purchases sooner to push inflation back to our objective. 
If one looks at the steps we have taken based on the data available in each period, it becomes 
clear that we acted based on an evolving medium-term outlook and taking into account the 
balance of risks at each moment – as any responsible policymaker should. The process in 
2014 that led to the launch of our APP illustrates well this point. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
At the start of 2014 we were confronted, on the one hand, with a consistent and broad-based 
downward trend in past inflation, falling from 3% at the end of 2011 to less than 1% at the 
beginning of 2014. But on the other, sentiment on the economic outlook was relatively positive 
for  the  year,  with  nearly  all  forecasters  expecting  the  recovery  to  strengthen  as  the  year 
progressed. In this context, we felt relatively comfortable that the medium-term inflation outlook 
was secure. While we were very alert to the risks to that outlook, there was no clear justification 
for a strong expansion of the monetary policy stance at that time. 
Moreover, the use of large-scale asset purchases was unprecedented in the euro area and 
came  with  concerns  that  do  not  exist  in  other  advanced  economies.  There  was  more 
uncertainty  about  the  strength  of  the  relative  transmission  channels  given  the  euro  area’s 
financial  structures;  and  there  was  more  concern  about  the  possible  side-effects  and 
redistributive effects of holding large amounts of government bonds in a monetary union that 
is not a fiscal union. All this created a further reason to be patient. In my view, deploying asset 
purchases had to be an ultima ratio decision. We had to see clear evidence of heightened 
deflationary  risks  either  in  the  realised  inflation  data  or  in  the  movements  of  inflation 
expectations. 
That  evidence  started  to  appear  in  the  summer  of  2014  as  the  macroeconomic  situation 
worsened unexpectedly and the underlying impetus that we saw earlier in the year faded. This 
removed an important driver behind the reflation scenario we had expected. The sharp fall-off 
in oil prices that began in the late summer added then further disinflationary pressures, feeding 
also into core inflation. The result was that, by January 2015, the euro area was experiencing 
negative  headline  inflation  rates.  Crucially,  there  were  also  material  signs  that  inflation 
expectations were becoming unanchored, which increased the likelihood that inflation would 
stay below our objective even when the oil price effect faded. 
These data, especially measures of inflation expectations, were sufficiently decisive to warrant 
our shift to large-scale asset purchases in January this year. The prevailing macroeconomic 
outlook meant that the benefits of deploying that instrument in terms of delivering our mandate 
now clearly outweighed the costs in terms of potential side effects. But by waiting for adequate 
evidence, had we ended up “behind the curve” in counteracting the disinflationary trend? In 
my view the answer is clearly no. 
First, we had taken a series of expansionary measures throughout 2014 in response to the 
incoming  data,  including  cutting  our  main  refinancing  rate  to  its  effective  lower  bound; 
introducing a negative rate on our deposit facility; launching our targeted long-term refinancing 
operations  (TLTROs);  and,  importantly,  in  September  2014,  with  our  decision  to  begin 
purchases of ABS and covered bonds. 
Second, by communicating clearly the conditions under which we would use large-scale asset 
purchases  – our so-called reaction function  – we had already initiated a gradual easing of 
financial conditions as markets anticipated our measures. Long-term nominal interest rates fell 
by around 100 bps from mid-2014 to January 2015. Because we were predictable and credible, 
our policy was taking effect before it was actually announced in January. 
Third, even though our measures were partly priced-in, when they were launched the initial 
impact was stronger than many expected and the response of macroeconomic indicators was 
quicker. We have seen strong signalling effects, reflected in rising inflation expectations, a 
rebound in consumer and business confidence and higher equity prices. And we have also 
seen  evidence  of  significant  portfolio  rebalancing  effects,  both  across  assets  classes  (i.e. 
towards more risky assets) and across jurisdictions, producing a fall in the effective exchange 
rate. 
As a result, the economic recovery has broadened and the June ECB staff projections now 
envisage inflation to average at 0.3% in 2015, 1.5% in 2016 and 1.8% in 2017. Our actions 
have proven timely and provide us, so far, with comfort that the medium-term inflation outlook 
is secure. Both output and inflation forecasts are broadly balanced. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
These forecasts are however contingent upon a full implementation of our programme. We 
intend to carry out our public sector purchases until end-September 2016 and, in any case, 
until  we  see  a  sustained  adjustment  in the  path  of  inflation. Only  once  we  see  convincing 
evidence that inflation has returned sustainably to levels in line with our objective will we be 
able to declare success. 
Monetary policy and structural reforms 
But this begs the question: if our measures are working well, why do we put so much focus on 
other policies? This is the second point that I would like to address – why structural reforms 
are relevant for monetary policy and why it is legitimate that, as a central bank, we take a view 
on them. In a nutshell, in the euro area, the more divergent economies become in terms of 
their structural conditions, the harder it ultimately becomes to achieve price stability at the euro 
area level. 
First, structural reforms have a direct link to inflation, inflation expectations and real interest 
rates through their effect on the adjustment process. 
When a country is hit by a shock, output will be less affected if relative prices can adjust quickly, 
and the recovery in output will be faster if the economy is able to reallocate resources in a 
more efficient way. This depends critically on structural features of the economy – for example, 
how labour markets adjust (i.e. the relative contributions of wage and employment adjustment), 
whether product markets are competitive and allow the entry and growth of new firms, and how 
quickly labour and capital can redeploy to more productive uses. This is related to issues such 
as the strength of insolvency regimes and effectiveness of active labour market policies. 
How adjustment takes place in turn has implications for euro area price stability. A fast price 
adjustment will cause inflation to fall steeply initially, but then agents will expect it to rise again. 
This  ensures  a  firm  anchoring  of  medium-term  inflation  expectations  and  does  not  affect 
perceptions of real interest rates going forward. A slow employment adjustment, by contrast, 
will create more prolonged downward pressure on inflation, which is more likely to weigh on 
inflation  expectations.  This  in  turn  can  lead  to  higher  expected  real  interest  rates  and 
exacerbates the effect of the shock, thus complicating the achievement of price stability at the 
euro area level. 
Second, structural factors can compound adjustment difficulties by affecting the transmission 
and effectiveness of monetary policy across different countries. 
That is because if economies recover very slowly from shocks, it is more likely to produce 
financial fragmentation and impair the transmission of monetary policy to those areas. For 
example,  a  prolonged  downturn  with  higher  unemployment  will  tend  to create  higher  loan-
losses for banks, which impairs the bank lending channel of transmission as banks are forced 
to rebuild their capital. Such an economic slump is also likely to worsen the fiscal position for 
the government, which can further exacerbate fragmentation via the bank-sovereign nexus. 
Moreover,  even  if transmission  works smoothly  on  the  supply  side,  structural  reforms  also 
affect the demand side: the willingness of entrepreneurs to take on credit for new investment. 
Insofar as structural factors create an unattractive investment environment, they can impede 
credit demand and thereby hamper the effectiveness of monetary policy. By the same token, 
structural reforms  and  accommodative  monetary  policy  can  be  complementary  in  boosting 
investment. 
That would include, at the micro level, opening up protected sectors where there is pent-up 
investment demand or reducing administrative burdens on entrepreneurship; and at the macro 
level, lifting expectations of future growth and hence “animal spirits”, especially where firms 
are constrained by a debt overhang. This psychological dimension of reforms is particularly 
important for the euro area given that 5 years ahead growth expectations among forecasters 
have been falling continuously since 2001, from around 2.7% then to 1.4% today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Third, if due to structural factors shocks leave deep scars on some economies, it can affect 
the long-term cohesion of the Union. 
Divergence in structural unemployment is more likely to become entrenched across the Union, 
which  of  course  cannot be  offset,  like  in  other federations,  by fiscal transfers  between  the 
constituent members. And to the extent that this weakens the political rationale for monetary 
union – that all members are better off over time inside the Union than they would be outside 
– it also weakens its long-term cohesion. This undermines the integrity of the currency union. 
The ECB’s interest in structural reforms therefore has two dimensions: achieving an efficient 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  the  short-term,  and  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the 
currency over the longer-term. Both of these feed into euro area price stability. However, our 
interest is not in how countries implement reforms. This is a national question and there are 
different models that can work in a monetary union. Our interest is in whether they succeed in 
doing so, as it is this that has implications for the whole euro area. It is in this context that we 
at the ECB have recently called for stronger common governance in this area. 
This call reflects the fact that some of the original expectations on how monetary union would 
function  have,  I  think,  now  clearly  been  shown  as  over-optimistic.  In  particular,  when  the 
Maastricht Treaty was signed, it was evident to most policymakers that monetary union would 
ultimately need to be accompanied by integration in other policy areas too. But it was widely 
expected that, following the functionalist logic, sharing a single currency would automatically 
trigger that integration. We know this did not happen. And while the role of common institutions, 
rules and procedures has increased, the institutional equilibrium in the euro area is still fragile. 
Institutional responses to our economic challenges 
So my third point is that we need to reflect seriously on the key features of a well-functioning 
monetary union, and how we can progress towards establishing them. A lot of progress has 
already  been  made  in  strengthening  our  rules  and  institutional  architecture.  We  have 
reinforced our fiscal rules and improved the coordination of our economic policies. And we 
have made a huge institutional leap with Banking Union, establishing the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM) within the ECB and a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). But we know 
that the architecture of EMU is not yet complete, and the 5 Presidents’ Report published this 
Monday describes how to take this process to the next level. 
Though like Rome a complete EMU cannot be built in a day, I believe we have to be ambitious 
both in the short and longer term. We have to show that we are building a bridge towards a 
more stable and prosperous union. This is what the report does. It fleshes out a number of 
quick-wins that can be implemented in a first stage without Treaty change. The Commission 
will come forward with concrete proposals on these still this year. And it sets the priorities for 
more  fundamental  changes  to  how  monetary  union  operates  in  the  future.  The  ECB  fully 
supports this process and will continue to actively contribute to it. Let me highlight what we see 
as two crucial aspects of the report. 
First, the report makes a strong case for completing Banking Union. It calls for finding a swift 
agreement  on  bridge  financing  and  a  permanent  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism (SRF), with the ESM identified as the natural institution to act as a backstop for 
the SRF, while remaining fiscally neutral. These measures would help further sever the bank-
sovereign  nexus,  which  would  in  turn  complement  the  functioning  of  monetary  union  –  by 
reinforcing the singleness of money within the euro area, and by supporting the even monetary 
policy transmission across jurisdictions. 
Second, the report advocates a long-term sovereignty shift in both economic and fiscal policies 
– a ‘move from rules to institutions’. Most importantly, the report calls for a new economic 
convergence process to make the euro area more resilient against shocks, which would in turn 
make further sharing of sovereignty in the fiscal domain possible. It also proposes eventually 
establishing  a  euro-area  treasury  to  take  decisions  jointly  on  certain  elements  of  national 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
budgets. This is certainly not for tomorrow, but this is the direction our Economic and Monetary 
Union ultimately needs to move in. In order to maintain the momentum, this process needs to 
start now. 
It is now up to the European leaders to reflect on these proposals and carry them forward. As 
a matter of fact, they are discussing the report at the European Council in their meeting tonight 
and tomorrow. I trust that the wider context will not be lost in those discussions. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Our  forceful  monetary  policy  measures  were  first,  necessary,  second,  timely,  and,  third, 
effective.  The  economic  recovery  is  now  proceeding  at  a  moderate  pace.  And  we  see 
encouraging signs that it is broadening. 
Monetary policy accommodation is a necessary condition for the recovery to keep on track. 
This implies that we will deliver what we announced. But it is not a sufficient condition. Member 
states have to do their part. Structural reforms are needed to strengthen the supply side and 
help economies regain a competitive edge in a globalized economy. And only with such an 
increased growth potential will the cyclical recovery become a sustained, structural recovery. 
Neither  monetary  policy  nor  economic  policy  takes  place  in  an  institutional  vacuum.  The 
institutional refurbishment of the European house has so far achieved a lot. But the ambition 
to do so was often driven by the urgency of crisis. And now that the worst may lie behind us, 
we have to keep the momentum of further integration. The 5 Presidents’ report is a useful 
roadmap for the way ahead. 
A  strong  commitment  to  completing  Banking  Union  will  ease  financing  conditions  for 
enterprises sustainably, and increase the resilience of Europe’s financial landscape with a view 
also to hemming in contagion. Likewise, a long-term sovereignty shift in both economic and 
fiscal policies will stimulate convergence towards similarly resilient economic structures, based 
on common standards. Not everything can be achieved today, but all countries agreeing on 
the same way forward is a key element for higher confidence and a lasting end to this crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
