  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Connecting ASEAN SMEs through financial integration 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at  the  ASEAN  SME  Conference  2015  “Connecting  ASEAN  SMEs  through 
Financial Integration”, Kuala Lumpur, 27 May 2015. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  afternoon  to  speak  at  this  inaugural  ASEAN  SME 
Conference.  This  conference  takes  place  at  a  challenging  and  yet  exciting  time  for  the 
ASEAN region. While there continues to be uncertainty on the future prospects for the global 
economy,  the  ASEAN  economies  have  demonstrated  a  high  degree  of  resilience.  The 
ASEAN economies have benefitted from the efforts for more than a decade to strengthen the 
foundations  of  our  economies  and  financial  systems.  Our  potential  is  now  being  further 
enhanced  by  steps  to  intensify  regional  economic  and  financial  integration.  In  particular, 
ASEAN has taken the opportunity during our period of growth and stability within this decade 
to  remain  steadfast  in  advancing  our  efforts  to  forge  greater  economic  and  financial 
integration to unlock the immense opportunities for the region including for the SME business 
community. 
My remarks today will touch on three areas; the significant intrinsic potential of the ASEAN 
economic  bloc,  how  the  SME  sector  would  stand  to  benefit from these  prospects,  and  on 
how greater financial integration can serve as a catalyst for the growth and development of 
SMEs. 
ASEAN: A growth centre in the global economy 
ASEAN has emerged centre stage in the global economy and has been recognised as one of 
the most dynamic regions in the world. The region has sustained high economic growth with 
a long-term average GDP growth of 5.3%, higher than the global growth average of 3.6%. 
Currently,  as  a  single  entity,  ASEAN  is  the  6th  largest  economy  in  the  world  with  a  GDP 
close  to  USD2.5  trillion.  With  a  projected  annual  GDP  growth  of  5.4%1  over  the  next  six 
years, the region is poised to reach an economic size of USD3.7 trillion by 2020, four times 
the size it was a decade ago. The strong growth and dynamism of the region is supported by 
its favourable demographic structure. With a population of more than 630 million people and 
a burgeoning middle class, ASEAN is rapidly transforming into a thriving hub for consumer 
demand. By 2020, ASEAN is expected to account for more than USD2 trillion of additional 
consumption. This is being reinforced by rising incomes in the region, with per capita income 
almost trebling in this recent decade. 
The rapid progress of economic integration in ASEAN has enabled the region to harness the 
benefits  arising  from  the  diversity  and  complementarities  that  exist  across  the  ASEAN 
economies. Amid the strengthening of cross-border supply chains in the region, intra-ASEAN 
trade and investment activity have increased significantly over these recent 15 years. Intra-
regional  trade  now  accounts  for  almost  a  quarter  of  the  region’s  total  trade  while  intra-
regional investment activity has quadrupled to 17% of total investment since 2000. 
The vibrant SME sectors in the respective ASEAN economies have been an important part of 
this commendable economic progress. Indeed, going forward, the development and growth 
of  ASEAN  SMEs  will  have  significant  potential  to  contribute  to  the  region’s  prospects  and 
become a key source for the future growth of the region. It is estimated that SMEs would 
account  for  between  20  to  50%  of  GDP  across  the  ASEAN  economies,  constituting  more 
than 96% of enterprises in the region, and contributing 50 to 80% of total employment. 
                                                
1  
International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook (April 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
While SMEs continue to contribute significantly to domestic economic growth, intra-regional 
trade  in  ASEAN  remains  driven  by  large  multi-national  companies  with  the  SME  sector 
mainly having a supporting role in the regional production network. The next phase of the 
ASEAN economic integration process should therefore be focused on enhancing the role of 
SMEs in contributing towards greater cross-border economic activity. To realise this, policy 
initiatives  are  being  geared  to  ensure  that  SMEs  in  our  region  will  be  plugged  into  the 
regional and global value chains. 
Leveraging on ASEAN’s growth prospects 
The recent drive for the greater economic and financial integration of ASEAN has paved the 
way for SMEs to expand and thrive. Firstly, ASEAN has enabled SMEs in the region to gain 
access  to  a larger  and  more  extensive  marketplace. The realisation  of  ASEAN  into  an 
integrated economic community means that the potential benefits for SMEs in the region are 
no longer constrained by national borders. With easier cross-border flow of goods, services, 
capital and people, ASEAN offers significant market opportunities for SMEs. Given the large 
consumer  base  in  ASEAN,  SMEs  can  also  utilise  ASEAN  as  a  platform  to  strengthen 
competitiveness before entering into the global market. 
Secondly, the lowering of regulatory barriers to trade within ASEAN has further increased 
the  potential  for  SMEs.  The  standardisation  of  trade  procedures,  the  removal  of  tariff  and 
non-tariff barriers and the improvement of regulatory frameworks across the region has been 
an  additional  enabling  factor.  This  will  not  only  provide  SMEs  with  a  level  playing  field  in 
conducting businesses across the region, but will also maximise the competitive advantage 
of the individual ASEAN economies. This is evidenced by the emergence of regional supply 
chains,  where  reductions  in  tariffs  on  imported  raw  materials  have  resulted  in  lower 
production costs, while the removal of tariffs on a wide range of finished products for export 
within ASEAN will also benefit SMEs that trade within the region. Thus, the lowering of tariffs 
within the region and the large regional market will provide an environment for SMEs to grow 
and  achieve  the  production  scale  and  efficiency  required  to  compete  in  the  global 
marketplace.  Additionally,  an  integrated  ASEAN  market  will  also  serve  to  facilitate  the 
meeting  of  global  standards  as  SMEs  upgrade  to  meet  the  more  harmonised  compliance 
requirements across the region. 
Thirdly,  SMEs  will  also  benefit  from  the  drive  to  strengthen  connectivity  in  the  ASEAN 
region. As highlighted in the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity, a comprehensive roadmap 
of  strategies  has  been  outlined  to  address  connectivity  challenges  on  three  key  areas, 
namely physical infrastructure, institutions and the people in ASEAN. Increased connectivity 
across all three dimensions will provide the physical and soft elements needed to create the 
enabling business environment for SMEs. 
Fourthly, various SME-specific policies by the ASEAN member countries will also benefit 
SMEs in the region. This includes the establishment of a regional SME internship programme 
which has assisted SMEs in seven ASEAN countries to enhance the skills of their employees 
through structured staff exchanges and capacity building workshops. A further initiative is the 
recent  launch  of  the  online  ASEAN  Marketplace  which  aims  to  provide  SMEs  with 
information on the business environment in each respective ASEAN country and a business 
directory of SMEs to facilitate the access to the markets in the region as well as the potential 
for  collaboration  of  SMEs  across  the  region.  To  date,  more  than  1,000  SMEs  across  the 
region  have  registered  with  this  online  portal.  It  is  expected  to  attract  more  than 
20,000 businesses  during  the  course  of  this  year.  Moving  forward,  the  ASEAN  Strategic 
Action  Plan  for  SME  Development  2016–2025  will  also  focus  on  promoting  productivity, 
technology  and 
financing,  enhancing  market  access  and 
internationalisation,  while  also  enhancing  the  policy  and  regulatory  environment,  and 
promoting entrepreneurship and human capital development. 
innovation,  access 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Fifth  and  finally,  SMEs  in  the  region  will  also  benefit  from  ASEAN’s  strategic  economic 
linkages  with  the  greater  Asia  and  with  other  parts  of  the  world,  including  the  advanced 
economies  and  other  emerging  regions.  Several  countries  have  entered  into  bilateral 
agreements,  including  trade  agreements  with  ASEAN  to  enhance  economic  cooperation. 
These  multilateral  and  bilateral  engagements  have  the  potential  to  create  many  new 
business opportunities for ASEAN SMEs. 
Greater financial integration as a catalyst of growth for SMEs 
Let me now turn to the prospects for greater regional financial integration and its potential to 
support growth for the ASEAN SMEs. Given the region’s high savings rate of approximately 
30%  of  GDP,  there  is  immense  scope  for  greater  financial  integration  in  the  region.  An 
intensification  of  financial  integration  in  ASEAN  will  serve  to  enhance  the  more  effective 
intermediation of funds and thus the efficient allocation of resources in the region, thereby 
acting as a catalyst to achieve a growth that is mutually reinforcing for the economies in the 
region.  This  will  allow  for  excess  savings  in  one  country  to  be  channelled  into  productive 
investments in another country within the region. 
The bulk of ASEAN’s surplus funds, however, are currently intermediated mainly through the 
international  financial  markets  before  being  reinvested  back  into  the  region.  In  particular, 
more  than  90%  of  cross-border  portfolio  investment flows  are channelled  to the  advanced 
economies. Given  the  USD  1  trillion  infrastructure  funding  required  by  ASEAN  in  the  next 
decade2, greater financial integration will facilitate the re-channelling of at least a part of the 
region’s  surplus funds towards  productive  investment  opportunities  in  the  region.  Regional 
financial integration will also allow for more efficient risk diversification of assets to include 
foreign  assets  from  within  the  region.  This  will  not  only  reduce  vulnerability  to  external 
developments but will contribute to achieving more stable conditions in the regional financial 
markets. 
Following the development of the domestic financial systems in ASEAN, the next phase of 
development  is  to foster  greater financial  integration  in  the  banking,  insurance  and  capital 
markets and in the linking of the payment and settlement systems. The growing presence of 
regional financial institutions will be an important contributor to the development of SMEs in 
ASEAN. The availability of cross-border financing will enable SMEs to innovate, invest and 
further expand within the region. Beyond financing, SMEs can also leverage on the extensive 
networks and advisory services of regional banks to facilitate matching with regional clients 
and  entry  into  new  markets.  This  can  be  an  important  source  of  information  on  country-
specific dynamics and requirements for the SMEs before venturing into new markets in the 
region. 
The digital age also augurs well for SME businesses. The use of technology such as mobile 
and  internet  banking  have  enabled  financial  institutions  to  provide  quality  and  affordable 
financial services to a regional SME client base. It is paramount for SMEs to embrace these 
technological  enhancements.  This  includes  the  adoption  of  end-to-end  supply  chain 
management  solutions  that  integrate  the  production  and  financial  flows  of  SME  activities, 
allowing for greater expansion into regional production networks. 
Together with digitalisation, the financial integration process will catalyse the convergence of 
institutional  frameworks  across  ASEAN  countries  to  create  a  more  effective  regional 
financing  ecosystem.  Such  institutional  infrastructures  and  instruments  include  credit 
guarantee schemes and credit and collateral registries. Another example is the ASEAN SME 
Working Group’s methodology for the ASEAN Benchmark for SME Credit Rating to facilitate 
the establishment of credit bureaus in ASEAN member states. Through these credit bureaus, 
                                                
2   As estimated by the Asian Development Bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
financial  institutions  would  have  wider  access  to  reliable  credit  records  of  SMEs,  thereby 
increasing the access to financing for the SMEs. 
The promotion of deeper financial inclusion can be regarded as the final mile in enhancing 
and enriching the regional financial integration process. The ASEAN Finance Ministers’ and 
Central Bank Governors’ Meeting in March this year elevated financial inclusion as a regional 
policy  priority.  Indeed,  ASEAN  will  continue  to  coordinate  and  intensify  efforts  to  advance 
financial  inclusion,  including  addressing  cross-border  financing  issues  for  SME  trade 
financing and investments. This is critical to ensure the benefits of regional integration are 
experienced by all in the region. 
Conclusion 
While the future for ASEAN looks promising, ASEAN businesses, including SMEs, need to 
consider and explore an ASEAN strategy and to view ASEAN as an increasingly integrated 
market. Having such regional or international perspectives may prove to be a game changer 
for  SMEs,  paving  a  path  towards  sustained  growth,  increased  job  creation,  and  higher 
innovation capacity. 
A  crucial  element  in  the  ASEAN  economic  agenda  is  the  development  of the  SME  sector 
which will contribute to stronger and more equitable growth in the region. The next frontier for 
SMEs is to emerge as regional players that are not constrained by the domestic consumer 
base. SMEs possess the potential to participate in global production networks by riding on 
ASEAN’s intrinsic strengths and prospects, multiple SME-focused policy initiatives as well as 
the continued wave of regional financial integration. This will allow for the transition for SMEs 
to benefit immensely from the ongoing regional economic and financial integration and thus 
contribute towards a balanced and sustainable growth of our region. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
