  Fritz Zurbrügg: Comments on financial market developments 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Fritz  Zurbrügg,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the media news conference of the Swiss National Bank, Berne, 18 June 
2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
I will begin with a review of the situation on the financial markets. I will then talk about the 
implementation of negative interest and its impact on the Swiss money and capital markets. 
Situation on financial markets 
Since the beginning of the year, monetary policy has continued to be an important pacesetter 
on  the  financial  markets.  This  applies  first  and  foremost  to  Switzerland,  where  events, 
especially  on  the  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  markets,  were  shaped  by  the 
discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate and the lowering of the negative interest rate 
on  15  January.  The  Swiss  stock  market  experienced  a  price  correction,  but  losses  were 
rapidly recouped. At present, the SMI is at roughly the same level as the start of the year. 
Thus Swiss shares benefited from a generally favourable mood among investors. Since the 
beginning  of  2015,  all  the  major  share  indices  have  recorded  gains  –  albeit  to  varying 
degrees. 
On international bond markets, exceptional price movements have been recorded over the 
past few months, as shown in chart 1. Until mid-April, the government bonds of a number of 
countries  with  high  credit  ratings  traded  at  historically  low,  or  even  –  in  some  cases  – 
negative yields. With both this development and the introduction of negative interest, yields 
on Confederation bonds declined over the entire spectrum of maturities. However, since mid-
April, the government bond markets have suffered substantial losses, with yields on ten-year 
German government bonds, for instance, rising within a very short period from about 0.1% 
to, most recently, 0.8%. In Switzerland the increase in interest rates was significantly smaller. 
Yields on ten-year bonds are currently around 0.1%, compared with –0.2% in mid-April. 
Since the beginning of the year, numerous central banks have adopted more expansionary 
monetary  policy  stances.  They  include,  in  particular,  the  European  Central  Bank,  which  in 
January  announced  an  asset  purchase  programme  in  excess  of  market  expectations  as 
regards both the amount and duration. In the US, by contrast, monetary policy continues to 
point  in  the  opposite  direction. Thus, most market  participants  expect  that  the  US  Federal 
Reserve will initiate a reversal in interest rates before the end of the year. For over a year, 
this monetary policy divergence has been a major factor behind the depreciation of the euro 
against  the  US  dollar.  As  chart  2  shows,  since  mid-2014,  the  European  currency  has 
declined some 18% in value and has also weakened on a trade-weighted basis, by around 
9%. The trade-weighted US dollar, by contrast, has gained approximately 15% in this period. 
Another important issue on financial markets has been the increased uncertainty due to the 
unresolved debt problem in Greece. Despite the fact that risk attitudes, as such, are positive, 
demand for safe investments and thus for the Swiss franc has remained particularly strong. 
Consequently, recent movements in the Swiss franc have been influenced not only by the 
divergence between the dollar and euro regions, but also by persistent safe haven flows. 
The discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate led to a very substantial but short-lived 
appreciation  in  the  Swiss  franc.  The  extent  of  this  appreciation  is  shown  in  chart  3.  The 
extreme movements in the exchange rate were accompanied by a sharp increase in volatility 
on the Swiss franc foreign exchange market. Since then, Swiss franc volatility has declined, 
although it remains high in a long-term comparison with the period prior to the financial crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  At the same time, bid-ask spreads, i.e. differences between the best purchasing and selling 
offers,  widened  substantially  following  the  end  of  the minimum  exchange  rate. These, too, 
have declined in the past few months, although the bid-ask spreads remain relatively large. 
In  trade-weighted  terms,  the  Swiss  franc  is  no  longer  at  the  extreme  levels  that  prevailed 
immediately after the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate. However, it is still some 
12% above the level at the beginning of the year. Thus, the Swiss franc is still substantially 
overvalued. 
Implementation and impact of negative interest 
Exactly six months ago, on 18 December 2014, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) decided to 
impose  negative  interest  on  sight  deposit  account  balances  at  the  SNB  for  the  first  time, 
setting the rate at –0.25%. When it discontinued the minimum exchange rate, it lowered the 
rate once again by 0.5 percentage points, to –0.75%. By imposing negative interest on sight 
deposits,  the  SNB  intends  to  move  the  three-month  Libor  into  negative  territory  and 
significantly reduce interest rates in the money and capital markets. The lower interest rate 
makes it much less attractive to hold Swiss francs compared to other currencies. This should 
lead to a weakening in the Swiss franc over time. 
How the negative interest rate is applied 
I would like to take a moment to remind you how our negative interest rate is applied. It is 
imposed  on  all  sight  deposit  account  balances  of  banks  and  other  financial  market 
participants  held  at the  SNB  exceeding  a  given  exemption  threshold.  For  domestic  banks, 
the  exemption  threshold  is  20  times  the  statutory  minimum  reserve  requirement.  For  non-
banks  and  foreign-domiciled  banks  (which  are  not  subject  to  the  minimum  reserve 
requirement),  a  fixed  exemption  threshold  of  at  least  CHF 10  million  has  been  set.  The 
cumulative  exemption  thresholds  come  to  about  CHF  300  billion.  This  means  that,  with 
current sight deposits amounting to some CHF 455 billion, approximately CHF 155 billion are 
subject  to  negative  interest.  To  date,  the  interest  due  on  this  amount  has  totalled  around 
CHF 100 million per month. 
The  exemption  thresholds  take  account  of  the  very  high  level  of  liquidity  in  the  banking 
system, which is due to the SNB’s past interventions on the foreign exchange market. The 
exemptions  are  calculated  to  ensure  that  they  remain  virtually  unchanged  over  time.  This 
means that the interest burden increases as soon as the SNB feeds more liquidity into the 
system – in particular in the event of further foreign exchange interventions. Consequently, 
the  SNB’s  readiness  to  remain  active  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  the  negative 
interest rate are two mutually reinforcing measures. 
By imposing negative interest on sight deposits that exceed a given exemption threshold, we 
set  incentives  for  the  entire  financial  system  to  give  preference  to  investments  in  foreign 
currencies over those in Swiss francs, thereby limiting new inflows into the Swiss currency. 
Since the exceptional demand for Swiss francs is not only foreign but also domestic, there is 
no  economic  argument  for  differentiating  by  origin  of  investor.  What  is  more,  we  have 
reduced to a minimum the number of exceptions from the obligation to pay negative interest. 
Impact of negative interest 
Six  months  after  the  announcement  of  negative  interest,  we  can  see  that  the  measure  is 
having the desired effect on the money and capital markets. The money market is working 
well, even with negative interest. Money market interest rates have reacted rapidly, and the 
three-month  Libor  has  settled  in  the  middle  of  the  range  we  targeted.  This  shows  that 
marginal  costs  –  the  costs  of  an  additional  unit  of  Swiss  franc  liquidity  –  are  relevant  for 
transmission on the interbank market. Although trading activity on the money market remains 
lower than before the financial crisis, it has revived somewhat. For instance, turnover on the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  secured  money  market,  in  particular  on  the  Swiss  franc  repo  market,  has  risen  since  the 
introduction of negative interest. 
As  intended,  negative  interest  has  been  transmitted  from  the  money  market  to  the  capital 
market. The lower interest rates for all maturities have widened the traditional interest rate 
differential  against  other  countries  again  somewhat.  Previously,  they  had  narrowed 
substantially. On the money and capital markets, the interest rate differential is now greater 
than it was without negative interest, in particular for short-term interest rates. Chart 4 shows 
the path of interest rates for three-month loans on the Swiss franc and euro money markets, 
together with the differential. The greater interest rate differential helps to ensure that Swiss 
franc  investments  are  less  attractive  than  investments  in  euros  and  other  currencies. 
Moreover, the rise in the interest rate differential has increased the cost of hedging foreign 
currency positions on the forward exchange market, which is an additional factor dampening 
Swiss franc demand. Although the interest rate differential has risen, it is still considerably 
below  the  long-term  average,  particularly  since  interest  rates  abroad  decreased  more 
substantially during the financial crisis than those in Switzerland. This can be seen in chart 5, 
which shows the example of interest rate differentials between Germany and Switzerland for 
three-month, two-year, five-year and ten-year maturities. 
While  interest  rates  on  the  money  and  capital  markets  declined  as  a  result  of  negative 
interest,  mortgage  rates  did  not  decrease  to  the  same  extent.  Indeed,  for  mortgages  with 
longer terms, rates are slightly higher than they were at the beginning of the year. The main 
reason for this divergence is that a major part of bank refinancing costs consists of interest 
paid on savings deposits, which has not fallen below zero as did interest rates on the money 
market. Because interest on savings deposits is significantly higher than the money market 
interest rate, bank interest margins came under pressure after they had hedged the interest 
rate risk associated with their mortgage business, and some mortgage rates were increased. 
Fears that negative interest might contribute to a significant decline in mortgage rates and, in 
turn, to stronger growth in mortgage lending have so far proved unfounded. 
For  investors,  by  contrast,  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  means  that  the 
challenges have increased. It is even more difficult for them to find yield-bearing investments. 
I  should  emphasise,  however,  that  this  investment  predicament  is  an  international 
phenomenon and not limited to the Swiss franc alone. 
Conclusion 
I will now come to my concluding remarks. Initial experience has shown that the interest rate 
instrument  is  also  effective  in  negative  territory.  As  intended,  negative  interest  on  sight 
deposits  at  the  SNB  was  rapidly  transmitted  to  all  segments  of  the  money  and  capital 
markets.  In  the  current  situation,  negative  interest  fulfils  a  very  important  monetary  policy 
purpose: to help correct the overvaluation of the Swiss franc over time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
