  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in Libération 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  Libération,  conducted  by  Mr  Jean  Quatremer  on  14  January,  published  on 
16 January 2015. 
 Why has the euro area become a black hole for growth? 
The trend of slow growth is not only affecting the euro area, but all developed countries. In 
Europe, it is also linked to insufficient technological innovation and a lack of dynamism and 
openness in the economy, and even in societies themselves. 
Isn’t the single currency partly to blame for the weak growth? 
No,  not  the  euro  itself.  It  has  even  provided  protection.  But  we  must  recognise  that  if  the 
financial  and  economic  crisis  of  2007–8  became  particularly  serious  in  the  euro  area,  it  is 
also because of design flaws in Economic and  Monetary  Union. The euro was built on an 
imperfect  institutional  framework,  envisaged  by  the  1992  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  1997 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  The  framework’s  principles  may  well  have  been  appropriate  in 
calm weather, but when the storm broke they proved inadequate. We lacked the instruments 
for coordination, solidarity and responsibility which would have allowed us to handle the crisis 
and bounce back more quickly, as was the case in the United States or the United Kingdom. 
This  error  has  been  progressively  rectified  since  2010  with  the  creation  of  the  European 
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  and  the  banking  union,  the  strengthening  of  economic 
governance and, in terms of monetary policy, the OMT programme, which allows the ECB to 
repurchase public debt if needed and has just been validated by the Advocate General of the 
European Court of Justice. But we still have a long way to go, and the human cost, in terms 
of unemployment and poverty, of these design flaws, compounded by too little potential for 
growth, has been considerable. 
Only six months ago the ECB dismissed any risk of deflation. Yet prices have begun 
to fall… 
The  euro  area  is  not  in  deflation.  But  there  is  a  risk,  which  got  worse  last  summer,  that 
growth  and  inflation  remain  weak  in  the  long  term  and  that  we  fall  into  a  “1%  economy”: 
growth  at  1%  and  inflation  at  1%.  This  outlook  is  dangerous  enough  to  be  a  concern  to 
everybody. European leaders must mobilise all instruments (monetary, budgetary, structural 
reforms)  so  that  growth  picks  up  in  a  sustainable  way.  It’s  imperative  that  we,  national 
governments and European institutions, take joint action to rapidly revive economic activity. 
This imperative has become even more pressing in light of the Paris attacks, which targeted 
the European values of freedom of expression, freedom of the press and freedom itself. In 
my  opinion,  the  attacks  have  further  highlighted,  if  possible,  the  fact  that  certain  young 
people remain marginalised, dropouts, with no job, and at risk in extreme cases of turning to 
delinquency  or  even  terrorism.  Without  growth,  this  can  only  get  worse.  Unity  among 
Europeans is a must, including in economic matters. Europe needs a strong economy if it is 
to defend its values. 
Could the attacks undermine confidence and ultimately lead to a drop in economic 
activity? 
I don’t think so. From what I have seen in Frankfurt, I can testify that the attacks of 7 January 
have created a profound sense of unity and solidarity, not only in France but across Europe. 
It is on this that we must build, in Europe, as in France. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Has the ECB already exhausted all its instruments? Interest rates are at 0.05%, you are 
lending money to banks for practically nothing (four-year TLTRO loans are at 0.15%), 
you are even making them pay to deposit money with the ECB, the euro has fallen 
against the dollar… 
The decisions that we took last summer have been efficient, as economic agents are now 
certain that conditions for borrowing are going to remain favourable for a long time. This has 
allowed  us  to  protect  the  euro  area  economy  from  international  financial  shocks,  linked  in 
part  to  the  normalisation  of  US  monetary  policy.  The  ECB  has  placed  our  economy  in  a 
“cocoon” to protect the fragile recovery from external shocks. Does that mean that we have 
done enough? Since summer 2014, economic growth has got off to a weaker- and slower- 
than-expected start, and inflation is far below the 2% of our mandate. This means that we 
have to react and, once again, come up with new instruments to support economic activity, 
as we have done several times since the beginning of the crisis. But whilst our actions are 
necessary  for  economic  recovery,  they  will  be  efficient  only  if  national  governments  act  in 
parallel. 
So the ECB is ready to pursue US-style quantitative easing, that is, repurchasing 
government bonds? 
The  Governing  Council  will  meet  on  22  January.  The  discussion  will  be  about  the 
composition and the scale of our purchases of assets on the markets and the base scenario, 
if we want to do more, would be to acquire public debt on a large scale on the secondary 
market (Editor’s note: the resale market and not directly from governments). Until now, we 
have  done  it  in  a  targeted  way  for  securities  (covered  bonds  and  ABS),  which  contribute 
directly to financing the economy. 
Will these purchases be capped and will they involve all the countries? 
That’s  a  discussion  that  the  Governing  Council  will  have  on  22  January. We  will  take  into 
account the American and British experiences in order to decide on the amount of securities 
to buy in order to restore confidence in inflation returning to a level close to, but below, 2%, 
while bearing in mind the economic and institutional specificities of the euro area. We also 
have to decide if the repurchases will focus on the debt of certain countries or if they should 
be weighted across the whole of the euro area. 
Now that the interest rates are very low and the banks are not rushing to lend you 
money, is QE really necessary? At the height of the crisis, it would have allowed a 
lowering of rates, but today… 
The goal of QE is to provide confidence in the central bank’s ability to stabilise inflation. The 
way  in  which  that  works  is  to  anchor  the  financing  rate  in  the  largest  possible  number  of 
countries at very low levels in order to guarantee funding conditions for European businesses 
and  households  at  very  low  rates for  periods much  longer than  at  present. What  we  have 
done so far has stabilised funding conditions over a horizon of one or two years. It’s a matter 
of adjusting the long-term funding conditions, notably (but not only) in the so-called periphery 
countries which are in most need of this support. 
If QE fails, you won’t have any more ammunition. 
Throughout the crisis, the ECB has devised efficient instruments to face up to new situations, 
while  remaining  within  the  framework  of  its  mandate.  But  let’s  not  delude  ourselves:  the 
efficiency of what we do will depend largely on what the governments are doing and will do in 
respect  of  budgets  and  structural  reforms,  quite  simply  because  monetary  policy  has  no 
impact on growth over the long term. That depends on the productivity of the economy, on 
human capital, the quality of education, social cohesion and also on the fact that public debt 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  has  come  back  under  control.  But  note  that  that  doesn’t  mean  that  we  should  expect  the 
governments to take steps before we do what we have to do as a central bank. That would 
be  an  easy  way;  it  is  not  my  idea  of  the  ethics  of responsibility  for those  who  bear  public 
responsibilities, and this is not in accordance with the text of the European treaties, which 
require us to fulfil our mission whatever may happen. 
The eurosceptic parties are gaining strength at each election and it shows that people 
are fed up with current policies, which are reflected in social decline. Isn’t there a risk 
that the states are politically paralysed? 
That they are fed up is no surprise! One cannot blame the people for that; it’s a moral and 
democratic question. It’s up to the European authorities and the governments to show that 
they can create growth and push down unemployment – something they haven’t managed to 
do convincingly since the crisis started. Now the risk is that this fed-up sentiment creates a 
spiral  of  defiance:  if  there  are  no  convincing  results,  people’s  confidence  in  European 
institutions  and  in  the  community  construction  is  undermined.  There  is  no  solution  without 
Europe: one cannot sustainably boost French growth if there’s no strengthening of German 
and Italian growth. In some area it’s even necessary to have “more” Europe. But to achieve 
this, it’s necessary to restore people’s confidence in Europe and to do that growth is needed. 
Hence the symbolic importance of the Juncker plan, which shows the determination of the 
governments to create growth. 
If Syriza wins the election in Greece on 25 January, will there be a risk that Greece 
leaves the euro as some in Germany seem to be thinking? 
It’s not a question of Greece exiting the euro. What’s at stake in the election lies elsewhere: 
it’s the composition of the mix of reforms which will allow this country to come out of the crisis 
once  and  for  all,  and  to  reintegrate  the  European  economies’  concert.  Depending  on  the 
result [of the election], the reform strategy in Greece will be different, that’s normal. That’s 
democracy, and it’s up to the Greeks to decide. Greece has fully benefited from European 
solidarity: whatever the election result may be a discussion is needed between this country 
and Europe to know how these reforms will fit into the European framework and how they will 
put Greece on a path of sustainable growth which will permit the country to repay its debt to 
Europe one day. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
