  G Padmanabhan: Changing contours of debt management 
Address  by  Mr  G  Padmanabhan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Primary Dealers Association of India, Mumbai, 17 January 2015. 
 Assistance  in  the  preparation  of  this  address  rendered  by  S/  Shri  Rajendra  Kumar  and  Chandan  Kumar  and 
helpful comments from a number of colleagues is gratefully acknowledged. Errors, if any, are speaker’s own. 
1. 
Mr  Sharan,  Mr  Sridharan,  office  bearers  of  Primary  Dealers  Association  of  India 
(PDAI)  and  other  colleagues  from  banking  fraternity.  India,  like  other  Emerging  Market 
Economies  (EMEs),  has  been  impacted  by  the  global  financial  crisis,  European  sovereign 
debt crisis and related developments. We were certainly bruised, but not battered. This led to 
increased  volatility  and  uncertainty  in  the financial  markets.  Like  other  economies,  we  had 
also  embarked  on  a  program  of  fiscal  stimulus  to  revitalise  the  economy  resulting  in 
accelerated  borrowings.  As  a  result,  gross  market  borrowing  of  Government  of  India  has 
increased by nearly 400 percent during last seven years. During 2008–10, we front loaded 
the borrowing, de-sequestered MSS balances and shortened average maturity of issuances 
to successfully complete the large borrowing programmes. Once the markets stabilized, we 
embarked  on  elongation  of  maturity.  During  these  years,  Reserve  Bank  has  continued 
development  of  the  G-sec  markets  by  a  series  of  measures  such  as,  introducing  new 
instruments,  expanding  the  investor  base,  strengthening  market  infrastructure,  etc.  As  a 
result, we have today, a world-class trading and settlement infrastructure, reasonably deep 
and liquid markets, a stable domestic investor base and keen foreign investor interest. On 
the sustainability front, the debt ratios are reasonable and there is political and administrative 
commitment for fiscal consolidation. 
2. 
The present market conditions are guided by a host of varying factors, like change in 
monetary  policy  stance  in  India  and  commitment  to  inflation  management,  reasonable 
stability on currency front, current account deficit under control, fiscal consolidation path but 
at  the  same  time  a  fast  changing  geo-political  landscape.  Weakening  commodity  prices 
including plummeting crude prices, weakening Euro Zone economy, signs of strengthening 
US  economy,  signs  of  growth  slowdown  in  China  and  at  the  same  time  emergence  of  a 
stable government in India are shaping the contours of Indian financial markets. 
3. 
We have been successful in running the huge government borrowing programme in 
a  cost  effective  and  risk  efficient  manner.  This  would  not  have  been  possible  without  the 
active participation of the primary dealers who are one of the most important stakeholders in 
the conduct of the government borrowing programme. To put this in perspective, PDs have 
subscribed  to  nearly  half  of  the  notified  amount  in  the  primary  auctions  of  GoI  dated 
securities during past two years. The share of PDs subscription in T-Bills auctions during last 
two  years  is  impressive  as  they  picked  up  nearly  three fourths  of  the  issuances.  Share  of 
Standalone PDs in secondary market volume in 2013–14 was around 15%.Thus the primary 
dealer  system  has  grown  and  showed  resilience  even  in  challenging  market  conditions 
thereby ensuring non-disruptive borrowings. 
4. 
However,  we  cannot  rest  on  our  laurels.  We  have  to  gear  up  for  the  future.  The 
government  is  committed  to  fiscal  correction  path  and  fiscal  consolidation  but  challenges 
abound  for  the  bond  traders  and  markets.  Going  forward,  the  gross  bond  supply  would 
remain  elevated  even  after  fiscal  consolidation  as  the  government  is  likely  to  continue 
running fiscal deficits in the foreseeable future due to the accumulated debt stock that needs 
to  be  rolled  over  as  also  the  country’s  growing  GDP.  The  demand  for  bonds  would  be 
impacted among other factors, by the likely pickup in the private sector credit, scaling down 
of SLR and HTM, the policy stance on foreign portfolio investment in G-sec, etc. 
5. 
With regard to foreign investment in domestic financial markets, our policy has been 
to  increase  access  in  a  calibrated  and  gradual  manner.  Though  we  are  sensitive  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
demand  for  opening  markets  to  foreign  investors,  the  advantages  of  widening  and 
diversifying investor base which improves demand for government bonds need to be kept in 
view  along  with  the  considerations  about  financial  stability  arising  from  sudden-stop  and 
reversal  risks.  These  risks  manifested  during  the  taper  tantrum.  Our  markets  were  liquid 
enough to enable large transactions in an orderly fashion and this is one of the factors that 
inspired  confidence  among  global  investors  and  influenced  their  return.  However,  the 
financial stability implication of “investment tourists” exiting at a whiff of trouble has always to 
be kept in mind as we progress along the path of liberalization. 
6.
In this context, it may be worthwhile to comprehensively debate on the issuance of
sovereign  bonds  abroad  either  in  INR  or  foreign  currency  vis-a-vis  enhancing  the  limits 
domestically  for  international  investors  including  the  pros  and  cons  of  joining  various 
emerging market indices. 
7.
In this regard, as you may be aware, there are proposals for allowing international
settlements of Indian government bonds through global securities settlements systems like 
Euroclear.  Such  settlements  could  potentially  improve  acceptability  and  attractiveness  of 
Indian bonds among foreign investors. However, there is also a view that one needs to be 
conscious  of  the  downside  risks  such  as  liquidity  getting  fragmented  as  some  of  the  FPIs 
presently  operating  in  India  may  like  to  move  off-shore  and  development  of  a  parallel 
Government  securities  yield  curve  outside  India  [creating  yet  another  NDF-like  market 
overseas with all the attendant issues]. You may perhaps like to debate this issue as  well 
during the course of your deliberations. 
8.
role of PDs. 
Let me now flag a few issues related to market development and where we see the
(a)
Auction Participation
Active Participation: Obviously we expect your continued active participation in both
(i) 
the primary and secondary markets for G-Sec and in bringing in new investors to the market. 
Active participation is expected across all maturities, not only in benchmark bonds. To meet 
the diverse funding and hedging needs of the participants, there is need for a wide array of 
instruments and products which would also offer benefits of portfolio diversification. Over the 
years, several instruments like zero-coupon bonds, floating rate bonds, Separate Trading of 
Registered  Interest  and  Principal  of  Securities  (STRIPs),  bonds  with  call  and  put  options, 
cash  management  bills,  inflation  indexed  bonds,  etc.  have  been  introduced  after  wide 
consultations with market participants. The success with regard to these products has been 
disappointing. We look towards primary dealers to be active not only in auctions of fixed rate 
bonds but also to contribute significantly to popularizing other interest rate products. 
Responsible  Bidding:  Responsible  bidding  is  expected  from  PDs  and  we  look  to 
(ii) 
them as providers of valuable information with regard to pricing of the bonds in auctions. I am 
afraid  that  our  expectations  on  this  count  are  not  fully  met  at  least  in  some  cases.  The 
bidding behavior of actively cornering commission in underwriting auctions and defensively 
bidding in auction to avoid allotment does not do justice to the PD role. I want you to reflect 
on this and also cogitate on whether a system of “success ratios for dated G-Sec Auctions” is 
an open option to encourage responsible and tight bidding in auctions or a negative incentive 
could be thought of for curbing wayward bidding and aid in better price discovery. 
Robust  Business  Model:  The  primary  dealer  business  is  exposed  to  interest  rate 
(iii) 
cycle and adverse movements would expose their balance sheets to losses. Further, geo-
political  and  economic  risks  and  consequent  volatility  in  domestic  or  international  financial 
markets  could  potentially  damage  the  financials.  This  risk  is  amplified  for  standalone  PDs 
due  to  small  balance  sheet  size.  It  is  essential  that  PDs  have  strong  financials  and  risk 
management  capabilities.  In  order  to  protect  PDs  from  downside  risks,  Reserve  Bank  has 
allowed PDs to diversify their businesses. However, only a couple of PDs have diversified. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The PD Boards must review the corporate strategy and de-risk the business from vagaries of 
interest rates and financial market volatility. 
Exclusivity: An issue that has been debated for some time is whether we can think 
(iv) 
of exclusivity to primary dealers. Exclusivity would enable issuer to sell bonds easily and also 
strengthen  primary  dealers.  However,  exclusivity  gives  commercial  advantages  and  this 
aspect must be kept in mind in a market where major investors have regulatory and statutory 
mandate to invest in government securities. In a situation, where some of the primary dealers 
are banks, exclusivity would mean that level playing field does not exist for access to SLR 
assets. Further, standalone PDs with small balance sheet size and limited holding capacity 
need to reflect on huge demands exclusivity would impose on them, given the large size of 
issuances. 
Market Making 
(b) 
Primary  Dealers  are  mandated  to  make  markets  in  G-sec  and  provide  liquidity.  However, 
market making efforts of PDs are limited to few liquid bonds. Once RBI starts rolling down 
the HTM limit, forcing churning of portfolio by banks, particularly in the public sector, PDs get 
to play a more active role in market making. 
Gandhi Working Group had recommended that one of the ways for improving liquidity is to 
consider allocating specific securities to each PD for market making and, if required, rotate 
the  stock  of  securities  among  the  PDs  at  periodic  intervals.  This  would  ensure  continuous 
availability  of  prices  for  a  select  group  of  securities.  Reserve  Bank  is  in  consultation  with 
Government and PDAI to operationalise this recommendation. Initially semi-liquid securities 
would need to be chosen. We plan to operationalise the market making scheme in the next 
fiscal  and  expect  significant  improvement  in  liquidity.  In  this  context,  the  present  annual 
minimum  turnover  ratios  of  5  times  for  Government  dated  securities  and  10  times  for 
T-Bills/CMBs of the average month-end stocks need to reviewed as the market has grown 
significantly during recent years and the prescribed turnover ratios are far too low at present. 
Market Development 
(c) 
Widen investor base: It is the responsibility of the primary dealers to provide liquidity 
(i) 
in government bonds as well as interest rate products. In order to do so, PDs need to make 
efforts to widen the investor base, distribute securities more efficiently and bring in retail and 
mid-segment  investors.  Reserve  Bank  has  imposed  targets  for  retail  and  mid-segment 
business, but PDs must cultivate the clients as a business opportunity rather than regulatory 
compulsion. Even now certain entities are depending on brokers to buy G-Sec at high costs. 
PDs need to expand their reach and PDs reluctance to do so in this technology driven era 
raises fundamental questions relating to their commitment. 
Develop Interest rate derivative markets: Another aspect of market development is 
(ii) 
to deal in interest rate derivatives and provide liquidity. As entities dealing in interest rate risk, 
it is surprising that PDs are not active in using the derivatives for hedging and trading. IRS 
market  is  still  dominated  by  select  foreign  banks.  Reserve  Bank  permitted  cash  settled 
Interest  Rate  Futures  (IRF)  on  10-year  Government  of  India  security  with  settlement  price 
based on a single benchmark bond after extensive consultations with stakeholders. The IRF 
has  received  reasonably  good  response  from  the  market  with  average  trading  volume  at 
around Rs. 3000 crore. However participation is not widespread as many market participants 
including PDs are yet to start using the product. PDs, as expert investors are expected to 
actively use the available products to hedge. This would perhaps call for PDs warehousing 
more  securities  for  market  making.  The  interest  rate  risk  that  this  may  entail  needs  to  be 
mitigated through greater participation in the IRF market. Why this is not happening needs 
serious soul searching. 
Market Intelligence: Debt management operations of the sovereign, especially large 
(iii) 
scale  borrowings  can  be  accomplished  only  with  active  engagement  with  all  stakeholders. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  We have been meeting the market participants regularly and exchanging views on several 
issues  such  as  auction  calendar,  demand,  maturity  of  instruments,  introduction  of  new 
products etc. PDs have been great sources of information and provided valuable inputs while 
preparing the auction calendar and introducing products like inflation indexed bonds, interest 
rate futures etc. We would like to keep the channel of communication free and open. 
(iv) 
Prevention  of  market  abuse:  As  you  all  know,  the  recent  instances  of  market 
manipulations in major global financial markets have seriously undermined the integrity and 
stability  of 
jurisdictions  have 
strengthened their surveillance system over the financial markets for curbing market abusive 
practices and so has been the case with RBI. During the last few years, the Indian G-sec 
markets  have  witnessed  significant  increase  in  its  depth  and  breadth  with  increasing 
participation  of  cash-rich  corporate  entities  with  large  treasuries  and  foreign  portfolio 
investors.  There  have  been  instances  of  off-market  transactions  especially  in  the  OTC 
segment  involving  institutional  clients  of  the  Banks/PDs.  The  PDs,  being  the  responsible 
players in the market, have to take appropriate steps to educate and sensitize their clients so 
as to refrain from such unethical trading practices. 
financial  markets.  Market  regulators  across  several 
Issues for Reserve Bank 
(d) 
Our debt portfolio is reasonably stable and sustainable and due to our conscious strategy of 
elongation of maturity, low level of foreign currency debt, large domestic investor base, risks 
are at a low level. There is, however, an unfinished agenda of consolidation of public debt. 
Going forward in the medium term, we will continue to follow the principle of predictable and 
transparent  issuances  by  sharing  information  with  market  participants.  The  endeavour  to 
build a low risk portfolio at a low cost in the medium term would also continue as hitherto. 
The measures to elongate maturity for reducing rollover risk and large benchmark issuances 
to foster liquidity would go on. We are planning to carry forward operations to smoothen the 
liability profile of the government through an active switch / buyback program and release a 
switch calendar along with the indicative half year calendar for issuance of bonds. Our efforts 
to  improve  liquidity  would  continue  with  special  focus  on  building  liquidity  in  state 
development loans. As announced, work on allowing re-repo of G-sec is underway. We will 
be  pursuing  the  goals  of  debt  management  in  close  coordination  with  all  the  stakeholders 
including primary dealers. 
9. 
To  conclude,  the  market  borrowing  programme  of  the  government  is  being 
conducted in a non-disruptive manner in spite of large increases in quantum. The PD system 
performed  well  by  helping  build  a  stable,  dependable  source  of  demand  for  securities  in 
primary  market  and  providing  liquidity  in  secondary  market.  However,  there  is  need  for 
gearing up and continuing the good work in the future as the elevated supply is expected to 
continue and the geo-political and economic risks could engender volatility. The need of the 
hour is to build resilience and strength of the balance sheets and participate in both primary 
and  secondary  markets  including  corporate  bonds  actively.  The  moot  point  is  as  to  how 
research and seminars can be converted in to action. The Reserve Bank recognizes PDs as 
valuable stakeholders and would continue to work closely in achieving common goals. 
10. 
I wish the conference a great success. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
