  
 
Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr:  Developing  the  Philippine  capital  market  – 
leveraging policy intentions into concrete actions 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the IHAP Membership Meeting and Induction Ceremonies, 
Manila, 10 June 2015. 
 I join you this afternoon to once again share my thoughts on the prospects of our financial 
market. I have been asked specifically to talk about the issues confronting the capital market 
and identify policy directions. 
From where we came 
Everyone in this room is well aware that this issue is neither new nor novel. The path that we 
have traversed on this issue has been long, to say the least, if not scenic. At the risk that 
they  might  deny  their  years  of  market  service,  I  see  colleagues  in  this  room  who  will 
remember  the  major  reforms  in  the  late  1970s  that  eventually  led  to  the  introduction  of 
universal banking by 1981. 
We did not only aspire to have bigger banks, we also wanted them to be one-stop FIs that 
could offer a slew of products. Thus, we brought investment banking into the fold of merchant 
banking nearly two decades before the US Congress repealed the venerable Glass-Steagall 
Act in favor of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley law of 1999. 
Responding  to  market  requirements,  we  saw  the  development  of  Commercial  Papers, 
although not of the 6–9 month tenor. LTCPs provided a means of funding while addressing 
peculiar local features. 
As the Asian Financial Crisis curtailed longer-term funding, the market’s creativity once again 
became evident with the introduction of Non-Deliverable Forwards. NDFs provided a hedge 
for eligible transactions, anchoring expectations on the dollar-peso rate. 
We  introduced  structural  changes  such  as  having  a  Real-Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS) 
system  through  PhilPass.  We  insisted  on  the  standard  of  Delivery-versus-Payment  (DvP) 
and  even  signed  a  cooperative  agreement  with  the  market  to  initiate  the  Philippine 
Settlement Highway (PSH). 
From practically non-existent a decade ago, there are now more corporate debt securities. 
Investors  have  a fairly  broad  range  of  choices  over  the  175 that  are  listed,  with  maturities 
extending to over 18 years remaining. Government securities of course has been a staple 
and  from  a  trading  volume  of  PHP437.7  billion  in  2005  on  the  exchange,  we  now  have 
PHP1.93  trillion  for  the  first  five  months  of  2015,  following  the  full-2014  trading  volume  of 
PHP4.40 trillion. 
To where we need to go 
Our numbers will be rather modest by global standards but it cannot be denied that we have 
indeed come far in the last 15 years. For that, allow me to congratulate all the stakeholders 
of the Philippine capital market. 
With the applause, one can almost hear people murmur, so let me say it aloud. 
Yes, ladies and gentlemen, there is a “but”. We have come this far but there is much that still 
lies ahead. 
Our  rapidly  growing  economy  needs  a  deep  and  active  domestic  debt  market  more  than 
ever, both to provide the more stable funding for infrastructure and other long-term needs as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  well as the investment outlets of a quality and variety that meet the diverse requirements of 
our savers. 
But it will not come about of its own without our active collaboration to build a market that 
inspires trust and confidence. It requires the cooperation and commitment of government as 
major  issuer,  of  the  financial  regulators,  of  the  tax  authority,  and  you,  the  market  players. 
Together we must build a public good that advances the welfare of all. 
At  the  very  core,  we  need  to  maintain  transparency  and  adhere  to  strong  standards  of 
governance. We desire prices to be efficiently discovered. As a market, we have experienced 
the dangers of purely bilateral trades, uncontrolled leverage and inefficient settlement. 
We need a yield curve that reflects active trade across a broad range of activities to serve as 
the sensitive and critical reference point to properly price risk and guide the market through 
changing conditions. 
We  need  competent  and  responsible  market  intermediaries  and  reliable  and  robust 
infrastructure that can provide the desired efficient access to the markets from wherever they 
are in our archipelago. 
 
Changing market incentives 
Ladies and gentlemen, the issues I just raised comprise a long enough list, but as you know, 
they are not exactly new either. With all the challenges, we remain a bank-based financial 
market. I believe however that three developments are pushing the pace of real reforms in 
our capital market. 
First,  banks  today  face  a  “new  normal”  -  one  that  demands  a  “fresh  perspective  on  risk”. 
Necessarily, this means banks must define a new strategic path moving forward. Although 
capital adequacy ratios have been kept above the regulatory minimum, capital is as much a 
scarce resource as any. In this sense, banks may be very liquid but they cannot and should 
not chase every credit option that comes their way. In other words, in building their portfolios, 
banks must not sacrifice their credit underwriting standards. For users of funds, therefore, the 
capital market should present a real alternative. 
Second,  bank  balance  sheets  have  been  under  intense  global  scrutiny.  As  a  result,  the 
global  reform  agenda  is  calibrated  to  “making  more  resilient  financial  institutions”.  That 
simply  means  that  the  prudential  bar  has  been  raised,  both  for  capital  adequacy  and  the 
quality of risk management . 
The  Single  Borrowers  Limit  on  banks  will  be  an  increasingly  binding  constraint  as  bigger 
projects are put into play. But the remedy is not in relaxing established prudential standards 
that help us manage excessive credit risk concentration and protect financial stability. The 
constructive response is for the capital market to step up and seize the opportunity. 
This  brings  me  to  the  third  point.  There  is  now  a  perceptible  shift  from  banking  to  capital 
markets. Regulatory authorities are actively discussing this evolving phenomenon. Not that it 
is a negative development, but more to dimension its potential implications. To be sure, low 
global  rates  have  encouraged  this  shift  but  I  would  think  that  the  fundamental  drivers 
precisely relate to the strategic allocation of risk capital and the new mindfulness to the inter-
relatedness of risks in banking. 
These  three  drivers  I  just  mentioned  augur  well  for  the  capital  market.  The  real  question 
however is: are we ready to take full advantage of them? 
Getting to a Better and Desired State 
Everyone  in  this  venue  appreciates  that  we  could  better  tap  these  opportunities  if  critical 
reforms  can  be  addressed.  And  these  issues  are  precisely  the  object  of  the  regulatory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  reforms we have been pursuing, essentially to enhance price discovery, promote responsible 
market conduct and enable product innovation. 
Our market infrastructure – from pre to post-trade activities, for both payments and transfers 
– is yet another area which regulators have been focusing on. While there are ongoing cross-
border initiatives, the main policy driver is still efficiency within an integrated market. Thus, 
we look to harmonize applicable processes across products and define standards, as may be 
warranted.  Developing  the  proper  market  infrastructure  is  now  high  on  the  priority  of  the 
Financial Sector Forum and the Financial Stability Coordination Council. 
The BSP is also set to consider a major reform of how we conduct monetary policy. We are 
developing  new  approaches  to  enhance  open  market  operations  and  start  to  move  away 
from  a  high  reserve  requirement  regime  in  the  context  of  establishing  an  Interest  Rate 
Corridor  System. The  objective  is  to  achieve  greater  efficiency  in  the  conduct  of monetary 
policy but it should also pave the way for the full development of the domestic money market 
that  is  the  anchor  of  real  price  discovery  and  better  liquidity  management  for  the  broader 
market. 
Final thoughts 
As you can see, ladies and gentlemen, the issues that confront our capital market are not 
new.  Neither  are  we  at  the  nascent  stages  of  reforms.  In  fact,  we  have  made  significant 
strides towards a more organized market. But to take us forward and further, we need to take 
key reforms to their logical conclusion. I would not say that this is the last mile because there 
will always be more reforms as markets evolve. But we are at the cusp of critical change. 
As  important  as  these  reforms  are,  we  can  never  underestimate  the  value  of governance. 
What  makes  this  industry  so  unique  is  not  just  the  blocks  of  funds  that  move  from 
stakeholder to stakeholder. Instead, it is the fact that we are able to serve the interests of 
those stakeholders even if their interests may be competing. 
The anchor is governance so that risks are fully priced to generate reasonable returns to the 
risk-taker. We need established governance principles too so that we can manage conflicts 
of  interest  which  are  inherent  in  financial  markets.  We  need  those  same  governance 
standards as a guide for executing the reforms that we have lined up for our market. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have always pursued the development of our capital market as a 
policy agenda. We are yet at another cusp where we can make significant change. Anchored 
on good governance and a clear vision of what we desire of the capital market, it would be 
quite an achievement for all stakeholders if we see the changes come to fruition. 
Wouldn’t it be such a feat for us to stop talking of pursuing capital market development and 
instead talk of sustaining a developed capital market? 
Thank you and good afternoon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
