  David Rule: Simple, transparent and comparable securitisation 
Speech by Mr David Rule, Executive Director for Prudential Policy of the Bank of England, at 
Global ABS, Barcelona, 17 June 2015. 
 Thank  you for  inviting me  to  speak  at Global  ABS  2015.  For  the  past couple  of  years the 
Bank of England has been working with the ECB to consider what can be done to foster the 
development  of robust  and  well-functioning  securitisation  markets  in  the EU.  Last  year  we 
published  a  joint  discussion  paper1  and  received  helpful  feedback  from  a  wide  range  of 
commentators. One theme was support for defining the characteristics of simple, transparent 
and comparable securitisation – more on that in a moment. More recently, we published a 
joint response2 in support of the European Commission’s consultation on securitisation and 
look forward to the Commission’s forthcoming legislative proposals. 
A key objective of the Capital Markets Union in Europe is a financial system in which stable 
market-based funding complements  bank  lending  as  a  source  of finance for  the  economy. 
Securitisation can be an important part of that stable, market-based funding, alongside other 
markets  such  as  equities,  bonds  and  private  placements.  Banks  can  use  securitisation  to 
diversify their funding and transfer risk on underlying loans. Importantly, non-banks can also 
finance lending through securitisation. 
Banks and non-banks can use securitisation to help match the maturity of their liabilities to 
their  assets.  This  is  particularly  important  in  the  context  of  housing  finance.  Residential 
mortgage-backed  securitisation  (RMBS)  was  the  largest  part  of  the  EU  market  before  the 
financial crisis and the subsequent decline in the overall market is primarily explained by the 
fall  in  RMBS  issuance.  A  large  part  of  that  decline  may  be  explained  by  fundamentals  – 
banks have cheaper ways to finance themselves at present. But, in the long run, I think we 
will need robust RMBS markets so that at least part of the risk on long-term housing lending 
is financed from long-term savings rather than short-term bank deposits. 
I prefer to focus on the long-term goal of building sustainable securitisation markets rather 
than reviving securitisation in the short run. Comparing current issuance with pre-crisis levels 
misses  the  point  that  the  pre-crisis  market  was  fragile,  based  on  investment  by  leveraged 
funds  and  bank  treasuries.  Building  a  stable  market  will  require  a  broader,  real  money 
investor base. 
The market also needs to be based on genuine risk transfer not regulatory arbitrage, such as 
synthetic sales of thin mezzanine tranches intended to maximise the reduction in regulatory 
capital  at  minimum  cost.  I  hope  the  future  will  be  transactions  in  which  banks  look  to  sell 
down the capital structure, subject to meeting risk retention requirements. Transferring the 
entire risk on a portfolio will be the only way to achieve a reduction in the exposure measure 
used for the leverage ratio. And the new Basel risk-weighted capital requirements announced 
in  December  also  move  in  the  direction  of  incentivising  transfer  of  senior  as  well  as 
mezzanine tranches of portfolios. 
I  said  I  would  come  back  to  Simple,  Transparent  and  Comparable  (STC)  securitisation. 
Unfortunately,  we  have  done  our  best  to  confuse  people  by  using  a  bewildering  range  of 
acronyms and terms for this project – STC, SST, STS, qualifying, high quality etc. Today I 
                                                
1  The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European Union: a discussion paper, European 
Central Bank and Bank of England, May 2014. 
2  Joint response from the Bank of England and the European Central Bank to the Consultation Document of the 
European  Commission:  ‘An  EU  framework  for  simple,  transparent  and  standardised  securitisation’,  March 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  am  using  the  STC  term  developed  by  the  taskforce  of  global  banking  and  securities 
regulators that I co-chair. But I can reassure you that these will be brought together into a 
single set of criteria in European legislation. I believe the intention is that they will then be 
applied consistently across different sectors – for example, banks, insurers and funds – and 
different regulations – for example capital and liquidity. 
I see the aims of the STC criteria as threefold. First, to help investors. An STC securitisation 
should meet the “What You See Is What You Get” principle. The structure should not have 
hidden traps or complications, allowing investors to focus on analysing the credit quality of 
the  underlying  assets.  But,  importantly,  the  STC  criteria  are  not  a  credit  opinion  on  those 
assets  and  STC  will  certainly  not  mean  “risk  free”.  Second,  to  help  issuers.  As  well  as 
potentially  helping  to  broaden  the  range  of  investors,  the  STC  criteria  should  make  risk 
transfer more robust. And third, to help regulators. Setting risk sensitive capital requirements 
for  securitisation  tranches  is  challenging.  One  solution  is  to  use  credit  ratings  but  the 
shortcomings of that approach were exposed during the crisis. Another is to use a regulatory 
formula capturing dimensions of risk such as the credit quality of the underlying pool, tranche 
seniority  and  maturity.  In  our  view,  including  a differentiation  based  on STC  in  that  capital 
calculation  helps  to  capture  other  important  dimensions  of  risk  related  to  structure, 
transparency and governance. 
Because one of our objectives is to broaden the investor base, it is important that the STC 
designation  makes  things  simpler  for  investors,  particularly  non-banks.  For  example,  they 
should be able to place greater reliance on it when conducting their own due diligence on 
matters  covered  by  the  STC  criteria,  such  as  risk  retention.  Investors  would  thus  be  in  a 
position to concentrate with more confidence on other, existing due diligence requirements, 
such  as  in  relation  to  the  creditworthiness  of  the  underlying  assets  and  cash  flows 
characteristics. 
The implementation process for the STC designation is therefore important. In our view, the 
primary obligation should be on the originator to attest compliance with the criteria. But this 
needs  to  be  in  the  context  of  a  regulatory  regime  with  effective  supervisory  oversight  and 
sanctions. 
We must also be careful not to label all non-STC transactions as “bad”. There should be a 
continuing  place  in  the  market  for  many  transactions  that  do  not  qualify  for  the  STC 
designation, including synthetic transactions, managed portfolios and pools that do not meet 
the granularity requirements. 
Turning  to  capital  requirements,  looking  at  historical  losses  on  securitisation  tranches,  we 
think  the  calibration  of  bank  capital  requirements  that  the  Basel  Committee  published  in 
December is broadly right. But there is a case for some lowering of capital requirements for 
STC transactions on the grounds of lower structure risk. 
A stronger argument can be made that Solvency 2 standardised capital requirements for EU 
insurers are still too high, especially at longer maturities – although it should be noted that 
these  will  not  apply  to  insurers  using  internal  models.  For  banks  and  insurers,  part  of  the 
issue with securitisation capital requirements is the comparison with covered bonds, which 
tend to be treated favourably in EU regulation. Issuers looking to raise secured funding may 
therefore see covered bonds as a more cost effective alternative to securitisation. Covered 
bonds  have  a  legitimate  role  in  the  market  as  a  source  of  stable  long-term  funding.  But 
securitisation  has  the  advantages  of  risk  transfer  and  lower  encumbrance  of  underlying 
assets. We would support moves to put securitisation and covered bonds on a more level 
playing field. 
To conclude, we support the European Commission’s current work on an EU framework for 
securitisation as part of the longer-term objective of growth in stable, market-based financing 
markets alongside bank lending. A uniform set of criteria for STC securitisation can play an 
essential role in de-stigmatising European securitisation, helping the market to develop on a 
sustainable track and attracting a broader investor base. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
