  Mark Carney: Building real markets for the good of the people 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  Lord  Mayor’s  Banquet  for  Bankers  and  Merchants  of  the  City  of 
London at the Mansion House, London, 10 June 2015. 
 I am grateful to Ben Nelson, Iain de Weymarn, Nicola Anderson, Alex Brazier, Andrew Hauser, Chris Salmon and 
Tim Taylor for their assistance in preparing this speech and accompanying Open Forum document. 
My Lord Mayor, Lady Mayoress, Chancellor, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Almost 350 years ago, the Great Fire destroyed the City of London and rendered 100,000 
people homeless. 
It took half a century to rebuild. 
The legacy of the Great Fire endures, including such Wren masterpieces as St Paul’s and his 
twenty-five other steeples that survive today within the City’s precincts. 
But the Fire’s legacy is not limited to how the City looks, it extends to what the City does. 
The blaze led Nicholas Barbon to establish the first insurance company, an innovation to fulfil 
a social need: the sharing of risk. 
Public authorities complemented private initiative. 
There was a Royal Proclamation that set standards for wider roads and houses built from 
brick and stone instead of timber. 
And Parliament passed the Parish Pump Act to prevent “mischiefs that may happen by fire” 
by establishing fire brigades and improving water supply. 
So that spark in Pudding Lane ignited much more besides the Great Fire itself: 
– 
– 
– 
From the coffee houses that served as meeting places for entrepreneurs and merchants; to 
the exchanges that supported the trading of financial claims; to a central bank that acted as 
lender of last resort: a rich infrastructure developed to support markets that served the UK 
and the world. As it grew into the world’s leading economic and trading power, the UK also 
became its centre of financial capitalism. 
By the early 20th century, though no longer the world’s largest economy, the UK was still its 
hub  of  international  finance.  It  held  close  to  a  half  of  the  world’s  stock  of  overseas 
investments and traded one third of all negotiable instruments. 
The  City  has  retained  its  pre-eminence  through  market  innovation.  From  eurobonds  to 
emerging  market  debt,  credit  derivatives  and  centralised  clearing;  the  City  has  continually 
created new financial products and markets to serve the real economy. 
Today the City remains the leading global financial centre. The UK is the venue for 40% of 
foreign exchange trading volume, half of all trades in OTC interest rate derivatives, and more 
than two-thirds of trading in international bonds. More international banking activity is booked 
in  London  than  anywhere  else,  and  the  UK  is  host  to  the  world’s  third  largest  insurance 
sector  as  well  as  its  second  largest  asset  management  industry.  UK  markets  matter  for 
global commerce. But above all, our markets matter for our prosperity. 
the provision of liquidity to limit contagion; 
a recognition that clear, well-understood codes contribute to the greater good; and 
a belief that financial markets can solve real world problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Markets  are  a  major  part  of  the  UK  economy.  350,000  people  are  employed  in  financial 
services in London alone, and 1 million across the UK as a whole. Across the country, their 
enterprise contributes £130 billion to our national income and £70 billion to our exports. On 
current  trends,  the  UK-based  non-bank  financial  system  would  increase  from  around  six 
times UK GDP to nearly fifteen times by 2050. 
Most fundamentally, our markets serve our real economy. 
By financing firms to hire, invest and expand, our markets help drive UK growth. 
By opening up cross-border trade and investment, our markets create new opportunities for 
UK businesses and savers. 
By  transferring  risks  to  those  most  willing  and  able  to  bear  them,  our  markets  help  UK 
households and businesses insure against the unexpected. 
Much  of  this  activity  depends  on  fixed  income,  currency  and  commodity  markets.  These 
FICC  markets  establish  the  borrowing  costs  of  households,  companies  and  governments. 
They  set  the  exchange  rates  we  use  when  we  travel  or  buy  goods  from  abroad.  They 
determine the costs of our food and raw materials. And they help our companies manage the 
financial risks they incur when investing, producing and trading. 
Markets have become ever more important to people as they bear increasing responsibility 
for financing their retirements and insuring against risks. The suitability of those decisions will 
depend heavily on FICC markets. It is therefore vital that they work well. And are seen to do 
so. 
The failures of FICC markets 
Though markets can be powerful drivers of prosperity, markets can go wrong. 
Left unattended, they are prone to instability, excess and abuse. 
Markets without the right standards or infrastructure are like cities without building codes, fire 
brigades or insurance. 
Poor infrastructure allowed the spark of the US subprime crisis to light a powder keg under 
UK markets, triggering the worst recession in our lifetimes. 
– 
Poor “soft” infrastructure such as codes of conduct that too few read and too many 
ignored. 
Faulty “hard” infrastructure like interest rate and foreign exchange benchmarks that 
were quite literally fixed; and 
Weak banks whose light capital and heavy reliance on short-term funding created a 
tinder box. 
  Central banks shared in these failings, operating a system of fire insurance whose ambiguity 
was anything but constructive when global markets were engulfed in flames. 
The Bank of England’s general approach was consistent with the attitude of FICC markets, 
which historically relied heavily on informal codes and understandings. That informality was 
well suited to an earlier age. But as markets innovated and grew, it proved wanting. 
Most  troubling  have  been  the  numerous  incidents  of  misconduct  that  exploited  such 
informality, undercutting public trust and threatening systemic stability. 
This  has  had  direct  economic  consequences.  Mistrust  between  market  participants  has 
raised borrowing costs and reduced credit availability. Falling confidence in market resilience 
has  meant companies  have  held  back  productive  investments.  And  uncertainty  has  meant 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  people  have  hesitated  to  move  job  or  home.  These  effects  are  not  trivial,  and  they  have 
reduced the dynamism of our economy in the post-crisis years.1 
Widespread  mistrust  has  also  had  deeper,  indirect  costs.  Markets  are  not  ends  in 
themselves,  but  powerful  means  for  prosperity  and  security  for  all.  As  such  they  need  to 
retain the consent of society – a social licence – to be allowed to operate, innovate and grow. 
Repeated episodes of misconduct have called that social licence into question. 
We have all been let down by these developments. And we all share responsibility for fixing 
them. 
Real markets 
I believe everyone in this room would agree: we need real markets for sustainable prosperity. 
Not  markets  that  collapse  when  there  is  a  shock  from  abroad.  Not  markets  where 
transactions  occur  in  chat  rooms.  Not  markets  where  no  one  appears  accountable  for 
anything. 
Real  markets  are  professional  and  open,  not  informal  and  clubby.  Participants  in  real 
markets compete on merit rather than collude online. 
Real markets are resilient, fair and effective. They maintain their social licence. 
Real markets don’t just happen; they depend on the quality of market infrastructure. 
Robust  market  infrastructure  is  a  public  good,  one  in  constant  danger  of  under-provision 
because the best markets innovate continually. This inherent risk can only be managed if all 
market actors, public and private, recognise their responsibilities for the system as a whole. 
The City has a special responsibility given London’s pre-eminent position in global markets, 
which  is  why  it  has  already  brought  so  many  ideas  and  such  energy  to  advance  financial 
reform.2 
Financial reform is re-building real markets 
Reform  is  strengthening  the  resilience  of  major  banks.  Their  capital  requirements  have 
increased ten-fold and their liquid assets are up four-fold. These banks’ trading assets are 
down by a third and intra-bank exposures by two-thirds. 
Reform is ending the scourge of Too Big To Fail. The combination of eliminating the implicit 
public  subsidy  and  increased  capitalisation  will  correct  the  distortions  caused  by  the 
structural  under-pricing  of  risk  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  And  by  making  a  further  shift  to 
market-based finance inevitable, it is increasing choice and competition – real market forces. 
Reform  is  also  improving  risk  transfer  by  untangling  the  complex  web  of  derivatives  that 
meant  failures  like  Lehman  triggered  chaos;  and  by  creating  simple,  transparent  and 
comparable securitisation markets. 
This  reform  agenda  has  increased  the  effectiveness  of  FICC  markets  and  reinforced  their 
social licence. 
                                                
1  See Haddow, A, Hare, C, Hooley, J and Shakir, T (2013) “Macroeconomic uncertainty: what is it, how can we 
measure it and why does it matter?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q2. See also Bloom, N, et al (2014), 
“Really uncertain business cycles”, mimeo. 
2   Examples include the contribution of the private sector to: the development of revised ISDA protocols as part 
of efforts to tackle Too Big To Fail; improvements in disclosure under the aegis of the Enhanced Disclosure 
Taskforce; consultation over TLAC proposals; the establishment of the Banking Standards Council; and on-
going work to develop the appropriate near-risk free reference rate for sterling markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  It is frustrating for us all that such major progress risks being overshadowed by misconduct 
problems. 
The fair and effective markets review 
We must break the back of these issues, and the Fair and Effective Markets Review shows 
the way forward. 
With its publication today, all the main building blocks are now in place for the real markets 
we need. 
I  want  to  pay  tribute  to  my  colleagues  Charles  Roxburgh,  Minouche  Shafik  and  Martin 
Wheatley,  who  so  ably  led  the  Review.  And  to  salute  Elizabeth  Corley,  who  so  expertly 
chaired  the  Review’s  independent  Market  Practitioner  panel,  canvassing  and  coalescing 
views from across the industry. 
The importance and complexity of their task is illustrated by the multiple root causes of the 
misconduct in FICC markets. Specifically, the Review identifies: 
– 
Market  structures  which  presented  specific  opportunities  for  abuse,  such  as  poor 
benchmark  design,  and  which  more  generally  were  vulnerable  to  conflicts  of 
interest, collusion, and thin markets; 
Standards of acceptable market practice that were usually poorly understood, often 
ignored and always lacked teeth; 
Firms’ systems of internal governance and control that were incapable of asserting 
the interests of firms – let alone the wider market – over those of close-knit trading 
staff; 
Individual  incentives  that  were  skewed,  with  pay  packages  stressing  short-term 
returns overlong-term value and good conduct; 
And personal accountability that was lacking, with a culture of impunity developing in 
parts of the market. 
    All  these  factors  contributed  to  an  ethical  drift.  Unethical  behaviour  went  unchecked, 
proliferated and eventually became the norm. Too many participants neither felt responsible 
for the system nor recognised the full impact of their actions. For too many, the City stopped 
at its gates, though its influence extended far beyond. 
A good start has been made in addressing these deficiencies. 
The design and regulation of key FICC benchmarks has been overhauled and transparency 
in  FICC  markets  is  being  enhanced.  Compensation  rules  have,  in  the  main,  been 
transformed to align better risk and reward. 
From next year, senior managers of banks and insurers will be held directly accountable for 
failures in their areas of responsibility. And the best firms are improving the “tone from the 
top”, launching conduct training and revamping control structures. 
But major gaps remain. 
These  are  evidenced  by  enforcement  actions  which  continue  to  appear  with  depressing 
frequency.  These  sanctions,  while  necessary,  aren’t  the  solution,  not  least  since  the  $150 
billion of fines levied on global banks translates into more than $3 trillion of reduced lending 
capacity to the real economy. 
We  need  a  better  balance  between  individual  and  firm  accountability.  But  who  should  be 
accountable? Against which standards? And with what consequences? 
In these regards, I welcome the Review’s recommendations that: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
First, individuals must be held to account. Doing so requires new, common standards, cast 
in clear language; better training and qualifications for FICC personnel; and mechanisms to 
ensure  that  when  individuals  are  fired,  their  history  will  be  known  to  those  who  consider 
hiring them. 
Second, firms must take greater responsibility for the system by improving the quality, clarity 
and  market-wide  understanding  of  FICC  trading  practices.  I  welcome  the  industry’s 
leadership  in  drawing  up  plans  for  a  new  FICC  Market  Standards  Board.  The  Board’s 
mandate  will  be  to  establish  readily  understandable  standards,  keep  them  up-to-date  with 
market developments, and promote adherence to them. Crucially, the Board will be dynamic, 
and will monitor and address areas of uncertainty in specific trading practices. 
This is a major opportunity for the industry to establish common standards of market practice 
that are well understood, widely followed and, crucially, that keep pace with markets. If firms 
and their staff fail to take this opportunity, more restrictive regulation is inevitable. 
To  give  these  measures  teeth,  key  elements  of  the  Senior  Managers  Regime  should  be 
extended  to  all  firms  active  in  wholesale  FICC  markets,  including  dealers  and  asset 
managers. That means all senior managers would have clearly defined responsibilities and 
would  be  answerable  for  training,  certifying  and  monitoring  the  material  risk  takers  they 
supervise. The FCA should oversee compliance, redeploying resources to focus on Senior 
Persons.  In  turn,  these  individuals  would  be  on  the  hook  for  promoting  compliance  within 
their organisations. Incentives will be aligned. 
For the best in the industry, this won’t be new. This is just how you run your business. But for 
others, who free ride on your reputations: the Age of Irresponsibility is over. 
Third, regulators should extend the coverage of market abuse regulation to include every 
major  fixed  income  and  currency  market.  And  criminal  sanctions  should  be  updated,  with 
market abuse rules similarly extended and maximum prison terms lengthened. 
Finally we need global standards for global markets. I welcome the FICC Markets Standards 
Board’s intent to be as global as possible in its membership and influence. All major Central 
Banks and market participants have begun working on developing a new single Global Code 
for  FX.  I  would  encourage  IOSCO  to  consider  complementing  these  efforts  with  a  similar 
initiative to cover FICC markets as a whole when they meet in London next week. The FSB 
will engage with these processes and work to improve the alignment between remuneration 
and conduct risk across the globe. 
The Bank of England’s role 
All must play a role in building real markets, including the Bank of England. 
Although the Bank does not regulate conduct or markets per se, it has responsibilities for, 
and powers over, the stability of the UK’s financial system as a whole. 
In the run-up to the crisis, the Bank’s contribution to the effectiveness of markets fell short in 
three respects. In all cases, the Bank is now responding. 
First, the Bank’s framework for providing liquidity was shown to have lagged behind market 
developments.  Once  under  pressure,  the  Bank  could  neither  stabilise  overnight  rates  nor 
support the banking system. Fortunately, in the jaws of the crisis, the Bank innovated rapidly 
and admirably to avoid a collapse of the system. 
Those  lessons  are  now  embedded  in  a  new,  comprehensive  framework  for  the  Bank’s 
sterling market operations. We have expanded the range of eligible collateral, and will lend to 
many more counterparties, at much longer maturities. The Bank also stands ready to act as 
a market maker of last resort. 
Constructive Ambiguity has been replaced by Open for Business. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Second,  like  many  others,  the  Bank  neither  identified  the  scale  of  risks  in  the  system  nor 
spotted the gaps in the regulatory architecture. 
Following  the  Chancellor’s  reforms  in  the  last  Parliament,  the  Bank  now  has  statutory 
responsibility to protect and enhance the stability of the UK’s financial system, and is working 
as  One  Bank  to  do  so.  The  FPC  and  the  PRA  have  catalysed  a  series  of  actions  that 
influence  market  resilience  including  stress  tests  of  banks  and  hedge  funds,  system-wide 
capital actions, and new tools like the leverage ratio and minimum repo haircuts.3 
Third,  the  Bank’s  arcane  governance  blurred  the  Bank’s  accountability  and,  by  extension, 
weakened the social licence of markets. 
Before  my  arrival,  the  Bank’s  governance  was  reshaped.  The  Bank’s  board  of  directors, 
Court, has been strengthened. Its external members now have formal powers to observe the 
meetings  of  the  Bank’s  policy  committees  and  to  commission  reviews  into  the  Bank’s 
performance.4 
I  welcome  the  Government’s  intention  to  introduce  legislation  further  strengthening  the 
governance and accountability of the Bank. 
The Bank will continue to modernise its operations. Following the Grabiner report, the Bank 
has focused its Market Intelligence programme, strengthened procedures, improved training 
and overhauled compliance. And the Bank is introducing today a new code of conduct. The 
Bank expects its senior management to meet the highest standards of professional conduct. 
As one example, the Bank will apply the core principles of the Senior Managers Regimes to 
its  own  senior  staff,  including  the  Governor.  This  is  in  addition  to  existing  obligations  and 
scrutiny from Court, Parliament, the media and the general public. 
And  the  Bank  will  continue  to  reinforce  its  commitment  to  openness  and  transparency. 
Minutes  of  Court  meetings  are  now  published  with  minimal  delay.  The  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  will  publish  transcripts  of  its  deliberations  with  an  appropriate  lag.  Whenever 
there  are  difficult  issues,  outside  reviews  of  the  Bank’s  performance  will  be  conducted, 
publicly released and acted upon. 
Looking ahead 
The  Bank  welcomes  such  scrutiny  of  our  activities,  including  open  debate  about  the 
cumulative impact of reform on the functioning of markets. 
In particular, while the core of the system has been made more resilient, the combination of 
new  prudential  requirements  on  dealers  and  structural  changes  in  markets  has  reduced 
market  depth  and  increased  potential  volatility.  This  process  likely  has  further  to  run, 
particularly  as  the  normalisation  of  global  monetary  conditions  edges  closer.  Firms  and 
regulators  should  be  alert  to  these  developments,  including  their  consequences  for 
investment funds that offer daily liquidity while investing in securities that only appear liquid. 
To be clear, more expensive liquidity is a price well worth paying for making the core of the 
system more robust. Removing public subsidies is absolutely necessary for real markets to 
exist.  Volatility  characterises  such  real  markets  and  much  of  the  pre-crisis  market  making 
capacity  among  dealers  was  ephemeral.  However,  the  possibility  of  sharp,  unpredictable 
changes  in  market  liquidity  poses  a  clear  risk  to  financial  stability,  particularly  when  some 
                                                
3  See, inter alia, the Record of the FPC meeting held on 20th November 2013, which summarises the outcome 
of  joint  work  with  the  FCA  on  “snap-back”  risk;  Bank  of  England  (2014),  “Stress  testing  the  UK  banking 
system: 2014 results”, December; Bank of England (2014), “The Financial Policy Committee’s review of the 
leverage ratio”, October. 
Including from a new independent evaluation office that reports directly to the non-executive Chairman. 
4 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  market participants take liquidity for granted and crowd into trades in anticipation of central 
bank action. 
The Bank is keenly alert to such risks. The FPC and the FSB are currently analysing these 
issues and welcome perspectives on whether the market, regulation or both should adjust for 
the good of the system. 
Conclusion 
With the main building blocks of reform in place, now is the time to take stock. 
It’s  vital  that  we  –  public  authorities  and  private  market  participants  –  work  together  to 
reverse  the  tide  of  ethical  drift.  This  cannot  be  a  one-off  exercise.  We  need  continuous 
engagement so that market infrastructure keeps pace with market innovation. 
That’s why the Bank is announcing that it will hold an Open Forum this Autumn which will 
bring  together  all  stakeholders  in  FICC  markets.  Our  goal  is  to  discuss  the  prospects  for 
market  functioning,  where  regulations  might  overlap  or  conflict,  and  whether  enough  has 
been done to build the real markets the UK deserves. 
To  prompt  an  open  discussion,  we  are  publishing  a  detailed  paper  which  reviews  these 
issues and draws out such questions.5 
Everyone  has  an  interest  in  the future  of financial  markets,  so  I  would  strongly  encourage 
you to engage with our Open Forum process online and at the conference itself. An Open 
and Accountable Bank welcomes your input. 
Our response to recent failings should be as ambitious as those of our predecessors to the 
Great Fire: renewed prosperity built on private markets and public market infrastructure. 
Let our legacy be the earthly equivalent of Wren’s ethereal genius, real markets so that the 
City can do what it does best: transact and innovate for the good of the people of the United 
Kingdom and the world. 
Thank you. 
                                                
5  See http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Pages/openforum.aspx. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
