  Sayuri Shirai: Shifting toward a moderately inflationary economy in 
Japan – overview of firms’ and households’ inflation expectations 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at Bruegel, 
Brussels, 4 March 2015; the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 6 March 2015, and 
the Bank of England, London, 10 March 2015. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website 
Introduction 
I. 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  about  Japan's  current 
monetary  policy. With  the  aim  of  achieving  its  2  percent  price  stability  target,  the  Bank  of 
Japan (hereafter the Bank) adopted quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) in 
April 2013. QQE was expanded further in October 2014. This was because of the potential 
risk  that  a  decline  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  inflation  rate  –  driven  by  somewhat 
weak domestic demand following the consumption tax hike and a substantial decline in crude 
oil  prices  –  may  have  exerted  downward  pressure  on  inflation  expectations,  thereby 
undermining  the  positive  developments  in  wage  negotiations  and  firms’  price-setting 
behavior.  In  my  view,  the  QQE  expansion  was  important  to  ensure  a  virtuous  cycle  from 
income to spending. Thereafter, crude oil prices dropped further and inflation has continued 
to decline, but domestic demand has continued its moderate recovery trend. Moreover, the 
Bank believes that inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from a somewhat 
long-term perspective. Nominal and real incomes are expected to rise, and thus the rate of 
increase in the CPI is expected to become positive once drops in crude oil prices stall and 
prices subsequently increase moderately. 
Low inflation also prevails in Europe. In the euro area, the rate of increase in the Harmonized 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) turned negative in December 2014 mainly as a result of 
the decline in crude oil prices. Some indicators of inflation expectations have also decreased. 
The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  undertaken  additional  unconventional  monetary 
easing  measures  in  January  2015  similar  to  those  adopted  by  the  Bank.  The  common 
features are (1) large-scale purchases of various financial assets (mainly sovereign bonds) 
as a main pillar and (2) a long-term conditional lending facility, where the amount of lending 
to financial institutions depends on the increased lending volume by those institutions to the 
private sector (Chart 1). In this low-inflation environment, one of a central bank's main tasks 
is avoiding deflation in Europe and conquering deflation in Japan. Bearing this in mind, I will 
review  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  over  the  past  two  years  and 
explain my opinions on the upside and downside risks with the latest baseline scenario. In 
addition, I will discuss developments related to inflation expectations in Japan. 
II. 
The bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices and risk assessment 
The bank’s baseline scenario 
A. 
The Bank presents quarterly forecasts on real GDP and core CPI (all items less fresh food), 
prepared by the nine members of the Policy Board, on a year-on-year basis for the next three 
years  (currently,  up  to  fiscal  2016).  Chart  2  shows  the  median,  minimum,  and  maximum 
forecasts  of  the  majority  of  policy  board  members  for  the  selected  four  forecast  points: 
(1) April 2013 (the month when QQE was adopted); (2) April 2014 (a year after adoption); 
(3) October 2014 (the latest month of the publication of the biannual Outlook for Economic 
Activity and Prices); and (4) January 2015 (the latest forecast point). As the median forecast 
is often regarded as mostly reflecting the Bank’s baseline scenario, I  will proceed  with my 
explanations on the Bank’s baseline scenario based on that median. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  If  one  reviews  the  Bank’s  medium-term  forecasts  on  economic  activity  and  prices,  it  is 
evident that there were rather large downward revisions over that period (Chart 2). The same 
is also true of my medium-term relatively cautious forecasts, which have been consistently 
lower than the median for both real GDP growth and core CPI inflation since the introduction 
of QQE in April 2013. It is natural for a central bank to revise its forecasts given changes in 
assumptions  with  respect  to  domestic  and  external  conditions.  Nevertheless,  since  the 
revisions  have  been  large,  I  feel  it  necessary  to  provide  a  clear  explanation  for  these 
developments. Thus, I will provide my views in this area in the following sections. 
B. 
Revisions of the bank’s outlook for economic activity 
Downward revisions on growth forecasts for fiscal 2014  
In  Chart  2,  one  feature  that  may  attract  your  attention  is  the  large  revisions  made  on 
economic growth for fiscal 2014 – from 1.4 percent in the April 2013 forecast point to minus 
0.5  percent  most  recently.  Four  main  reasons  may  be  given  here.  First,  the  downward 
revision  took  place  mainly  owing  to  the  greater-than-expected  decline  in  private  spending 
caused  by  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014  as  well  as  the  weaker-than-expected 
subsequent recovery pace. The declines in private consumption (especially durable goods) 
and  residential  investment  are  attributable  both  to  a  reaction  to  the  front-loaded  increase 
prior to the tax hike and to a decline in real (disposable) income, mainly associated with the 
tax hike. 
The  adverse  impact  of  the  tax  hike  turned  out  to  be  greater  than  projected  –  perhaps 
because it was difficult to grasp the structural changes in the economic and social structures 
that  occurred  after  the  previous  tax  hike  in  1997.  Those  changes  included  the  following: 
(1) an increase in the number of pensioners and a temporary cut in pension benefits in fiscal 
2013–15 (owing to dissolution of the special level of pension benefits); and (2) a continued 
decline and resultant low level of per-capita nominal income that is prevalent even after the 
wage increase since fiscal 2014 (as a result of the growing number of nonregular workers 
and  the  long  spell  of  restrained  wage  growth  for  regular  workers).  In  this  regard,  I  have 
repeatedly  emphasized  that  the  Bank  should  recognize  the  pace  of  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation as a downside risk. It is clear that this risk has materialized 
and played a major role in the downward revision of the Bank’s outlook. In other words, a 
decline in domestic demand as a result of a real income drop (the Keynesian effect) appears 
to have exceeded an increase in domestic demand driven by the improved sentiment toward 
the  sustainability  of  the  fiscal  balance  and  the  social  security  system  (the  non-Keynesian 
effect). In addition, bad weather conditions adversely affected private consumption in July-
October 2014. Thereafter, however, private consumption started to recover gradually as the 
adverse impact of the tax hike waned. Residential investment also appears to have more or 
less bottomed out. 
Second, the sharp depreciation of the yen brought only a limited gain in export volume, thus 
failing to offset a substantial decline in domestic demand caused by the tax hike. The tepid 
export performance was due to the following: (1) a shift to overseas production, which was 
accelerated in the phase of the yen’s sharp appreciation; (2) a loss in price competitiveness 
in some manufacturing sectors; and (3) weak recovery of global demand. The limited growth 
in  export  volume  produced  few  benefits  for  manufacturing  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), which generally operate as suppliers of parts and intermediate goods to 
larger  domestic manufacturing firms; the  latter gained  profits  partly  driven  by  the  valuation 
effect.  Since  the  second  half  of  2014,  meanwhile,  the  export  volume  has  begun  to  rise 
moderately,  reflecting  a  gain  in  price  competitiveness  and  the  relatively  strong  economic 
recovery in the United States. 
Third,  while  the  above  two  factors  were  the  major  reasons  for  the  downward  revisions, 
business fixed investment also did not rise as much as projected. This was partly because 
the end of support for some widely-used software programs and tightening of gas emission 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  regulations applied to construction machinery produced a front-loaded increase in purchases 
of personal computers and construction machinery before April 2014; this was followed by a 
subsequent  decline  in  such  purchases.  Moreover,  some  firms  postponed  their  plans  to 
expand business fixed investment owing to the greater-than-expected accumulated inventory 
(especially consumer durable goods). Currently, however, investment continues to recover, 
inventory stock has begun to fall, and industrial production has started to rise. 
Fourth,  the  potential  economic  growth  rate  has  trended  downward  historically,  and  it  still 
remains below 0.5 percent despite a moderate recent increase (Chart 3). This may be one of 
the reasons that according to various opinion surveys, many households have not felt signs 
of economic recovery. That could be contributing to the sluggish pace of domestic demand 
recovery. The decrease in potential economic growth is considered to be the consequence of 
demographics,  a  deceleration  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth,  and  a  decline  in 
capital stock (driven by delayed investment). 
Moreover, the unemployment rate has already dropped to around 3 percent – a level closer 
to the natural unemployment rate – and along with the decline in the working-age population, 
the  labor  shortage  is  increasingly  evident. The  labor  shortage  has favorably  contributed  to 
creation  of  new  employment  and  nominal  income  growth;  however,  it  has  also  incurred 
constraints on economic growth by allowing mainly SMEs and firms in nonmetropolitan areas 
to  lose  the  opportunity  to  expand  or  continue  their  businesses.  For  example,  owing  to  a 
severe  shortage  of  skilled  workers  and  engineers,  the  construction  sector  was  prevented 
from adequately expanding the volume of their building construction starts in response to the 
front-loaded  order  placement  of  public  investment  in  April-June  2014.  Instead,  this  sector 
faced a rapid increase in the unit operating price caused by rising personnel expenses and 
cost of construction materials. Regarding residential investment, a decline in the real interest 
rate generated by QQE helped stimulate potential demand for mortgage loans. Conversely, 
an  increase  in  housing  prices  caused  by  rising  construction  costs  partially  discouraged 
residential investment by ordinary households. 
Nonetheless,  let  me stress  that  the  economic growth  rate for fiscal  2014  could  have  been 
even lower without QQE. Corporate profits as well as the employment and income situation 
might  have  been  less  favorable  than  at  the  current  level.  QQE  has  brought  negative  real 
interest rates and promoted the following: (1) the wealth effect, for example through stocks 
and real estate; (2) the diversification of financing sources for firms; and (3) a correction of 
the yen’s excessive appreciation (Chart 4). These effects, in turn, have given rise to various 
positive  developments  by  activating  firms’  fixed  investment  and  pricing  behavior,  financial 
institutions’  lending  and  investment  behavior,  individual  investors’  incentives  to  manage 
financial assets, and inbound tourism. Therefore, although there were downward revisions to 
the  Bank’s  economic  outlook,  I  believe  that  the  effectiveness  of  QQE  should  not  be 
questioned. 
Upward revisions of growth forecasts for fiscal 2015 and 2016 
By  contrast,  the  Bank’s forecast  on  economic  growth for fiscal  2015  was  adjusted  upward 
significantly from 1.5 percent in the April 2013 forecast point to 2.1 percent in the most recent 
forecast. The upward revision is natural since it reflects the adjustment process of returning 
from the bigger-than-expected decline in the previous year. In addition, as for reasons why 
degree  of  upward  revision  was  particularly  large  in  the  latest  January  2015  forecast,  I 
personally  view  that  the  following  four  factors  were  incorporated:  (1)  improvement  in 
corporate profits and the resultant greater active business fixed investment (owing to a crude 
oil price drop and the lagged impact of the yen’s further depreciation since November 2014); 
(2)  gradual  recovery  overseas  (owing  to  a  crude  oil  price  drop)  and  the  resultant  positive 
effects  on  exports  from  Japan;  (3)  an  increase  in  real  income  and  resultant  expansion  of 
private consumption (driven by a crude oil price drop and the postponement of the second 
round of the consumption tax hike); and (4) expected positive effects from the government’s 
economic  measures  based  on  the  supplementary  budget  for  fiscal  2014.  The  most  recent 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  forecast on economic growth for fiscal 2016 was also revised upward to 1.6 percent, partly 
because of a shift of the front-loaded increase in spending from fiscal 2015 to fiscal 2016 as 
a result of the postponement of the second round of the tax hike. 
I project that the potential growth rate will rise gradually toward somewhat below 1 percent by 
the end of fiscal 2016. This will occur mainly through an accumulation of capital stock, an 
improvement in TFP growth, and a reallocation of the labor force – through corporate sector 
restructuring  and  greater  focus  on  higher  value-added  goods  and  services.  It  is  also 
expected  that  the  government  will  make  greater  efforts  in  implementing  growth  strategies 
and reforms aimed at promoting greater labor participation by female and elderly persons. 
Revisions of the bank’s outlook for prices 
C. 
Let  me  now  address  the  Bank’s  outlook  for  prices.  The  Bank’s  forecast  on  the  rate  of 
increase in the core CPI for fiscal 2014 was revised downward from 1.4 percent in the April 
2013  forecast  point  to  0.9  percent  in  the  most  recent  forecast  (Chart  2).  The  downward 
revision was due to the following: (1) the greater-than-expected base effect; (2) the delayed 
improvement  in  the  output  gap,  which  had  seen  an  unexpected  deterioration  for  two 
consecutive quarters since April-June 2014, although it was at around zero percent (Chart 3); 
(3) a slower-than-expected increase in inflation expectations; and (4) a decline in crude oil 
prices since around July 2014. These factors delayed the timing for the rate of inflation to 
resume the rising trend from fiscal 2014 to the latter half of fiscal 2015. 
The  adjustment  for  fiscal  2014  also  contributed  to  the  forecast  on  the  rate  of  inflation  for 
fiscal  2015,  which  was  revised  downward  significantly  from  1.9  percent  in  the  April  2013 
forecast point to 1 percent in the most recent forecast – primarily because of the decline in 
crude oil prices. The Bank currently estimates that the contribution of energy items will be in 
the  range  of  minus  0.7  percent  to  minus  0.8  percent  of  the  core  CPI.  It  is  projected  that 
downward pressure on prices caused by crude oil price drops will diminish gradually toward 
the middle of fiscal 2015. Subsequently, the rate of inflation is projected to accelerate sharply 
from around the second half of fiscal 2015 and approach close to around 2 percent by the 
end of the fiscal year for several reasons. First, the pace of improvement in the output gap 
will be greater than that envisaged in the April 2013 forecast point due to upward revisions 
on the economic growth forecast. Second, there will be the lagged impact of the yen’s further 
depreciation from November 2014. Third, the pace of the increase in inflation expectations 
will also be greater than initially projected, once it resumes its rising trend. 
In  other  words,  the  forecasts  for  fiscal  2014  and  2015  reflect  the  Bank’s  view  that  the 
underlying price developments will remain intact. First, though the effect from the decline in 
crude oil prices is considered temporary, its positive support for economic activities will result 
in  an  improvement  in  the  output  gap,  thereby  eventually  reinforcing  longer-term  upward 
pressure on core CPI inflation. Second, while inflation expectations inferred from market data 
had  exhibited  a  decrease  in  recent  months,  as  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  those 
inflation  expectations  inferred  from  various  surveys  remain  roughly  constant.  Third,  spring 
wage  negotiations  for  fiscal  2015  are  currently  ongoing.  The  Japan  Trade  Union 
Confederation  demanded  an  over  2  percent  increase  in  base  salary,  and  the  Japan 
Federation of Economic Organizations expressed its willingness to make the greatest efforts 
to raise wages. These positive developments may be a sign that firms’ and households’ price 
perceptions  and  related  economic  behavior  are  gradually  adjusting  to  a  moderately 
inflationary environment. 
It is expected that these forces will generate sufficient upward pressures on prices such that 
the rate of inflation will accelerate to around 2 percent by the end of fiscal 2015. This is why 
the Bank maintains the view that this rate is likely to reach about 2 percent around the middle 
of the  projection  period,  that  is,  in  or  around fiscal  2015. The  forecast for  fiscal  2016 thus 
remains largely unchanged with the rate of increase in the core CPI exceeding 2 percent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Risk factors related to the bank’s baseline scenario 
D. 
Next, let me explain my views on the upside and downside risks that are important as factors 
that may affect the Bank’s latest outlook. Regarding risks related to the Bank’s outlook on 
economic  activity,  I  pay  particular  attention  to  external  factors,  including  unstable  financial 
and  commodity  markets  and  economic  developments  abroad,  which  may  work  both  as 
upside and downside risks. In Europe, there is uncertainty regarding the impact of drops in 
crude oil prices, debt problems, low inflation, and the geopolitical issues on business fixed 
investment and employment conditions. In the United States, the economic recovery is solid. 
The  normalization  process  of  the  monetary  policy  by  the  Federal  Reserve  is  notable, 
especially with regard to its effect on the domestic economy and markets, as well as global 
capital flows and economies. The continued economic recovery in the United States with a 
smooth  implementation  of  the  exit  policy  and  a  moderate  increase  in  crude  oil  prices  will 
likely generate upside risks. 
Regarding the risks associated with domestic factors, I believe that there is a high degree of 
uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  extent  of  the  increase  in  business  fixed  investment  and 
domestic consumption in response to higher corporate profits and real income growth. First, 
it may take some time to improve significantly the sentiments of households that are facing 
difficulties  following  a  sharp  drop  in  real  income  in  fiscal  2014.  Second,  households  may 
allocate a higher portion of their increased income to savings if they regard it as a temporary 
windfall  gain  and  do  not  expect  future  permanent  income  growth.  Third,  households’  and 
firms’ economic growth expectations may not rise unless the government’s growth strategies 
make  progress.  Concerns  over  the  sustainability  of  the  social  security  system  and  fiscal 
balance may undermine households’ and firms’ incentives for spending. In this respect, some 
local  governments,  firms,  and  financial  institutions  are  gradually  taking  advantage  of  the 
accommodative  financial  environment  generated  by  QQE  and  the  government’s  economic 
policy and structural reforms to energize the local economy and firms’ competitiveness and 
innovation. Whether remarkable progress will be made remains uncertain – both in terms of 
upside and downside risks. 
Turning to my views on risks related to the Bank’s outlook for prices, I pay particular attention 
to the following three types of risks. First, the crude oil price decline may not only lower the 
prices  directly  through  a  reduction  in  imported  energy  prices,  it  may  also  lower  prices 
indirectly,  through  a  decrease  in  overall  imported  prices  caused  by  global  disinflation. 
Second,  though  a  rise  in  income  (nominal  and  real)  and  the  resultant  improvement  in 
households’  sentiments  may  make  it  easier  for  firms  to  charge  higher  sales  prices,  some 
firms may lower or contain sales prices to acquire greater market share in the presence of 
fierce  domestic  competition.  Third,  inflation  expectations  may  remain  sluggish  throughout 
fiscal  2015  so  that  the  timing  for  these  expectations  to  resume  rising  may  be  delayed. 
Alternatively,  these  expectations  could  become  unstable  because  those  of  households  in 
particular  are  heavily  affected  by  the  actual  price  movements  of  daily  necessities  and 
gasoline, as I will indicate later. Finally, in my view, given that QQE was already expanded in 
October 2014, a temporary reduction in the core CPI inflation is acceptable as long as the 
underlying  price  developments  and  recovery  process  in  domestic  demand  continue. 
Nonetheless,  the  timing  of  a  rate  of  inflation  approaching  around  2  percent  now  entails 
greater uncertainty, including the possible delay from the Bank’s latest forecast. 
III. 
Overview of inflation expectations in Japan 
Underlying price developments 
A. 
Earlier,  I  mentioned  that  the  Bank  regards  underlying  price  developments  as  having 
remained  unchanged  despite  a  fall  in  actual  inflation  rate.  Here,  I  will  first  explain  more 
clearly what the Bank means by underlying price developments. Generally, underlying price 
developments  are  assessed  by  the  output  gap  and  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations,  and  they  are  typically  monitored  through  the  core  CPI  –  assessed  after 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  excluding  volatile  items  (that  is,  fresh  food  in  the  case  of  the  Bank).  Of  course,  these 
relationships  are  reflected  in  the  trend  in  income  growth  and  firms’  price-setting  behavior. 
However, the core CPI is not the only indicator monitored. The Bank looks at a wide range of 
other  price  indicators,  including  the  10  percent  trimmed mean, the  Laspeyres  chain  index, 
the ratio of items whose prices are rising to core CPI items (the rising-CPI item ratio), and the 
breakdown  items  of  the  CPI.  Producer  price  index,  services  producer  price  index,  and 
commodity prices are also closely monitored. The core CPI, 10 percent trimmed mean, and 
Laspeyres  chain  index  have  shown  a  decline  since  the  middle  of  2014.  By  contrast,  the 
rising-CPI item ratio has remained unchanged (Chart 5). 
In  practice,  whether  the  underlying  price  developments  remain  unchanged  could  be 
assessed  by  observing  whether  (1)  the  prices  of  a  wide  range  of  items  are  increasing, 
(2) such a rise is persistent, and (3) medium- to long-term inflation expectations have on the 
whole increased or at least remained stable. Currently, the rising-CPI item ratio indicates that 
a persistent increase in prices is widely observed for about 60 percent of the items covered 
by  the  core  CPI.  On  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  some  market-based 
indicators – such as the break-even inflation (BEI) and inflation swap rates – declined over 
the past months, but have become constant or begun to rise recently (Chart 6). Moreover, 
the  survey-based  indicators  of  firms,  households,  and  economists  have  remained  more  or 
less stable, as noted earlier (Chart 7). 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
B. 
Major central banks have clear inflation targets and conduct monetary policy so as to achieve 
around  2  percent  in  the  medium  term.  Under  the  so-called  flexible  inflation-targeting 
framework,  a  temporary  deviation  of  actual  inflation  from  the  target  is  accepted.  This  is 
permissible as long as there is a natural tendency for actual inflation to converge to around 
2 percent.  In  assessing  whether  such  a  tendency  prevails,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations  play  an  essential  role.  If  these  expectations  remain  stable  (or  “anchored”)  at 
around 2 percent, actual inflation is likely to converge to around 2 percent – even if actual 
inflation fluctuates around the target. In this environment, wage negotiations and firms’ price-
setting  behavior  are  more  likely  to  be  determined  based  on  expectations  of  approximately 
2 percent inflation. Such an economy could be referred to as having achieved price stability. 
In  the  case  of  Japan,  where  mild  deflation  has  persisted  over  a  long  period,  inflation 
expectations  have  not  been  anchored.  Moreover,  those  inflation  expectations  have  been 
volatile at around 1 percent. Thus, one of the Bank’s challenges is to raise and anchor such 
expectations toward around 2 percent. 
A  central  bank  generally  makes  a  judgment  on  the  movements  of  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  using  several  indicators;  this  is  because  the  levels  of  inflation 
expectations and their directions of movement often differ. This reflects the fact that (1) each 
indicator  entails  various,  specific  biases,  and  (2)  some  indicators  target  different  price 
indexes. With (1), for example, households’ inflation expectations tend to be upward-biased 
since households always expect that the price level will increase, as will be discussed later. 
By contrast, large firms’ expectations on sales prices tend to be downward-biased because 
they tend to make cautious management plans. With (2), for example, the Opinion Survey on 
the General Public’s Views and Behavior compiled by the Bank asked respondents the price 
outlook  referring  to  “overall  prices  of  goods  and  services  the  respondents  purchase.”  By 
contrast, the Bank’s Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) explicitly 
refers to the CPI when asking firms about their outlook on general prices. Moreover, the BEI 
and inflation swap rates target the core CPI, but they include both inflation expectations and 
various  premiums.  Chart  8  provides  basic  information  about  survey  based  indicators  on 
short-term  (one  year  or  less)  and  medium-  to  long-term  (over  one  year)  inflation 
expectations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  achieving  price  stability,  what  matters  most  are  the  inflation  expectations  of  firms  and 
households, as well as their associated economic behavior. I  will therefore concentrate on 
these inflation expectations here. 
Developments in inflation expectations of firms 
C. 
The Bank’s quarterly Tankan asks about 10,000 firms with at least 20 million yen in capital 
about their outlook regarding sales prices (rate of price changes relative to the current level) 
and general prices (annual percentage rate changes) for three projection periods: one year, 
three years, and five years ahead. These questionnaires have been incorporated since the 
March  2014  survey,  and  so  currently  four  forecast  points  are  available:  March,  June, 
September,  and  December  2014.  Since  the  amount  of  data  acquired  is  not  yet  sufficient, 
some caution is required in interpreting the results. The respondents are also decomposed 
into  four  groups  (large  manufacturing,  large  nonmanufacturing,  small  manufacturing,  and 
small nonmanufacturing). I will now share with you in the following sections my preliminary 
observations  on  the  survey  results.  Since  the  findings  that  I  will  describe  remain  largely 
unchanged across the forecast points, I will focus on the latest (December 2014) forecast.  
Inflation expectations for sales prices (one, three, and five years ahead) 
The  outlook  on  sales  prices  is  chosen  from  ten  options  from  “around  plus  20  percent  or 
higher”  to  “around  minus  20  percent  or  lower”  (categorized  in  5  percent  increments)  and 
“Don’t  know.”  The  average  inflation  outlook  on  sales  prices  for  “all  firms,  all  industries”  is 
1 percent for one year, 1.7 percent for three years, and 2 percent for five years ahead, and 
shows a rising trend relative to the current level. 
It should be noted that these figures refer to the rate of changes relative to the current level, 
not  the  annual  percentage  rate  change.  Thus,  taking  the  difference  between  these 
intertemporal figures gives a 0.7 percent increase for three years relative to one year ahead 
and a 0.3 percent increase for five years relative to three years ahead. Namely, the scale of 
the sales price increase tends to fall as the projection period moves from one to five years 
ahead. Another caution is that the average outlook figures are obtained from the sample pool 
after excluding the “Don’t know” respondents. So the average outlook figures are based on a 
limited number of respondents – especially for the outlook over three and five years ahead. 
• 
First,  large  manufacturing  firms  expect  on  average  that  sales  prices  will  remain 
unchanged from the current level in three years’ time (plus 0.1 percent) and will fall 
from  the  current  level  in five  years’  time  (minus  0.2  percent). This  shows  a  sharp 
contrast from the three other groups, all of which expect a rising sales price level 
from  the  current  level  (Chart  9).  In  large  manufacturing,  the  declining  price 
expectation  is  evident  for  five  years  ahead,  especially  among  processing  sectors, 
such as electrical and transportation machinery. Given that these sectors face fierce 
competition, large firms in these sectors are more likely to formulate their business 
plans conservatively or envision their future sales prices without an increase. 
Second, regardless of the scale of firms, nonmanufacturing firms tend to expect their 
future  sales  prices 
large 
nonmanufacturing  firms,  relatively  higher  sales  prices  are  expected 
the 
construction  &  real  estate  sectors  for  three  years  ahead  and  in  the  construction 
& real estate, retailing, and accommodations & eating & drinking services sectors for 
five years ahead. With small nonmanufacturing firms, relatively higher sales prices 
are  expected  in  the  construction  &  real  estate  and  accommodations  &  eating 
& drinking  services  sectors  for  three  years  ahead  and  in  the  construction  &  real 
estate, wholesaling & retailing, accommodations & eating & drinking services, and 
transport & postal activities sectors for five years ahead. Some of these sectors are 
already facing a labor shortage, higher real estate prices in large cities, or a rise in 
construction materials. 
than  manufacturing  ones.  Among 
to  be  higher 
in 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  These two observations suggest that sales prices are projected to rise in nonmanufacturing – 
rather than in manufacturing – and in the labor-intensive sectors. 
Next, I examine the three largest responses – “around plus 5 percent,” “around 0 percent,” 
and “Don’t know” – among the aforementioned ten options. The following additional points 
are observed: 
• 
Third,  for  “all  firms,  all  industries,”  the  responses  for  one  year  ahead  tend  to 
concentrate on “around 0 percent” (from the current level); they account for about 60 
percent of all responses. The next-largest responses are related to “around plus 5 
percent,” which account for about 20 percent. By contrast, the responses for three 
years  ahead  are  more  widely  spread  among  the  various  options.  The  largest 
responses are for “around 0 percent” (accounting for about 30 percent), and the next 
two largest responses are for “around plus 5 percent” and “Don’t know” (accounting 
for over 20 percent each). Those three options account for about 80 percent of all 
responses.  Regarding  the  responses  for  five  years  ahead,  the  largest  responses 
relate  to  “Don’t  know”  (accounting  for  about  35  percent);  the  proportion  of  the 
“around 0 percent” responses drops to about 20 percent and that of the “around plus 
5 percent” responses remains at over 20 percent (Chart 10-1). 
Fourth,  the  four-group  classification  indicates  that  there  are  greater  differences 
between 
than  between  manufacturing  and 
nonmanufacturing. For both large and small firms, the “Don’t know” responses grow 
as the projection period increases from one year to five years ahead. However, the 
proportion of the “Don’t know” responses is greater among large than among small 
firms  for  any  projection  period.  Small  firms  tend  to  choose  the  “around  plus 
5 percent” option more frequently than large ones (Charts 10–2, 10–3, and 10-4). 
large  and  small 
rather 
firms 
 In light of these responses, it may be said that small manufacturing firms find it easier to form 
expectations  on  sales  prices  than  do  large  ones.  This  is  probably  because  small 
manufacturing  firms  tend  to  project  future  sales  prices  through  supplier-transaction 
relationships  with  large  firms  and  also  because  they  deal  with  limited  kinds  of  parts  and 
intermediate  goods.  Meanwhile,  small  nonmanufacturing  firms  form  expectations  on  sales 
prices  by  taking  into  account  an  expected  increase  in  production  costs  while  considering 
relevant market prices influenced mainly by large nonmanufacturing firms. This may reflect 
the fact that small nonmanufacturing firms are relatively more labor intensive than large ones 
and are already facing a labor shortage.  
Inflation expectations on general prices (one, three, and five years ahead) 
Let us now examine the outlook for general prices, as measured by the CPI. The responses 
are chosen from ten options, ranging from “around plus 6 percent or higher” to “around minus 
3 percent or lower” (categorized in 1 percent increments), and “Don’t have clear views” with 
three  sub-categories  (on  general  prices).  The  average  inflation  outlook  for  “all  firms,  all 
industries” is 1.4 percent for one year, 1.6 percent for three years, and 1.7 percent for five 
years ahead, and shows a rising trend as the projection period increases from one to five 
years ahead (Chart 7). I will now elaborate on three observations on these results. 
• 
First,  the  four-group  classification  reveals  that  the  differences  in  the  projected 
inflation 
than  between 
manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing.  Large  firms  project  on  average  1.1  percent 
for one year ahead and 1.2 percent for both three and five years ahead; and small 
firms on average report about 1.7 percent for one year, 1.8 percent for three years, 
and 1.9 percent for five years ahead. So while they both basically project a rising 
trend, small firms have higher levels of inflation expectations (Chart 11).  
level  are  greater  between 
large  and  small 
firms 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  By focusing on the four largest responses – “around plus 2 percent,” “around plus 1 percent,” 
“around 0 percent,” and “Don’t have clear views” – among the aforementioned options, the 
following points are observed: 
• 
Second,  among  “all  firms,  all  industries,”  the  general  price  outlook  for  one  year 
ahead  is  relatively  widespread  among  the  options  compared  with  the  sales  price 
outlook. The largest “around plus 1 percent” responses account for about 30 percent 
of total responses, followed by the “around plus 2 percent” and “around 0 percent” 
responses  (accounting  for  about  20  percent  each).  The  “Don’t  have  clear  views” 
responses account for approximately 15 percent of total responses. On the outlook 
for three years ahead, the “Don’t have clear views” response increases to about 30 
percent. The next-largest responses are “around plus 1 percent” and “around plus 
2 percent”  (each  accounting  for  about  20  percent).  This  pattern  becomes  more 
apparent  with  the  outlook  for  five  years  ahead.  The  proportion  of  the  “Don’t  have 
clear  views”  responses  rises  to  approximately  40  percent;  the  “around  plus 
1 percent”  and  “around  plus  2  percent”  responses  both  drop  to  about  15  percent. 
From one to five years ahead, the proportion of “Don’t have clear views” responses 
are  greater  than  that  of  the  “Don’t  know”  response  for  sales  price  outlook  
(Chart 12–1). 
Third,  the  four-group  classification  reveals  that  the  “Don’t  have  clear  views” 
response is greater among large than among small firms. The responses account 
for over 40 percent on the outlook for three years ahead and over 50 percent on that 
for five years. As for small firms, the proportion of “around plus 2 percent” responses 
is  greater  than  that  for  large  firms  with  the  outlooks  for  one,  three  and  five  years 
ahead (Charts 12–2, 12–3, and 12–4).  
Summary of observations related to inflation expectations of firms  
Based on the aforementioned results, I will now summarize the combined observations on 
sales price- and general price-related inflation expectations of firms. 
1. 
The average outlook for general prices among “all firms, all industries” indicates 1.4 
percent  for  one  year,  1.6  percent  for  three  years,  and  1.7  percent  for  five  years 
ahead. However, the outlook among large firms remains largely unchanged over the 
same projection period. This implies that the rising trend in the outlook appears to 
largely reflect the outlook among small firms. Large firms also appear to make more 
conservative, lower projections on sales prices than small firms. 
For  both general  and  sales  prices,  the  “Don’t  have  clear  views”  and  “Don’t  know” 
responses are greater among large than small firms. Large firms are likely to face a 
greater  degree  of  uncertainty  in  their  outlooks  for  both  types  of  prices  –  probably 
because  of  the  direct  exposure  to  fierce  global  and  domestic  competition  in  final-
product markets. By contrast, small firms tend to expect higher general and sales 
prices through labor shortage and high input costs because of their labor intensity 
and relatively low profit margins. 
Large firms project more conservative, lower sales prices than small firms. This may 
in turn affect the sales prices of small firms through transaction relationships. As a 
result, some small firms may find it difficult to pass their rising production costs onto 
their  sales  prices, thereby  squeezing  their margins  and  profitability. This  suggests 
that  small  firms  will  need  to  make  greater  efforts  to  improve  margins  and  shift  to 
higher value-added business models. 
Because large firms often play a role as price setters, aggregating their sales price 
outlooks, especially those of processing industries whose products are close to final 
goods,  will  likely  result  in  the  true  outlook  for  general  price  inflation,  such  as  CPI 
inflation. If such large firms maintain their conservative, lower pricing behavior with 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 5. 
 respect to sales prices, the level of actual inflation in general prices may turn out to 
be  lower  than  the  level  suggested  by  the  average  of  inflation  expectations for  “all 
firms, all industries.” 
Finally, for both general and sales prices, the “Don’t have clear views” and “Don’t 
know” responses account for 20 percent-40 percent for the projection for three years 
ahead  and  30  percent-50  percent  for  that  for  five  years.  Moreover,  greater 
dispersion among the responses is observed as the projection period increases. In 
terms  of  level  of  general  price  inflation,  even  the  average  of  projections  by  small 
firms for five years (whose average is highest) is 1.9 percent. In this regard, it may 
be said that firms’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations are not yet anchored 
and that the Bank has only passed the halfway point on the path toward achieving 
the 2 percent price stability target. 
Developments in inflation expectations of households 
D. 
The Bank conducts the Opinion Survey on the General Public’s Views and Behavior with a 
sample  of  about  4,000  people  (a  little  over  half  provide  valid  responses).  The  quarterly 
survey results are currently available on a consistent base since June 2006 up to its latest 
December 2014 survey. There are two indicators related to inflation expectations: one year 
(the  outlook  for  price  levels  one  year  ahead);  and  five  years  (the  outlook  for  the  annual 
average  change  in  price  levels  over  the  next  five  years).  In  addition,  some  other  relevant 
price-related indicators that can be calculated using the survey data include the perception 
diffusion index (DI) of present price levels (the difference between perceived increase and 
perceived decrease responses compared with one year earlier) and the price rise tolerance 
DI  (the  difference  between  rather  favorable  and  rather  unfavorable  responses  to  the  price 
rise). I will explain the features obtained from these indicators and other relevant information 
derived  from  the  survey  (such  as  income,  spending,  and  employment  conditions  DIs), 
starting with the present and short-term developments and proceeding to medium- to long-
term inflation expectations. 
Attitude to the price rise (price rise tolerance) 
• 
The perception DI of present price levels appears to be inversely related to the price 
rise  tolerance  DI  (Chart  13).  Namely,  whenever  households  believe  that  present 
price levels have increased compared with one year earlier, the price rise tolerance 
DI tends to drop or the attitude to the price rise becomes negative. The price rise 
tolerance DI rose from late 2009 to early 2010, when both the actual CPI and the 
perception DI dropped during the middle of the global financial crisis. This suggests 
that  households  accepted  the  price  rise  more  favorably  or  found  price  drop  more 
unfavorably – probably not because of the price hike per se but because of growing 
concerns about recession reflected in an actual price decline.  
Comparing  two  observation  years  –  2008  and  2014  –  during  which  a  comparable 
rise occurred in CPI inflation, the price rise tolerance DI was greater in 2014 than in 
2008.  This  may  be  associated  with  better  employment  and  income  conditions  in 
2014 than in 2008. Indeed, the present income DI, the one-year-ahead income DI, 
and the employment conditions DI were all higher in 2014 than in 2008 (Chart 14).  
 Expectations for one-year inflation and relations to income and spending 
• 
The indicators for one-year inflation expectations on average remain positive – even 
in the phase of deflation. This suggests that households always believe that price 
levels one year ahead will be higher. Conversely, both the present income DI and 
one-year-ahead income DI remain negative. This suggests that households always 
consider their present income to have declined compared with one year earlier and 
that  their  income  one  year  ahead  will  decrease  compared  with  the  present.  This 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   implies  that  households  always  expect  that  their  real  income  one  year  ahead  will 
decline (Chart 15). 
Meanwhile, the present spending DI remains positive, whereas the one-year-ahead 
spending DI remains negative (Chart 15). Namely, households have increased the 
present  level  of  spending  compared  with  one  year  earlier,  but  plan  to  reduce  the 
spending level one year from now. Moreover, households tend to regard the rise in 
living  expenses  as  the  main  reason for  the  increase  in  the  current  spending  level 
when the present spending DI grows. 
Taking these features into account, it may be said that households plan to reduce spending 
one year ahead because they expect their real income to have declined by then. Generally 
speaking, with a rise in one-year-ahead inflation expectations, households tend to frontload 
their spending today and reduce their future spending to smooth the intertemporal budgetary 
constraint.  In  this  regard,  an  increase  in  the  present  spending  DI  associated  with  the 
increase in one-year-ahead inflation expectations could be understood as a sign of defensive 
action against future price hikes. 
   Present price perception and inflation expectations (one and five years) 
• 
Like one-year inflation expectations, the indicators for five-year inflation expectations 
on average remain positive. This means that households expect that price levels will 
rise over the next five years – even during a time of deflation (Chart 16).  
Among the following – (1) the perception of present inflation (based on the year-on-
year percentage price change), (2) one-year inflation expectations, and (3) five-year 
inflation expectations – the fluctuations for (1) are greatest, followed by (2). Chart 16 
reveals that the perception indicator grew sharply in 2008 compared with one- and 
five-year inflation expectations. This suggests that although households found that 
present prices had increased sharply in 2008 compared with one year earlier, they 
believed that that extreme price hike would eventually be contained. By contrast, all 
three indicators remained stable in 2014, with average values of around 4 percent-5 
percent. 
The  opinion  survey  began  a  biannual  questionnaire  about  information  sources  for 
households’  price  views  in  September  2013.  According  to  the  most  recent 
(September  2014)  survey  for  both  present  price  levels  and  five-year  inflation 
expectations,  “developments  in  prices  of  frequently-purchased  items  such  as 
foodstuffs” was chosen as the most applicable source, followed by “developments in 
gasoline prices.” Over 50 percent of all respondents regarded those two options as 
their most relevant information sources (Chart 17). 
The  indicators  for  five-year  inflation  expectations  remain  stable.  At  first  glance, 
adopting  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  and  QQE  in  2013  appear  to  have 
exerted no significant effects on inflation expectations. However, I will return to this 
issue.  
Summary of households’ inflation expectations and relation to those of firms 
E. 
Let me know sum up my observations on households’ inflation expectations and relate them 
to the expectations of firms. 
1. 
Households’ five-year inflation expectations on average appear to remain stable at 
around  4  percent  at  first  glance.  However,  the  survey  revealed  that  the  basis  for 
five-year  inflation  expectations  largely  depends  on  the  prices  of  frequently-
purchased items and gasoline – and not much from monetary policy. Thus, stable 
movements in inflation expectations do not necessarily mean that their medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations are anchored. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
 2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
 One interesting feature is that households rely more heavily on general price-related 
information and various other sources with respect to five-year inflation expectations 
compared with perceptions of present price levels. For example, they rely relatively 
more  heavily  on  “media  reports  on  individual  prices  of  goods  and  services  and 
prices in general” and “developments in foreign exchange rates” (Chart 17). 
In addition, the indicators for one- and five-year inflation expectations remain largely 
unchanged before and after adopting the 2 percent price stability target and QQE. It 
might appear at first glance that the effects of the monetary policy have been limited. 
However,  the  survey  responses  are  known  to  have  reporting  biases:  outliers  with 
extreme numbers; downward rigidity or the tendency to avoid negative numbers – 
even  when  respondents  expect  deflation;  and  many  responses  with  integers, 
especially  multiples  of  five.  After  taking  these  biases  into  account,  the  modified 
distribution  of  one-  and  five-year  inflation  expectations  has  displayed  notable 
changes since 2013. Namely, the skew to the deflationary side has diminished for 
both inflation expectations. The right tail to the inflationary side for five-year inflation 
expectations has contracted. As a result, the spike at around 2 percent has become 
sharper  for  both  inflation  expectations,  which  shows  that  households’  inflation 
expectations  concentrated  at  around  2  percent  (Chart  18).  This  may  suggest  that 
the  change  in  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  in  2013  has  positively  affected 
households’ inflation expectations, leading to a greater concentration of responses 
to about 2 percent.1 
Households’  inflation  expectations  are  higher  than  those  of  firms,  which  suggests 
the presence of an upward bias. This may be because of two possible reasons. One 
is  that  households  and  firms  envisage  different  prices  when  responding  to  the 
survey questionnaire. Households are asked to respond to “overall prices of goods 
and  services  the  respondents  purchase,”  whereas  firms  are  asked  to  respond  to 
general  prices  measured  by  the  CPI.  The  reason  households  are  asked  in  this 
manner is that some respondents are unfamiliar with the CPI, which makes it difficult 
to form an outlook based upon it. 
The other possible reason for the upward bias is that households tend to perceive 
and  expect  higher  price  levels  as  a  corollary  of  long-standing  sluggish  income 
growth,  resulting  in  an  anticipated  tightening  of  household  budgets.  By  contrast, 
firms  tend  to  form  conservative  inflation  expectations  based  on  the  surrounding 
economic environment and information obtained from transactions with other firms. 
Given that firms appear to weigh more on macro information and that some of them 
perceive price developments based not only on input prices but also on sales prices, 
their  inflation  expectations  as  a  whole  are  more  likely  to  be  lower  than  those  of 
households and more closely approximate the rate of actual CPI inflation. 
The  most  important  finding  is  that  households  expect  that  prices  will  have  risen  one  year 
ahead and will increase over the next five years; such an expected price rise is regarded as 
rather  unfavorable  because  it  is  associated  with  an  expected  decline  in  their  future  real 
income.  Partly  reflecting  such  limited  tolerance  for  price  rises  by  households,  large  firms 
(manufacturing  and  nonmanufacturing) may  tend  to  project a  relatively  conservative,  lower 
increase in both general prices and sales prices than small firms. 
Households’ poor tolerance for price rises reflects the perception that their present income 
level has declined compared with one year earlier and also that their income level one year 
ahead  will  not  increase  much.  To  achieve  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  with  a 
sustainable increase in private spending, it is necessary for price rises to be widely accepted 
                                                
1  See Shunsaku Nishiguchi, Jouchi Nakajima, and Kei Imakubo, “Disagreement in Households’ Inflation 
Expectations and Its Evolution,” Bank of Japan Review Series 2014-E-1, March 2014. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  by households. This requires an improvement in current employment and income conditions 
as well as an increase in expectations of future income growth. In this respect, I will closely 
monitor favorable developments in income (nominal and real) projected for fiscal 2015 and 
beyond as important steps toward achieving the price stability target. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
The Bank adopted the 2 percent price stability target for the following reasons: (1) the need 
to maintain a sufficient buffer for inflation owing to the upward-bias problems inherent in CPI 
statistics; (2) the need to leave sufficient room for the conduct of flexible monetary policy by 
achieving a certain level of inflation in recessionary phases; and (3) the need to set a target 
of  around  2  percent  as  a  global  standard  in  terms  of  a  price  stability  target  to  avoid 
reemergence  of  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen.  In  addition,  the  2  percent  target  is 
essential  to  realize  normal  economic  conditions,  in  which  positive  rates  of  nominal  GDP 
growth occur on a sustainable basis. 
However,  households  tend  to  regard  price  level  rises  as  unfavorable.  It  is  not  easy  to 
promote their understanding of the Bank’s price stability target – especially since real income 
dropped sharply in fiscal 2014. Nonetheless, income (nominal and real) will likely rise in fiscal 
2015. Therefore, it is essential for the Bank to boost the effectiveness of its communication 
strategy by explaining more clearly why it aims to achieve the 2 percent target and how this 
will improve people’s lives in the medium to long term. I will continue making further efforts in 
this regard. 
In  addition,  even  though  the  Bank’s  economic  growth  outlook  for  2014  has  been  revised 
sharply downward, it is clear that Japan’s economy is currently in a far better shape than it 
was before the introduction of QQE. A virtuous cycle from income to spending, which is the 
driving force of the economy, is being maintained in the household and corporate sectors. 
Thus, it is crucial for the Bank to continue to support the current recovery process.  
I  sincerely  hope  that  all  entities  will  take  full  advantage  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the 
highly  accommodative  financial  environment  generated  by  QQE  to  expand  their  efforts 
toward enhancing innovation and productivity – in concert with the economic growth strategy 
and structural reforms implemented by the government. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    15 
     16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  18 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  20 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  22 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23 
  24 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
  26 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 27 
  28 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 29 
  30 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 31 
  32 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 33 
  34 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 35 
  36 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 37 
