  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Frankfurt am Main, 22 January 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference.  Let  me  wish  you  all  a  Happy  New  Year.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity to welcome Lithuania as the nineteenth country to adopt the euro as its currency. 
Accordingly,  Mr  Vasiliauskas,  the  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Lietuvos  bankas,  became  a 
member of the Governing Council on 1 January 2015. The accession of Lithuania to the euro 
area on 1 January 2015 triggered a system under which NCB governors take turns holding 
voting rights on the Governing Council. The details on this rotation system are available on 
the ECB’s website. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  conducted  a  thorough 
reassessment of the outlook for price developments and of the monetary stimulus achieved. 
As a result, the Governing Council took the following decisions: 
First,  it  decided  to  launch  an  expanded  asset  purchase  programme,  encompassing  the 
existing  purchase  programmes  for  asset-backed  securities  and  covered  bonds.  Under  this 
expanded  programme,  the  combined  monthly  purchases  of  public  and  private  sector 
securities will amount to €60 billion. They are intended to be carried out until end-September 
2016 and will in any case be conducted until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of 
inflation which is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% 
over  the  medium  term.  In  March  2015  the  Eurosystem  will  start  to  purchase  euro-
denominated  investment-grade  securities  issued  by  euro  area  governments  and  agencies 
and  European  institutions  in  the  secondary  market.  The  purchases  of  securities  issued  by 
euro area governments and agencies will be based on the Eurosystem NCBs’ shares in the 
ECB’s capital key. Some additional eligibility criteria will be applied in the case of countries 
under an EU/IMF adjustment programme. 
Second, the Governing Council decided to change the pricing of the six remaining targeted 
longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs). Accordingly, the interest rate applicable to 
future  TLTRO  operations  will  be  equal  to  the  rate  on  the  Eurosystem’s  main  refinancing 
operations  prevailing  at  the  time  when  each  TLTRO  is  conducted,  thereby  removing  the 
10 basis point spread over the MRO rate that applied to the first two TLTROs. 
Third,  in  line  with  our  forward  guidance,  we  decided  to  keep  the  key  ECB  interest  rates 
unchanged. 
As regards the additional asset purchases, the Governing Council retains control over all the 
design  features  of  the  programme  and  the  ECB  will  coordinate  the  purchases,  thereby 
safeguarding the singleness of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy. The Eurosystem will make 
use of decentralised implementation to mobilise its resources. With regard to the sharing of 
hypothetical losses, the Governing Council decided that purchases of securities of European 
institutions (which will be 12% of the additional asset purchases, and which will be purchased 
by NCBs) will be subject to loss sharing. The rest of the NCBs’ additional asset purchases 
will not be subject to loss sharing. The ECB will hold 8% of the additional asset purchases. 
This  implies  that  20%  of  the additional  asset  purchases  will  be  subject  to  a  regime  of risk 
sharing. 
Separate  press  releases  with  more  detailed  information  on  the  expanded  asset  purchase 
programme and the pricing of the TLTROs will be published this afternoon at 3.30 p.m. 
Today’s  monetary  policy  decision  on  additional  asset  purchases  was  taken to  counter  two 
unfavourable  developments.  First,  inflation  dynamics  have  continued  to  be  weaker  than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  expected. While the sharp fall in oil prices over recent months remains the dominant factor 
driving current headline inflation, the potential for second-round effects on wage and price-
setting  has  increased  and  could  adversely  affect  medium-term  price  developments.  This 
assessment  is  underpinned  by  a  further  fall  in  market-based  measures  of  inflation 
expectations over all horizons and the fact that most indicators of actual or expected inflation 
stand at, or close to, their historical lows. At the same time, economic slack in the euro area 
remains  sizeable  and  money  and  credit  developments  continue  to  be  subdued.  Second, 
while  the  monetary  policy  measures  adopted  between  June  and  September  last  year 
resulted in a material improvement in terms of financial market prices, this was not the case 
for  the  quantitative  results.  As  a  consequence,  the  prevailing  degree  of  monetary 
accommodation was insufficient to adequately address heightened risks of too prolonged a 
period  of  low  inflation.  Thus,  today  the  adoption  of  further  balance  sheet  measures  has 
become  warranted  to  achieve  our  price  stability  objective,  given  that  the  key  ECB  interest 
rates have reached their lower bound. 
Looking ahead, today’s measures will decisively underpin the firm anchoring of medium to 
long-term inflation expectations. The sizeable increase in our balance sheet will further ease 
the monetary policy stance. In particular, financing conditions for firms and households in the 
euro  area  will  continue  to  improve.  Moreover,  today’s  decisions  will  support  our  forward 
guidance on the key ECB interest rates and reinforce the fact that there are significant and 
increasing  differences  in  the  monetary  policy  cycle  between  major  advanced  economies. 
Taken  together,  these  factors  should  strengthen  demand,  increase  capacity  utilisation  and 
support money and credit growth, and thereby contribute to a return of inflation rates towards 
2%. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP in the euro area rose by 0.2%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2014. The 
latest data and survey evidence point to continued moderate growth at the turn of the year. 
Looking ahead, recent declines in oil prices have strengthened the basis for the economic 
recovery  to  gain  momentum.  Lower  oil  prices  should  support  households’  real  disposable 
income and corporate profitability. Domestic demand should also be further supported by our 
monetary  policy  measures,  the  ongoing  improvements  in  financial  conditions  and  the 
progress  made  in  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Furthermore,  demand  for 
exports should benefit from the global recovery. However, the euro area recovery is likely to 
continue  to  be  dampened  by  high  unemployment,  sizeable  unutilised  capacity,  and  the 
necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and private sectors. 
The risks surrounding the economic outlook for the euro area remain on the downside, but 
should have diminished after today’s monetary policy decisions and the continued fall in oil 
prices over recent weeks. 
According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP inflation was –0.2% in December 2014, after 
0.3% in November. This decline mainly reflects a sharp fall in energy price inflation and, to a 
lesser extent, a decline in the annual rate of change in food prices. On the basis of current 
information and prevailing futures prices for oil, annual HICP inflation is expected to remain 
very  low  or  negative  in  the  months  ahead.  Such  low  inflation  rates  are  unavoidable  in  the 
short  term,  given  the  recent  very  sharp  fall  in  oil  prices  and  assuming  that  no  significant 
correction  will  take  place  in  the  next  few  months.  Supported  by  our  monetary  policy 
measures, the expected recovery in demand and the assumption of a gradual increase in oil 
prices  in  the  period  ahead,  inflation rates  are  expected  to  increase gradually  later  in  2015 
and in 2016. 
The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price 
developments  over  the  medium  term.  In  this  context,  we  will  focus  in  particular  on 
geopolitical  developments,  exchange  rate  and  energy  price  developments,  and  the  pass-
through of our monetary policy measures. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  recent  data  indicate  a  pick-up  in  underlying  growth  in 
broad money (M3), although it remains at low levels. The annual growth rate of M3 increased 
to  3.1%  in  November  2014,  up from  2.5%  in October  and  a trough  of 0.8%  in  April  2014. 
Annual  growth  in  M3  continues  to  be  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the 
narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 6.9% in November. 
The annual rate of change of loans to non-financial corporations (adjusted for loan sales and 
securitisation)  remained  weak  at  –1.3%  in  November  2014,  compared  with  –1.6%  in 
October, while continuing its gradual recovery from a trough of –3.2% in February 2014. On 
average  over  recent  months,  net  redemptions  have  moderated  from  the  historically  high 
levels recorded a year ago and net lending flows turned slightly positive in November. In this 
respect,  the  January  2015  bank  lending  survey  indicates  a  further  net  easing  of  credit 
standards in the fourth quarter of 2014, with cross-country disparities decreasing in parallel 
with an increase in net demand for loans across all loan categories. Banks expect that these 
dynamics will continue in early 2015. Despite these improvements, lending to non-financial 
corporations remains weak and continues to reflect the lagged relationship with the business 
cycle,  credit  risk,  credit  supply  factors  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-
financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation) was 0.7% in November, after 0.6% in October. Our monetary 
policy measures should support a further improvement in credit flows. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis confirmed the need for further monetary policy accommodation. 
All our monetary policy measures should provide support to the euro area recovery and bring 
inflation rates closer to levels below, but close to, 2%. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative  stance  contributes  to  supporting  economic  activity.  However,  in  order  to 
increase  investment  activity,  boost  job  creation  and  raise  productivity  growth,  other  policy 
areas need to contribute decisively. In particular, the determined implementation of product 
and  labour  market  reforms  as  well  as  actions  to  improve  the  business  environment  for 
firms  needs to gain  momentum  in  several  countries. It  is  crucial  that  structural  reforms  be 
implemented  swiftly,  credibly  and  effectively  as  this  will  not  only  increase  the  future 
sustainable growth of the euro area, but will also raise expectations of higher incomes and 
encourage  firms  to  increase  investment  today  and  bring  forward  the  economic  recovery. 
Fiscal policies should support the economic recovery, while ensuring debt sustainability in 
compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact, which remains the anchor for confidence. All 
countries  should  use  the  available  scope  for  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal 
policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
