  Christian Noyer: Interview in Handelsblatt – “A government bond buying 
programme can only be implemented if the majority of bonds continue to 
be held by private investors” 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, in Handelsblatt, conducted by 
Mr Thomas Hanke and Mr Daniel Schafer, published 13 January 2015. 
 The  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France  discusses  the  impact  of  the  forthcoming  Greek 
elections  on  the  ECB’s  government  bond  buying  programme,  the  terrorist  attacks  and  the 
overly slow rate of reforms in France. 
This interview with Christian Noyer, member of the Governing Council of the ECB, took place 
two days after the terrorist attack on the newspaper Charlie Hebdo. 
Mr Noyer, the French people’s reactions to the terrorist attacks have impressed all of 
us Europeans. What could be the political and economic consequences of this new 
threat? 
Christian Noyer 
This  was  clearly  seen  as  an  attack  on  freedom.  The  strong  reactions  remind  all  of  us, 
European citizens, that we have a long-term project for Europe based on common values. 
These common values are much more important than the difficulties we sometimes have to 
agree on regarding the proper technical way to achieve this or that. Of course at the Banque 
de France we are all the more impressed by the reactions and the demonstrations since we 
suffered a loss ourselves … 
… Bernard Maris, the economist and journalist, was one of your board members. 
C.N. 
Yes, it was a horrible shock for us. Bernard Maris was a man of culture and tolerance, a free 
spirit and he was murdered because of his ideas. It is a huge loss for all of us.  
Do you see any economic consequences from these attacks? 
C.N. 
I do not think they will have significant economic consequences. 
Before the attacks everybody was looking towards Greece. Could the elections of the 
25th trigger a new round of crises in the euro area? 
C.N. 
In  my  view  the  risks  of  a  crisis  for  the  euro  area  are  much  lower  than  a  few  years  ago. 
Greece has clearly taken a path of reforms and restoration of its competitiveness. It is in the 
interest  of  Greece  to  continue  following  that  path  and  to  benefit  from  an  accelerated 
improvement  in  their  recovery.  The  second  point  is  that  we  have  built  many  significant 
defences against the risk of crisis and destabilisation in Europe. 
What is the scope for a more lenient policy in Greece or even for debt restructuring? 
C.N. 
We all know that the debt level of Greece is very high. The programme of the Troika foresaw 
a decrease in the debt ratio in the years to come. But it is really for the governments to see 
whether  these  assumptions  remain  likely.  Any  debt  restructuring  is  always  very  costly  in 
terms  of  confidence.  It  is  really  something  that  you  want  to  only  use  as  a  last  resort 
instrument and do so in the friendliest possible way with lenders. We could wonder whether 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the repayment schedule is appropriate, but this is really a matter for negotiations between 
the lenders and the borrowers. 
Given that debt levels are above 170 per cent GDP, isn’t debt restructuring inevitable? 
C.N. 
It very much depends on the assumptions on Greek growth in the future, which in turn will be 
dependent on the pace of Greek reforms and the growth in the euro area as a whole. 
Is  it  even  possible  for  the  ECB  to  decide  on  further  monetary  policy  easing  with  a 
possible bond purchase programme just a few days before the Greek election? 
C.N. 
Nothing has been decided yet at the ECB but we will have to take these uncertainties into 
account. But the Greek bond market is extremely small and so the question maybe difficult in 
theory but in practice it doesn’t really apply.  
Just to make it clear, the negotiations with Greece won’t block the ECB, will they? 
C.N. 
No, they won’t. The problem of Greece is rather minor compared to the question of whether 
or  not  and  when  to  step  in  with  action  on  further  market  segments  in  our  unconventional 
monetary policy. 
So that means Greece would not even need to be included in the government bond 
buying programme? 
C.N. 
Don’t  jump  the  gun!  The  first  question  for  the  Governing  Council  is:  should  we  decide  to 
launch  it?  My  personal  reading  is  that  if  we  were  to  decide  to  have  a  government  bond 
buying programme, we should have a cap in terms of the percentage of what we would be 
buying, so that most of the financing will continue to rely on the private market. 
That would mean a relative limit of outstanding debt of each country? 
C.N. 
Yes, in my view, such a programme can be launched only if a majority of the debt were to 
continue to be held by private investors. 
So it should not be an absolute figure like 500bn? 
C.N. 
Personally I do not put too much trust in the absolute figures regarding caps. For me there is 
only one objective: to maintain price stability. That means we both need to have the credible 
prospect of returning to our objective of close to but lower than 2 per cent inflation, and we 
must  ensure  that  expectations  are  not  disanchored.  If,  thanks  to  the  fall  in  the  oil  price, 
inflation, which was already very low, were to remain too low for too long, we would need to 
act to continue to ensure the credibility of our goal. 
There doesn’t seem to be a consensual view in the Governing Council? 
C.N. 
On all new measures, there has always been a lot of prior discussion, after which we have 
always managed to make a decision. The debate is not only about whether we should do it at 
all but also about when we should do it. Some believe that should have started buying bonds 
months  ago,  others  think  that  we  should  do  it  maybe  later  or  that  we  should  do  it 
straightaway. There are not two opposing camps; it is much more complex than that. And 
many  of  us  have  held  certain  views  but  have  changed  their  minds  over  time,  wondering 
whether quantitative easing was the only way to maintain price stability. Whatever we do, it 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  must  be  a  common  Eurosystem  programme,  in  which  all  national  central  banks  take  part, 
with clear rules and coordinated by the Governing Council. No one should be excluded, no 
one should be allowed to purchase more than others. 
We have had negative inflation figures last week. Isn’t that an argument to start now? 
C.N. 
This  is  not  about  negative  inflation  figures  at  a  point  in  time,  but  rather  about  the  risk  of 
having either negative of very low inflation for a too long period of time. Expectations could 
then change, resulting in less consumption and less investment. The credibility of the ability 
of the ECB to keep price stability must not be jeopardised. 
Should the ECB limit its purchases to highly-rated bonds? 
C.N. 
It is too early to answer your question. But if we were to step in, we would have to be very 
attentive not to disturb the way the market values the various risks and spreads. One way to 
avoid this would be not to buy too many bonds in the same market segment. 
Has the French government done enough do reduce the fiscal deficit and to improve 
the conditions for growth? 
C.N. 
Social contributions must be reduced, which is currently being achieved through the Social 
Responsibility  Pact.  The  “Macron  Act”,  which  allows  working  on  Sundays,  for  example,  is 
certainly  a  positive  step.  However  we  have  not  done  enough  on  the  labour  market,  and  I 
hope that the other reforms will see the light. We need a more flexible minimum wage and 
more  room  for  negotiated  arrangements  in  firms  and  branches,  like  in  Germany.  Public 
finances  will  only  be  sustainable  and  credible  if  the  reduction  in  the  structural  deficit 
continues,  in  particular  through  a  downsizing  of  the  public  sector.  Structural  reforms  must 
gain  momentum  in  order  to  support  growth.  Interest  rates  will  eventually  rise  and  the 
governments  that  have  not  implemented  the  necessary  reforms  will  find  themselves  in  a 
difficult situation. 
Your second term as Governor is coming to the end. What were the highlights? 
C.N. 
Naturally, the financial crisis. The most important event has been the creation of the Banking 
Union. It is the most significant step since towards a united Europe and is exactly in the spirit 
of how the founding fathers of Europe wanted the EU to evolve since the introduction of the 
euro. The role of the Governor of the BdF like that of the President of the Bundesbank will 
increasingly  be  that  of  an  important  player  on  the  European  field,  and  much  less  at  the 
national level.  
In Germany, we tend to believe that the role of national central banks is shrinking. 
C.N. 
At  the  Banque  de  France,  some  of  my  colleagues  thought  that  one  day  the  ECB  could 
replace us. I told them that it would not happen as we are in a federal system with a relatively 
small centre. Within the Governing Council we take common decisions but most of the work 
is done by the national central banks. But from now on we will have to work differently, for 
example, instead of looking for the best payment system for France, we must look for the 
best  payment  system  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  In  this  respect,  our  best  partner  has 
mostly been the Bundesbank. 
But the relationship seems to have become more distant? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  C.N. 
No,  certainly  not.  The  Bundesbank  remains  our  number  one  partner.  We  may  start  with 
different approaches on some of the issues in the Governing Council but in the vast majority 
of cases we have the same responses. It is with the Bundesbank that we have developed 
most of the projects for the euro area, with which we organise conferences, and with which 
we cooperate in the international field. This cooperation is beneficial for both of us. 
Is it sad to leave at a time when central banks have become such important players? 
C.N. 
It is not good that we are seen as the only game in town. We cannot replace governments, 
simply because they are not seen to be acting quickly enough. We have created in the euro 
area  many  new  institutions  and  new  rules.  They  must  now  be  used.  It  is  up  to  the 
parliaments and governments to decide the reforms to be made, but they have to take their 
responsibilities. 
Mr Noyer, thank you for this interview. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
