  Peter Praet: Economic developments in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the FT Debt Capital Markets Outlook Conference, London, 12 February 2015. 
I would like to thank John Hutchinson for his contribution to this speech. 
 Summary 
Given the “gap” between inflation projections and our policy objective, we decided to launch 
an expanded asset purchase programme. We had to act because the inflation outlook had 
deteriorated, while our previous measures had not worked as effectively as we expected. In 
this environment our decision was fully consistent with our reaction function, which we had 
communicated last year, and it was only natural for markets to anticipate our move. Indeed 
faced  with  an  increasing  risk  of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation,  we  intensified  our 
stimulus  to  a  degree  necessary  to  bring  inflation  closer  to  2%.  We  did  it  in  line  with  our 
mandate and price stability objective. And I have no doubt that the measures we took will 
bring the intended effects. 
*** 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much to the Financial Times for inviting me to open this conference today. 
As you know, the ECB Governing Council last month decided to launch an expanded asset 
purchase programme to bring inflation back to levels closer to our aim of below but close to 
2% over the medium term. What I would like to talk to you about this morning is the context 
in which we took that decision and how we are calibrating our policy response. 
The context for our recent decisions 
A  stylised  way  of  thinking  about  why  we  introduced  our  recent  measures  is  to  use  the 
concept of the “inflation gap”. This gap is the difference between our aim of an inflation rate 
below but close to 2% over the medium-term and our projection for inflation over that same 
horizon, based on our current monetary policy stance and the information on the state and 
evolution of the economy that we have access to today. If the inflation gap widens, and the 
monetary  policy  stance  remains  unchanged,  it follows  that  there  is  a  “missing  stimulus”  to 
which we may need to respond. 
At  its meeting  on  22  January,  the Governing  Council  assessed  that  two factors  had  come 
together  which  had  led  to  a  widening  of  this  “inflation  gap”  and  had  hence  rendered  our 
stimulus insufficient. 
The first was the fact that the credit easing package we decided in June-October 2014 had 
delivered  less  stimulus  and  thus  less  support  to  inflation  than  initially  expected.  And  the 
second  was  the  fact  that,  in  parallel  and  independent  of  the  monetary  policy  stance,  the 
inflation outlook for the euro area had further deteriorated towards the end of the year. This 
contributed to a further widening the inflation gap that our measures needed to close. 
Let me explain each point in some more detail. 
The initial impact of credit easing 
For  some time  inflation dynamics  in  the  euro  area  have  been  surprising  on  the  downside, 
and  by  June  last  year  our  inflation  projections  were  suggesting  that  the  risk  of  us  not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  feedback 
achieving  our  mandate  over  the  medium  term  was  increasing.  At  that  time  we  foresaw 
annual HICP inflation at 0.7% in 2014, 1.1% in 2015 and 1.4% in 2016. 
While  our  policy  stance  was  undeniably  very  accommodative,  our  assessment  was  that  it 
was not being transmitted to credit conditions faced by the real economy in large parts of the 
euro area, and that this in turn was hindering the economic recovery in the euro area as a 
whole.  What  we  observed  was  a 
loop  between  weak  macroeconomic 
developments and weak demand for and supply of credit. The effect was downward pressure 
on our medium-term inflation outlook. 
Our response was the credit easing package we introduced between June and October last 
year. This package was designed to achieve two types of transmission effects. The first was 
a qualitative effect – to strengthen the pass-through per euro of liquidity injected to private 
sector  borrowing  costs.  The  second  was  a  quantitative  effect  –  to  generate  volumes  of 
liquidity sufficient to activate portfolio rebalancing channels. 
While the effects of such a package of course take time to materialise, our view was that by 
the  beginning  of  this  year  we  should  be  in  a  position  to  make  an  initial  assessment  of 
whether  it  was  working  as  intended.  And  when  the  Governing  Council  evaluated  the 
effectiveness  of  the  credit  easing  measures,  our  conclusion  was  that  the  pass-through 
effects of the package were satisfactory, but the quantity side was below expectations. 
In terms of pass-through, our measures now seem to be working their way through markets 
and  the  economy.  Bank  lending  rates  to  non-financial  corporations  (NFCs)  have  been 
trending  downwards  since  the  third  quarter  of  last  year.  By  the  end  of  last  year,  the 
composite  cost  of  borrowing  indicators  in  Italy  and  Spain  had  declined  by  approximately 
70 basis points and 50 basis points, respectively, when compared to the middle of the year. 
This should be seen in a context where lending rates in these countries had not been very 
responsive to monetary policy actions for at least three years. 
These  developments  coincided  with  the  first  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operation 
(TLTRO)  and  the  announcement  of  the  asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme 
(ABSPP) and covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3). I think it is therefore fair to say 
that these measures have had a positive effect on compressing spreads. 
In addition, on average net redemptions of loans to NFCs have moderated, with net lending 
turning slightly positive in November. Results from the January 2015 Bank Lending Survey 
have also been encouraging and indicate a further net easing of credit standards across all 
loan  categories  in  the  final  quarter  of  last  year.  And  we  are  seeing  that  banks  that 
participated in last year’s two TLTROs have been reducing loans by less than in the previous 
year,  and  by  less  than  non-participating  banks,  which  have  not  altered  their  lending 
behaviour to the same extent. 
On  the  quantity  side,  the  less  favourable  assessment  is  a  reflection  of  the  lower  than 
expected outturns for the TLTRO and a slower contribution from the outright purchases. This 
has meant weaker portfolio rebalancing effects than we foresaw in the original calibration of 
the package. For example, TLTRO borrowings enable banks to pay down market debt, thus 
passing on cash to bank bond investors and encouraging them to rebalance their portfolios 
and  find  alternative  investment  opportunities.  A  lower  uptake  in  the  TLTRO  therefore 
naturally weakens the strength of these effects. 
The inference was thus clear: while our measures had been effective in certain ways, relative 
to  what  we  envisaged  when  we  adopted  our  June-October  package,  they  had  not  been 
sufficient. They had not provided the degree of policy support to the inflation trajectory that 
we saw as necessary to close the inflation gap. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The deteriorating inflation situation 
In  parallel,  the  inflation  gap  had  widened  as  the  inflation  outlook  had  materially  worsened 
towards  the  end  of  last  year.  When  we  took  the  decision  in  January  most  indicators  of 
realised and expected inflation in the euro area stood at, or close to, their historical lows. 
While the main driver of inflation developments in the months before was the sharp fall of 
global  oil  prices, the  conditions  we  faced made  this  shock  different from  a  classic  positive 
supply  shock,  and  we  could  not  afford  to  “look  through”  the  effects  on  inflation.  Indeed, 
several factors suggested that the present situation was more worrying than past episodes of 
oil-induced  disinflation,  particularly  the  most  recent  case  in  2009  following  the  collapse  of 
Lehman brothers. 
First, the persistence of low inflation across a range of statistical metrics was higher than in 
2009. This reflects the fact that, at that time, disinflation was very abrupt with inflation rates 
expected to quickly revert back into positive territory. The current episode is characterised by 
a prolonged downward inflation trend, and we expect inflation to remain in negative territory 
until latter stages of this year. 
Second,  since  last  summer  market  measures  of  inflation  expectations  have  become  more 
sensitive  to  realised  inflation,  even  at  maturities  and  at  horizons  that  we  would  normally 
expect to be more resilient. This is in stark contrast with 2009, where inflation expectations 
hardly moved, even over the shorter end of the inflation forward curve. 
Finally, measures of core inflation are less sticky today compared to 2009, which implies a 
higher  risk  of  second  round  effects  materialising  from  low  realised  inflation  and  falling 
inflation expectations. This in turn creates a higher likelihood that, absent policy action, low 
inflation will become entrenched and will not bounce back when oil prices normalise. 
The importance of fulfilling the mandate 
In sum, what we saw was a real risk of not achieving our aim of an inflation rate of below but 
close to 2% over the medium-term. And let me stress that there is no room for complacency 
when inflation stays too low for too long. There are real costs to falling short of our objective. 
Those costs are both institutional and economic. 
First, in institutional terms, it is important to remember the very unique environment in which 
we  operate  in  the  euro  area.  It  involves  multiple  actors  in  multiple  countries,  and  optimal 
economic  outcomes  can  only  be  achieved  if  each  of  those  actors  follows  the  rules  in  its 
domain, thereby ensuring a consistent set of policies at the aggregate level. This is why, for 
example,  we  constantly  stress  the  importance  of  countries  respecting  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact rules. 
However,  if  we  were  to  miss  our  mandate  as  soon  as  it  became  difficult  to  achieve,  how 
would it affect the incentives of others in the euro area to fulfil their own mandates? Could we 
still  expect  others  to  stick  to their  commitments –  such  as  implementing  structural  reforms 
and fiscal consolidation – in difficult times? And perhaps even more importantly, would our 
credibility be preserved if we are given a narrow mandate but cannot deliver it? 
Second, in economic terms, a too prolonged period of low inflation can negatively affect both 
consumption  and  investment.  Certainly,  an  oil  price  shock  improves  the  terms  of  trade, 
increases  households’  real  disposable  income  and  reduces  the  input  costs  for  firms,  thus 
boosting aggregate demand. But if inflation expectations become de-anchored and second 
round effects set in, then the sign of the effect can change. What is initially a positive supply 
shock can morph into a negative demand shock. 
This is first of all because at the zero lower bound falling inflation implies rising real interest 
rates,  causing  households  to  postpone  consumption  and  firms  to  delay  investment,  which 
can then feedback into still lower inflation. In fact, when we took our decision expected real 
rates had risen by almost half a percentage point in the previous few months alone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  These effects are then amplified in the presence of high levels of debt – as we see in the 
euro area today. The reason is that if second round effects take hold, the debt burden in real 
terms increases. The result is that a higher proportion of firms’ and households’ income has 
to be diverted to debt service, eroding the positive term-of-trade gain arising from lower oil 
prices. And this may have negative implications for aggregate demand due to the different 
propensities to consume and invest of borrowers and lenders. 
What  we  are  concerned  about  here  is  of  course  not  the  extreme  type  of  debt-deflation 
scenario that Irving Fisher had in mind when studying the experience of the 1930s. We are 
rather  concerned  about attrition:  that the  difficult  process  of  recovering from the  crisis  and 
working through the debt overhang in the euro area becomes even more complicated and 
protracted. 
Finally, it is important to remember that a too prolonged period of low inflation is not only a 
cause of demand weakness, but also a symptom of it – as is evidenced in the decline in core 
measures  of  inflation.  The  latter  reflects  underutilised  resources,  which  if  persistent  can 
produce  hysteresis,  scarring  effects  on  the  unemployed  and  underinvestment.  This  in  turn 
can  permanently  lower  potential  growth,  which  is  also  inimical  to  working  through  a  debt 
overhang. 
Calibrating our response 
In  this  context,  with  the  risks  of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation  materialising,  the 
Governing  Council  saw  a  clear  case  for  scaling  up  our  monetary  stimulus  sufficient  to 
respond to it. In fact, nearly all Governing Council members agreed that in the situation we 
faced, if there were still a margin for further interest rate cuts, we would have used it. 
The question was however more complex: how to act when rates reach the lower bound in a 
monetary  union  like  the  euro  area.  At  this  point,  is  moving  from  interest  rates  to  asset 
purchases as the main instrument of monetary policy simply a linear progression? Or does 
the specific institutional makeup of the euro area mean that there are non-linearities when 
the lower bound is reached, which in turn make large scale asset purchases of private and 
sovereign paper an exceptional tool? 
My own view is that when the central bank is in danger of missing its mandate, and it has a 
tool  at  its  disposal  that  is  both  legal  and  effective,  it  has  to  use  it.  Indeed,  the  Governing 
Council is unanimous that the asset purchase programme is a monetary policy tool in a legal 
sense.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  the  design  of  an  asset  purchase  programme 
including  sovereign  bonds  has  to  reflect  the  specificities  of  the  euro  area  institutional 
framework  with  a  single  monetary  policy  and  many  fiscal  authorities.  And  the  Governing 
Council decision reflects these considerations. 
We have taken a significant monetary policy step, showing that we have the capacity and 
determination to deliver our price stability mandate, and that we act in full independence. But 
we have also acknowledged, through the loss sharing arrangement, the reality that the euro 
area is not a fiscal union and it is for politicians, not central bankers, to decide if and when it 
will become one. 
Importantly, 
the 
communication  on  our  reaction  function  that  we  introduced  last  year  to  help  observers 
understand  our  strategy  in  an  environment  of  heightened  uncertainty.  In  a  speech  in  April 
2014 President Draghi laid out three contingencies that would warrant further policy action by 
the ECB. And as each of those contingencies materialised, we responded as we indicated 
we would. 
In  particular,  we  communicated  explicitly  that  should  we  enter  our  “third  contingency”  –  a 
worsening  of  the  medium-term  outlook  for  inflation  and/or  a  loosening  in  the  anchoring  of 
inflation  expectations  –  we  would  deploy  a  broad-based  asset  purchase  programme.  It  is 
the  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  was  also 
line  with 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  therefore no surprise that market participants, seeing much the same economic and financial 
data as we do, have largely anticipated this move. 
It is important to keep this in mind as it helps clarify some misconceptions about what drives 
the Governing Council’s decisions. Long-term nominal interest rates have declined by around 
100 bps since the middle of last year precisely because we specified our reaction function 
and markets understood it. Therefore, the argument that asset purchases are unnecessary 
because  market  interest  rates  have  already  come  down,  or  that  the  ECB  is  “following” 
markets, misses the direction of causality. 
The transmission of asset purchases to the real economy 
How  does  the  asset  purchase  programme  add  extra  monetary  stimulus  to  the  euro  area 
economy? It does so along five dimensions. 
The first is the overall size of our interventions, which will be substantial. The second is the 
pace,  which  will  accelerate  to  €60  billion  per  month.  The  third  is  the  composition  of 
purchases, which will include securities issued by euro area sovereigns and EU institutions. 
The fourth is the maturity, which extends from 2 to 30 years. And the fifth dimension is the 
horizon  of  our  new  measures,  which  will  last  until  end-September  2016  or  until  we  see  a 
sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  our  aim  of  achieving  inflation 
rates close to 2% over the medium term. 
This  combination  of features  will  provide  for full  control  over the  scale  and  intensity  of the 
monetary stimulus. And while it will work through several transmission channels, we expect it 
to  be  particularly  powerful  in  terms  of  portfolio  rebalancing  effects.  Put  simply,  the 
displacement of investors’ portfolios will be larger, faster and take place across more market 
segments.  This  should  also  help  reduce  market  segmentation  arising  from  excess  risk 
aversion,  improve  confidence  and  lead  to  a  generalised  easing  of  financing  conditions  for 
euro area firms and households. 
While  such  effects  have  been  extensively  studied  in  other  jurisdictions  where  large-scale 
asset  purchases  were  introduced,  the  way  in  which  they  work  may  differ  in  the  euro  area 
compared with other regions given our specific financial structure – namely the prevalence of 
bank-based  over  market-based 
important 
Indeed, 
transmission channel for our new measures will be via banks. 
Banks  may  tend  to  follow  a  pecking  order  strategy  in  their  response  to  large-scale  asset 
purchases. In the first instance, those that sell their securities to the central bank, and thus 
have an excess reserve position, may react by paying down market debt. This would create 
scarcity in bond markets, thus inducing a portfolio rebalancing effect and leading in turn to a 
compression of yields. 
When  this  liability  management  reaches  its  limit,  we  would  then  expect  that  those  more 
favourable market funding conditions to translate into lower lending rates for borrowers in the 
real economy – which is a key aim of our measures. This should be aided by the effect of 
portfolio rebalancing on the returns on securities and its implication for banks’ decisions to 
grant loans. 
Specifically, as expected returns on securities will be compressed, maintaining net interest 
income will require banks to shift their portfolios away from securities and towards loans to 
firms and households. Indeed, one reason that credit growth has been weak, especially in 
peripheral  countries,  is  that  the  risk  adjusted  returns  for  banks  on  loans  have  been  very 
subdued relative to returns on securities portfolios – especially domestic government bonds. 
Moreover, as credit conditions further ease and the macroeconomic outlook improves, there 
should  be  an  endogenous  effect  on  borrowing  conditions.  Insofar  as  banks  expect  lower 
delinquencies  thanks  to  improving  macroeconomic  conditions,  they  should  require  lower 
credit risk  premia from firms  and  households,  implying  lower  lending  rates.  And  insofar  as 
intermediation. 
I  expect 
that  an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  asset  prices  are  boosted  by  our  measures,  collateral  values  will  rise  in  tandem,  implying 
higher lending volumes. 
Finally,  we  expect  all  these  effects  to  be  reinforced  by  the  way  we  have  calibrated  our 
programme, in particular the open-ended commitment to return inflation back close to 2%. 
This  strengthens  the  signal  emanating  from  our  decisions,  which  is  visible  in  price 
movements at the longer end of the yield curve. And it should also support the firm anchoring 
of  inflation  expectations,  which  is  crucial  to  avoid  the  self-reinforcing  dynamics  associated 
with a too long period of low inflation that I mentioned above. 
The pivotal role of governments 
Still,  it  is  clear  that  if  our  measures  are  to generate  a faster  and more sustained  recovery 
then  governments  also  have  to  play  their  part.  In  particular,  at  both  the  micro  and  macro 
levels,  structural  reforms  are  pivotal  to  encourage  firms  to  capitalise  on  the  easing  of 
financial conditions and undertake new investment projects. 
At the micro level, any investment project will happen if the return on investment sufficiently 
exceeds the cost of capital. Monetary policy can increase the wedge between the two on the 
downside, by lowering the cost of capital. But structural reforms can increase the wedge on 
the upside, by raising returns – for example by reducing costs arising from unnecessary red 
tape. 
At  the  macro  level,  monetary  policy  can  influence  investment  through  lowering  the  real 
interest rate. But there also has to be a fundamental reason to invest, which comes down 
chiefly  to  developments  in  labour  participation  and  total  factor  productivity.  Here  again 
structural reforms can complement monetary policy by, for instance, reactivating structurally 
unemployed workers and improving allocative efficiency across firms, thus raising potential 
growth. 
Indeed, perhaps the biggest risk we face with our new measures is that they fall on barren 
ground because governments are not doing enough to raise confidence in the future. If firms 
are  simultaneously  revising  down  their  growth  expectations  as  we  expand  our  monetary 
policy, we will not see the impact we expect and which is required. 
Yet  the  opposite  story  is  also  possible.  If  governments  are  determined  in  addressing  their 
structural challenges, all the conditions are there for growth to surprise on the upside. We are 
already  seeing,  in  countries  like  Spain,  how  improved  financing  conditions  together  with 
targeted structural reforms can lead to stronger-than-expected growth outcomes. And if we 
take advantage of the window of opportunity that exists today, that possibility is there for the 
whole euro area. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The  success  of  the  euro  area  depends  on  every  party  doing  its  job,  including  the  central 
bank. For us that means being fully symmetric in how we interpret our mandate: acting as 
decisively when the inflation outlook undershoots our aim as we would when it exceeds it. 
This is our responsibility in the Treaty and our duty to the firms and households of the euro 
area. 
Remember  that  firms  and  households  have  entered  contracts  and  entertain  economic 
relationships based on the expectation that we will meet our inflation objective. If we fail, then 
we make their recovery from the crisis harder. And that loss of credibility would in turn make 
it harder for us to deliver our mandate in the future. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That  is  why,  faced  with  an  increasing  risk  of  a  too  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation,  we 
increased  our  stimulus  to  a  degree  necessary  to  bring  inflation  closer  to  2%.  And  we  will 
continue to monitor the progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
