  Glenn Stevens: The world economy and Australia 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American 
Australian Association luncheon, hosted by Goldman Sachs, New York City, 21 April 2015. 
I thank Elliott James for assistance in preparing these remarks. 
 Thank you to the American Australian Association for affording me the opportunity to speak 
again in New York. Thank you also to Goldman Sachs for hosting the event. 
The world economy 
There are about as many indicators of the world economy as there are people studying it. My 
remarks  will  be  fairly  high-level,  and  since  we  have  just  had  the  IMF  meetings,  it  seems 
appropriate  to  begin  with  the  picture  they  present.  The  Fund’s  latest  publication  estimates 
that output in the world economy grew by 3.4 per cent in 2014 (Graph 1). This is a bit shy of 
the long-run average of 3.7 per cent, and actually fractionally above the previous estimate in 
October. The projections are for a slight pick-up in 2015 and around average growth in 2016. 
These figures are broadly in line with the private sector consensus. 
Most  of  the  recent  growth  has  come  from  the  emerging  world.  As  a  group,  the  emerging 
world grew by 4½ per cent in 2014. China grew by about 7½ per cent, more or less as the 
authorities  intended.  It  will  probably  grow  by  a  little  less  in  2015;  the  IMF  is  saying  below 
7 per  cent.  But  given  its  size  now,  China  growing  at  6–7  per  cent  would  still  be  a  major 
contributor  to global  growth.  Indeed,  the  current  projections  have  China  contributing  about 
the  same  growth  in  global  output  in  2015  and  2016  as  it  did  in  recent  years.  Meanwhile, 
growth looks to have picked up in India but softened in some other emerging markets. 
Graph 1 
In  the  major  advanced  economies,  in  contrast,  growth  has  generally  been  below  previous 
averages for quite a number of years. It has taken longer to recover than we had all hoped. 
There are, happily, some signs of improvement at present. Growth is slowly recovering in the 
euro  area  and  has  resumed  in  Japan.  In  the  United  States,  notwithstanding  some  recent 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  softer  numbers,  the  economy  looks  to  have  pretty  reasonable  momentum.  So  it  would 
appear that we are heading in the right direction. 
Unfortunately,  that  doesn’t  mean  the  legacy  of  the  2008  crisis  is  yet  behind  us.  From  the 
vantage  point  of  most  central  banks,  the  world  could  hardly,  in  some  respects,  look  more 
unusual. Policy rates in the major advanced jurisdictions have been near zero for six years 
now. In fact, official deposit rates in the euro area and some other European countries are 
now negative. As it turns out, the “zero lower bound” wasn’t actually at zero. Central bank 
balance  sheets  in  the  three  large  currency  areas  have  expanded  by  a  total  of  about 
US$5½ trillion since 2007, and the ECB and Bank of Japan will add, between them, about 
another US$2½ trillion to that over the next couple of years. 
That  central  banks  have  had  to  take  such  extraordinary  measures  speaks  both  to  the 
severity of the crisis that these countries faced and the limited capacity of other policies to 
support growth. History tells us that recovering from a financial crisis is  an especially  long 
and painful process, and more so if other countries are in the same boat. 
The  direct  effect  of  this  unprecedented  monetary  easing  has  been  to  lower  whole  yield 
curves  to  extraordinarily  low  levels,  and  that  process  is  continuing.  The  most  pronounced 
effects  can  be  seen  in  Europe.  If  one  were  to  invest  in  German  government  debt  for  any 
duration  short  of  nine  years,  one  would  be  paying  the  German  government  to  take  one’s 
money.  The  same  can  be  said  for  Swiss  government  debt.  Even  some  corporate  debt  in 
Europe has traded at negative yields. It seems likely that these European developments are 
also affecting long-term interest rates in the United States. 
These ultra-easy monetary policies have helped along the process of balance sheet repair, 
bringing households and businesses closer to the point where they can start to spend and 
hire  and  invest  again.  And,  it  has  to  be  observed,  it  has  made  fiscal  constraints  on 
governments much less binding than they would otherwise have been. Lower interest rates 
also increase the value of assets that can be used as collateral. Banks’ willingness to supply 
credit is affected by their balance sheet’s strength, of course, but it seems to be improving 
even in Europe at present. For larger businesses with access to capital markets, borrowing 
terms have probably never been more favourable. 
Such policies are, then, working through the channels available to them to support demand. 
But these channels are financial in nature. They don’t directly create demand in the way that, 
for example, government fiscal actions do. They work on the incentives for private savers, 
borrowers  and  investors  to  alter  their  financial  behaviour  and,  it  is  hoped  in  time,  their 
spending behaviour. 
A striking feature of the global economy, according to World Bank and OECD data, is the low 
rate  of  capital  investment  spending  by  businesses.  In  fact,  the  rate  of  investment  to  GDP 
seems to have had a downward trend for a long time. 
One potential explanation is that there is a dearth of profitable investment opportunities. But 
another  feature  that  catches  one’s  eye  is  that,  post-crisis,  the  earnings  yield  on  listed 
companies seems to have remained where it has historically been for a long time, even as 
the return on safe assets has collapsed to be close to zero (Graph 2). This seems to imply 
that the equity risk premium observed ex post has risen even as the risk-free rate has fallen 
and by about an offsetting amount. Perhaps this is partly explained by  more sense of risk 
attached to future earnings, and/or a lower expected growth rate of future earnings. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 2 
  Or  it  might  be  explained  simply  by  stickiness  in  the  sorts  of  “hurdle  rates”  that  decision 
makers  expect  investments  to  clear.  I  cannot  speak  about  US  corporates,  but  this  would 
seem  to  be  consistent  with  the  observation  that  we  tend  to  hear  from  Australian  liaison 
contacts  that  the  hurdle  rates  of  return  that  boards  of  directors  apply  to  investment 
propositions  have  not  shifted,  despite  the  exceptionally  low  returns  available  on  low-risk 
assets. 
The possibility that, de facto, the risk premium being required by those who make decisions 
about real capital investment has risen by the same amount that the riskless rates affected 
by central banks have fallen may help to explain why we observe a pick-up in financial risk-
taking, but considerably less effect, so far, on ‘real economy’ risk-taking. 
Potential vulnerabilities 
Whether  this  is  best  seen  as  a  temporary  increase  in  risk  aversion,  a  genuine  dearth  of 
investment  opportunities,  evidence  of  monetary  policy  “pushing  on  a  string”,  a  portent  of 
secular  stagnation,  or  just  unusually  long  lags  in  the  effects  of  policy,  will  probably  be 
debated for some time yet. I don’t pretend to know what that debate may conclude. 
In the meantime, we have to think about some of the vulnerabilities that may be associated 
with  the  build-up  of  financial  risk-taking.  This  is  one  of  the  responsibilities  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board, particularly (though not only) through its Standing Committee on Assessment 
of  Vulnerabilities.  Two  factors  stand  out  at  present  as  potentially  combining  to  heighten 
fragility at some point. The first arises from the sheer extent and longevity of the search for 
yield. 
As  I  have  noted,  compensation  in  financial  instruments  for  various  risks  is  very  skinny 
indeed.  Investors  in  the  long-term  debt  of  most  sovereigns  in  the  major  countries  are 
receiving very little – if any – compensation for inflation and only minimal compensation for 
term.  Some  model-based  decompositions  of  bond  yields  suggest  that  term  premia  on  US 
long-term  debt  and  some  sovereign  debt  in  the  euro  area  are  actually  negative. 
Compensation for credit risk is also narrow in many debt markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Moreover,  because the search for  yield  is  a global  phenomenon,  considerable  amounts of 
capital  have  flowed  across  borders.  There  is  some  evidence  to  suggest  that  as  emerging 
country bond markets have developed, particularly in Asia, more issuers have been able to 
raise funds in their local currencies. This leaves the foreign exchange risk associated with 
the capital flows more with the investor rather than a local bank or corporate, which is a good 
development. Nonetheless, we don’t have full visibility of those risks and there has been a 
notable build-up of debt overall in some emerging markets. 
The other factor of importance is a set of structural changes in capital markets, where there 
are two key features worth noting. One is the expanding role of asset managers. The search 
for yield, and the general tendency since the crisis for some intermediation activity to migrate 
to the non-bank sector, has resulted in large inflows to asset managers since the crisis. 
Yet liquidity – the ability to shift significant quantities of assets in a short period without large 
price  movements  –  has  probably  declined,  which  is  the  second  of  the  structural  changes 
worth noting. Certainly the willingness of banks and others to act as market-makers in the 
way they did in the past will have diminished considerably. Now, of course, to some extent 
this  is  a  result  of  the  changes  to  financial  regulation  which  have  aimed  to  improve  the 
robustness of the financial system. We should be clear that it was intended that the cost of 
liquidity  provision  in  markets  be  more  fully  borne  by  investors.  Liquidity  was  under-priced 
prior to the crisis. 
Nonetheless,  the  question  is  whether  end-investors  truly  appreciate  that  the  availability  of 
liquidity in the system has declined. Good asset managers have sufficient liquidity holdings to 
meet redemptions that may occur over any short time period and will also offer appropriate 
redemption terms and so pose only limited risks to the broader financial system. But the cost 
of holding the most liquid assets in a world of very low returns overall may pressure some 
asset  managers  to  hold  less  genuine  liquidity  than  they  might  otherwise.  Meanwhile,  the 
amount of client funds being managed is much larger than it was and we don’t know how all 
those  investors  will  behave  in  a  more  stressed environment,  should  one  eventuate.  A  key 
concern the official sector has is that investors may be assuming a degree of liquidity that will 
not actually be available in a more stressed situation. 
Putting  all  that  together,  we  find  a  world  where  the  banking  system  is  much  safer,  but  in 
capital  markets  some  valuations  are  stretched,  credit  spreads  are  compressed,  there  has 
been significant cross-border capital flow and liquidity may be less available than investors 
are assuming. That raises the risk that a sell-off, were it to occur, could be abrupt. 
What might trigger such an event? 
The usual trigger people have in mind is a rise in US interest rates. The US economy now 
looks strong enough for the Federal Reserve to consider increasing its policy rate later in the 
year.  In  itself,  this  should  be  welcomed.  And  it  will  have  been  very  well  telegraphed. 
Understandably,  the  Fed  is  proceeding  with  the  utmost  caution.  But  it  will  also  have  been 
over  nine  years  since  the  Fed  previously  raised  interest  rates.  Some  market  participants 
won’t have lived through a Fed tightening cycle before. Hence, it would not be surprising to 
see some bumps along this road. 
A second trigger could come from slower growth in emerging markets. Growth has already 
weakened  in  some  economies,  several  of  which  have  been  bruised  by  falling  commodity 
prices. Capital that flowed into emerging markets could flow out again, perhaps when interest 
rates begin to rise in the United States. That would probably occur alongside an appreciating 
US dollar. So the distribution of credit risk and foreign currency risk will be of considerable 
importance. One can easily see why investors could become less forgiving of borrowers on a 
shaky footing, be they corporates or sovereigns. 
A complicating factor here is that the rise in US interest rates looks set to occur while the 
central banks of Japan and Europe are continuing an aggressive easing of monetary policy 
via  balance  sheet  measures.  The  combined  Japanese  and  European  “QE”  will  be  very 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  substantial.  The  extent  to  which  such  funds  will  flow  across  borders  will  depend  on  which 
sorts  of  investors  are  ‘displaced’  from  their  sovereign  debt  holdings  and  what  their  risk 
appetites are. To the extent that funds do flow across borders, the proportions in which they 
flow to emerging markets, as opposed to the United States, will also be important. 
So there is a fair bit that we don’t know, but need to learn, about this environment. It will be 
important  for  the  officials  thinking  about  these  and  other  risks  to  continue  an  effective 
dialogue with private market participants over the period ahead. 
Australia 
These  major  global  trends  have  certainly  affected  financial  and  economic  conditions  in 
Australia.  We  see  the  effects  of  the  search  for  yield  all  around  us.  Short  and  long-term 
interest  rates  are  at  record  lows,  but  are  still  attractive  to  some  international  investors. 
Foreign capital has been attracted not just to debt instruments but to physical assets. The 
demand  for  commercial  property  has  been  particularly  strong  and  meant  that  prices  have 
risen even as rental income has softened and the outlook for construction seems reasonably 
subdued.  That  raises  some  risks,  which  we  discussed  in  our  recent  Financial  Stability 
Review.1 
We  also  noted  the  attention  being  given  by  APRA  (Australian  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority)  and  ASIC  (Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission)  to  risks  in  the 
housing  market.  APRA  has  announced  benchmarks  for  a  few  aspects  of  banks’  housing 
lending  standards  and  both  APRA  and  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  monitoring  the  effects  of 
these measures carefully; at this stage, it is still too early to judge them. We can only say that 
over the past few months, the rate of growth of credit for housing has not picked up further. 
Overall, we think the Australian financial system is resilient to a range of potential shocks, be 
they from home or abroad. Banks’ capital positions are sound and are being strengthened 
over  time.  They  have  little  exposure  to  those  economies  that  are  under  acute  stress  at 
present.  Measures  of  asset  quality  –  admittedly  backward-looking  ones  –  have  been 
improving. 
But it is developments in the ‘real’ sector of the economy that, right at the minute, seem more 
in  focus.  The  economy  is  continuing  to  adjust  to  the  largest  terms  of  trade  episode  it  has 
faced  in  150  years.  As  part  of  that  adjustment,  there  has  been  a  major  expansion  in  the 
capital stock employed in the resources and energy sector, accomplished by exceptionally 
high  rates  of  investment.  These  are  now  falling  back  quickly,  exerting  a  major  dampening 
effect on demand. There has been a major cycle in the exchange rate, which is still under 
way.  There  has  been  considerable  change  to  the  structure  of  the  economy.  This  all 
happened  as  the  major  economies  encountered  the  biggest  financial  crisis  in  several 
generations,  with  its  very  long-lasting  after  effects,  and  which  also  had  an  impact  on 
Australian attitudes to spending and leverage. To say there have been some pretty powerful, 
and disparate, forces at work is something of an understatement, even for a central banker. 
At  present,  while  growth  in  Australia’s  group  of  trading  partners  is  about  average,  and  is 
higher than the rate of growth for the world economy as a whole, the nature of that growth is 
shifting. The growth in Chinese demand for iron ore, for example, has weakened at the same 
time that supply has been greatly increased, much of it from Australia. Iron ore prices are 
therefore falling and contributing to a fall in Australia’s terms of trade. 
As  the  terms  of  trade  fall,  and  national  income  grows  more  slowly  than  it  would  have 
otherwise, adjustment is occurring in several ways: 
                                                
1  See < http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/fsr/2015/mar/html/contents.html>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
      Incomes  of  those  directly  exposed  to  the  resources  sector,  be  it  as  employees, 
owners or service providers, are reduced. 
Nominal wages generally are lower than otherwise. 
The Australian dollar has declined and will very likely fall further yet, over time. This 
is  one  of  the  main  ways  that  the  lower  national  income  is  ‘transmitted’  to  the 
population:  purchasing  power  over  foreign  goods  and  services  is  reduced.  At  the 
same  time,  Australians  receive  some  price  incentives  to  substitute  towards 
domestically produced goods and services. And the purchasing power of foreigners 
over the value added by Australian labour and capital is higher than otherwise. 
Saving  by  households,  which  rose  when  the  terms  of  trade  rose,  is  tending  to 
decline as the terms of trade fall. This is a natural response to lower income growth 
and is being reinforced by easier monetary policy, which has reduced the return on 
safe  financial  assets.  That  said,  the  fact  that  many  households  already  carry  a 
considerable debt burden means that the extent to which they  will be prepared to 
reduce saving to fund consumption may be less than it once was. More on this in a 
moment. 
As part of the same adjustment, government saving is increasing more slowly (more 
accurately, government dis-saving is lessening more slowly) than otherwise. This is 
more  or  less  automatic  to  the  extent  that  lower  commodity  prices  directly  reduce 
state  and  federal  government  revenues.  More  generally,  the  more  reluctant 
households  are  to  lower  their  saving  and  increase  their  spending  the  harder  the 
government may find it to increase its saving. 
Macroeconomic policy is supporting the adjustment. On the fiscal front, the government has 
little choice but to accept the slower path of deficit reduction over the near term. But over the 
longer term, hard thinking still needs to occur about the persistent gap we are likely to see 
(under current policy settings) between the government’s permanent income via taxes and its 
permanent spending on the provision of good and services. 
In  the  case  of  monetary  policy,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  offering  support  to  demand, 
consistent  with  its  mandate  as  expressed  by  the  medium-term  inflation  target.  Relevant 
considerations  of  late  include  the  fact  that  output  is  below  conventional  estimates  of 
“potential”,  aggregate  demand  still  seems  on  the  soft  side  as  resources  investment  falls 
sharply,  and  unemployment  is  elevated  and  above  most  estimates  of  “natural  rates”  or 
“NAIRUs”. And inflation is forecast to be consistent with the 2–3 per cent target. So interest 
rates should be quite accommodative and the question of whether they should be reduced 
further has to be on the table. 
What complicates the situation is that these are not the only pertinent facts. A good deal of 
the effect of easier monetary policy comes via the housing sector – through higher prices, 
which  increase  perceived  wealth  and  encourage  higher  construction,  through  higher 
spending  on  durables  associated  with  new  dwellings,  and  so  on.  These  are  not  the  only 
channels but, according to research, together they account for quite a bit of the direct effects 
of  easier  monetary  policy.  And  they  do  appear  to  be  working,  thus far.  Housing  starts  will 
reach high levels this year and wealth effects do appear to be helping consumption, which is 
rising faster than income. 
But household leverage starts from a high level, having risen a great deal in the 1990s and 
early 2000s. The extent to which further increases in leverage should be encouraged is not 
easily answered, but nor can it be conveniently side-stepped. Even if we chose to ignore it, 
monetary  policy’s  ability  to  support  demand  by  inducing  households  to  bring  forward 
spending that would otherwise be done in future might well turn out to be weaker than it used 
to be. For a start, households already did a lot of that in the past and, in any event, future 
income growth itself looks lower than it did a few years ago. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Then there  are  dwelling  prices,  which,  at  a  national  level,  have  already  risen  considerably 
from  their  previous  lows,  at  a  time  when  income  growth  has  been  slowing.  Popular 
commentary is, in my opinion, too focused on Sydney prices and pays too little attention to 
the more disparate trends among the other 80 per cent of Australia. That said, it is hard to 
escape the conclusion that Sydney prices – up by a third since 2012 – look rather exuberant. 
Credit conditions are only one of several factors at work here. But credit conditions are very 
easy. So while the conduct of monetary policy can’t allow these financial considerations to 
dominate the “real economy” ones completely, nor can it simply ignore them. A balance has 
to be found. 
To this point, the balance that the Reserve Bank Board has struck has seen the policy rate 
held at what would once have been seen as extraordinarily low levels for quite a while now. 
The Board has, moreover, clearly signalled a willingness to lower it even further, should that 
be helpful in securing sustainable economic growth. The Board has been proceeding with a 
degree of caution that is appropriate in the circumstances. It also has, I would say, a realistic 
assessment  of  how  much  monetary  policy  can  be  expected  to  achieve  in  supporting  the 
adjustment the economy needs to make. 
Any help in boosting sustainable growth from other policies would, of course, be welcome. In 
particular,  things  that  could  credibly  be  seen  as  lifting  prospects  for  future  income,  and 
increasing confidence in those prospects, would give easy monetary policy a good deal more 
traction. 
In fact, that point generalises to the rest of the world. Across much of the world, too much 
weight  is  being  put  on  monetary  policy  to  try  to  achieve  what  it  can’t:  a  durable  and 
sustainable increase in growth, in an environment where private leverage is already rather 
high or even too high. Monetary policy alone won’t deliver that. 
This is probably a moment to recall the commitments we all made in the G20 meetings in 
Australia last year, as we agreed on the goal of an additional rise in global GDP of 2 per cent 
over five years. 
Those commitments were not actually about monetary policy; they were about other policies. 
It will be important this year, after one of the five years has passed, to see whether we are all 
making  good  on  our  various  promises.  More  generally,  actions  which  promote 
entrepreneurship,  innovation,  adaptation  and  skill-building,  that  reward  “real”  risk-taking, 
while providing a stable macroeconomic environment and a well-functioning financial system, 
will best support our future wellbeing. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
