  Peter Praet: Interview in Jornal de Negócios 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  Jornal  de  Negócios,  conducted  by  Mr  Rui  Jorge  on  9  February  and  published  on 
16 February 2015. 
 The ECB has presented its quantitative easing (QE) program almost six years after the 
Federal Reserve System and the Bank of England. What took you so long to go in that 
direction? 
The  Federal  Reserve  System  intervenes  traditionally  by  buying  securities  directly  on  the 
market, while we typically provide liquidity to the banks via temporary lending operations. As 
a  result  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  have  adapted  our  monetary  policy  tools:  for  example, 
recently we lent for longer maturities of up to four years provided that banks provide loans to 
the  economy  and  we  guaranteed  very  low  rates  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  through 
forward guidance. 
Why now? 
Monetary policy accommodation via the banking system has reached its limit. With its asset 
purchase program, the ECB  wants to regain control over its balance sheet: we will decide 
how much base money we will inject in the system. 
Have previous measures failed? 
Monetary policy has had a big impact on the economy. Without all the measures we have 
taken since the beginning of the crisis, we would probably be in the midst of a depression 
today.  Our  measures  have  led  to  a  significant  degree  of  accommodation.  Additionally,  we 
managed  to  decouple  our  monetary  policy  from  the  United  States  in  line  with  economic 
fundamentals.  Recently  we  have  also  seen  some  positive  effects  from  the  credit  easing 
measures  we  took  over  the  summer,  but  given  the  persistence  of  too  low  inflation  for  a 
prolonged period of time, the Governing Council decided to take additional measures. 
Several economists question the effectiveness of QE in Europe: banks are still not in 
good shape; the euro area now has lower interest rates than the United Kingdom and 
United  States  at  the  time;  and  Europeans  have  fewer  financial  assets.  How  do  you 
answer that? 
QE comes in addition to all the other measures of monetary policy accommodation. QE is 
intended and expected, in particular to strengthen one transmission channel through which 
non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  work,  the  so-called  portfolio  rebalancing  channel. 
This channel depends on the amount of liquidity that is created by the central bank. QE will 
reinforce this channel, which was judged to be too weak otherwise. 
Do you have an estimate of the possible impact on inflation? 
The question is not so much to reach a precise figure of inflation at the end of September 
2016, it is rather to influence medium-term inflation expectations. Our March projections will 
cover 2015, 2016 and 2017. 
One of the market indicators of the expected inflation rate in five years’ time for the 
following five years was at 1.6%. This is still historically low… 
You cannot expect a big impact immediately. We have to start this programme, be patient 
and do what we said we would do. 
How  would  you  describe  the  risks  for  your  mandate  of  keeping  inflation  below,  but 
close to, 2% over the medium term? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  We  have  had  an  extended  period  over  which  inflation  has  been  below  levels  where  the 
Governing Council wants to see it in the medium term that is below, but not too far from, 2% 
and  that  is  why  we  decided  to  act  further.  We  have  not  seen  deflation,  despite  having 
negative inflation, but we did see a higher risk of deflation. If this risk were to materialise, it 
would be very damaging. 
People were a bit confused as to why it took so long to act, given very low and even 
negative inflation and the fall in expectations. Why was this? 
I don’t agree that we are behind the curve. The measures we took in June and September 
resulted in a significant compression of loan spreads and yields, including in Portugal. They 
had a positive impact on financial conditions in general. The problem is that the volume of 
loans didn’t follow sufficiently. We have seen some improvement, but it is still too little. 
Your measures are aimed at easing credit conditions. But Portugal is a very indebted 
economy. And several countries in Europe face that problem. How do we solve a debt 
problem with more debt? 
Indeed,  in  Portugal  and  other  euro  area  economies  some  sectors  need  deleveraging,  and 
this is what is steadily happening already. QE will help contain the adverse macroeconomic 
side  effects  of  this  necessary  process  of  deleveraging.  Portfolio  rebalancing  means  some 
people will sell assets and get cash to buy other assets, or they will spend it partly. If they 
buy other assets, some will be outside of the Eurozone. Also banks could sell portfolios of 
credit to make room for new private loans and buy public debt. 
For  QE  to  work,  would  you  need  aggregate  demand  to  increase  through  more 
consumption and investment, or not? 
QE will stimulate aggregate demand through all of its components. 
The ECB has said that time is of the essence for approaches at the European level to 
address  aggregate  demand,  such  as  the  Juncker  plan.  We  are  still  waiting  for  the 
results of a €315 billion plan that is leveraged 15 times. Are you worried? 
It  is  not  just  about  having  a  common  European  plan.  It  is  also  about  asking  countries  to 
reprioritise  their  budgets  in  terms  of  public  investment  and  taxes,  which  is  admittedly  not 
easy to do. 
Should countries with fiscal space use it? 
You need to have fiscal space. 
When I look at aggregate values for the euro area, it is even better than those for the 
United States or United Kingdom. It is not as if the euro area is in a danger zone. 
You cannot reason only on aggregate, because one also needs to assure fiscal sustainability 
in  each  country.  Moreover,  the  spillovers  across  the  countries  are  relatively  limited.  So 
countries could use their fiscal space without compromising sustainability. There should be 
no illusion that a big demand shock will come from fiscal expansion. 
Without that demand shock, either with public or private money, QE will not work, or 
will it? 
Financial  conditions  are  much  easier  and  will  support  aggregate  demand.  Also,  structural 
reforms in a number of countries have started to produce positive effects. In addition, you 
have  to  consider  the  oil  supply  shock,  which  is  positive  for  growth,  provided  that  inflation 
expectations remain anchored. This is important. 
Why? 
When inflation expectations are threatened by a shock, you may get negative impacts owing 
to possible delaying of consumption or investment. This is why QE comes at the right time. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Why doesn’t the central bank just print money and send a check to every household 
until September 2016. That would probably have an effect, wouldn’t it? 
This point is made in some academic circles, but how should this money then be distributed? 
It  would  be  up  to  parliaments  to  decide  how  to  distribute  it,  but  then  the  ECB  would  be 
directly involved in the monetary financing of governments, which it is not allowed to do. 
Wouldn’t  it  be  possible  to  find  a  solution  whereby  the  exact  money  that  is  printed 
finds its way to the private sector without affecting the budget directly? 
But what would you do? Would you, for instance, give each person, rich or poor, a cheque 
for the same amount? 
This option, at least from what we have learned from others’ experiences, also has a 
redistributive effect through a wealth effect: it makes the rich richer! 
Governments have to take care of redistributive effects. 
How important is confidence in the private sector? 
It  is  extremely  important.  The  biggest  risk  now  is  that  after  years  of  lower  inflation 
expectations  and  lower  real  growth  there  is  a  risk  of  an  entrenched  pessimism  that  might 
become  self-fulfilling,  delaying  expenditure  and  investment,  which  in  turn  leads  to 
underemployment and lower potential growth. 
What would you expect the main impact of QE to be in Portugal? 
The portfolio rebalancing effect will be quite significant. There will also be a steep drop in the 
lending rates that banks apply to households and firms in Portugal. We saw this happening 
even before the start of the programme. 
There is a discussion going on about the fiscal impacts of the operation in Portugal, 
both  as  a  result  of lower interest  rates  in the  market  and  owing  to  the  fact that the 
interest paid to the central bank will be given back in part to the government. And this 
depends a lot on how much you buy. 
Yes,  but  you  have  to  look  to  all  of  the  consequences  for  the  economy,  not  only  the 
consequences for the interest rates. The impact on debt is just part of it. 
You have decided that around 90% of the risk in sovereign bonds will be national, and 
10% will stay with the Eurosystem. However, profits are supposed to be shared. 
To be precise, considering all the additional purchases, sovereign and European institutions 
bonds around 20% of the risk will be shared, and 80% will be borne by the national central 
banks. The legal acts have not yet been published. Several options were considered, but for 
the part of the overall portfolio that is not shared, the Governing Council intention is to have 
the same approach applied to both the profits and the losses. 
What is your evaluation of the current economic situation in Portugal? 
We have seen an improvement almost everywhere, including Portugal, which will also benefit 
from  the  reforms  undertaken,  the  fall  in  the  oil  price  and  better  financial  conditions.  The 
question mark hangs over what we call “reform fatigue”, whereby, for example, some reforms 
have been suspended in recent months. 
There is a risk that Novo Banco will be sold below the value of the recapitalisation. Is 
this a problem from your perspective? 
It is premature to say anything on this. 
Your sustainability analyses imply levels of growth and primary balances in the next 
10  to  20  years  hard  to  achieve.  How worried  are  you  about  the  sustainability  of the 
public debt in Portugal? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The  financial  assistance  programme  and  the  policies  implemented  are  in  line  with  the 
conclusion  that  Portuguese  debt  is  sustainable.  The question  is  more whether  the  country 
can  increase  its  growth  performance  in  a  structural  way.  If  growth  is  weaker,  it  becomes 
more difficult. 
The  rules  of  the  fiscal  compact,  namely  the  debt  reduction  rule,  imply  primary 
surpluses  of  3%  to  4%  of  GDP  every  year  for  decades  in  Portugal  and  other 
economies. Few countries have achieved this for more than a few years. People are 
asking whether it is feasible. 
It is feasible. The question is whether the country will continue with the reforms and will be 
able to increase its potential growth. Otherwise, it will indeed be  very difficult to achieve. I 
come from a country where we had around 6% of primary surplus and it was sustained for a 
number of years. But it is more difficult to reach a primary surplus than to sustain it. 
Portugal is expected to grow at around 1.5% to 2% in real terms in the next few years – 
is that enough? 
The  question  is  always  the  interest  rate  you  pay  versus  the  nominal  growth  rate  (that 
includes the effect of inflation), which is also important. It is challenging, and that is why the 
reforms are really essential. 
In  future  programmes  and  post-monitoring  programmes  will  the  ECB  be  out  of  the 
Troika? 
This is still under discussion. What I can say is that the ECB came to be in the Troika out of 
European  necessity.  The  fact  that  the  ECB  participates  very  closely  in  the  design  of  the 
programme,  in  a  role  that  we  saw  as  advisory,  means  more  information  and  better 
assurances. 
The recent opinion of an Advocate General of the European Court of Justice is that the 
ECB should not get involved in financial assistance programmes. 
This opinion relates to the outright monetary transactions and states that being a part of the 
Troika might lead to a conflict of interests. It is not clear whether this can be generalised. 
The ECB says that it does not get involved in politics. However, it participates in the 
Troika and has influenced several countries to accept bailouts. How do your explain 
the ECB’s influence to voters? 
We had weak institutions in Europe to deal with the crisis. The ECB was asked to participate 
in  discussions  on  the  financial  assistance  programmes  in  liaison  with  the  European 
Commission.  The  fact  that  governments  have  implemented  credible  programmes,  has 
allowed us to be more flexible in the context of the financial crisis. 
For instance? 
There are a number of rules in the ECB, namely defining the counterparts to our monetary 
policy, and the rules for accepting collateral. 
So if the ECB does leave the Troika, you will not be able to have waivers. 
We need to have assurances that imbalances are credibly tackled. 
Does that explain why you have stopped accepting Greek debt as collateral? 
The  initial  technical  extension  was  possible,  because  we  had  this  credible  prospective  of 
finalising the review, which made it possible to prolong the waiver. Recently, however, the 
Governing  Council  concluded  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  assume  that  there  will  be  a 
successful conclusion of the programme review. 
What do you need from the Greek government? 
At the moment this is a topic for politicians to discuss. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Could emergency liquidity assistance be extended for months? 
Emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  can  only  be  temporary  and  can  be  given  only  to 
solvent banks. When you have a systemic crisis, you may need flexibility in terms of duration. 
Is a country that is cut off from ELA cut out of the Monetary Union? 
ELA is provided to banks, not to countries. And I will not comment on speculative scenarios. 
We are not in that situation. We suspended the waiver on government debt to be accepted 
as  collateral,  but  Greek  banks  are  still  counterparties. When  they  have  insufficient  eligible 
collateral for monetary policy, they will have access to ELA. 
ELA is given by the national central bank, which bears the risk and should depend on 
its own judgment of the solvency of the banking sector. However, since last year it is 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism that supervises the banking sector. How does this 
work? 
Yes, it is the responsibility of the SSM to provide an assessment of the solvency of banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
