Janet L Yellen: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban  Affairs,  US  Senate, 
Washington DC, 24 February 2015. 
 Chairman Shelby, Ranking Member Brown, and members of the Committee, I am pleased to 
present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. In my 
remarks  today,  I  will  discuss  the  current  economic  situation  and  outlook  before  turning  to 
monetary policy. 
Current economic situation and outlook 
Since my appearance before this Committee last July, the employment situation in the United 
States has been improving along many dimensions. The unemployment rate now stands at 
5.7 percent, down from just over 6 percent last summer and from 10 percent at its peak in 
late 2009. The average pace of monthly job gains picked up from about 240,000 per month 
during  the  first  half  of  last  year  to  280,000  per  month  during  the  second  half,  and 
employment  rose  260,000  in  January.  In  addition,  long-term  unemployment  has  declined 
substantially, fewer workers are reporting that they can find only part-time work when they 
would prefer full-time employment, and the pace of quits – often regarded as a barometer of 
worker confidence in labor market opportunities – has recovered nearly to its pre-recession 
level.  However,  the  labor force  participation  rate  is  lower  than  most  estimates  of  its  trend, 
and  wage  growth  remains  sluggish,  suggesting  that  some  cyclical  weakness  persists.  In 
short, considerable progress has been achieved in the recovery of the labor market, though 
room for further improvement remains. 
At  the  same  time  that  the  labor  market  situation  has  improved,  domestic  spending  and 
production have been increasing at a solid rate. Real gross domestic product (GDP) is now 
estimated  to  have  increased  at  a  3–3/4  percent  annual  rate  during the second  half  of  last 
year. While GDP growth is not anticipated to be sustained at that pace, it is expected to be 
strong  enough  to  result  in  a  further  gradual  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate.  Consumer 
spending has been lifted by the improvement in the labor market as well as by the increase 
in household purchasing power resulting from the sharp drop in oil prices. However, housing 
construction continues to lag; activity remains well below levels we judge could be supported 
in the longer run by population growth and the likely rate of household formation. 
Despite the overall improvement in the U.S. economy and the U.S. economic outlook, longer-
term interest rates in the United States and other advanced economies have moved down 
significantly  since  the  middle  of  last  year;  the  declines  have  reflected,  at  least  in  part, 
disappointing  foreign  growth  and  changes  in  monetary  policy  abroad.  Another  notable 
development  has  been  the  plunge  in  oil  prices.  The  bulk  of  this  decline  appears  to  reflect 
increased global supply rather than weaker global demand. While the drop in oil prices will 
have  negative  effects  on  energy  producers  and  will  probably  result  in  job  losses  in  this 
sector, causing hardship for affected workers and their families, it will likely be a significant 
overall plus, on net, for our economy. Primarily, that boost will arise from U.S. households 
having  the  wherewithal  to  increase  their  spending  on  other  goods  and  services  as  they 
spend less on gasoline. 
Foreign economic developments, however, could pose risks to the outlook for U.S. economic 
growth.  Although  the  pace  of  growth  abroad  appears  to  have  stepped  up  slightly  in  the 
second  half  of  last  year,  foreign  economies  are  confronting  a  number  of  challenges  that 
could restrain economic activity. In China, economic growth could slow more than anticipated 
as policymakers address financial vulnerabilities and manage the desired transition to less 
reliance on exports and investment as sources of growth. In the euro area, recovery remains 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
slow,  and  inflation  has  fallen  to  very  low  levels;  although  highly  accommodative  monetary 
policy  should  help  boost  economic  growth  and  inflation  there,  downside  risks  to  economic 
activity in the region remain. The uncertainty surrounding the foreign outlook, however, does 
not exclusively reflect downside risks. We could see economic activity respond to the policy 
stimulus  now  being  provided  by  foreign  central  banks  more  strongly  than  we  currently 
anticipate,  and  the  recent  decline  in  world  oil  prices  could  boost  overall  global  economic 
growth more than we expect. 
U.S. inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. In large part, the 
recent softness in the all-items measure of inflation for personal consumption expenditures 
(PCE)  reflects  the  drop  in  oil  prices.  Indeed,  the  PCE  price  index  edged  down  during  the 
fourth quarter of last year and looks to be on track to register a more significant decline this 
quarter because of falling consumer energy prices. But core PCE inflation has also slowed 
since  last  summer,  in  part  reflecting  declines  in  the  prices  of  many  imported  items  and 
perhaps also some pass-through of lower energy costs into core consumer prices. 
Despite the very low recent readings on actual inflation, inflation expectations as measured 
in  a  range  of  surveys  of  households  and  professional  forecasters  have  thus  far  remained 
stable.  However,  inflation  compensation,  as  calculated from the  yields  of  real  and  nominal 
Treasury  securities,  has  declined.  As  best  we  can  tell,  the  fall  in  inflation  compensation 
mainly  reflects  factors  other  than  a  reduction  in  longer-term  inflation  expectations.  The 
Committee expects inflation to decline further in the near term before rising gradually toward 
2  percent  over  the  medium  term  as  the  labor  market  improves  further  and  the  transitory 
effects  of  lower  energy  prices  and  other  factors  dissipate,  but  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
inflation developments closely. 
Monetary policy 
I  will  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  is 
committed to policies that promote maximum employment and price stability, consistent with 
our mandate from the Congress. As my description of economic developments indicated, our 
economy  has  made  important  progress  toward  the  objective  of  maximum  employment, 
reflecting in part support from the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy in recent 
years. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the substantial 
improvement  in  the  outlook  for  labor  market  conditions  –  the  stated  objective  of  the 
Committee’s recent asset purchase program – the FOMC concluded that program at the end 
of October. 
Even  so,  the  Committee  judges  that  a  high  degree  of  policy  accommodation  remains 
appropriate to foster further improvement in labor market conditions and to promote a return 
of inflation toward 2 percent over the medium term. Accordingly, the FOMC has continued to 
maintain  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  0  to  1/4  percent  and  to  keep  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  holdings  of  longer-term  securities  at  their  current  elevated  level  to  help 
maintain accommodative financial conditions. The FOMC is also providing forward guidance 
that  offers  information  about  our  policy  outlook and  expectations  for  the  future  path  of the 
federal funds rate. In that regard, the Committee judged, in December and January, that it 
can be patient in beginning to raise the federal funds rate. This judgment reflects the fact that 
inflation continues to run well below the Committee’s 2 percent objective, and that room for 
sustainable improvements in labor market conditions still remains. 
The FOMC’s assessment that it can be patient in beginning to normalize policy means that 
the Committee considers it unlikely that economic conditions will warrant an increase in the 
target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  for  at  least  the  next  couple  of  FOMC  meetings.  If 
economic conditions continue to improve, as the Committee anticipates, the Committee will 
at some point begin considering an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate on 
a meeting-by-meeting basis. Before then, the Committee will change its forward guidance. 
However, it is important to emphasize that a modification of the forward guidance should not 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
be  read  as  indicating  that  the  Committee  will  necessarily  increase  the  target  range  in  a 
couple  of  meetings.  Instead  the  modification  should  be  understood  as  reflecting  the 
Committee’s judgment that conditions have improved to the point where it will soon be the 
case  that  a  change  in  the  target  range  could  be  warranted  at  any  meeting.  Provided  that 
labor  market  conditions  continue  to  improve  and  further  improvement  is  expected,  the 
Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds 
rate when, on the basis of incoming data, the Committee is reasonably confident that inflation 
will move back over the medium term toward our 2 percent objective. 
It continues to be the FOMC’s assessment that even after employment and inflation are near 
levels consistent with our dual mandate, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant 
keeping the federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. 
It  is  possible,  for  example,  that  it  may  be  necessary  for  the  federal  funds  rate  to  run 
temporarily  below  its  normal  longer-run  level  because  the  residual  effects  of  the  financial 
crisis may continue to weigh on economic activity. As such factors continue to dissipate, we 
would expect the federal funds rate to move toward its longer-run normal level. In response 
to unforeseen developments, the Committee will adjust the target range for the federal funds 
rate to best promote the achievement of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. 
Policy normalization 
Let me now turn to the mechanics of how we intend to normalize the stance and conduct of 
monetary policy when a decision is eventually made to raise the target range for the federal 
funds  rate.  Last  September,  the  FOMC  issued  its  statement  on  Policy  Normalization 
Principles  and  Plans.  This  statement  provides  information  about  the  Committee’s  likely 
approach to raising short-term interest rates and reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities 
holdings. As is always the case in setting policy, the Committee will determine the timing and 
pace  of  policy  normalization  so  as  to  promote  its  statutory  mandate  to  foster  maximum 
employment and price stability. 
The FOMC intends to adjust the stance of monetary policy during normalization primarily by 
changing its target range for the federal funds rate and not by actively managing the Federal 
Reserve’s balance sheet. The Committee is confident that it has the tools it needs to raise 
short-term interest rates when it becomes appropriate to do so and to maintain reasonable 
control  of  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  as  policy  continues  to  firm  thereafter,  even 
though the level of reserves held by depository institutions is likely to diminish only gradually. 
The primary means of raising the federal funds rate will be to increase the rate of interest 
paid  on  excess  reserves.  The  Committee  also  will  use  an  overnight  reverse  repurchase 
agreement facility and other supplementary tools as needed to help control the federal funds 
rate.  As  economic  and  financial  conditions  evolve,  the  Committee  will  phase  out  these 
supplementary tools when they are no longer needed. 
The Committee intends to reduce its securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner 
primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal from securities held by the Federal 
Reserve. It is the Committee’s intention to hold, in the longer run, no more securities than 
necessary for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, and that these 
securities be primarily Treasury securities. 
Summary 
In  sum,  since  the  July  2014  Monetary  Policy  Report,  there  has  been  important  progress 
toward the FOMC’s objective of maximum employment. However, despite this improvement, 
too  many  Americans  remain  unemployed  or  underemployed,  wage  growth  is  still  sluggish, 
and  inflation  remains  well  below  our  longer-run  objective.  As  always,  the  Federal  Reserve 
remains committed to employing its tools to best promote the attainment of its objectives of 
maximum employment and price stability. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
