  Agus D W Martowardojo: Strengthening stability, accelerating structural 
reform to reinforce economic fundamentals 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Agus  D  W  Martowardojo,  Governor  of  Bank  Indonesia,  at  the 
discussion  and  launching  of  the  2014  Indonesia  Economic  Report  (LPI),  Jakarta,  29  April 
2015. 
  The honorable former Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Members of the House of Representatives and Audit Board of RI, 
Members of BSBI, 
Members of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, 
Speakers, Responders, and Moderators, 
Dear Invitees and Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Assalamu’alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh, 
Good morning and may God bless us all, 
1. 
First of all, allow us to ask you to thank God the Almighty for his blessings that we 
are given the opportunity to attend this event. Insya Allah, we will soon witness the launching 
of 2014 Indonesia Economic Report (LPI) Book, which will continue to a discussion themed 
“Strengthening  Stability,  Accelerating  Structural  Reform 
to  Reinforce  Economic 
Fundamentals”. 
2. 
LPI  Book  is  an  annual  publication  of  Bank  Indonesia,  which  comprehensively 
contains  national  economic  dynamics  in  2014.  In  addition  to  documenting  the  journey  of 
Indonesia’s economy, LPI also seeks to present the lessons learned during such period. The 
efforts  to  learn  such  lessons  are  very  important  as  a  foundation  for  strengthening  and 
improvement of policies in the future. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
3. 
Slide 2:  2014  turns  out  to  be  full  of  challenges  for  Indonesia’s  economy.  Global 
economic  condition  is  not  as  bright  as  initially  predicted.  Recovery  is  still  taking  place  in 
various major economies in the world, but at an unexpected and unequal speed. The world’s 
commodity  prices  continuously  decrease  due  to  weakening  demands,  particularly  from 
China. 
4. 
Slide 3:  As  a  country  with  open  economic  and  financial  system,  Indonesia  will 
closely relate to the global economic constellation. Furthermore, amidst the world’s divergent 
monetary  policies  and  changing  perception  of  external  risks  resulting  in  the  increasingly 
stronger US dollar on a global scale. 
5. 
Slide 4: Throughout 2014, Indonesia must face different financial market turbulence. 
Occurrences throughout 2014, such the default of Argentine, stronger expectation for interest 
rate increase in US, decrease in euro exchange rate as the impact of loosening monetary 
policies  by  ECB,  and  sharp  fall  in  Russian  ruble  at  the  end  of  2014,  contribute  to  the 
Indonesia’s economic dynamics. 
6. 
Such  different  external  pressures  have  in  turn  resulted  in  domestic  economy 
instability, one of which is the outgoing foreign capital flows from Indonesia. Such instability 
also serves to reflect different structural issues in the real sector. The structural issues are 
not new since they have been subsisting within the last several years. 
7. 
Slide 5:  We  observe  that  our  high  dependency  on  exports  of  low  value-  added 
natural resources has resulted in vulnerable economic growth against price fluctuation. Our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
exports  sharply  fall  due  to  weakening  demands  from  major  trade  partner  countries  and 
declining prices of natural resources based export commodities. Consequently, the economic 
growth  in  most  provinces  whose  economy  is  based  on  exports  of  extractive  products, 
primarily Sumatera and Kalimantan, also drastically decreases. 
8. 
Slide 6:  Moreover,  weak  energy  resilience  makes  energy  requirements  fail  to  be 
fulfilled  by  ourselves,  thereby  we  keep  importing.  Such  weak  energy  resilience  has  also 
caused the Government to adjust fuel price in June 2013 and November 2014 to maintain 
fiscal sustainability. It then triggers inflation, which pressure we still experience until the end 
of 2014. 
9. 
Slide 7:  Our  fragile  production  structure  amidst  external  pressure  has  made  the 
national economic growth rate hindered by deficit in the current transaction balance, which 
has been taking place until now. As a result, exchange rate depreciation becomes inevitable 
and even necessary to ensure such deficit will not increase and economic slowdown will be 
controlled. 
10. 
Slide 8:  In  addition,  we  still  also  see  the  emerging  additional  vulnerabilities  at  a 
micro  level.  The  first  is  the  increasingly  higher  corporate  external  debts,  but  most  are 
unprotected  from  fluctuating  exchange  rate  risks.  Slide 9:  The  second  is  a  huge 
accumulated  portfolio  capital  by  foreign  investors  on  government  bonds,  which  may  easily 
flow out of the country and trigger exchange rate fluctuation. In addition, our shallow financial 
market may intensify such turbulence if spillover effects occur. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
11. 
The  Government  and  Bank  Indonesia  adopt  various  policies  to  maintain  macro 
stability in order to control economic growth slowdown in the short run. Policies are directed 
to  ensure  inflation  is  controlled,  stability  of  rupiah  exchange  rate  is  maintained  on  its 
fundamental condition, and deficit in the current transaction balance may be reduced towards 
a healthier level. 
12. 
Slide 10: In such policy direction, Bank Indonesia has strengthened its policy mix, 
namely  (i)  continue  the  “tight  bias”  policy  by  increasing  BI  Rate  by  25  bps  to  7.75%  in 
November 2014, (ii) strengthen monetary operations, (iii) stabilize rupiah exchange rate, and 
(iv) strengthen macro- prudential policy. 
13. 
Slide 11:  Bank  Indonesia’s  policy  to  increase  BI  Rate  in  November  2014  is  an 
“ahead  to  curve”  step  to  mitigate  expected  inflation  increase  risks  and  ensure  inflation 
pressure  post-increase  in  subsidized  fuel  price  will  be  controlled  and  temporary  and  may 
immediately return to the targeted track. 
14. 
We believe that with inflation and its expectation anchored to low rate, people’s real 
savings  and  purchase  power  will  not  be  eroded;  therefore,  it  becomes  the  foundation  for 
stronger economic growth and poverty alleviation in the future. 
15. 
The monetary policies we have adopted are accompanied by the strengthening of 
inflation control coordination through the Inflation Control Team (TPI) and Regional Inflation 
Control Team (TPID). 
16. 
The  tight  bias  policy  we  have  adopted  also  aims  to  ensure  that  the  deficit  in  the 
current  transaction  balance,  which  has  been  taking  place  for  three  years,  will  remain 
controlled  at  2.5–3  percent  of  GDP  and  will  not  increase.  Controlled  deficit  in  the  current 
transaction  balance  is  very  vital  to  ensure  the  national  economy  will  grow  strong  and 
balanced and job creation will continue. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
17. 
We also see that efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability must also be supported 
by  the  principle  of  prudence  in  the  business  world.  We  observe  that  such  prudence  is 
primarily required for businesses obtaining foreign loans. 
18. 
Slide 12: In this relation, Bank Indonesia has obliged corporations to do hedging by 
applying  the  following  rules:  (i)  minimum  hedging  ratio,  (ii)  maintenance  of  forex  liquidity 
adequacy,  and  (iii)  minimum  credit  rating.  We  will  consistently  monitor  the  private  foreign 
loans and take advanced steps if necessary. 
19. 
Slide 13: In the financial sector, we also see that structural challenges must also be 
tackled to deepen financial market. Alternative financing sources in our economy still focuses 
on the banking sector and remains undiversified, while the roles of bond market have been 
insignificant. 
20. 
Slide 14:  Efforts  to  deepen  financial  market  by  developing  “hedging”  market  have 
become  very  urgent  as  well  because  we  will  face  increasingly  complex  global  challenges. 
Therefore,  Bank  Indonesia  in  cooperation  with  the  Financial  Services  Authority  (OJK)  has 
established  a  foreign  exchange  market  committee,  issued  market  conduct,  simplified  and 
deregulated  some  provisions  to  facilitate  hedging  transactions  on  the  forex  market, 
encouraged  interbank  repurchase  activities,  and  improved  provisions  for  JIBOR  (Jakarta 
Interbank Offer Rate). 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
21. 
We are pleased and record that strategic and tactical steps have been initiated by 
the  Government  on  urgent  structural  reform  nodes  in  order  to  build  a  stronger  supporting 
environment  for  investment.  Such  nodes,  primarily  strengthening  of  physical  connectivity 
focusing  on  maritime  and  its  integration  to  land  connectivity,  we  believe  will  significantly 
decrease  logistics  cost,  making  businesses  more  competitive  in  the  global  market  and 
eventually achieving equal cost efficiency throughout the country. 
22. 
Slide 15: Another important thing is the Government’s efforts to reform fuel subsidy, 
which is very vital to be shifted to strengthen development’s basic capital. Development of 
HR  quality,  infrastructures,  and  innovative  and  institutional  capacity,  which  are  the  basic 
capital for the national economy to grow stronger and more sustainable, has been hostage to 
improperly  targeted  subsidy.  Therefore,  Bank  Indonesia  fully  supports  the  “firm  step”,  the 
benefits of which will be experienced in the coming years. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, 
23. 
Slide 16:  At  the  end  of  2014,  some  initial  indications  of  economic  recovery  have 
been  observable.  Stability  oriented  policies  have  prevented  the  national  economy  from 
increasingly  stronger  pressures.  The  deficit  in  the  current  transaction balance  in 2014  has 
been lower to reach –2.87% of GDP, compared to –3.18% in 2013. 
24. 
Slide 17: Stability oriented policy has also put more confidence of investors in the 
quality of Indonesia’s macroeconomic policies. It is depicted by the large incoming flows of 
portfolio investment, which reaches Rp 181.5 Trillion in 2014. The flows maintain investment 
enthusiasm in the market price and government securities (SBN). 
Slide 18:  Along  with  direct  investment,  such  portfolio  investment  flows  have 
25. 
supported  the  surplus  in  Indonesia’s  Balance  of  Payment,  making  the  foreign  exchange 
reserves at the end of 2014 reach USD 111.9 billion (equal to 6.5 months of requirements for 
imports and payment of the Government’s external debts), compared to USD 99.40 billion at 
the end of 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
Therefore,  it  will  not  be  exaggerating  to  say  that  policy  measures  taken  by  the 
the 
Indonesia  have  been  proven  successful  at  recovering 
26. 
Government  and  Bank 
macroeconomic condition in 2014 to the “path of stability”. 
Overall,  Indonesia’s  economic  dynamics  in  2014  bring  some  valuable  lessons  to 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
27. 
support sustainable economic growth. 
First, it is important to maintain consistent macroeconomic policies, both fiscal and 
28. 
monetary  policies.  Such  maintained  consistency  will  grow  trust  in  and  credibility  for  the 
policies. Second, amidst diverse and increasingly complex economic challenges as well as 
various  vulnerabilities,  including  high  current  transaction  deficit  and  inflation,  a  synergy  of 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies  and  structural  reform  are  required  to  allow  higher  economic 
growth  with  maintained  macro  stability.  Third,  timeliness  is  important  in  adopting  policies. 
Bank Indonesia considers that policy mix should be implemented in a timely and measurable 
manner. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
29. 
Although  external  and  internal  challenges  for  the  national  economy  ahead  will 
become  increasingly  serious,  it  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  the  enthusiasm  of  our 
present economic achievement prospect will go dim. We think optimism over our economy 
ahead will remain high. 
30. 
Slide 19:  With  such  optimism,  we  estimate  that  Indonesia’s  economy  will  grow  by 
5.4%–5.8% in 2015 and 5.6%–6.0% in 2016, in a reduced deficit in the current transaction 
balance. With such prognosis, it is estimated that real exchange rate will relatively stable. To 
ensure  that  different  structural  reform  programs  supporting  economic  growth  will  be 
implemented, we are consistent in seeking to anchor inflation rate and its expectation on the 
medium term target at 4±1%. 
31. 
However, various positive prospects are not easily realized because there are some 
risks and challenges ahead. Global economic condition ahead will remain full of uncertainty. 
Divergent  global  monetary  policies  will  make  the  world’s  financial  market  vulnerable  to 
shifting perception. Global turbulence risks may spillover quickly to our economy through the 
financial market and trade. 
32. 
thereby making the supply side of our economy unresponsive. 
33. 
Considering  the  global  and  domestic  economic  constellations  require  consistent 
stability-oriented  monetary  policies  and  “firm”  structural  reform  policies  to  increase  the 
capacity and competitiveness on the supply side; therefore, we expect our economy ahead 
will sustainably grow high from “non-artificial” forces. 
Meanwhile,  we  are  still  struggling  with  diverse  structural  rigidity  and  inefficiency, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
34. 
I  conclude  my  brief  introduction.  Further  description  of  the  journey  of  Indonesia’s 
economy in 2014 has been prepared in a 2014 Indonesia Economy Report book (LPI), which 
you all will receive at the end of this event. 
We  invite  all  of  you  to  thoroughly  observe  the  contents  of  the  book,  which  is  the 
35. 
eminent regular publication of Bank Indonesia. As an illustration of the book cover, we have 
selected  a  figure  of  the  “Gradon  Boat”  traditional  sport,  representing  our  fighting  spirit  in 
work.  In  addition  to  power  and  speed,  a  dragon  boat  also  requires  coordination  and 
teamwork to be able to come out as a winner. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
I  also  wish  to  extend  my  appreciation  to  the  resource  persons,  responders,  and 
36. 
moderator who accept our invitation to this morning’s discussion. We expect the discussion 
will make our determination stronger to reinforce economic fundamentals. 
37.  
To conclude, on behalf of the Board of Governors of Bank Indonesia, I present 2014 
LPI and expect this book will give broad knowledge to the readers. This is book is expected 
to be able to continue LPI’s reputation as a quality and reliable reference for the journey of 
Indonesia’s  economy  in  wading  through  the  sea  of  challenges  towards  the  port  of  welfare 
and prosperity. 
38.  
Indonesia to remain productive. Thank you. 
Wassalamu ‘alaikum warahmatullahi wabarakatuh. 
 
May God bless our steps and always give the guidance, direction, and blessings to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
