  
 
Benoît Cœuré: Completion of the ECB-coordinated technical cooperation 
programme of the Eurosystem with the Central Bank of Montenegro 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the press conference on the closing of the EU-funded technical cooperation 
programme with the Central Bank of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, 23 March 2015. 
 Dear Governor Dakić, 
Dear Mr Lys, 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  pleasure for  me  to  be  here  in  Podgorica today  to  mark  the  completion  of  the  ECB-
coordinated  technical  cooperation  programme  of  the  Eurosystem  with  the  Central  Bank  of 
Montenegro. 
Let me first of all thank Governor Dakić and the Central Bank of Montenegro for your strong 
support and the active involvement of your staff. We have seen seven months of intensive 
work and excellent cooperation designed to strengthen the institutional capacity of the central 
bank,  an  institution  which  is  key  to  the  overall  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  of 
Montenegro as it moves towards joining the European Union (EU). The programme has also 
helped to strengthen the contacts and relations between our institutions. 
I  would  also  like  to  express  my gratitude to  our 10  partner  national  central  banks (NCBs), 
namely those of Austria, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, 
Slovakia  and  Slovenia,  who  provided  the  expert  knowledge  that  made  this  programme  a 
success. The large number of partner NCBs in this programme is a clear indication that our 
institutions have not turned inward-looking, despite the major challenges faced over the past 
few  years  in  the  wake  of  the global financial  crisis  and  then the  euro  area  sovereign  debt 
crisis. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the experts from all the central banks for 
their willingness to share their knowledge and for their dedication and commitment in taking 
on this additional assignment in the area of technical cooperation. 
Let me also express my gratitude to Mr André Lys and the Delegation of the European Union 
to Montenegro for funding this activity through the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance. 
It  is  a  fine  example  of  how  European  institutions  can  work  together  for  the  benefit  of  EU 
candidate countries. 
I  will  now  briefly  turn  to  the  results  of  the  programme  and  how  it  is  embedded  in  our 
institutional relations. 
The  main  deliverable  of  the  programme  is  a  report  that  lays  down  recommendations  for 
changes to the central bank law and regulations as well as processes and practices in order 
to  prepare  the  Central  Bank  of  Montenegro  for  membership  of  the  European  System  of 
Central  Banks,  once  Montenegro  joins  the  EU.  I  am  confident  that  this  report  will  help  to 
develop the central bank’s strategy, to strengthen its role as an institution and to smooth the 
path  towards  EU  accession.  Let  me  say  that  our  experts  could  not  have  produced  such  a 
comprehensive report without the excellent cooperation of the Central Bank of Montenegro 
and the commitment of Governor Dakić and his team to this project. 
The needs assessment report and the recommendations, however, are not the only tangible 
outcomes. Throughout the whole programme, staff members of the central bank have met 
many colleagues from Eurosystem national central banks as well as from the ECB and have 
established an excellent network of contacts. They can thus draw on the expertise of many 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  national  central  banks  that  are  actively  participating  in  a  number  of  other  initiatives  in  the 
region. 
Our institutional relations with the Central Bank of Montenegro, and with other central banks 
in the Western Balkans more generally, go beyond technical cooperation. In November last 
year, I was pleased to welcome Governor Dakić and Vice Governors Fabris and Milošević to 
Frankfurt for the second high-level policy dialogue between our respective institutions. The 
ECB  conducts  such  dialogues  with  all  the  central  banks  of  those  countries  which  are 
negotiating to join the EU. The ECB also launched a Regional Workshop Series last year that 
provides  opportunities  for  policy  discussions  and  technical  cooperation.  Both  of  these  are 
based  on  the  regular  monitoring  and  analysis  of  economic  and  financial  developments  in 
countries which are prospective EU members. 
The  ECB  and  the  entire  Eurosystem  engage  in  these  activities  with  central  banks  of  EU 
candidate and potential candidate countries on account of the strong economic and financial 
links between the euro area and the Western Balkans, the prospect of EU integration, and 
the associated need for sustainable convergence. 
Economic  and  financial  links  between  the  euro  area  and  the  Western  Balkans,  including 
Montenegro, are very close. For example, banks with headquarters in the euro area account 
for around half of the assets of the Montenegrin banking sector, while  around one third of 
Montenegro’s total trade is with the euro area. We therefore have a mutual interest in each 
other’s well-being. 
Capital inflows from the EU together with this region’s growing integration into pan-European 
production chains will help the economies here to catch up and will gradually contribute to 
higher  living  standards –  provided,  of  course, that  sound  domestic  policies  are  in  place  to 
make this happen. Similarly, economic growth in the euro area and the rest of the EU will 
have  a  positive  impact  on  the  region  here.  In  this  regard,  the  recovery  of  the  economic 
situation in the euro area is good news for Montenegro and the Western Balkans generally. 
Links will grow as a result of the banking union which is being established in the EU. The 
new institutional set-up involves new responsibilities for the ECB, which became the banking 
supervisor  of  the  entire  euro  area  last  November.  The  establishment  of  this  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  consolidates  our  relationship  with  the Western  Balkans  in  view  of 
the ownership structure of the banking sector. The ECB will at the same time become the 
home supervisor of a large part of the banking sector in Montenegro and other countries in 
the region. 
The main reason, however, for our focus on the countries in the Western Balkans and their 
central banks is the prospect of EU membership. 
For  one,  the  EU  central  banking  community  considers  it  important  to  support  its  sister 
institutions in this region as they seek to apply best practices for the benefit of their country 
and their people. This is also in the interests of all EU central banks as one day the Central 
Bank of Montenegro will join the European System of Central Banks and, at that time, will 
need to meet all relevant standards and be able to function properly within the system. 
Moreover,  strong,  stable  and  independent  institutions  are  a  prerequisite  for  sound 
macroeconomic policies and financial stability, which in turn are a condition for sustainable 
convergence. This is in the interests of Montenegro but, again, also in the interests of the 
euro area and the rest of the EU. Joining the European Union and eventually the euro area is 
not  an  end  in  itself.  They  are  a  means  to  an  end,  namely  to  enhance  the  welfare  of  the 
Member States and their citizens. 
In this regard, one of the key lessons of the recent crisis in the euro area is that in order to 
benefit from membership, countries need to achieve sustainable convergence. Convergence 
must not only be reached in the run-up to joining. To sustain it requires constant policy efforts 
in the areas of fiscal, financial and, in particular, structural policies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Pursuing growth-promoting structural reforms while maintaining financial stability and fiscal 
sustainability need to be key policy priorities for economic policy-makers in this context. This 
applies both prior to and after EU accession. The best contribution central banks can make is 
to  ensure  price  stability  and  to  remain  focused  on  their  mandate,  while  having  a  sound 
institutional framework that ensures their independence. 
There is one point that I would like to mention which makes the Central Bank of Montenegro 
a special case: it does not issue a national currency. The Deutsche Mark and subsequently 
the  euro  were  unilaterally  introduced  by  the  Montenegrin  authorities  as a  parallel  currency 
and then as the sole legal tender in a very specific historical and economic context, which we 
acknowledge.  However,  Montenegro’s  unilateral  use  of  the  euro  is  fully  distinct  from  any 
special relationship with the euro area, let alone euro area membership. According to the EU 
Treaties, the adoption of the euro is the end point of a structured convergence process within 
a  multilateral  framework.  Our  support  provided  in  this  programme  therefore  does  not 
prejudge the ECB’s or the EU’s position with respect to the implications of the EU Treaties’ 
framework on Montenegro’s monetary regime. This will have to be duly assessed during the 
country’s ongoing negotiations to join the EU. 
Let me conclude by noting that our institutions share a common future in Europe. The results 
of this programme will form the basis for stronger links between the central banks of the EU 
and the Central Bank of Montenegro. Let me emphasise that the ECB and the Eurosystem 
remain  committed  to  Montenegro  and  the  region.  Completing  this  needs  assessment 
programme will not bring our cooperation to an end – on the contrary, it provides us with a 
solid  foundation  for  further  common  work.  We  will  devise  new  joint  activities  which  take 
account both of your priorities and of the resources available in the Eurosystem. 
I wish  you every success with all the  work ahead on the road towards membership of the 
European Union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
