  R Gandhi: Securitisation in India – ambling down or revving up? 
Inaugural  speech  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
“India Securitisation Summit 2015”, organized by the National Institute of Securities Markets 
(NISM), Mumbai, 14 July 2015. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Anupam Sonal is gratefully acknowledged. 
1.  Financial  sector’s  primary  role  is  intermediation  between  ultimate  savers  and  ultimate 
investors.  Initially,  it  was  banks  which  were  the  intermediaries.  As  the  financial  sector 
evolved,  other  types  of  financial  institutions  came  on  the  scene  to  undertake  such 
intermediation directly, or between and among other intermediaries. A parallel development 
is  the  emergence  of  varieties  of  financial  products,  far  removed  from  simple  deposits  and 
advances, delivering such intermediation. Securitisation, as we all know, is among the latest 
of such intermediating product. 
Securitisation – definition 
2. Securitisation is the financial practice of pooling various types of contractual debt such as 
residential mortgages, commercial mortgages, auto loans or credit card debt obligations (or 
other  non-debt  assets  which  generate  receivables)  and  selling  their  related  cash  flows  to 
third  party  investors  as  securities,  which  may  be  described  as  bonds,  pass-through 
securities, or collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Securitisation diversifies credit markets 
as  it  breaks  the  process  of  lending  and  funding  into  several  discrete  steps,  leading  to 
specialisation and economies of scale. 
3. Securitisation actually has two major stages. In the first stage there is sale of single asset 
or  pooling  and  sale  of  pool  of  assets  by  the  owner  of  the  assets  (“Originator”)  to  a 
“bankruptcy  remote”  special  purpose  vehicle  (“SPV”)  in  return  for  an  immediate  cash 
payment,  and  in  the  second  stage  repackaging  and/or  selling  of  the  security  interests 
representing claims on incoming cash flows from the asset or pool of assets to third party 
investors by issuance of tradable debt securities. 
4.  Thus  in  a  nutshell,  Securitisation  is  the  process  of  taking  an  illiquid  asset,  or  group  of 
assets, and through financial engineering, transforming them into a security. 
Advantages of Securitisation 
5. Securitisation can offer a number of advantages for the stakeholders. Some of the benefits 
of the traditional vanilla securitisation products are as under: 
For originators 
i. 
Securitisation  frees  up  an  originator’s  capital  by  removing  the  assets  from  the 
balance sheet. This way, capital is now available for origination of fresh assets with 
profitability potential. 
Through  Securitisation,  an  originator  with  a  relatively  lower  credit  rating  but  with 
better rated cash flow would be able to borrow/raise funds against such higher rated 
cash flows at cheaper cost. 
It  improves  the  liquidity  position  of  the  originator  as  the  future  receivables  are 
replaced by cash. 
ii. 
iii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 iv. 
Securitisation can be used as a potent tool for re-balancing and re-distributing risks 
such as credit, market or liquidity risk or risk concentrations on the balance sheet of 
the originator. 
 For investors 
For the investing parties, Securitisation offers different set of benefits. 
i. 
ii. 
It provides another option for diversifying their debt portfolio. 
It facilitates participation in relatively lower or higher risk portion of the cash flows, as 
per their own risk appetite. 
High rated and credit enhanced securities add to the safety of investments as well 
as capital savings for the investors. 
The  presence  of  the  “Pool  Servicer”  provides  certain  additional  assurance  and 
safety. 
Securitisation allows flexibility in structuring the timing of cash flows to one’s needs. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
For servicers, trustees, credit rating agencies and brokers 
Securitisation offers added business opportunities and increased fee income. 
For financial markets 
Securitisation  provides  alternate  debt  instruments  in  the  financial  markets  and  improves 
market liquidity. It widens the markets and allow entry to new players. It enhances return on 
capital,  diversifies  financial  markets,  and  serves  as  an  alternate  route  of  funding. 
Securitisation diversifies credit markets as it breaks the process of lending and funding into 
several  discrete  steps,  leading  to  specialisation  and  economies  of  scale.  Securitisation 
improves  efficiencies  in  financial  markets  through  risk  diversification  as  the  risks  can  be 
bundled  and  hived  off  and  distributed  among  counterparties  better  equipped  to  manage 
these risks. 
Regulation of Securitisation – global initiatives 
6. Securitisation emerged in the developed nations in 1970s as a financial innovation. The 
regulatory ethos of those days let the innovation thrive with least regulations. However, the 
lessons  from  the  great  financial  crisis  of  2008  activated  a  number  of  initiatives  by  the 
international  standard  setting  bodies,  regulators  and  governments  for  re-building  investor 
confidence  in  the  securitisation  market.  These  initiatives  were  mainly  aimed  at  addressing 
the  concerns  on  conflicts  of  interest  created  by  misaligned  incentives  and  compensation 
systems  for  securitisers  or  originators  within  the  securitisation  chain,  address  information 
asymmetry within the securitisation process by increasing transparency of the securitisation 
structure,  introduce  risk  retention  or  “skin  in  game”  requirements  and  more  stringent 
disclosure requirements, enhance oversight of credit rating agencies governance and reduce 
regulator reliance on ratings, better align the incentives of mortgage originators with those of 
investors in mortgage loans, standardization of disclosure documentation, etc. The foremost 
among these are the Basel III Standards and enhancements to the Basel II Norms by BCBS, 
The  Dodd  Frank  Wall  Street  Reforms  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  in  USA,  Capital 
Requirements  Directive  (CRD  II)  and  a  proposal  for  a  Directive  on  Alternative  Investment 
Fund Managers Directive (AIFMD) in the European Union, issue of Disclosure Principles for 
Public Offerings and Listings by IOSCO, and other such directives/ guidelines by G20, FSB, 
etc. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7. As part of the Enhancement to the Basel II Norms in July 2009, the BCBS strengthened 
the  treatment  for  certain  Securitisation  exposures  under  Pillar  1  (minimum  capital 
requirements)  and  introduced  higher  risk  weights  for  re-Securitisation  exposures  to  better 
reflect the risk inherent in these products. It also required the banks to conduct more rigorous 
credit  analyses  of  externally  rated  Securitisation  exposures.  The  supplemental  Pillar  2 
(supervisory  review  process)  guidance  addressed  several  notable  weaknesses  that  were 
revealed  in  banks’  risk  management  processes  during  the  GFC.  The  areas  addressed 
include: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
firm-wide governance and risk management; 
capturing the risk of off-balance sheet exposures and Securitisation activities; 
managing risk concentrations; 
providing incentives for banks to better manage risk and returns over the long term; 
and 
sound compensation practices. 
v. 
8. The Pillar 3 (market discipline) requirements have been strengthened in several key areas, 
including  Securitisation  exposures  in  the  trading  book;  sponsorship  of  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles;  re-Securitisation  exposures;  and  pipeline  and  warehousing  risks  with  regard  to 
Securitisation exposures. 
9.  Carrying forward, the  BCBS  has  in  December  2014,  published  revisions  to  address  the 
shortcomings in the Basel II Securitisation framework and to strengthen the capital standards 
for Securitisation exposures held in the banking book. This framework, which will come into 
effect  in  January  2018,  forms  part  of  the  Committee’s  broader  Basel  III  agenda  to  reform 
regulatory standards for banks in response to the global financial crisis and thus contributes 
to a more resilient banking sector. The most significant revisions relate to changes in: 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
the hierarchy of approaches; 
the risk drivers used in each approach; and 
the amount of regulatory capital banks must hold for Securitisation exposures (i.e. 
the framework’s calibration). 
10.  The  revised  hierarchy  of  approaches  reduces  reliance  on  external  ratings.  It  also 
simplifies  and  limits  the  number  of  approaches.  At  the  top  of  this  hierarchy  is  the  Internal 
Ratings-Based Approach, which banks may use if their supervisors have approved their use 
of internal models. This is followed by the External Ratings-Based Approach – where credit 
ratings  are  permitted  to  be  used  in  the  jurisdiction  –  and  the  Standardized  Approach. 
Additional  risk  drivers,  notably  an  explicit  adjustment  to  take  account  of  the  maturity  of  a 
Securitisation’s tranche, have been introduced. 
11. Recently, a joint BCBS-IOSCO Task Force on Securitisation Markets (TFSM) undertook 
a review of securitisation markets in order to identify the factors that may be hindering the 
development  of  sustainable  securitisation  markets.  TFSM  has  identified  14  criteria  for 
introduction of Simple, Transparent and Consistent (STC) Securitisation structures which, if 
satisfied, could indicate that a securitisation transaction possesses minimal level of simplicity, 
transparency  and  consistency.  The  consultative  document  on  criteria  to  identify  STC 
securitisations  was  published  for  comments  in  December  2014  along  with  revised  capital 
framework for securitisations. 
Early regulation of Securitisation in India 
12. There is no comprehensive single regulatory framework for the securitisation market per 
se. In effect, only the financial sector has a clear framework for participating in securitisation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  13.  The  recommendations  of 
the  High  Level  Committee  on  Corporate  Debt  and 
Securitisation  (Chairman:  Dr.R.H.Patil)  in  2005  proved  to  be  the  turning  point  towards  the 
development of the corporate debt and securitisation market. 
14.  The  Reserve  Bank  accepted  several  of  its  recommendations  and  in  February  2006, 
issued  guidelines  for  securitisation  of  standard  assets  by  Banks,  FIs  and  NBFCs.  These 
guidelines provided the regulatory framework for several critical aspects of securitisation. 
15. In 2007, the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act 1956 was amended in 2007 to include 
“securitised instruments” in the definition of “securities”. The amendment has paved the way 
for listing and trading of securitised debt on stock exchanges. 
16.  Consequently,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  released  draft 
regulations for “Public Offer and Listing of Securitised Debt Instruments” in June 2007 which 
is  yet  to  be  formalised.  However,  these  guidelines  envisage  a  very  different  transaction 
structure compared to current market practices. 
17. Earlier, the enactment of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interests Act, 2002 (SARFAESI Act 2002) enabled securitisation of 
the non-performing assets of Banks, which could sell off their NPAs to asset reconstruction 
companies  registered  with  RBI.  The  SARFAESI  Act  also  laid  the  framework  to  the 
constitution of asset reconstruction companies (ARCs) specialising in securitising distressed 
assets purchased from banks. 
Role of the Reserve Bank of India in regulation of Securitisation 
18.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  is  the  regulator  of  the  major  players  in  the  Indian 
financial  system  (banks,  financial  institutions  and  NBFCs)  and  has  to  ensure  that financial 
intermediaries engage in Securitisation prudently. 
19. The Reserve Bank issued the first set of comprehensive guidelines applicable to banks, 
financial institutions and non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) on Securitisation in India 
way  back  in  February  2006.  The  guidelines  covered  following  aspects  relating  to 
Securitisation transactions: 
• 
Broad definitions on important securitisation related concepts such as securitisation, 
SPV,  bankruptcy  remote,  credit  enhancement,  first  loss  facility,  liquidity  facilities, 
service provider and underwriting facilities. 
Prescribed  detailed  “true  sale”  criteria  and  criteria  to  be  met  by  originators  and 
SPVs. Some important criteria included that originators should not indulge in market 
making on securities issued by SPV, originators shall not invest in more than 10% of 
securities issued by SPV, securities cannot have any put option, etc. 
Detailed policy for originators and third parties on provision of credit enhancements, 
liquidity support/ facilities, underwriting facilities, servicing arrangements, etc. 
Capital adequacy norms for Credit Enhancement – First loss credit enhancement is 
deducted  from  capital  and  second  loss  facility  is  risk  weighted  according  to  the 
rating.  Credit  enhancement  cannot  be  withdrawn/  reduced  by  the  provider 
throughout the life of the transaction except to cover the losses suffered by SPV. 
Prudential Norms for investment in the securities issued by SPVs. 
Accounting treatment for securitisation transactions – An important feature was that 
profit / premium arising on account of sale should be amortised over the life of the 
securities issued or to be issued by the SPV. 
Due diligence framework for securitisation transactions and disclosures to be made 
by the SPVs/ Trustee and originators. 
     4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  20. Based on the lessons learnt from the global financial crisis on Securitisation and with a 
view to develop an orderly and healthy securitisation market, the RBI guidelines of February 
2006  were  reviewed  and  enhancements  to  the  guidelines  issued  in  May  2012.  While  the 
securitisation framework in India had been reasonably prudent, certain imprudent practices 
had  reportedly  developed  like  origination  of  loans  with  the  sole  intention  of  immediate 
securitisation  and  securitisation  of  tranches  of  project  loans  even  before  the  total 
disbursement was complete, thereby passing on the project implementation risk to investors. 
In view of the same and in accordance with the on-going international work on Securitisation, 
another  important  objective  of  the  enhancements  was  to  ensure  greater  alignment  of  the 
interests  of  the  originators  and  investors  and  retention  of  “skin  in  the  game”  by  the 
originators. These guidelines also covered prudential treatment for transfer of assets through 
direct assignment of cash flows and underlying securities, if any. The important features of 
the May 2012 guidelines are as follows: 
• 
Prescription of the Minimum Holding Period (MHP): Minimum Holding Period varies 
from 3 months to 12 months depending upon the tenor of the loan and repayment 
frequency  and  is  defined  in  terms  of  number  of  installments  paid.  The  criteria 
governing  determination  of  MHP  reflect  the  need  to  ensure  that  i)  the  project 
implementation  risk  is  not  passed  on  to  the  investors  and  ii)  a  minimum  recovery 
performance  is  demonstrated  prior  to  securitisation  to  ensure  better  underwriting 
standards. 
Prescription  of  Minimum  Retention  Requirement  (MRR)  –  5  %  for  loans  up  to 
24 months  and  10%  for  loans  of  tenor  beyond  24  months.  The  MRR  is  primarily 
designed  to  ensure  that  the  originating  banks  have  a  continuing  stake  in  the 
performance  of  securitised  assets  so  as  to  ensure  that  they  carry  out  proper  due 
diligence of loans to be securitised. 
“True sale criteria” made applicable to assignment transactions also. 
Liberalised  recognition  of  cash  profit  received  allowed  in  view  of  the  mitigation  of 
concerns on “Originate to Distribute” models. 
Disclosures  requirements  were  strengthened  and  due  diligence  expectations  were 
elaborated. 
Stress  testing  requirements  were  laid  for  banks/FIs/  NBFCs  in  respect  of  their 
Securitisation  positions.  The  factors  for  stress  tests  could  include  rise  in  default 
rates  in  the  underlying  portfolios  in  a  situation  of  economic  downturn,  rise  in  pre-
payment rates due to fall in rate of interest or rise in income levels of the borrowers 
leading  to  early  redemption  of  exposures,  fall  in  rating  of  the  credit  enhancers 
resulting  in  fall  in  market  value  of  securities  (Asset  Backed  Securities/  Mortgage 
Backed Securities) and drying of liquidity of the securities resulting in higher prudent 
valuation adjustments, etc. 
Outsourcing of credit decision is not allowed. 
In  case  of  non-compliance  with  the  guidelines,  as  applicable  to  originators,  no 
capital  relief  will  be  available  for  originators.  For  investors,  in  case  of  non-
compliance with guidelines as applicable to investors, the asset will be risk weighted 
at 1111% (revised to 1250% in March 2015). 
Certain forms of Securitisation transactions / structures are not allowed – Complex 
structures  such  as  Re-Securitisation  and  Synthetic  Securitisation  is  not  allowed. 
Revolving  credit 
/  assigned.  Single  asset 
Securitisation are not allowed – as they do not fit into the definition of Securitisation. 
Securitisation / assignment of loans where both interest and principal are due only at 
maturity are not allowed – as it is not possible to assess the repayment track record. 
facilities  cannot  be  securitized 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Credit  enhancement  is  not  allowed  in  case  of  assignment  transactions  –  as  the 
assignment  deals  are  generally  carried  out  among  two  financial  institutions.  It  is 
expected that the purchasing institution will do its own due diligence while acquiring 
assets rather than relying on credit enhancement. 
 Indian Securitisation market and transaction volumes 
21.  The  Indian  market  is  still  at  a  nascent  stage  driven  as  it  is  by  the  needs  for  meeting 
priority sector lending targets by banks. The band of originators and investors is narrow with 
NBFCs  as  the  main  originators  and  banks  as  investors.  Public  Sector  Banks  are  mostly 
absent. Asset backed securitisation (ABS) is the largest securitisation class in India, driven 
by retail loan portfolio of banks. NBFCs like the Asset Finance Companies (AFC) operating in 
the  SME  and  Transport  financing  segments  and  Micro  Finance  Institutions  (MFI)  are  very 
active as originators. Though the market had begun since the year 2000, the GFC obviously 
has  its  repercussions  in  Indian  market  as  well.  It  is  reported  that  the  Indian  Securitisation 
market which reached a high of ₹ 63,730 crore by March 2008 dwindled down to ₹ 28,800 
crore in by March 2014. 
22. The micro finance companies play a larger role mainly due to their PSL underlying pools. 
Another  positive  development  witnessed  in  recent  years  is  the  preference  for  multiple 
tranche  products  as  against  single  tranche  structures.  Another  encouraging  factor  is  the 
preference for the lower rated senior tranches by the investors. It is reported that during the 
financial  year  2014,  the  number  of  AAA  ratings  at  initiation  dropped  from  45%  in  2012  to 
26%. 
23.  Insurance,  Pension  and  Mutual  Funds  can  play  an  important  role  in  the  Indian 
securitisation  market  as  they  can  invest  long  term  and  at  the  same  time  have  the  risk 
appetite,  capacity  and  expertise  for  taking  exposures  to  the  lower  tranches.  However,  the 
Pension Funds are not allowed to invest in securitisation PTCs and Insurance companies are 
allowed to invest in high investment grade AAA securities only. MFs are still hesitant to invest 
in the securitised papers due to past pending court cases as well as lack of clarity on the tax 
implications  for  their  investments.  In  the  Finance  Bill  2013,  Mutual  Funds  were  exempted 
from application of the Distribution Tax imposed on securitisation SPV’s. 
Low appetite for Securitisation in Indian financial market 
24. The appetite for Securitisation in India has been on the lower side; it is used largely to 
meet priority sector lending targets by banks as investors, NBFCs being the originators. This 
low  appetite  can  be  ascribed  to  several  factors,  including  legal,  taxation  and  stamp  duty 
issues. 
25. Recently, we undertook an informal and quick survey of the securitisation market in India. 
The primary objective was to assess the issues facing the market along with the reasons for 
poor take off in securitisation as a risk transfer and liquidity enhancing product. The sample 
survey included originators, investors, third party liquidity and credit enhancement providers, 
servicers  and  arrangers,  SPVs  /  trustees,  credit  rating  agencies,  etc.  The  major  issues 
highlighted  by  the  participants  related  to  disclosures,  low  demand  for  Long  Tenor 
Receivables,  lack  of  Investor  base,  absence  of  Secondary  market  besides  the  Taxation, 
Stamp Duty and Legal aspects including Foreclosure Laws. 
The way forward – ambling down or revving up 
26. Though significant progress has been made in reconfiguring Securitisation markets in the 
aftermath of the global financial crisis, the task of ensuring that these markets contribute to 
economic growth and financial stability is unfinished. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27. In this context, we must note that fingers are pointed at the regulatory framework itself. It 
is alleged that the regulations are conservative, and inhibit the growth of the segment. The 
restrictions  on  assignments,  the  prohibition  of  re-securitisation,  the  restrictions  on  the 
insurance  and  pension  funds,  the  restrictive  first-loss  provisions,  the  restrictive  credit 
enhancement provisions etc. are mentioned as impediments. With tax related disincentives 
driving  away  investors  like  Mutual  funds,  and  even  banks,  the  critics  say  the  Indian 
Securitisation market can only be ambling forward. 
28.  I  beg  to  differ.  In  my  opinion,  the  Indian  Securitisation  Market  is  raring  to  go.  Let  me 
explain. 
29. Firstly, the priority sector obligations will continue to be a good reason for securitisation. 
While the upcoming Priority Sector Lending Certificates (PSLC) can kind of dent the market, 
there  will  still  be  need  for  diversification  of  portfolios  and  hence  the  Securitisation  will  still 
have its place. 
30. Secondly, the NBFCs, be they Asset Finance Companies specialising in SME financing 
or transport financing, or be they MFIs or Housing Finance Companies (HFC), their USP is 
their capacity to originate loans and advances in sectors where the main stream banks have 
least penetration. They have comparative advantage and to leverage that they will have good 
opportunities in resorting to Securitisation. 
31.  Thirdly,  the  new  set  of  differentiated  banks,  the  Small  Finance  Banks,  whose  major 
portfolio will be small loans, will resort to securitisation for diversifying their balance sheet. In 
all likelihood, they are unlikely to build capacity in large sized lending and will resort to build 
diversified portfolio of large credit through Securitisation. 
32.  Fourthly,  given  recent  experience  relating  to  the  stress  and  non-performance  of 
infrastructure finance and project finance, questions have been raised about the capacity of 
other than large banks in the credit appraisal of such large credits. This can compel these 
banks to participate in large infrastructure and project credits through Securitisation after the 
project  has  taken  off,  rather  than  participating  through  consortium  or  multiple  banking 
arrangement before the cash flows have emanated. 
33. For these to happen, there is a need for a change in the mind set and attitude of banks 
and financial institutions, including the NBFCs. 
34. These institutions should reflect on the following questions: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
35. They also need to be ready to let go. Primarily, they should be prepared to parcel out 
high quality cash flows and share the spoils of good cash flows. 
36. We as regulators are ever ready to assist financial market development. As I understand, 
initiatives  are  underway  by  SEBI  to  formulate  a  detailed  template  mandating  disclosure 
requirements covering granular details of all aspects of securitisation transactions / products. 
Similarly,  SEBI  is  further  examining  the  prospects  of  setting  up  a  trading  and  reporting 
platform where all securitisation transactions will be reported and a central data repository 
will  be  available  to  the  securitisation  market  participants.  IRDA  and  PFRDA  have  been 
requested  to  look  into  their  rules  and  regulations  to  facilitate  long  term  investments  by 
Insurance  and  Pension  funds  in  securitised  products.  Reserve  Bank  will  also  review  the 
guidelines on an ongoing basis. 
37. Thank you all for your patient attention. 
Are we good in originating or holding? 
Do we have deep pockets? 
Do we find value in continuous turning over, or in holding on without growth? 
For diversification, do we build our entire portfolio or acquire a part? 
Should we build capacity in all segments of credit or focus on the best suited? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
