  Mark Carney: Fortune favours the bold 
Lecture by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  to  honour  the  memory  of  The  Honourable  James  Michael  Flaherty,  P  C, 
Dublin, 28 January 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
It is a pleasure to be in Dublin and an honour to give this Iveagh House lecture in memory of 
Jim Flaherty. 
Jim’s attitude and actions typified the Flaherty family motto: Fortune Favours the Bold. Born 
the  sixth  of  eight  children  in  La  Chine,  Quebec;  Jim  Flaherty  worked  odd  jobs  and  won  a 
hockey  scholarship  to  put  himself  through  Princeton.  Successful  in  private  and  public 
sectors; he rose to become Attorney General and Minister of Finance of his province before 
becoming Canada’s 37th Minister of Finance. Once there, his accomplishments were legion, 
ranging from creating and enhancing support programs for the disabled and care givers to 
setting the country back on the path to fiscal balance after the crisis and ensuing recession. 
His tenure as Canadian finance minister was shaped by that crisis and its aftermath. It was 
my  honour  to  work  with  him  as  Canada  weathered  the  storm.  And  many  of  you  worked 
closely  with  Jim  as  Ireland  negotiated  agreements  with  the  Troika  and  devised  policies  to 
rebuild its battered economy. I am confident he would be proud of the progress Ireland has 
made. 
I suspect he would be more than a little frustrated with the euro area, however. To his last 
days he remained unconvinced that Europe had fixed its problems, often berating colleagues 
at the G20 for the lack of progress. That was typical. Jim Flaherty was always forthright. He 
wouldn’t avoid a problem, hoping it would get better. 
On  current  projections  it  will  take  the  euro  area  eight  years  to  achieve  the  recovery  that 
Canada secured in two. Tonight I would like to draw on Jim’s legacy to reflect on how the 
euro area could act to avoid another lost decade. This matters for Ireland, Europe and the 
UK.  The  euro  area  is  the  world’s  second  largest  economy.1  With  27%  of  global  banking 
assets it is a key determinant of global financial stability. It is the UK’s largest trading partner 
and the single largest destination for UK foreign direct investment. 
The euro area would do well to live up to the Flaherty motto because, although there was 
monetary boldness last week, the currency union has been relatively timid in putting in place 
the other policies and, crucially, the institutions  necessary to deliver sustainable prosperity 
for its citizens. 
Now is not the time for half measures. In all advanced economies, private investment is still 
being  held  back  by  a  combination  of modest  demand  prospects  and  lingering  concerns of 
another major adverse shock. Nowhere are these impediments more severe than in the euro 
area. 
Since the financial crisis all major advanced economies have been in a debt trap where low 
growth  deepens  the  burden  of  debt,  prompting  the  private  sector  to  cut  spending  further. 
Persistent economic weakness damages the extent to which economies can recover. Skills 
and  capital  atrophy.  Workers  become  discouraged  and  leave  the  labour  force.  Prospects 
decline and the noose tightens. 
                                                
1  At market prices. In PPP terms it is third largest after China and the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  As difficult as it has been, some countries, including the US and the UK, are now escaping 
this trap. Others in the euro area are sinking deeper. This relative performance underscores 
the  importance  of  policy  and  institutions,  particularly  those  that  share  and  transfer  risks. 
Building institutions at a time of reform fatigue may not be easy, but it is essential. 
Before I draw out this crucial point, I would like to quickly review how we got here. 
2. 
Setting the debt trap 
Building the debt that now weighs on our economies was the work of a generation. 
In  the  decade  before  the  crisis,  private  financial  balances  became  unsustainable.  UK 
households borrowed 4% of GDP year after year; Irish households at more than twice that 
rate. Household debt peaked close to 100% of GDP in the UK, and 120% in Ireland.2 
This  borrowing  was  largely  for  consumption  and  real  estate  investment  rather  than 
businesses  and  projects  that  would  generate  the  earnings  necessary  to  service  those 
obligations. Property prices soared as a result (Chart 1). 
Such  excesses  were  possible  because  a  decade  of  non-inflationary,  consistent  expansion 
turned  initially  well-founded  confidence  into  dangerous  complacency.  Beliefs  grew  that 
globalisation  and  technology  would  drive  perpetual  growth,  and  that  the  omniscience  of 
central banks would deliver enduring stability. 
With  a  growing  conviction  that  financial  innovation  had  transformed  risk  into  certainty, 
underwriting standards slipped from responsible to reckless and bank funding strategies from 
conservative to cavalier. 
Financial  innovation  made  it  easier  to  borrow.  Bonus  schemes  valued  the  present  and 
discounted  the  future.  Banks  operated  in  a  heads-I-win-tails-you-lose  bubble  and  were 
capitalised for perfection. And a steady supply of foreign capital from the global savings glut 
–  and  in  Ireland’s  case,  the  initial  euphoria  of  European  Monetary  Union  –  made  it  all 
cheaper. 
When the Minsky moment finally struck, debt tolerance decisively turned and the kindness of 
strangers evaporated. UK households swung from borrowing 4% of GDP annually to saving 
2% of GDP. The comparable swing in Ireland was more than twice as large.3 
In the wake of the crisis, three truths came back to the fore. 
First, while asset prices rise and fall, debt endures. 
Second, the distribution of debt and assets matters. 
And  third,  it  is  very  hard  to  reduce  high  debt  in  one  sector  or  region  without  at  least 
temporarily increasing it in another. 
The debt tail is wagging the market dog. 
These realities continue to weigh on the European financial system. 
It is often argued that the world is awash with liquidity and excessive risk taking. And yet the 
rain  is  falling  unevenly  on  the  plain  leaving  some  regions  parched  and  others  sodden. 
Savings aren’t flowing freely to the areas that need them the most. This is certainly true in 
the euro area, where many savings are trapped and much of finance remains fragmented. 
                                                
2  While UK corporates accumulated debts to rival their household counterparts, Irish corporates surpassed that 
with debt rising beyond 200% of GDP. 
3  The UK and Irish private sectors swung dramatically into surplus (Charts 2 and 3). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The result is demand compression, weighing on the outlook for growth and sustaining fears 
that  another  major  adverse  shock  is  possible.  Risk  appetite  is  more  fleeting  than  median 
growth forecasts suggest. 
The constellation of asset price moves since last summer bears this sober assessment out. 
Yields  on  sovereign  bonds  have  fallen  across  all  maturities.  France  hasn’t  borrowed  this 
cheaply  since  the  ‘50s  –  the  1750s.  Real  rates  are  negative  as  far  as  the  eye  can  see, 
suggesting perpetually anaemic growth.4 
In the past six months, estimates of the equity risk premium have risen by over 100bps in the 
UK  and  the  euro  area  back  to  levels  last  seen  in  the  heart  of  the  crisis.5  In  addition,  the 
probability of large declines in equity prices implied by options prices rebounded during 2014. 
This  all  suggests  that  investors  may  be  attaching  some  probability  to  very  bad  outcomes, 
possibly the tail risk of economies becoming stranded in a debt trap. 
This market view is mirrored in elevated corporate caution. Investment remains subdued and 
businesses continue to build cash in many advanced economies.6 This is one reason why 
the so-called “equilibrium” real interest rate is negative in many advanced economies, though 
it  has  risen  and  is  possibly  now  positive  in  others  like  the  UK.7  Reflecting  these  real 
dynamics,  central  bank  interest  rates  have  had  to  be  set  at  extraordinarily  low  levels  and 
supplemented by large scale asset purchases simply for monetary policy to remain neutral.8 
Escaping  a  debt  trap  requires  a  suite  of  measures  including  structural  reforms  to  boost 
productivity. But above all an economy needs to be able to channel all available savings – 
household,  corporate  and  foreign  –  to  those  sectors  willing  and  able  to  spend.  In  many 
respects, recent progress in the UK shows how. 
How the UK is escaping its debt trap 
3. 
In recent years, the UK economy has shown increasing signs of normalisation. Non-financial 
private  debt  has  fallen  by  around  30%  of  GDP  since  its  peak,  the  economy  has  grown 
consistently above trend, and unemployment has fallen from a peak of 8.5% to less than 6% 
today. 
This performance underscores several structural features necessary to escape a debt trap. 
The  first  is  an  integrated  financial  system  which  channels  savings  from  one  part  of  the 
economy to investment in others. Since the near collapse of the UK banking system, bold 
steps have since been taken to shore up its resilience. £140 billion of new bank capital has 
                                                
4   Term premia, which measure investors’ compensation for holding long- rather than short-maturity claims, are 
also estimated to have declined since last summer, perhaps reflecting growing expectations for central bank 
asset purchases. 
5  For the UK, December 2008; and for the euro area, June 2012. 
6  The non-financial corporate sector was a net saver in Germany, Ireland, Spain, Greece and the UK at end 
2013, based on Eurostat data (ESA 95 basis). 
7  The  “equilibrium”  rate  of  interest  is  that  which  equates  demand  with  potential  output,  thereby  delivering 
inflation at target in the absence of “cost-push” shocks. 
8  As my colleague Ben Broadbent recently said, central banks aren’t the cause of low interest rates, but rather 
are  actors  reading  a  script  written  by  others,  Broadbent,  B  (2014),  “Monetary  policy,  asset  prices,  and 
distribution”, speech at the Society of Business Economists Annual Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  been raised in recent years, and banks’ performance in the recent UK stress test suggest 
growing confidence in the resilience of the system is merited.9 
Second, the UK’s fiscal policy framework helps insure against severe systemic shocks. 
The  UK  had  the  space  to  allow  its  automatic  stabilisers  to  cushion  the  impact  of  the 
recession.  With  the  deficit  rising  to  a  peak  of  more  than  10%  of  GDP  before  steadily 
consolidating, fiscal policy effectively recycled elevated private savings and built a bridge to 
the period when private balance sheets were repaired and confidence returned. 
Fiscal stabilisers also play an important role in sharing risks across individuals, sectors and 
regions, thereby reinforcing the resilience of the UK’s currency union.10 
A  powerful  demonstration  of  this  comes  with  the  recent  sharp  fall  in  global  oil  prices. 
Because this risk is shared across the entire UK (which on the whole is a net beneficiary of 
lower oil prices), the net impact on the Scottish public finances is a mere one tenth of what it 
would  have  been  if  there  were  no  risk  sharing.11  There  are  few  clearer  illustrations  of  the 
benefits of sound fiscal arrangements in a currency union. 
Third, the UK economy is open and flexible. 
With a high degree of openness – its imports and exports summing to 60% of GDP – and a 
flexible exchange rate, the UK has a safety valve that can be used to recycle surplus savings 
to the rest of the world without driving down domestic demand, wages and prices. 
The  25%  depreciation  of  sterling  that  took  place  in  the  wake  of  the  global  crisis  helped 
smooth the path of adjustment, and also meant a “mark-to-market” gain to the tune of over 
£500bn on the UK’s external balance sheet.12 
The  UK  labour  market  is  also  highly  flexible.  The  fall  in  real  incomes  caused  by  the 
depreciation  of  sterling  was  absorbed  by  employees,  effectively  purchasing  faster  job 
creation.13 
In addition, large inflows of foreign capital – now financing a current account deficit of 6% of 
GDP  –  mean  spending and  investment  are  higher  than  would  otherwise  be  possible.  This 
underscores the value of the UK maintaining its attractiveness as an investment destination 
through a competitive tax system, deep human capital, a flexible economy and ready access 
to a wide range of markets. 
Finally, the UK has a highly credible monetary policy framework. 
The  UK’s  inflation  target  of  2%  is  symmetric:  we  care  about  inflation  below  the  target  as 
much as above. 
                                                
9  With other reforms to further the fairness and effectiveness of market-based finance, and major steps taken 
towards end Too-Big-To-Fail, the UK is also on track to ensure greater risk-sharing between its creditors and 
debtors.  
10  It is estimated that on average around a fifth of variation in regional personal income relative to the national 
average  is  stabilised  by  central  government  transfers.  Estimates  reported  in  Melitz  and  Zumer  (2002), 
“Regional  Redistribution  and  Stabilization  by  the  Center  in  Canada,  France,  the  UK  and  the  US:  A 
Reassessment and New Tests”. Journal of Public Economic, 86, pp. 263–286. 
11  The  geographical  share  of  North  Sea  oil  revenues,  estimated  by  the  Scottish  Government,  was  84.2%  in 
2012–3, down from 92.9% in 2008–9. In 2012–3, Scotland’s per capita share of North Sea oil revenues was 
estimated by  the  Scottish  Government  to  be  8.2%.  See  tables  4.4  and 4.5 of  Scottish Government  (2014), 
“Government expenditure and revenue, Scotland 2012-3”.  
12  Exchange  rate  effects  alone led  to an  improvement  of £573  billion  to the  UK’s net  international investment 
position  between  2006  and  2008,  estimated  in  Whittard  (2012),  “The  UK’s  External  Balance  Sheet  –  The 
International Investment Position (IIP)”, ONS, March. 
13  See Carney (2014), Speech at the 146th Annual Trades Union Congress, Liverpool. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Our remit recognises that the inflation rate may, on occasion, depart from the target and that 
attempts to keep it at the target may cause undesirable volatility in output. That flexibility and 
focus  meant  that  the  Bank’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  could  provide  additional 
stimulus  through  historically  low  interest  rates,  large  scale  asset  purchases  and  monetary 
policy guidance even when inflation was temporarily above target. 
Inflation has recently dropped sharply to 0.5% – equalling its lowest rate on record. 
So  next  month  I  will  write  the  first  open  letter  from  a  Bank  of  England  Governor  to  a 
Chancellor explaining why the inflation rate is too low and what we are going to do about it. 
The why is relatively straightforward. The majority of the weakness is caused by sharp falls in 
commodity prices, most notably oil,  which has  suffered its third largest fall in the past half 
century. 
Lower  energy  and  food  prices  are  unambiguously  positive  for  the  UK.  Temporarily  low 
inflation will boost real take-home pay and help household finances. 
Commodity  prices  do  not  explain  wholly  why  inflation  is  so  low.  Generalised  inflationary 
pressures in the economy are also subdued. Core inflation measures are running at 1.3%. 
That is a legacy of a long period following the crisis in which unemployment has been high 
and wage growth muted.14 
With  additional falls  in  petrol  prices  in the  pipeline,  inflation  is  likely  to fall  further  over  the 
coming  months  and  turn  slightly  negative  for  a  period.  It  should  pick  up  again  in  twelve 
months or so as the direct effects of a lower energy price drop out of the inflation rate. 
The Bank has the means, will and responsibility to return inflation to the 2% target within the 
next two years. That is consistent with the average horizon over which the MPC has sought 
to return inflation to target following overshoots in the past and with the nature of shocks the 
UK currently faces. 
The UK economy is expanding solidly. Over half a million jobs have been created in the past 
year and there are signs that wage growth is picking up. Interest rates can be expected to 
begin to return towards more normal levels over the next few years. Relative to what we and 
the markets expected a year ago, that path of interest rate increases can be expected to be 
more gradual and more limited. 
4. 
What is needed in the euro area? 
The challenges for monetary policy are much greater in the euro area than in the UK. 
Since the crisis, euro area nominal GDP has increased by a mere 5% in almost seven years. 
Consumer price inflation is already below zero. Core inflation has been running at or below 
1% for over a year. 
This is potentially dangerous. Low nominal growth is intensifying the euro area’s debt burden 
(Chart 4).15 The fear of stagnation is holding back spending and investment. 
The ECB’s actions last week were timely and welcome. They were also important not least 
because they removed any residual concerns about whether it has the will or means to meet 
its price stability mandate. By doing so, the ECB has reduced tail risks associated with the 
debt overhang to the extent monetary policy can or should. 
                                                
14  Unit  labour  costs  rose  by  0.5%  in  the  year  to  2014Q3,  and  unit  wage  costs  rose  by  0.9%  over  the  same 
period, based on the MPC’s backcast for UK GDP. 
15  Aggregate euro-area household debt was 61% of GDP in 2007 and stood at 64% in 2013. The corresponding 
figures for non-financial corporates were 94% in 2007 and 100% in 2013 and 66% and 92% respectively in the 
aggregate government sector. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  However, the ECB alone cannot eliminate the risks of a prolonged stagnation. These exist 
primarily because, in most respects, the current construction of the euro area is unfinished.16 
With  limited  cross-border  banking  in  the  euro  area,  savings  don’t  flow  to  potential 
investments. Euro-area corporates’ cash balances have risen to the tune of €420 billion, or 
3% of GDP, since the crisis, for example. Modest cross-border equity flows mean inadequate 
risk  sharing.  Moreover,  by  design,  there  are  virtually  no  cross-border  fiscal  flows  so  fiscal 
space is separated from fiscal needs. 
The burden of adjustment has been concentrated on efforts to improve 
competitiveness. 
Some of these efforts are entirely worthy. Boosting productivity reduces the burden of a debt 
overhang  as  extra  supply  creates  extra  demand  and  incomes.  But  that  takes  time,  during 
which debt dynamics may become oppressive. 
Improved competitiveness will also support exports to the rest of the world, but it is unlikely to 
be decisive in a listless world economy. More important for a given country in the euro area 
is to improve competitiveness against other members via internal devaluation. As you know, 
this is not easy.17, 18 
Irish workers and citizens deserve great credit for the flexibility they have shown. Wages in 
Ireland fell by almost 9%. In Spain they rose by 3%. Even though Irish unemployment rose to 
painfully high rates, it peaked at only a little over half the rate reached in Spain. 
That flexibility, by keeping unemployment lower than otherwise, has undoubtedly helped to 
reduce the risk that high unemployment becomes entrenched and destroys future economic 
capacity. 
For three reasons it is no panacea, however. 
First, internal devaluations simply reallocate demand within the currency union. They do not 
boost  aggregate  demand  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Put  another  way,  since 
competitiveness is relative, a solution for some cannot be a solution for all. 
Second, the degree of flexibility is not just an abstract economic choice; it is also a political 
one that determines the burden of risk sharing between labour, firms, and the state.19 
Third, internal devaluation always forces down nominal incomes for a time, regardless of the 
degree  of  price  and  wage  flexibility.20  In  more  flexible  economies,  these  reductions  are 
concentrated  in  wages;  in  less  flexible  ones,  unemployment.  Cumulative  nominal  GDP 
growth since the crisis has been no better in Ireland than it has been in Spain. And it is this 
                                                
16  As President Draghi recently said, EMU is incomplete and there is unfinished business. See Draghi (2014), 
“Stability and prosperity in monetary union”, speech at the University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 27 November 2014. 
17  A truth laid bare by the large flow of people out of the Irish economy, overwhelmingly to economies outside the 
euro area, since the crisis (Chart 5). 
18  The  only  way  to  recycle  surplus  savings  in  peripheral  economies  has  been  to  export  them.  But  since 
peripheral countries are not the average euro area economy, the euro exchange rate has not depreciated as 
far as would be warranted for them alone.  To move to running a current account surplus, they have needed to 
undergo  painful  internal  devaluation  against  the  core  countries  of  the  euro  area,  by  driving  down  demand, 
prices and wages. The current account of Ireland has moved from a deficit of 6.6% of GDP to a surplus of 
almost 6% today.  
19  In this regard it is impressive that some suggest centralised oversight and influence over such decisions. See 
Draghi (op. cit.) and Trichet, J C (2011), “Building Europe, building institutions”, on receiving the Karlspreis 
2011 in Aachen, 2 June 2011.  
20  Real incomes should eventually rise if structural reforms generate a productivity dividend. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  weakness of nominal income growth that is so harmful in dealing with a debt overhang and 
creates the tail risk of stagnation. 
So if increased flexibility is not sufficient, what else is required? 
The answer is to build the risk sharing institutions that are present in any successful currency 
union.  This  means  financial  integration  and  common  fiscal  arrangements.  In  other  words, 
both  private  and  public  risk  sharing.  It  is  not  realistic  to  expect  the  private  sector  to  do 
everything the public sector will not. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  European  financial  system  appeared  in  many  respects  to  be  highly 
integrated with cross-border bank loans amounting to more than a third of total bank lending. 
However, most of this was interbank loans, implicitly backed by the state. With many of the 
recipients being judged too big to fail during the crisis, creditors weren’t exposed to loss for 
fear of systemic damage. 
Since  the  crisis,  cross-border  banking  lending  has  halved,  and  the  ability  of  the  European 
system to recycle the surplus savings of peripheral nations to other parts of the private sector 
has been severely curtailed. 
The good news is that European authorities recognise the need to re-found the euro 
area financial union on the principle of risk sharing. 
The  current  fragmentation  of  the  system  stems  in  part  from  a  collapse  of  confidence  in 
financial  institutions  across  national  borders.  The  recent  Asset  Quality  Review  and  stress 
tests conducted by the ECB represent a major step towards restoring that confidence. Close 
to €60billion of capital has been raised since January 2014 as a result.21 
The  establishment  of  a  Banking  Union  and  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  as  well  as 
implementation of the G20 proposal on Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC) will help break 
the link between sovereigns and banks and establish greater risk sharing between creditors 
and  debtors.  When  combined  with  improved  resiliency  of  banks,  more  sustainable  cross-
border banking flows should grow with time. 
It is also welcome that the new Commission has advocated the creation of a Capital Markets 
Union to boost cross-border flows of market-based finance. Such a union would deepen the 
single  market,  could  benefit  all  member  states,  and  could  promote  much  greater  cross-
border risk sharing within the euro area. 
Had the cross-border financing of deficit countries taken the form of equity rather than debt, 
firms  in  deficit  countries  would  have  been  more  robust  and  losses  would  have  been 
dispersed. 
In  addition,  greater  direct  market-based  debt  financing  could  also  help  share  risks.  For 
historical reasons Europe has a much less well developed system of market-based finance, 
with banks dominating the provision of credit.22 This need for diversity is one reason why the 
Bank  of  England  and  the  ECB  are  working  towards  proposals  to  revive  the  European 
securitisation market.23 
                                                
21  See ECB (2014), “Aggregate report on the comprehensive assessment”, October. 
22  In the euro area, banks have historically played an important role in financing the real economy. Banks loans 
account for around 50% of firms’ external financing, which is very different from the US where around 80% of 
firms’ financing comes from capital markets (equity and debt securities). 
23  Had  debts  taken  the  form  of  corporate  bonds  or  proper  securitisations  with  real  risk  transfer,  defaults  by 
borrowers in the periphery would have been passed to the creditors in the core and this would have meant the 
financial system was more reliably available post crisis.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  To achieve this, the significant home bias in equity investment within Europe will need to be 
reduced, through measures such as the removal of national restrictions on investments by 
funds, greater provision of cross-border borrower information and greater pre and post trade 
transparency of prices and investment terms. 
These  reforms  hold  out  some  promise  of  helping  to  prevent  a  repeat  of  the  crisis.  Unlike 
banking union, they do not require institutional changes. They will benefit all member states 
in  the  single  market.  However,  they  will  take time  to  design  and  longer  to  implement,  and 
they will have no impact on the burden of the debt overhang that already exists. 
For complete solutions to both current and potential future problems the sharing of 
fiscal risks is required. 
It is no coincidence that effective currency unions tend to have centralised fiscal authorities 
whose spending is a sizeable share of GDP – averaging over a quarter of GDP for advanced 
countries outside the euro area (Table 1). 
I have already discussed how parts of the UK have benefitted from fiscal risk sharing. The 
euro area also stands out from federal systems like the US, Canada and Germany. In those 
systems, the impact of localised shocks to income is reduced by between one tenth and one 
fifth by centralised fiscal transfers (Chart 6). 
Without this risk sharing, the euro area finds itself in an odd position. 
As  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Council,  European  Commission,  Eurogroup  and 
European  Central  Bank  argued  in  their  report,  European  Monetary  Union  will  not  be 
complete until it builds mechanisms to share fiscal sovereignty. 
Possible options for sharing fiscal risks range from a transfer union to a pooled employment 
insurance mechanism. The latter would appear to be an opportunity to combine the current 
enthusiasm for labour market reform with the longer term imperative to build elements of an 
efficient transfer union. And it would ensure risk sharing was based on cyclical, rather than 
structural, labour market positions. 
And  what  of  short-term  fiscal  dynamics  in  the  euro  area?  President  Draghi  recently 
underscored the importance of fiscal policy as a short term stabilisation tool as well as the 
difficulty of utilising it in the current imperfect union. 
Consider the following comparison between the euro area and the UK. 
In the euro area, the private sector continues to generate surplus savings of 3½% of GDP 
(Chart 7). Those must be recycled effectively to generate an expansion. The UK no longer 
faces that challenge. Its private sector is in balance. 
The euro area unemployment rate of 11½% is twice that in the UK. 
Gross general government debt in the euro area is roughly the same as in the UK and below 
the average of advanced economies. 
The weighted average yield on 10-year euro area sovereign debt is around 1%, compared to 
1½% in the UK. 
And yet, the euro area’s fiscal deficit is half that in the UK. It structural deficit, according to 
the IMF, is less than one third as large. 
It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, if the euro zone were a country, fiscal policy would 
be substantially more supportive. However, it is tighter than in the UK, even though Europe 
still  lacks  other  effective  risk  sharing  mechanisms  and  is  relatively  inflexible.  A  more 
constructive fiscal policy would help recycle surplus private savings and mitigate the tail risk 
of stagnation. It would also bridge the drag from structural reforms on nominal spending and 
would be consistent with the longer term direction of travel towards greater integration. 
It would be bold, and it would be favoured by fortune. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
5. 
Jim Flaherty understood the importance of having a plan, and implementing it diligently and 
clearly. 
Not just because, as policymakers, that is our job. But also because in the absence of such a 
plan,  businesses  and  households  would  shy  away  from  the  risk-taking  we  need  for  a 
sustained global expansion. 
Europe needs a comprehensive, coherent plan to anchor expectations, build confidence and 
escape its debt trap. 
That plan begins but does not end with the monetary policy boldness of the ECB. 
That plan includes difficult structural reforms, but cannot be wholly reliant on them. 
That plan requires greater private risk sharing via banking and capital markets unions. 
But that plan also needs to recognise that private risk sharing will never fully replace public 
risk sharing so that plan should include what every other successful currency union has at its 
heart: mechanisms to share fiscal sovereignty. 
As of this evening, progress on structural reforms in the euro area remains uneven. Cross 
border risk sharing through the financial system has slid backwards. Europe’s leaders do not 
currently foresee fiscal union as part of monetary union.24 
Such timidity has costs. 
I think we all know what Jim Flaherty would have said about that. 
 
                                                 
24  As  President  Draghi  recently  noted,  “In  other  political  unions,  cohesion  is  maintained  through  a  strong 
common  identity,  but  often  also  through  permanent  fiscal  transfers  between  richer  and  poorer  regions  that 
even  out  incomes  ex  post.  In  the  euro  area,  such  one-way  transfers  between  countries  are  not 
foreseen…” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Chart 1:  
Chart 2:  
House prices(a) rose significantly  
during the boom years across euro area 
periphery countries and in the UK 
UK private sector swung sharply into 
surplus when the crisis hit but now back 
close to balance… 
  (a) Nominal house price indices. Source: OECD. 
 
Chart 3:  
… while Irish private sector  
surplus endures  
Non-financial private sector
Per cent of  GDP 
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
 g
n
i
v
a
s
 
t
e
N
 g
n
i
w
o
r
r
o
b
 
t
e
N
General government
Other (incl rest of world)
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
Source: Eurostat (ESA 95 definitions). 
  10 
  Source: Eurostat (ESA 95 definitions). 
 
Chart 4:  
Aggregate euro area debt has not  
fallen relative to GDP since 2007 
 
Source:  Buttiglione,  L,  Lane,  P,  Reichlin,  L  and 
Reinhart, V (2014) “Deleveraging, what deleveraging?”, 
Geneva Reports on the World Economy, 16, Centre for 
Economic Policy Research.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 5:  
Chart 6:  
Net migration(a) from Ireland 
overwhelmingly to economies outside the 
euro area since the crisis  
Risk-sharing in EMU substantially  
lower than in Canadian, US and German 
federal systems 
 
(a)  Cumulative  net  migration  between  2009–14  from 
Ireland by destination. Source: Central Statistics Office 
of Ireland. 
 Chart 7:  
Rest of the world now borrowing  
from the euro area as a whole 
 Source: IMF – Toward a fiscal union for the euro area, 
technical background notes (September 2013). Based 
on  Hepp  and  von  Hagen  (2012) 
for  Germany; 
Asdrubali,  Sorensen  and  Yosha  (1998)  for  the  US; 
Balli,  Basher  and  Rosmy  (2011)  for  Canada;  and 
Afonso and Furceri (2008) for the EMU and EU.  
 
 
    Source: Eurostat (ESA 95 definitions). 
 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  General and central government expenditure as a % of GDP 
Table 1:  
General government 
expenditure,  
% of GDP 
 Australia 
Austria 
Belgium 
Canada 
Czech Republic 
Denmark 
Estonia 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Hungary 
Iceland 
Ireland 
Israel 
Italy 
Japan 
Korea 
Luxembourg 
Mexico 
Netherlands 
Norway 
Poland 
Portugal 
Slovak Republic 
Slovenia 
Spain 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Turkey 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Source: OECD  
36 
53 
53 
44 
44 
58 
40 
56 
57 
48 
51 
50 
52 
65 
45 
50 
41 
30 
44 
23 
51 
45 
45 
51 
40 
49 
46 
52 
34 
40 
50 
43 
Central government 
expenditure,  
% of GDP 
26 
27 
30 
17 
30 
42 
30 
28 
24 
16 
40 
33 
40 
58 
39 
29 
18 
20 
31 
19 
31 
36 
27 
39 
23 
31 
19 
30 
11 
29 
46 
26 
 Notes: Table shows ratios of nominal government expenditure to nominal GDP 
for 2010.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
