  Yves Mersch: Getting the balance right – innovation, trust and regulation 
in retail payments 
Introductory speech by  Mr Yves  Mersch,  Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  joint  European  Central  Bank/Suomen  Pankki  (Bank  of  Finland) 
Conference, Helsinki, 4 June 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  provide  the  introductory  remarks  at  this  conference  on 
innovation,  trust  and  regulation  in  retail  payments.  Before  I  start,  I  would  like  to  thank 
Suomen Pankki for organising this event jointly with the ECB, and for hosting it. I am also 
very grateful to Erkki Liikanen for opening this conference. I am sure that we will spend two 
fruitful days having  valuable discussions and exchanges on the economics, strategies and 
policies of retail payments. 
Getting the balance right. It makes me think of Nik Wallenda, who crossed the Niagara Falls 
on a tightrope in 2012. The right mix of courage and caution that was necessary for that feat 
is required in other walks of life, too – and retail payment innovators are no exception here. 
In my remarks today I’d like to cover three things. First, I will outline the structural changes 
and challenges that the retail payments industry is facing as a result of digitalisation. Second, 
I will touch upon users’ changing expectations, also resulting from digitalisation. Third, I will 
make some suggestions on the responses needed from the industry and the regulators. 
Since  the  late  1980s,  digitalisation  in  communication  and  information  technology  has 
triggered significant social and economic change worldwide. Our professional and our private 
lives  have  been  greatly  affected  by  the  digital  revolution.  And  digitalisation  is  driving 
innovation in the financial sector as well. 
Widespread  use  of  the  internet,  of  mobile  telephony  and  of  social  media  has  created  a 
situation  in  which  information,  communication  and  commerce  are  no  longer  subject  to  the 
constraints  of  time  and  space.  They  can  be  accessed  24/7,  instantaneously  and  at  global 
level. 
The digitalisation of content has disrupted entire industries: think of what has happened to 
the music or publishing industry, or in the media. Consumption of digital content has changed 
quickly  and  substantially.  It  has  been  quite  a  painful  process  for  the  content  providers 
because it has had a major impact on their traditional revenue models. In the music industry, 
the sharing of MP3 files over the internet quickly unsettled the long-standing business model 
of  physical  recordings.  Record  companies  had  to  learn  that  the  internet  shouldn’t  simply 
serve  as  an  additional  distribution  channel  for  their  products;  they  had  to  overhaul  their 
business models in order to survive. 
In  contrast,  the  retail  payments  industry,  and  particularly  the  end-user  to  service  provider 
sphere,  is  only  now  starting  to  be  affected  by  structural  changes  arising  from  the  digital 
revolution. It is hard to say whether retail payments will change as rapidly and fundamentally 
as the music or newspaper industry. I expect that this conference will shed more light on user 
behaviour  and  choice.  What  I  think  is  safe  to  say  is  that  user  expectations  have 
undoubtedly changed due to the digitalisation of our lives at home and at work. At the ECB, 
we  receive  many  inquiries  and  comments  from  individuals  and  companies  across  Europe 
about retail payments. We are frequently asked why, in this age of real-time communication, 
e-payments  take  longer  than  e-mails.  Users  expect  retail  payments  to  be  like  other  digital 
content: easy, secure, not obstructed by national borders – and instantaneous. 
Let me make another point about the music, publishing and media industries. We have seen 
that  while  the  sales  of  CDs  and  printed  newspapers  are  declining,  they  have  not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  disappeared. There are people who still use them, like them and pay for them. Likewise, I 
think it is illusory to expect that cash or “traditional” cashless payment instruments will totally 
disappear within the next five to ten years because of digitalisation.1. The cashless society, 
as  appealing  as  it  may  sound,  is  probably  just  as  elusive  as  the  much  vaunted  paperless 
office. 
However,  digitalisation  can  make  cashless  payments  more  efficient  and  attractive,  to  the 
extent that they become a viable alternative to cash. What matters most is that users have a 
choice.  They  should  be  able  to  pay  in  the  way  that  suits  them  best  in  different  payment 
situations.  At  present,  person-to-person  payments  such  as  the  sharing  of  a  dinner  bill  are 
often  restricted  to  cash.  In  future,  easy  and  secure  alternatives  such  as  mobile  person-to-
person payments should be possible – across Europe. 
As I mentioned just now, users – be they consumers, retailers or businesses – do not see 
why  retail  payments  cannot  be  like  instant  messages.  So  it’s  no  surprise  that  instant 
payments have become the “hot” topic in the retail payments industry. We do not need to 
discuss any longer the “if” and “why”, we have to discuss the “how”. 
As you well know, in December 2014, the Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB), which is the 
multi-stakeholder group helping  to foster the  development  of  an  integrated,  innovative  and 
competitive market for retail payments in euro in the European Union, identified a need for at 
least  one  pan-European  instant  payment  solution  for  euro  that  is  open  to  any  payment 
service provider in the European Union. For me, it seems logical that such a solution would 
be based on ISO 20022, IBAN and immediate payment finality. In short, SEPA credit transfer 
looks like the most suitable basis for an instant payment scheme. 
I expect that the ERPB will take a clear stance on the way ahead at its meeting this month. I 
also expect that the industry and, more specifically, the European Payments Council (EPC), 
representing  payment  service  providers,  will  carry  out  its  work  accordingly.  Time  is  of  the 
essence here. The SEPA project showed that the harmonisation of retail payments in Europe 
can  be  a  time-consuming  process.  Innovation,  however,  often  moves  at  high  speed.  We 
cannot afford to take a wait-and-see approach. 
At  present,  innovative  payment  methods  are  being  implemented  by  some  national 
communities  in  Europe. Many  of  those methods  offer  instant  payments,  which  are  cleared 
immediately.  However,  although  they  are  often  based  on  the  same  standards,  the 
implementation of those standards is not harmonised and thus the methods are not easily 
interoperable. On top of that, many euro area constituencies are facing a dilemma because 
they  do  not  know  whether  to  wait  for  a  pan-European  scheme  or  to  develop  a  national 
scheme themselves. 
I think that rather than starting to develop national schemes, we should go straight to a pan-
European solution for instant payments. We should take advantage of the harmonisation and 
integration  already  achieved  with  SEPA  and  use  SEPA  as  a  blueprint  for  instant  payment 
solutions. 
As I said, instant payments are the “hot” topic in the retail payments industry. Yet they will be 
largely invisible to end users. They will form the basis on which payment service providers 
build  their  offerings  for  end  users,  aiming  to  fulfil  those  users’  expectations  with  regard  to 
convenience and safety. 
                                                
1   The  British  futurologist  Dr  Ian  Pearson  predicts  that  by  2025  people  will  be  able  to  spend  their  money 
electronically  anywhere  without  worrying  about  what  kind  of  devices  or  apps  they  have.  However,  he  also 
believes that even in 2025 coins and notes will still be useful for certain purposes and will stay in common use. 
See 
payments: 
http://www.payyourway.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/Pay-Your-Way-2025-FUTURE-OF-
PAYMENTS.pdf 
commissioned 
Payments 
Council 
report 
future 
the 
the 
on 
by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  As  a  result  of  the  digitalisation  of  information,  communication  and  commerce,  payments  – 
and in particular remote payments – are no longer perceived on a stand-alone basis. Rather, 
they  have  become  part  of  some  increasingly  long  and  complex  value  chains.  Users  will 
above  all  want  these  value  chains  to  seamlessly  integrate  e-commerce,  social  media  and 
retail payments. In e-commerce, buying and paying with one click is easier than having to 
navigate  from  the  merchant  website  to  the  bank  online  application  and  entering  payment 
data, passwords, TANs and so on. 
Interestingly and unsurprisingly, the companies that dominate the digital world – the internet 
“big  five”,  namely  Apple,  Google,  Microsoft,  Amazon  and  Facebook  –  are  all  offering 
payment  services  or  considering  doing  so.2  These  payment  services  are  incorporated 
seamlessly  into  their  digital  ecosystems  and  thus  potentially  have  a  global  reach.  Their 
business case is clear. They provide the services free of charge to retail clients (but not to 
merchants),  expecting  to  achieve  indirect  returns  through  increased  customer  loyalty, 
acquisition of customer data (big data), analysis of purchasing behaviour and personalised 
advertising. 
This is the big challenge for the incumbents in the market. However, the market pie in retail 
payments innovation in Europe has not been sliced up and shared out yet. Incumbents can 
still have an impact, provided they are far-sighted enough to realise that the challenges of 
digitalisation  cannot  be  met  by  merely  considering  the  internet  and  the  smartphone  as  an 
additional channel for retail payments. 
While  the  new  service  providers  and  competitors  should  not  be  underestimated,  let’s  not 
forget  the  comparative  advantages  that  banks  can  offer.  Data  and  operational  security  is 
one. Many users are worried about some practices of the international providers in the digital 
sphere.  Confidence  in the  security  of transactions  is  –  and  will  remain  –  the  basis for  any 
kind of relationship between payment service provider and user. Believe it or not, payment 
service users still trust their banks. 
Against this background, the role of the regulators in general and central banks in particular 
has not changed that radically. The main concern of central banks is to maintain confidence 
in  money  by  fostering  safe  and  efficient  retail  payment  systems.  However,  the  issues  that 
need to be addressed are changing. First, the digitalisation of the retail payments industry 
means  that  the  security  requirements  need  to  be  adapted  and  enhanced  accordingly. 
Second, the emergence of new payment services and payment service providers requires a 
level playing field for newcomers and for long-established players, as well as an appropriate 
level  of  protection  for  the  payment  service  users.  Third,  while  Europe  is  striving  for  pan-
European  solutions,  global  service  providers  offering  global  solutions  present  a  further 
challenge that has to be tackled. 
Let me conclude. 
What I have tried to show in these opening remarks is that the structural changes in the retail 
payments  industry  arising  from  digitalisation  are  just  beginning  to  take  effect.  Payment 
service  providers  –  be  they  market  incumbents  or  new  players  –  and  regulators  need  to 
respond  to  the  challenges  that  these  structural  changes  bring.  Payment  service  providers 
have to understand users’ expectations in terms of speed, convenience and security, and act 
accordingly. 
As  for  instant  payments,  I  think  the  most  logical  way  forward  is  a  pan-European  solution 
based on SEPA credit transfer. Although that might mean having to strike a balance between 
                                                
2   Apple Pay was introduced in October 2014 for iPhone 6 in the US; Google Wallet started operating in the US 
in  2011;  Android  Pay  –  mobile  payments  framework  was  announced  by  Google  in  March  2015;  Amazon 
Payments started operating in 2007; Facebook Messenger P2P payments started to be rolled out in March 
2015 in the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  fast-moving innovation and a more gradual integration process, it would seem to offer greater 
potential and to be better than trying out a multitude of national approaches that are difficult 
to harmonise at a later stage. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
