  Manuel Sánchez: Emerging markets and the world’s unusual monetary 
conditions 
Remarks by Mr Manuel Sánchez, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at the GIC Central 
Banking Series: Madrid, Madrid, 13 May 2015. 
 It is a pleasure to be in Spain, a country which has a close history and strong cultural and 
economic ties with Mexico. I would like to thank BBVA for the invitation to participate in this 
conference, and to share my thoughts with you on the challenges for emerging economies in 
the current unique global scenario. 
I  will  begin  my  presentation  by  reflecting  on  the  extraordinarily  loose  monetary  stances  in 
most  advanced  countries.  Then,  I  will  describe  how  these  conditions  affect  emerging 
economies  and  their  policy  options,  and  I  will  conclude  by  touching  on  Mexico’s  financial 
developments. As usual, my remarks are entirely my own and are not necessarily the views 
of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Monetary policies in advanced countries 
Since  2008,  the  central  banks  of  advanced  nations  have  implemented  increasingly 
expansionary monetary policies. This trend has shown at least three important facets: first, 
authorities have resorted to unconventional tools never tried before; second, the degree of 
monetary  accommodation  achieved  is  unprecedented;  and  third,  the  tendency  has  been 
widespread, encompassing most major central banks, following the lead of the U.S. Federal 
Reserve. 
In  particular,  the  traditional  instruments,  benchmark  interest  rates,  have  been  reduced  to 
minimum levels, to virtually zero in the United States or even to negative values for policy 
and  or  deposit  rates  in  continental  Europe.  The  liquidity  growth  has  mainly  reflected 
significant  augmentation  of  central  banks’  balance  sheets,  through  large-scale  asset 
purchases, commonly referred to as quantitative easing. 
The variety of securities bought has been ample, including, in some cases, private credit and 
stocks.  Forward  guidance  completes  the  toolkit,  in  an  attempt  at  influencing  market 
expectations regarding the direction of future policy actions. 
In the wake of the global crisis, the main aim of monetary policy was to normalize financial 
conditions.  Central  banks  implemented  extraordinary  measures  to  meet  the  increased 
demand  for  liquidity  amid  a  generalized  rejection  of  assets,  highly  preferred  during  the 
preceding boom, that were suddenly perceived as too risky. 
This goal, which was at the core of the central bank role as lender of last resort, was attained 
well.  Financial  stabilization  benefited  not  only  the  countries  where  measures  were 
undertaken, notably the United States, the epicenter of the crisis, but, in light of the contagion 
effect, also the world as a whole. 
Even after financial markets stabilized, monetary expansion continued to deepen, although 
through  different  paths  across  jurisdictions.  While  emphasis  on  objectives  differed,  each 
central bank looking to its legal mandate, in general, looser monetary policies have sought to 
support economic recovery and, at the same time, preserve price stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The  contribution  of  monetary  accommodation  to  growth  since  2010  has  been  subject  to 
debate, particularly in the United States. Although evidence tends to confirm a positive effect 
on economic activity, estimated results have sometimes turned out to be relatively modest.1 
Regarding price stability, monetary actions in advanced countries have been motivated by 
recurrent  fears  of  deflation.  While  such  an  event  cannot  be  ruled  out,  concerns  about 
possible  implications  should  not  be  magnified.  Neither  theory  nor  history  establish  a  clear 
connection between deflation and poor economic activity. The only evident negative episode 
seems to be the substantial deflation that occurred during the Great Depression. But at that 
time  prevailing  monetary  conditions  were  tight,  and  no  precedent  exists  of  significant 
deflation under highly expansionary monetary conditions.2 
Regardless  of  their  effectiveness  in  attaining  desired  results,  extremely  loose  monetary 
policies may generate increasing risks and unintended consequences. Low interest rates can 
result in excessive risk-taking, overleverage and the channeling of credit to projects with low 
productivity.  The  discouragement  of  saving  hurts  retirees,  as  well  as  pension  funds  and 
insurance companies, which could face difficulties meeting long-term liabilities. 
Asset  prices  may  reach  levels  inconsistent  with  underlying  fundamentals.  Inefficiencies 
would hinder economic growth, and imbalances could endanger financial stability, something 
that  bears  watching  especially  in  light  of  the  recent  global  crisis.  Also,  expansionary 
monetary policies potentially reduce incentives to implement other needed reforms, such as 
fiscal consolidation and productivity-oriented changes.3 
In fact, during recent years, monetary measures have kept gaining ground relative to other 
policies in attempts to support growth. However, expecting too much from monetary policy 
may be counterproductive. Central banks have become crucial participants in new financial 
arenas,  including  credit  allocation,  at  the  risk  of  distorting  prices.  Additionally,  speculation 
and  news  about  possible  central  bank  decisions  have  become  the  most  important  market 
movers. 
This activist role may have unintentionally weakened the public’s confidence in the ongoing 
recovery. The abnormal situation has resulted in the circumstance that financial participants 
tend to react positively to weaker-than-expected economic data and vice versa. 
The  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Fed  to  begin  unwinding  its  policy  in  the  near  future  is  a 
welcome development. It will likely reflect stronger U.S. economic performance, which should 
favor the world economy, especially those countries most closely linked to the United States. 
Normalization,  in  turn,  is  a  precondition  for  containing  the  accumulation  of  possible 
vulnerabilities that could eventually jeopardize global economic improvement. 
In  any  case,  the  future  likely  scenario  for  advanced  nations  is  one  of  divergent  monetary 
paths. While the United Kingdom will perhaps be next after the United States in unwinding 
stimulus, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan and other major central banks could 
further loosen monetary stances. The pace in each direction is highly uncertain. 
                                                
1   For  an  estimation  of  real  effects  of  unconventional  monetary  policy,  see,  for  example,  Engen,  E.M.,  et  al. 
(2015), “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies,” Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2015–005, January; and 
Wu,  J.C.  and  F.D.  Xia  (2014),  “Measuring  the  Macroeconomic  Impact  of  Monetary  Policy  at  Zero  Lower 
Bound,” Chicago Booth Research Paper 13–77, July. 
2   Two  analyses  on  the  possible  real  consequences  of  deflation  are:  Atkeson,  A.  and  P.J.  Kehoe  (2004), 
“Deflation and Depression: Is There an Empirical Link?” American Economic Review, 94 (2); and Ryska, P. 
(2014), “Deflation and Economic Growth in Long-Term Perspective,” Charles University in Prague, Institute of 
Economic Studies Working Paper 18/2014. 
3   For a review of possible risks from prolonged monetary expansion, see Hannoun, H. (2015), “Ultra-Low or 
Negative Interest Rates: What They Mean for Financial Stability and Growth,” Speech at the BIS Eurofi High-
Level Seminar, April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Effects on emerging economies 
Unconventional  monetary  policies  in  developed  countries  have  had  significant  bearing  on 
emerging  markets.  Financial  stabilization  in  a  U.S.  economy  overwhelmed  by  the  global 
turbulence was clearly positive, as it mitigated significant outward contagion. To the extent 
that a larger collapse was avoided, other countries benefited, a comment that can also be 
extended to the subsequent U.S. economic rebound. 
The  search  for  yield  stemming  from  abundant  liquidity  since  2010  has  translated  into 
substantial capital flows, especially portfolio funds, to emerging economies. Benign financial 
conditions  have  helped  stock  and  debt  issuers  in  both  local  and  foreign  currencies.  In  as 
much as productive opportunities have been exploited, this environment has helped growth. 
At the same time, vulnerabilities may have surfaced in some countries. These include the 
overheating  of  specific  sectors,  high  indebtedness  and  excessive  exposure  to  foreign 
currencies,  as  well  as  asset  overvaluations  that  may  not  be  sustainable,  especially  once 
easy liquidity conditions are reversed.4 
These  fragilities  might  have  been  made  worse  by  the  fact  that  emerging  economies  have 
generally loosened their monetary stances in reaction to the expansion in advanced nations. 
Indeed, policy rates have tended to remain below what is suggested by different versions of 
the Taylor rule.5 
In any case, concerns related to the aforementioned risks have shaped defensive measures 
in  emerging  markets.  Obviously,  the  actions  announced  and  undertaken  by  the  Fed  have 
played a crucial role. 
Before the taper tantrum in May 2013, as portfolio capital moved more steadily and strongly, 
the main focus of policy makers was probably how to discourage or slow down the entrance 
of  these  funds.  Strategies  in  many  countries  included  capital  restrictions,  official  foreign 
exchange purchases to avoid currency appreciation, and interest rate cuts by central banks. 
Evidence regarding the net effect of these tools is mixed.6 
During the last two years, as capital flows have contracted and later resumed with less vigor, 
a  policy  shift  has  apparently  occurred  towards  how  to  protect  financial  stability.  In  some 
countries,  the  change  has  implied  the  reversal  of  previous  measures,  for  example,  lifting 
controls, using international reserves to fight currency depreciation, and hiking interest rates. 
In  particular,  monetary  policy  was  tightened  in  economies  exhibiting  large  domestic  and 
external imbalances as well as climbing inflation. 
Facing uncertainty in emerging markets 
Portfolio  capital  flows  largely  exploit  carry  trades.  If  a  determinant  of  the  trade  changes, 
investor  decisions  can  be  expected  to  change  as  well.  The  possible  reduction  of  lax 
conditions  would  largely  depend  on  expectations,  including  those  regarding  central  banks’ 
reactions in emerging markets. In such a scenario, a sudden stop or reversal of capital flows 
cannot be ruled out. 
                                                
4   For  an  exploration  of  the  effects  of  unconventional  policies  on  emerging  economies,  see  Chen,  Q.,  et  al. 
(2015), “Financial Crisis, US Unconventional Monetary Policy and Intentional Spillovers,” BIS Working Paper 
494,  March;  Hoffmann,  A.  (2014),  “Zero  Interest  Rate  Policy  and  Unintended  Consequences  in  Emerging 
Markets,”  ICER  Working  Paper 2/2014, February; and Tillman, P. (2014), “Unconventional Monetary Policy 
Shocks and the Spillovers to Emerging Markets,” HKIMR Working Paper 18/2014, August. 
5   See, for example, Hofmann, B. and B. Bogdanova (2012), “Taylor Rules and Monetary Policy: A Global ‘Great 
Deviation’?” BIS Quarterly Review, September. 
6   See, for example, Forbes, K., et al. (2015), “Capital Flow Management Measures: What Are They Good For?” 
NBER Working Paper No. 20860, January; and Alfaro, L., et al. (2014), “The Real Effects of Capital Controls: 
Financial Constraints, Exporters, and Firm Investment,” NBER Working Paper 20726, December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
The rise in global risk aversion and the significant financial volatility triggered by the taper 
tantrum may be an indication of how markets could react to a surprising move by the Fed. 
Currently, a lot of speculation has centered on the date of the first hike, but this and other 
details on U.S. monetary unwinding cannot be  known in advance, simply because, as the 
Fed itself has stated, the whole process is data dependent. 
It  seems  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  continue  to  use  forward 
guidance  as  cautiously  as  possible,  especially  in  light  of  its  experience  with  the  taper 
tantrum.  In  that  sense,  if  monetary  changes  are  anticipated  and  gradual,  international 
volatility resulting from such actions may be contained. Presumably, markets would price in 
those  changes  in  advance,  without  much  over-  or  undershooting  of  asset  prices  and, 
perhaps, of portfolio adjustment. 
Indeed, the Fed has revealed its preference for incremental moves, stating that the policy 
rate may stay at levels lower than those consistent with full achievement of its mandate for 
some  time  even  after  those  goals  have  been  attained.  This  expectation,  along  with  the 
assumption that other advanced nations may further deepen their monetary expansion, could 
keep world liquidity conditions relatively ample for some time. 
However,  gradualism  cannot  be  assured.  In  the  event  of  a  surprise  tightening  of  the  U.S. 
labor  market,  for  instance,  the  monetary  authority  may  be  forced  to  change  gears  more 
significantly than initially planned. 
Also,  other  countries  may  end  up  taking  monetary  postures  less  loose  than  currently 
envisioned.  For  example,  extreme  unconventional  monetary  policies  have  resulted  in 
negative interest rates for a wide array of maturities in a number of European countries. If 
they prevail too long, we do not know what impact these rates may have on financial stability 
or  economic  efficiency.  That 
its  possible 
consequences can hardly be estimated. 
In such an uncertain scenario, an effective way for emerging economies to shield themselves 
against external shocks is by strengthening their macroeconomic fundamentals. At the same 
time, authorities must remain vigilant to detect factors that may endanger financial stability 
and react in a timely manner. 
territory  has  never  been  explored,  and 
Financial developments in Mexico 
Like other emerging economies, during the last few years, Mexico has been the destination 
of considerable portfolio capital flows. Substantial external resources have been channeled 
to the domestic markets, and financing in foreign currencies has been successfully tapped by 
the government and corporates. 
Mexico’s capital account openness has facilitated these inflows. The most noticeable impact 
has been observed in nonresidents’ holdings of peso-denominated government bonds, which 
rose since 2010 to reach approximately 37 percent of the total outstanding.7 
It is worth noting that Mexico’s banks are not large recipients of capital flows. They enjoy an 
ample,  low-cost  domestic  funding  base  in  pesos.  Also,  prudential  bank  regulation, 
established in the 1980s and 1990s as a result of macroeconomic crises, imposes stringent 
foreign currency restrictions in terms of limitations for opening deposit accounts, caps on net 
liabilities and open positions, as well as a minimum liquidity ratio. 
Obviously,  Mexico  has  not  been  immune  to  changes  in  global  risk  aversion.  The  clearest 
recent impact has been felt in asset prices, especially through movements in the exchange 
rate. In particular, the currency’s weakening and volatile trend since the middle of last year 
                                                
7   Outstanding refers to federal government debt securities. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
has mostly mirrored the generalized appreciation of the U.S. dollar, in addition to the fall in oil 
prices. In contrast, medium- and long-term interest rates have increased moderately since 
the taper tantrum, resulting in steepening of the yield curve, slightly more than that of the 
United States. 
Furthermore, since 2013, nonresident holdings of peso-denominated government securities 
have  remained  roughly  stable  as  a  proportion  of  the  total  outstanding.  Throughout  these 
months,  composition  has  changed,  with  long-term  bonds  gaining  a  higher  share  at  the 
expense  of  zero  coupon  short-term  securities,  which  may  reflect  a  cleaning-up  of  highly 
speculative positions. 
Mexico’s  relative  resilience  to  external  shocks  seems  to  be  based  on  a  solid  economic 
foundation,  including  prudent  fiscal  management,  monetary  policy  focused  on  controlling 
inflation,  and  a  sound  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial  institutions. 
Additionally,  a  broad  reform  agenda  may  be  contributing  to  a  positive  perception  of  the 
economy. 
Nevertheless,  recent  financial  developments  are  no  guarantee  of  future  tranquility.  The 
challenges  ahead  are  faced  by  other  emerging  markets  as  well.  Mexico  can  further 
differentiate itself through commitment to an announced multiyear reduction of public debt, 
the  convergence  of  inflation  to  the  permanent  target,  and  a  profound  implementation  of 
ongoing  structural  reforms.  These  measures  should  foster  financial  stability  and  long-term 
economic growth. 
Concluding remarks 
The  likely  divergent  monetary  paths  of  advanced  nations  pose  challenges  for  emerging 
economies. The proximity of the liftoff of rate hikes in the United States is encouraging, as it 
will  reflect  a  strong  economic  performance  that  should  favor  the  world  recovery.  The 
intended gradualism by the Fed, and the possible continuation of monetary expansion by the 
European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan, may suggest that the global economy will still 
see abundant liquidity, with relatively benign financial conditions for emerging markets. 
However, uncertainty surrounding the pace of U.S. normalization and of monetary actions in 
other  countries  may  give  rise  to  episodes  of  international  financial  volatility.  In  particular, 
market  sentiment  towards  emerging  economies  could  change.  The  best  strategy  for 
countries  to  shield  themselves  against  external  shocks  is  to  strengthen  economic 
fundamentals, while at the same time authorities remain on alert for factors that would put 
financial stability at risk. 
Finally,  Mexico  can  potentially  remain  attractive  to  investors  by  assuring  public  debt 
sustainability, consolidating convergence of inflation to the target, and implementing ongoing 
structural reforms in a deep-seated, effective manner. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
