  Vítor Constâncio: Monetary policy and the European recovery 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the XXXI 
Reunión Círculo de Economía, Barcelona, 30 May 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I start by thanking Círculo de Economia for inviting me to participate in this prestigious event. 
The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  is  on  ways  to  “consolidate  the  recovery”.  The  ECB’s 
monetary policy measures aim at precisely that: supporting the recovery in order to reach our 
price stability objective. Our policies have however, a broader impact, also being part of the 
European response to the challenges that the euro area has been confronted with for some 
time. 
The first challenge was precisely the need to overcome the situation of low growth and low 
inflation  then  prevailing.  The  second,  referred  to  the  necessity  of  overcoming  the  financial 
and  economic  fragmentation  among  the  members  of  the  monetary  union.  The  third, 
corresponded  to  the  goal  of  repairing  and  strengthening  the  banking  sector  in  order  to 
improve the financing of the recovery. The last challenge consisted in increasing the rate of 
potential growth which is essential. 
In  different  degrees  these  challenges  are  still  with  us  but  a  remarkable  set  of  initiatives 
started to deal with them in a more forceful way. Besides our own monetary policy decisions, 
from the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) announcement to the recent Asset Purchase 
Programme (APP), we need to recall the Banking Union project; the operational start of the 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  in  the  ECB;  the  Comprehensive  Assessment  and  Stress 
Tests  that  preceded  it;  the  creation  of  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism;  the  launch  of  the 
European  Fund  for  Strategic  Investments  aimed  at  spurring  investment  and  finally,  the 
announcement of the ambitious goal of creating a Capital Markets Union. 
In my remarks today, I will explain the rationale for the monetary policy measures taken since 
mid-2014 and the effects they are having on the on-going recovery. Secondly, I will address 
some  financial  stability  risks  portrayed  in  our  just  published  Financial  Stability  Review.1 
Subsequently,  I  will  reflect  on  the  macroprudential  policy  framework  needed  to  deal  with 
those  risks  and  on  the  role  that  the  Capital  Markets  Union  may  have  in  improving  the 
efficiency  of  our  financial  system  and  on  the  creation  of  private  risk  sharing  mechanism, 
particularly important for our monetary union. 
The rationale for the ECB’s monetary policy and its effects on the recovery 
A  phase  of  active  management  of  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet  and  our  monetary  base, 
started once inflation fell below 1%, in the second half of 2013, and kept drifting down over 
the  first  semester  of  2014.  These  developments  were  also  accompanied  by  a  significant 
decline  in  various  measures  of  long-term  inflation  expectations.  During  the  same  period, 
economic  growth  was  faltering  reflecting  a  general  lack  of  demand  in  the  euro  area  with 
corresponding  high  unemployment.  A  more  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  was 
needed to maintain price stability in the face of insufficient aggregate demand and downward 
inflationary pressures. 
In  response  to  these  developments,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  in  June  and 
September  2014  cut  the  monetary  policy  rate,  decided  on  a  negative  deposit  facility  rate; 
introduced two asset purchase programmes, for asset backed securities (ABS) and covered 
                                                
1  See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/fsr/html/index.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  bonds,  and  launched  a  new  liquidity  facility  to  provide  longer-term  funding  to  banks 
conditional on their credit performance (TLTROs). 
The relatively  weak  use  of the first  tranches  of the TLTRO  by  the  banks  and  the fact that 
inflation  turned  negative  in  December,  led  the  ECB  to  enlarge  the  Asset  Purchase 
Programme  (APP)  by  including  sovereign  bonds  and  by  deciding  to  calibrate  a  monthly 
amount of €60 billion purchases of the three types of assets. 
The switch to a more active steering of the ECB balance sheet is the distinguishing feature of 
the new phase of our non-standard measures. It is important to underline the nature of this 
new phase. We are not thinking of increasing our monetary base, expecting that through the 
workings  of  a  stable  multiplier,  monetary  aggregates  will  increase,  thereby  causing  an 
upward  movement  in  inflation,  by  whatever  ways  the  traditional  quantitative  approach 
conceived. We decided on a Large Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) mostly to be able to use 
several new channels of transmission of an expansionary monetary policy. The increase of 
the  monetary  base  and  the  total  balance  sheet  is  a  consequence  of  these  new  types  of 
monetary stimulus. 
By purchasing this type of long-maturity assets, we intervene directly on medium-term rates, 
we extract duration from the market, we provide liquidity directly to non-bank entities, and we 
open  space  in  banks’  balance  sheets  for  increasing  credit.  Also,  by  reducing  persistent 
market spreads, in ABSs for instance, we encourage banks to increase their supply. As new 
money  origination  can  only  be  achieved  through  the  creation  of  more  loans,  this  measure 
has the potential to increase the supply of credit and reduce the price at which it is granted. 
Another important channel through which asset purchases work in the euro area is the broad 
portfolio  balance  channel.  If  different  assets  are  imperfect  substitutes,  interventions  by  the 
central  bank  that  affect  the  supply  of  various  assets  available  to  private  investors  could 
influence the prices of many other assets, including investment grade bonds, equities, real 
estate or foreign assets with consequences for the exchange rate. Higher valuations facilitate 
the  process  of  balance sheet  repair  that  is  on-going  in  the  euro  area,  and  more generally 
contribute  to  support  credit  growth. We  see  that  the  various  effects  also  impact  the  credit 
channel. 
Finally,  asset  purchases  also  operate  through  a  signalling  effect,  i.e.  by  affecting 
expectations of future inflation and the future likely path of the key ECB rates. For the U.S., 
there is indeed evidence suggesting that quantitative easing contributed to increase inflation 
expectations,  and  therefore  that  asset  purchases  by  the  Fed  reduced  real  interest  rates. 
Lower real rates stimulate aggregate consumption and investment, and ultimately contribute 
to a faster return of the euro area inflation rate to levels consistent with our definition of price 
stability. 
All these transmission channels show that the effects of our policy go well beyond the direct 
effect on the yields of the purchased securities. Therefore, the criticism that the policy would 
not be effective on account of already low sovereign yields  is not  well founded. Even less 
valid is the argument that sovereign bond purchases ease the pressure on governments to 
do structural reforms. It is not the task of a central bank to exert more or less pressure on 
governments  to  adopt  policies  for  which  governments’  are  responsible.  They  should 
implement  the  reforms  that  are  necessary.  In  order  for  central  banks  to  deserve  their 
independence they have to fulfil their responsibility of ensuring price stability in the medium-
term,  an  objective  that  monetary  policy  has  the  power  to  achieve.  To  be  credible,  central 
banks must act in a symmetric way, avoiding both too high and too low inflation. 
Recent figures confirm that our policy is indeed working according to plan. Conditions in a 
host  of  asset  markets,  from  equities  to  bonds  or  foreign  exchange,  have  reacted  in  the 
expected  way  through  the  portfolio  rebalancing  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy. 
Since January, equity prices have gone up by 14% and by 18% since last May, lowering the 
cost of equity for non-financial firms and banks; the effective exchange rate has come down 
by 3% since January and by 12% since last May; corporate bond yields have come down by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  56 basis points since mid-last year, yields of bank bonds by 66 basis points and bank lending 
rates decreased, on average, by 70 basis points. This last point shows that our policies are 
also  improving  the  credit  channel,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  credit  to  the  private 
sector reached a turning point and has shown positive monthly flow in the last few months 
until April. Annualising this recent positive growth we come to an annual rate of 2%2 which 
contrasts  with  negative  rates  in  the  more  recent  years.  On  the  other  hand,  the  euro  area 
composite  spot  5-year  real  interest  rate  which  had  increased  by  around  60  basis  points 
between  September  2014  and  January  2015  shows  now  a  decrease  by  85  basis  points 
between  mid-January  and  May.  More  expansionary  financial  conditions  are  supporting  the 
recovery  and  also  the  expected  increase  in  inflation  expectations  that  reduced  the  real 
interest rate. 
All these improvements in financial conditions justify our staff projections published in March 
pointing  to  a  sustained  recovery  that  leads  to  a  real  growth  rate  of  2.1%  in  2017,  the 
elimination of the present negative output gap and an inflation rate of 1.9%. This 4% nominal 
growth  rate  is  equal  to  the  average  between  2000  and  2008  and  much  higher  than  the 
meager 0.87% average from 2009 to 2014, with 1.8% last year. If the exogenous external 
factors  implicit  in  those  projections  materialize  and  our  policies  are  successful,  it  is  very 
important  to  underline  the  deep  significance  of  what  these  numbers  imply.  First,  the 
normalisation  of  inflation  within  the  range  in  our  mandate  would  be  an  important 
achievement,  underpinning  the  credibility  of  the  ECB,  and  ensuring  price  stability  which  is 
important for the well functioning of our decentralized economies dependent on price signals 
for  the  allocation  of  resources.  Second,  those  numbers  would  also  represent  a  significant 
contribution  to  financial  stability  by  overcoming  the  low  nominal  growth  that  has  been 
portrayed as the underlying factor of the main risks for financial stability in the euro area in 
the  recent  years.  It  was  indeed  underlying  the  deflationary  risks  perceived  by  some 
commentators, it was underlying the increased burden of servicing the high debt of both the 
public and the private sector which constituted a drag on the recovery; and it was underlying 
the weak profitability of the banking sector. 
Needless  to  say,  all  projections  are  surrounded  by  uncertainty.  Some  risks  are  still  to  the 
downside as, for instance, those associated with the still low real investment or to possible 
external shocks that may create unexpected difficulties. We have to be cautious and, above 
all,  persist  in  our  policies  as  promised,  given  that  these  encouraging  projections  are 
predicated on the full implementation of our purchase programmes until next year. 
Sometimes criticism is directed at our policies, either because by reducing interest rates now 
we  hurt  savers  or  because  low  rates  are  contributing  to  excesses  in  assets  valuations. 
Implicitly, these views are attributing the responsibility of the low interest rate environment to 
central bank policies. But the case is exactly the opposite: central banks are only reacting 
and trying to correct a situation that they did not create. 
Medium and long term market interest rates are mostly influenced by investors and market 
players as the recent so-called “bund tantrum” illustrates. More importantly though, it should 
be  pointed  out  that  for  a  few  decades  now  we  see  a  sort  of  secular  trend  for  lower  real 
interest rates. This trend is related to secular stagnation in advanced economies, resulting 
from  a  continuous  deceleration  of  total  productivity  growth  and  an  increase  in  planned 
savings  over  less  buoyant  investment  prospects.  Monetary  policy  short-term  rates  are  low 
because of those developments, not the other way around. At the same time, our monetary 
policy  has  to  be  accommodative  precisely  in  order  to  normalise  inflation  and  growth  rates 
therefore getting to higher interest rates. 
                                                
2  Annualised six month growth rate of MFI loans to the private sector adjusted for sales and securitisations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Furthermore, in the present short-term conditions, with fiscal policy blocked, it is monetary 
policy that can create the hope that this normalisation will protect savers in the future and 
improve net margins for banks. 
Financial Stability risks and macroprudential policy 
Clearly, no policy intervention is without side effects. A prolonged period of low interest rates 
contributes  to  search  for  yield  and  to  possible  rich  asset  valuations  which  may  generate 
financial stability concerns. In our Financial Stability Review published two days ago, this is 
acknowledged and described as the first risk to stability: the possibility of an abrupt reversal 
of risk premia and asset valuations that could induce capital losses and disturb the recovery. 
It  should  be  however  noted  that,  to  date,  no  generalised  overvaluations  in  asset  markets 
have  been  identified.  While  euro  area  stock  prices  are  increasing  rapidly,  the  Schiller 
measure of cyclically adjusted average price-earnings-ratio in the euro area stock exchanges 
is 14, which is close but still below its historical average, whereas it stands at around 26 in 
the  U.S.  Valuation  metrics  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  suggest  that  residential  property 
prices  are  broadly  in  line  with  fundamentals  and  below  their  historical  average,  with  the 
opposite  holding  for  prime  commercial  property,  given  continued  strong  price  increases. 
Likewise, our internal model-based assessments of the euro area corporate bond market do 
not signal overvaluations and excessive bond premia to date. 
In  the  present  context,  there  is  nevertheless, the  need  to  remain  vigilant  and  continuously 
monitor developments. Monetary policy must however remain focused on inflation and/or on 
growth.  Therefore,  such  risks  need  to  be  addressed  by  policy  instruments  dedicated  to 
ensuring  financial  sector  resilience  while  curbing  financial  cyclical  excesses  –  that  is,  by 
supervision and macroprudential policy. 
Macroprudential  policy  has  two  main  objectives:  to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  whole 
system and to smoothen the financial cycle, i.e. the fluctuation of credit, leverage and asset 
prices that may lead to boom-bust episodes. 
As financial and business cycles are not always aligned across countries and sectors in the 
euro  area,  area  wide  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  complemented  by  more  targeted 
macroprudential  policy.  Unlike  monetary  policy  that  influences  the  euro  area  across  the 
board macroprudential policy instruments can be applied in a granular manner, addressing 
risks at the country, sector and institutional level. Macroprudential policy therefore provides 
the most appropriate instruments for mitigating financial stability risks, thereby supporting the 
price-stability focused monetary policy. 
An effective macroprudential policy requires policy interventions in a timely and bold manner, 
significantly affecting the normal behaviour of financial markets or financial institutions. This 
poses challenges. First, should there be a need for policy intervention measures need to be 
admittedly  intrusive,  going  well  beyond  the  new  capital  and  liquidity  regulatory  framework. 
Secondly, the macroprudential tool-kit that has been legislated – including the one entrusted 
to the ECB/SSM – is centered on banks. Instruments would need to address other financial 
activities  and  institutions,  notably  those  pertaining  to  the  shadow  banking  sector.  This 
growing  sector  is  posing  new  potential  risks,  albeit  in  an  incipient  way,  as  identified  in  the 
ECB Financial Stability Review. 
Regarding  the  instrument  tool-kit  at  its  disposal,  the  ECB  may  use  all  macroprudential 
instruments laid down in the European legislation CRD IV/CRR, in the sense that it may top-
up  specific  macro-prudential  measures  if  it  considers  actions  by  national  designated 
authorities as insufficient to mitigate systemic risks. It covers capital instruments, such as the 
counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  the  systemic  risk  buffer,  capital  surcharges  of  systemically 
important institutions as well as liquidity instruments, such as the liquidity coverage ratio. In 
addition, the ECB can also increase risk weights on real estate exposures or set higher limits 
on large exposures. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  a  single  currency  area,  macro-prudential  policies  are  particularly  important  to  deal  with 
sectoral  and  regional  risks  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  a  common  monetary  policy. 
Measures  such  as  the  caps  on  loan-to-value  (LTV)  or  debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratios  are 
suitable  instruments  to  address  these  developments.  In  this  context,  recent  research 
suggests that exposure-based measures, such as LTV and DTI could be more efficient than 
capital-based measures. On the other hand, they may generate important cross-border spill-
overs  and  leakages,  and  moreover,  are  now  solely  in  the  remit  of  national  authorities. 
Implementing them will therefore require co-ordination and the ECB will play an active role to 
facilitate this in the euro area. 
Now, the present tools of macroprudential policy are mostly focused on the banking sector 
while  important  risks  are  emerging  from  the  steadily  growing  shadow  banking  sector.  The 
sector  is  engaged  in  maturity  transformation  and,  while  mostly  funded  via  equity,  shadow 
banks  are  also  subject  to  the  short-term  redemption  risk.  If  they  experience  substantial 
redemptions, they may, like banks, be forced to promptly sell assets to fulfil their obligations, 
which  may  give  rise  to  fire  sales.  This  is  particularly  worrisome,  since  98%  of  almost 
95 thousand  non-money  market  investment  funds  operating  in  the  euro  area  in  2014  are 
open-ended funds, which means that the investors can redeem their shares in the funds at 
any time. Moreover, the funds’ buffer of liquid assets has dropped in recent years thereby 
increasing the illiquidity risks. 
In this context, it is necessary to intensify the supervision of systemically important non-bank 
institutions  The  U.S.  Fed  has  been  given  the  competence  to  place  non-bank  financial 
institutions  within  the  supervised  perimeter.  Some  shadow  banks  grew  too-big-to-fail  and 
hence, should be subject to the same surveillance as Global Systemically Important Banks 
(G-SIBs).  In  fact,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  preparing  a  methodology  for 
identifying Global Systemically Important Non-bank Financial Institutions (G-SINFIs). 
Regarding  the  asset  management  industry  that  is  the  main  component  of  the  shadow 
banking  sector,  direct  measures  such  as  additional  liquidity  requirements,  guided  stress 
tests,  minimum  and  time-varying  load  and  redemption  fees  should  be  part  of  the 
macroprudential toolbox. Well defined limits to leverage, especially synthetic leverage which 
is built-up with derivatives, should also be introduced, accompanied by harmonized methods 
to calculate it. 
Countercyclical  haircuts  could  limit  volatility  and  leverage  in  financial  markets  more 
effectively than the minimum haircut requirements recently recommended by the FSB to be 
applied  to  repos  and  other  securities  financing  transactions.  Another  important  FSB 
workstream focuses on re-hypothecation and re-use of securities in the repo market which 
create chains of inside liquidity that enhance the “illusion of liquidity” that tends to disappear 
in times of stress. I would encourage further work in order to fully assess the effects of these 
tools and how best to apply them in practice. 
Capital Markets Union and Monetary Union 
A last element of the European response to the recent challenges that I would like to touch 
upon  today  is  the  Capital  Markets  Union  project,  recently  launched  by  the  European 
Commission. It is a very important initiative, in particular for the countries participating in the 
Monetary Union. Fully integrated capital markets would facilitate the implementation of the 
single monetary policy, and would enhance the mechanisms of risk sharing through private 
markets.  This  could  improve  the  objectives  of  income  and  consumption  smoothing  among 
countries and thereby mitigate economic fragmentation. 
Income  and  consumption  smoothing  between  countries,  also  known  as  risk-sharing,  can 
increase welfare by making income growth less sensitive to output growth in a country. For 
countries in a monetary union, risk-sharing is particularly important because monetary policy 
is  unable  to  address  asymmetric  shocks,  whereby  some  countries  are  in  a  recession  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  others are booming. It is understood that the high degree of effective risk-sharing in the U.S. 
is essential in making it a successful monetary union.3 
There  are  three  main  mechanisms  whereby  risk-sharing  can  take  place  between  member 
states in an economic area. First, countries can share risk via cross-ownership of productive 
assets,  a  mechanism  facilitated  by  developed  capital  markets.  Second,  a  system  of  taxes 
and transfers can serve as a vehicle for further income smoothing. Third, member states can 
smooth  consumption  by  adjusting  their  asset  portfolios,  for  example,  by  lending  and 
borrowing in international credit markets. 
The  U.S.  have  traditionally  been  characterised  by  a  very  high  degree  of  income  and 
consumption smoothing across states that has only been increasing over time. The available 
evidence suggests that about 75% of income shocks in individual states are smoothed, with 
13% smoothed by the federal tax-transfer and grant system, 39% smoothed by insurance or 
cross-ownership of productive assets, and 23% smoothed by borrowing or lending. In other 
words, 62% of state-specific shocks in the U.S. are smoothed through market transactions, 
almost five times the contribution of the federal government to income smoothing.4 
With comparatively less developed financial markets and more rigid labour markets, with low 
mobility of labour, and an absent federal system of taxes and transfers similar to that in the 
U.S.,  pre-euro  Europe  exhibited  much  lower  levels  of  risk-sharing.  The  existing  literature 
estimated that only between 40% and 43% of country-specific GDP shocks were smoothed 
among European countries before 1998, with roughly half of this smoothing achieved through 
national government budget deficits and half achieved by corporate saving patterns.5 These 
low  levels  of  risk-sharing  contrasted  with  very  high  levels  within  individual  European 
countries; for example, in pre-unification Germany, 91% of shocks to per capita state gross 
product were smoothed, with the bulk (54%) smoothed through the federal tax-transfer and 
grant system.6 
Risk-sharing among euro area member states seems to have increased after the introduction 
of  the  euro.  Available  estimates  suggest that  in  2008–2009,  57%  of  shocks  to  state gross 
product per capita were smoothed.7 However, in 2010 risk-sharing declined significantly in 
most EU countries and essentially collapsed in countries under fiscal stress.8 
A significant contribution to private risk sharing would, in my view, require the development of 
a  genuine  CMU  with  a  high  level  of  financial  integration.  Full  integration  is  reached  if  all 
market  participants,  with  the  same  relevant  characteristics  firstly  face  a  single  set  of  rules 
when  they  decide  to  deal  with  financial  instruments  and/or  services;  secondly,  have  equal 
access to a set of financial instruments and/or services; and thirdly, are equally treated when 
                                                
3  Sala-i-Martin, X., and J. Sachs (1992), “Fiscal federalism and optimum currency areas: Evidence for Europe 
from the United States”, in: M. Canzoneri, P. Masson, and V. Grilli, eds., Establishing a Central Bank: Issues 
in Europe and Lessons from the U.S., Cambridge University Press: London. 
4  Sorensen, B., and O. Yosha (1998), “International risk sharing and European monetary unification”, Journal of 
International Economics 45, pp. 211–238; Afonso, A., and D. Furceri (2008), “EMU enlargement stabilization 
costs and insurance mechanisms”, Journal of International Money and Finance 27, pp. 169–187. 
5  Hepp,  R.,  and  J.  von  Hagen  (2013),  “Interstate  risk  sharing  in  Germany:  1970–1991”,  Oxford  Economic 
Papers 65, pp. 1–24. 
6  Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sorensen, B., and O. Yosha (2005), “Asymmetric shocks and risk sharing in a monetary 
union:  Updated  evidence  and  policy  implications  for  Europe”,  in:  H.  Huizinga  and  L.  Jonung  (eds.),  The 
Internationalization of Asset Ownership in Europe, Cambridge University Press: New York. 
7  Balli, F., and B. Sorensen (2007), “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The role of capital gains, 
capital income, transfers, and savings”, MPRA Working Paper 10223. 
8  Furceri,  D.,  and  A.  Zdzienicka  (2013),  “The  euro  area  crisis:  Need  for  a  supranational  risk  sharing 
mechanisms?”, IMF Working Paper 13/198. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  they  are  active  in  the  market.  This  level-playing  field  would  contribute  to  stimulate  cross-
border risk-taking between EU Member States. 
A final point to underline is that despite other positive effects stemming from greater financial 
diversification and market-based finance, more financial integration can also entail financial 
stability  risks.  It  can  exacerbate  the  size  and  speed  of  contagion.  In  addition,  the  “push” 
towards market-based financing may lead to the build-up of risks in this part of the economy, 
typically less regulated and lacking information. 
This  brings  me  back  to  the  importance  of  an  effective  macro-prudential  supervision  and 
regulation, i.e. one that considers all systemically important financial entities and activities. In 
order  to  make  CMU  a  success  with  stronger  capital  markets  and  deeper  cross-border 
financial integration in bank- and market-based financing, we need to further strengthen the 
European macro-prudential framework. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. The economic recovery in the euro area is now broader and it is firming 
itself but still in need of achieving higher investment to make it more self- sustained. ECB 
policies are working and making a significant contribution to the normalisation of economic 
conditions in the short term. Let me add that they also help the medium-term as, by closing 
the  negative  output  gap,  they  reduce  the  detrimental  of  effect  of  hysteresis  on  the  labour 
supply  and  the  capital  stock.  A  prolonged recession  contributes to  reduce  the qualification 
and  employability  of  the  unemployed,  and  the  capital  stock  becomes  less  productive,  as 
replacement investment subsides. 
On  the  back  of  the  fall  in  capital  accumulation  and  labour  utilisation,  euro  area  potential 
output growth declined from a level close to 2% in the years preceding the crisis to less than 
1% on average between 2008 and 2012. Unfortunately, since the start of the crisis, euro area 
total factor productivity  growth has remained subdued, falling behind productivity growth in 
the U.S., where it rebounded after reaching a trough in 2009. To increase potential output 
growth against the background of a decreasing working age population, the euro area has to 
rely  on  more  investment  and  capital  deepening  but,  crucially,  more  so  on  total  factor 
productivity growth which needs to resume growing at least at an annual growth pace around 
1%, the rate prevailing at the beginning of the previous decade. 
This will not be achieved without a continued effort to implement structural reforms for which 
monetary policy is not responsible. It is however our task, especially now that the ECB was 
given  supervisory  responsibilities,  to  ensure,  besides  price  stability,  proper  conditions  of 
financial stability in the euro area by continuing to work as we have been doing, to build up a 
resilient, robust and efficient financial system that is essential for the long-term prosperity of 
our monetary union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
