  Carolyn Wilkins: Panel remarks for round table discussion at the 
21st Conference of Montréal 
Panel remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, for 
round table discussion at the 21st Conference of Montréal: International Economic Forum of 
the Americas, Montréal, Quebec, 8 June 2015. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the invitation to be here today. I’m honoured to be part of this panel. 
It’s been more than seven years since the global financial crisis began, and we’re still coping 
with its aftermath. One of the consequences of the crisis has been a disruption of financial 
globalization. Global capital flows – to give just one measure – have fallen by more than half 
from their pre-crisis peak of over US$8 trillion.1 
I’ll spend a few minutes on why we’re seeing this fragmentation. I’ll then offer my views on 
what we should do to realize the full benefits of financial globalization and manage the risks 
associated with it. 
Causes of fragmentation 
The  retreat  from  financial  globalization  that  we’ve  seen  reflects  cyclical  economic  forces, 
such as the slowdown of global trade and investment. It also reflects structural adjustments, 
including the deleveraging undertaken by banks to repair their balance sheets and respond 
to  regulatory  changes.  None  of  this  should  come  as  a  surprise,  given  what  we’ve  been 
through. 
On the cyclical side, the crisis has cost the world economy as much as US$10 trillion in lost 
output, or almost 15 per cent of production. Global trade slowed, as did the demand for the 
international financial services that support it. The share of trade in GDP fell after the crisis, 
reversing some of the 20-percentage-point increase over the two decades that preceded it.2  
On the structural side, financial institutions that experienced losses during the crisis had to 
repair their balance sheets by scaling back their lending – not only at home but especially 
internationally. Trade, commodities and infrastructure financing were particularly hard hit. 
Since the crisis, banks have more than doubled the amount of common equity capital they 
hold. While doing this, banks have tended to focus on their home market and the best ways 
to allocate capital in the new environment. Rules such as anti-money laundering and counter 
terrorism financing laws may also be altering the terrain. 
Financial  institutions  have  also  had  to  respond  to  regulatory  changes.  For  example, 
derivatives dealers appear to be doing more business with domestic counterparties in part 
because  of  more  stringent,  and  sometimes  inconsistent,  rules.3  While  the  level  of  cross-
                                                
1   The  Institute  of  International  Finance,  “Financial  Globalization:  Maximizing  Benefits,  Containing  Risks” 
December 2014. 
2   M. Francis and L. Morel, “The Slowdown in Global Trade”, Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2015): 13–25. 
3   S.  O’Malia,  “No  Answer  Yet  to  Cross-Border  Concerns”,  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association, 
11 May 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  border activity in this area is still robust, one study finds that regulatory changes can explain 
roughly half of the drop in cross-border claims since before the crisis.4  
To put things in perspective, total foreign banking claims measured as a share of global GDP 
have fallen by one-third since 2008, to 39 per cent at the end of 2014.5 
This  fragmentation  is  of  concern  to  people  like  me,  who  believe  that  open  global  financial 
markets are generally a good thing for economies because they facilitate the most efficient 
allocation of capital and boost growth. 
At the same time, the crisis taught us that integrated markets also entail risks that need to be 
properly  managed.  We  know  that,  unchecked,  financial  globalization  could  increase  pro-
cyclicality and make financial cycles larger.6 In other words, booms and busts could become 
more frequent and more destabilizing. And it’s possible that international financial flows were 
inflated by excessive growth in finance relative to global GDP.7 
So authorities have to find the right balance between encouraging globalization and guarding 
against its risks. 
Getting the right balance 
Progress is being made globally. We have put in place a framework to better manage the 
risks that come with financial globalization through reforms agreed to by G-20 leaders. The 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  established  new  rules  for  banks,  and  the 
Financial Stability Board (FSB) published its Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes 
for Financial Institutions. These are big steps in the right direction. 
Some of these reforms have been substantially implemented. I’m talking about the Basel III 
rules,  which  impose  more  stringent  standards  on  capital  and  liquidity  and  a  surcharge  for 
systemically important banks, and the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, which 
establish  higher  standards  for  central  counterparties  and  other  systemically  important 
infrastructures. A level playing field on this is supported by peer reviews conducted by the 
FSB to ensure consistent implementation in different countries. 
At the national level, recovery and resolution regimes are being introduced to further protect 
taxpayers  and  minimize  systemic  disruption  in  the  event  that  a  domestic  systemically 
important bank (D-SIB) fails. 
Canada has made good progress in putting in place the G-20 reforms in the spirit in which 
they  were  intended.  We’ve  implemented  Basel  III  ahead  of  schedule  and  started  work  on 
recovery and resolution plans for D-SIBs. 
Some  jurisdictions  have  also  made  rules  that  deliberately  separate  different  parts  of  their 
financial  systems.  For  example,  some  have  enacted  changes  to  ring-fence  retail  banking 
activities  within  banking  groups  to  limit  the  funding  of  investment  banking  activities  with 
deposits backed by government safety nets – Vickers in the United Kingdom and Volcker in 
the United States. 
                                                
4  
International Monetary Fund, Navigating Monetary Policy Challenges and Managing Risks, Global Financial 
Stability Report, April 2015. 
5   Based  on  calculations  using  data  from  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  (Consolidated  Banking 
Statistics)  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (World  GDP,  from  the  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO) 
database). 
6   C. Borio, “The International Monetary and Financial System: Its Achilles Heel and What to Do about It”, BIS 
Working Paper No. 456, September 2014. 
In  the  decade  leading  up  to  financial  crisis,  global  banks’  cross-border  claims  as  a  share  of  world  GDP 
increased tenfold, from 6 per cent in 1995 to 60 per cent in 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
7  
2 
   Every  jurisdiction  has  different  requirements,  and  our  view  is  that  we  must  ensure  that 
jurisdictions  don’t  go  too  far  down  the  road  toward  more  domestically  oriented  financial 
system  reforms. In  an  interconnected  world,  the  actions  of  one  country  affect  others. If  all 
jurisdictions act in their own national interest, narrowly defined, everyone could be left worse 
off. Co-operative outcomes are superior. 
Mutual recognition 
This points to the need for coordination among regulators. The G-20 reforms can make the 
world safer for international capital flows only as long as there is consistent implementation 
of international standards and mutual recognition among authorities. If we fail to achieve this, 
we  could  end  up  with  inconsistent  and  incomplete  regulations  that  impede  desirable  flows 
and create scope for circumvention. 
Canada  has  stayed  away  from  imposing  structural  reforms  that  would  create  a  separation 
between  commercial  and  investment  banking  activities,  focusing  instead  on  a  principles-
based  approach.  Historically,  Canadian  banks  have  benefited  from  diversification  in  their 
business lines, and the consolidated supervision of the banking group by the Office of the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions has been effective.8  
A  lot  of  work  remains  at  the  international  level.  It  hasn’t  been  easy  to  agree  on  plans  to 
coordinate  cross-border  recovery  and  resolution  for  global  systemically  important  banks 
(G-SIBs),  and  not  for  a  lack  of  effort  and  goodwill  on  the  part  of  the  home  and  host 
authorities.  One  major  step  was  taken  in  October,  when  18  G-SIBs  agreed  to  a  protocol 
established by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association that will give authorities 
more  time  to  organize  an  orderly  resolution  of  a  troubled  bank.  The  success  of  this 
mechanism  depends  on  its  broad  adoption  by  market  participants,  so  industry  also  has  a 
responsibility here. 
If  multilateral  agreements  prove  intractable,  bilateral  agreements  could  be  another  way  to 
reach the same goal, in light of the trend toward regional banking. In time, successful bilateral 
agreements could even serve as models for more ambitious multilateral agreements. 
Conclusion 
Let me  wrap  up. The global financial  system  is important to  Canada. We’re  a  small,  open 
economy,  highly  dependent  on global  trade. That  means  we  rely  on  cross-border financial 
flows to fund exports and investment. And Canadian banks have continued to increase their 
foreign  presence  in  the  post-crisis  period.  In  the  past  five  years,  their  foreign  claims  have 
risen by 70 per cent. 
This  is  why  Canada  is  pushing  for  consistent  implementation  of  global  rules.  With  more 
homogeneous  financial  regulation  and  good  co-operation  on  supervision,  we  will  achieve 
solid prudential outcomes, build trust and reduce the tension that contributes to ring-fencing 
and  fragmentation. While  there  are  still  some  challenges  at  the  international  level,  notably 
around the resolution of international banks, we continue to make progress. 
As the reform agenda is implemented, we’ll see an improvement in global financial flows. We 
probably  won’t  get  back  to  the  pre-crisis  pace  of  globalization.  This  pace  was  probably 
unsustainable anyway. We should nonetheless achieve close to the right balance between 
sustainable growth and financial stability. 
I’d like to thank Paul Chilcott and Alexandra Lai for their help in preparing these remarks. 
                                                
8   M. Zelmer, “Promoting a Safe and Sound Financial System: Lessons from the Goose That Laid the Golden 
Egg” (remarks to the 2012 Canadian Financial Services Insolvency Protection Forum, Toronto, 21 November 
2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
