 Andrew G Haldane: Stuck 
 Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, to the Open University, London, 30 June 2015. 
Accompanying charts can be found on the Bank England’s website. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Will Abel, Charlotte Adams, Gareth Anderson, Daniel Beale, Will Dison, Ronnie Driver, David Elliot, Jeremy 
Franklin, Rich Harrison, Robert Hills, Chris Jackson, Phil King, David Latto, Clare Macallan, Holly-Ann Mansford, 
Jack McKeown, Rebecca Maule, Francesca Monti, Ben Nelson, Tom Pattie, Lukasz Rachel, Gareth Ramsay, Jon 
Relleen,  Martin  Seneca,  Minouche  Shafik,  Scott  Simmons,  Thomas  Smith,  Matt  Waldron,  Dan  Wales  for  their 
comments and contributions.  
Oliver Jeffers is an author and illustrator of children’s books. In Stuck, he tells the story of a 
boy whose kite becomes lodged in a tree. The boy makes vigorous attempts to dislodge the 
kite  by  throwing  up  objects,  including  a  cat,  a  gorilla  and  an  ocean-liner.  (The  story  is 
fictional.) Yet the kite remains stuck. 
Central  banks  today  can  sympathise  with  the  boy’s  dilemma.  Official  interest  rates  in  the 
major  economies  remain  stuck  at  unprecedentedly  low  levels.  Central  banks  have  made 
vigorous  attempts  to  dislodge  them,  including  through  special  liquidity  schemes,  asset 
purchases and forward guidance. (This story is factual.) Yet interest rates remain stuck. 
This stickiness in interest rates has surprised both policymakers and financial markets. After 
they hit their floor, financial markets expected official rates in the US to unstick in 6 months, 
in the UK in 10 months, in Japan in 13 months and in the euro-area in 14 months. 
But  they  have  remained  stuck:  in Japan for  over  20  years  and  in the  US,  the  UK  and the 
euro-area  for  over  6  years.  Indeed,  the  expected  time  to  lift-off  remains  as  many  months 
away today as when rates first hit their floor: in the US 9 months, in the UK 10 months, in the 
euro-area 34 months, in Japan 72 months (Chart 1).1  
Looking  at  the  path  of  interest  rates  implied  by  financial  markets,  this  adhesiveness  is 
expected to continue. In Japan and the euro-area, official interest rates are only expected to 
have reached 1.2% and 2.0% respectively ten years hence. And in the UK and US, they are 
only expected to have reached 2.5% and 3.4% respectively by 2025 (Chart 2).2  
This  implies  an  extraordinarily  slow  pace  of  monetary  tightening,  at  least  by  historical 
standards. On average over the next five years, interest rates are only expected to rise by 
13 basis points per quarter in the US, 9 basis points in the UK, 7 basis points in the euro-
area and 2 basis points in Japan. This, truly, is a brave new world: in my time at the Bank of 
England I can recall UK interest rates rising by 5 percentage points in a day. 
Moreover,  even  these  estimates  may  overstate the future  path  of  interest  rates  implied  by 
financial  markets.  Market  interest  rates  are  probability-weighted  averages  of  different 
possible interest rate paths – they are a mean. Model estimates of the modal – or most likely 
– path for interest rates are lower still (Chart 3). 
Estimates of the modal path of interest rates are drawn from estimated models, so are no 
more than illustrative. Nonetheless, the modal interest rate three years ahead in the US is 
                                                
1  Expected lift-off here refers to a 25 basis point increase. 
2  The path of forward interest rates will also be affected by term premia. See Shafik (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  only  1.1%.  In  the  UK  it  is  0.8%,  little  changed  from  current  levels.  According  to  these 
estimates, the glue holding interest rates to the floor looks stronger still. 
There is an old English aphorism, due to Walter Bagehot in the 19th century: “John Bull can 
stand many things, but he cannot stand 2%”. Prior to 2009, the Bank of England had been 
careful to avoid the wrath of Mr Bull: Bank rate had never been below 2% in its then-315 year 
history. 
For  the  past  six  years  the  MPC  has  been  testing  the  patience  of  Mr  Bull,  with  the  2% 
threshold  consistently  breached.  If  financial  markets  are  to  be  believed,  Mr  Bull,  Mrs  Bull, 
and their children are set to have their patience tested further: UK rates are not expected to 
reach 2% until 2019. 
So  whatever  is  gluing  official  interest  rates  to  the  floor  in  major  economies  is  proving 
remarkably resilient. What factors are responsible? Are they temporary or permanent? And 
what are their implications for financial markets, the economy and monetary policy? 
There are many factors which explain the extra-ordinary current constellation of yields. Many 
of these factors pre-date the crisis. Global real rates have been falling for over three decades 
(Chart 4). They averaged 5% in the 1980s and 4% in the 1990s. So far this century, they 
have averaged 2%. Currently, they are around zero or slightly negative. 
At a Parliamentary Committee hearing a few years ago I asserted, boldly, that global interest 
rates were at their lowest-ever levels. A wise colleague challenged me afterwards: “How do 
you know they  weren’t lower in Babylonian times?” Several exhausted research assistants 
later I can report that, luckily, I was on safe ground. Interest rates appear to be lower than at 
any time in the past 5000 years (Chart 5). 
The explanations for this secular fall in global real rates include excess savings in the East, 
deficient  investment  in  the  West,  worsening  demographic  trends  and  rising  inequality 
(Haldane  (2015a)).  Some  have  interpreted  their  downward  drift  as  evidence  of  secular 
stagnation, in an echo of concerns raised after the Great Depression (Summers (2014)). 
Whatever the explanation, there has been a further ratchet down in global real rates since 
the crisis. I wish to focus on two factors which have contributed to this fall: dread risk and 
recession risk. The first generates an elevated perception of risk, the second an asymmetric 
balance of risk. Both are relevant to explaining the path of interest rates, the likely fortunes of 
the economy and the optimal setting of monetary policy. 
Dread risk 
In  their  classic  account,  Friedman  and  Schwartz  (1963)  believed  pessimism  among 
households and businesses played a key role in explaining the severity and persistence of 
the Great Depression: “The contraction instilled an exaggerated fear of continued economic 
instability, of the danger of stagnation, of the possibility of recurrent unemployment.” In other 
words,  economic  depression  contributed  to  psychological  depression,  and  vice-versa,  in  a 
feedback loop. 
Subsequent 
to  Friedman  and  Schwartz’s  hypothesis. 
Psychological studies show that catastrophic events generate an exaggerated sense of fear 
and  insecurity.  This  causes  people  to  over-estimate  systematically  the  probability  of  these 
dread  events  re-occurring,  relative  to  their  true  probability.3  Perceptions  of  risk,  in  other 
words, are exaggerated. Psychologists call this “dread risk” (Slovic (1987)). 
research  has 
lent  support 
                                                
3  As  a  corollary,  people  also  tend  systematically  to  under-estimate  the  probability  of  risks  with  a  higher 
probability but which affect a smaller number of people, such as car crashes (Gigerenzer (2004)). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Dread risk has been shown to be associated with events which, although low probability, are 
high  impact.  Specifically,  they  are  associated  with  large  losses  among  a  large  number  of 
people  occurring  at  the  same  time.  Prominent  examples  of  “dread  risks”  with  these 
characteristics are plane crashes and terrorist attacks, such as 9/11 in the US. 
This exaggerated sense of risk is stronger, the more recent the event. In other words, the 
over-estimation of risk is subject to time decay. This is known as disaster myopia (Guttentag 
and  Herring  (1986)).  Rates  of  time  decay  from  dread  events  are,  however,  typically  slow. 
While the psychological scars from dread events fade, they do so only gradually and never 
fully disappear. 
Although the over-estimation of risk is, in one sense, “irrational”, its anthropological roots are 
deep.  They  are  found  in  the  hunter-gatherer  communities  that  existed  thousands  of  years 
ago, typically involving groups of 50–100 people. Simultaneous loss of 100 people would, in 
this setting, have threatened these communities’ very existence. And this “dread” appears to 
have hard-wired itself into our psyche to this day (Gigerenzer (2014)). 
The  consequences  of  dread  risk  may  not,  however,  be  benign.  It  generates  risk-averse 
behaviour which, while instinctive, may be counter-productive even from a risk perspective. 
The dread risk associated with 9/11 led to an exaggerated fear of flying and a sharp rise in 
car use. The loss of life from this increased car use may have been greater than the loss of 
life from 9/11 itself (Gigerenzer (2014)). This is the paradox of precaution. 
The  self-same  logic  applies  when  moving  from  catastrophic  losses  of  life  to  catastrophic 
losses  of  livelihood.  Financial  crises  are  the  classic  example  of  such  catastrophic  events. 
They  too  cause  large  losses  of  income  by  a  large  number  of  people  at  the  same  time.  In 
other  words,  they  have  all  the  hallmarks  of  a  dread  event,  albeit  one  associated  with 
economic, rather than physical, insecurity. 
The Great Depression was the most prominent example of an economic dread event in the 
20th century. Historical accounts point clearly to it having generated an exaggerated sense 
of  insecurity  (Galbraith  (1954)).  One  way  this  manifest  was  a  surge  in  demand  for  safe 
assets. In Friedman and Schwartz’s  words: “Expectations of great instability enhanced the 
importance attached to accumulating money and other liquid assets”. 
In  the  1930s,  this  search  for  safety  resulted  in  a  rise  in  the  demand  for,  and  price  of, 
government securities, lowering their yield. The yields on US and UK government bonds fell 
significantly and persistently during the 1930s (Chart 6). Insecurities revealed themselves in 
securities. 
The  Great  Depression  also  widened  the  gap  between  the  return  on  safe  and  risky  assets 
such as equities. This wedge – the equity premium – appears to have risen sharply after the 
Great Depression. It remained elevated for several decades thereafter. In finance circles, this 
is known as the “equity premium puzzle” (Mehra and Prescott (1985)). 
Recent  academic  evidence  has  argued,  persuasively,  that  this  puzzle  can  be  solved  by 
recognising  that  the  Great  Depression,  and  other  catastrophic  output  losses,  are  dread 
events  which  exaggerate  and  prolong  risk  perceptions.  Catastrophe  risk  then  explains  the 
size and persistence of the equity premium (Cogley and Sargent (2005), Barro (2005)). 
As with other dread events, precautionary responses to the Great Depression worsened its 
impact. It blunted entrepreneurial activity, with fewer start-ups of new businesses and lower 
take-up of external financing (Malmendier and Nagel (2011)). Moreover, this scarring effect 
on risk-taking lasted a whole generation, consistent with a slow rate of disaster time decay. 
These precautionary responses reduced investment and innovation by companies, adding to 
the  depth  and  persistence  of  the  recession  and  amplifying  insecurities  in  a  negative  loop. 
This is what Keynes called the paradox, not of precaution, but thrift (Keynes (1936)). 
After the Great Depression, the next largest financial crisis of the 20th century was probably 
the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s. Like its predecessors, this caused catastrophic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  losses  of  income  for  a  great  many  people  across  Asia  at  around  the  same  time.  In  other 
words, it too bears all the hallmarks of an economic dread event. 
As in the past, this caused a precautionary shift into safe assets, lowering the yield on US 
bonds by a similar amount and for a similar period as after the Great Depression (Chart 6). 
The increased demand for safety was concentrated among Asian countries. But the fear of a 
similar dread event spread to other potentially vulnerable emerging markets too. 
In response, they built war-chests of foreign exchange reserves: the global stock rose 6-fold 
between  1997  and  2012,  from  $2  trillion  to  $11  trillion  or  from  5%  to  16%  of  world  GDP 
(Chart  7).  The  consequences  of  this  precautionary  response  were  far  from  benign.  The 
global glut of savings is believed by many to have sowed the seeds of the subsequent global 
financial crisis (Bernanke (2005), Wolf (2014)). 
That global financial crisis is the most damaging economic and financial event since at least 
the  Great  Depression.  To  put  it  in  context,  Chart  8  plots  the  distribution  of  annual  GDP 
growth  across four  countries  since  1870  and  in the  UK  since  1700.  It  highlights  outcomes 
around the Great Depression and the Great Recession. Both occupy a place in the left tail of 
the historical growth distribution. 
The  precautionary  responses  to  these  crises  have  been  similar,  with  the  fall  in  US  and 
UK government  bond  yields  since  the  Great  Recession  mimicking  that  after  the  Great 
Depression  (Chart  6)).  As  in  the  1930s,  the  global  financial  crisis  also  appears  to  have 
caused the equity premium to rise (Chart 9). This time, perhaps it is not so puzzling. 
Pre-crisis, one of the causes of low global real rates was felt to be the insufficient supply of 
safe assets (Caballero and Farhi (2014)). Since the crisis, the deteriorating fiscal position of 
many countries has helped solve that problem. Since 2010, the US, UK, the euro-area and 
Japan have issued around $11 trillion in government securities. 
Yet over the same period, global real interest rates have fallen further. The demand for safe 
assets has overwhelmed this additional supply. Through their asset purchase programmes, 
central banks in the UK, US, Japan and the euro-area have purchased government assets 
totalling around $5 trillion since the start of 2010. 
But  they  have  clearly  not  been  alone.  Most  global  banks  have  increased  their  holdings  of 
safe government assets and central bank reserve balances. Among US banks, the ratio of 
liquid  assets  to  total  assets  increased  from  11%  in  2009  to  15%  in  2014,  while  among 
UK banks it rose from 20% to 23%.4 That has been in part for precautionary purposes and in 
part in anticipation of new regulatory requirements. 
Among companies in the UK, US and Europe, there has been a significant increase in their 
liquid asset holdings, of around $0.5 trillion since 2008, mostly for precautionary purposes. 
And among institutional investors, there has been a further portfolio switch into bonds since 
the  crisis.  Since  2009,  the  size  of  US  bond  funds  has  more  than  doubled,  rising  from 
$1.5 trillion to $3.5 trillion. 
As after the Great Depression and the Asian financial crisis, this precautionary behaviour has 
not  been  confined  to  the  government  bond  market.  It  has  affected  spending  behaviour 
among households and companies too. And, as previously, the consequences for the wider 
economy have not been benign. 
In 2008, households and companies were running a combined financial deficit (income less 
spending) of 2.4% of GDP in the US and 1.5% of GDP in the UK, while in the euro-area they 
were running a small surplus of 2.4% of GDP (Chart 10). In other words, the private sector in 
aggregate was neither saving nor dissaving to any great degree. 
                                                
4  See IMF Financial Soundness Indicators. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  By 2010, the private sector had switched to a large financial surplus of 7.2% of GDP in the 
US, 8.2% of GDP in the UK and 5.8% of GDP in the euro-area. The private sector was now 
saving and in significant scale. This precautionary behaviour, as after the Great Depression, 
has proved persistent. It has only recently started to normalise. 
This is a 21st century paradox of thrift and precaution. The psychological scars of the Great 
Recession,  as  after  the  Great  Depression,  have  proved  lasting  and  durable.  They  help 
explain the sluggishness of the recovery, and the adhesiveness of interest rates, since the 
crisis. And, if the past is any guide, these scars may heal only slowly. 
Recession risk 
Psychological  scarring  affects  how  people  perceive  and  respond  to  risk  in  the  past.  As 
important for monetary policy, however, is the economic and financial risk people expect to 
face  in  future.  Another  lower  left  tail  event  could  further  frazzle  the  nerves  and  set  back 
recovery and risk appetite. Just how likely is that? 
Looking at the long-run pattern of growth, across countries and time, gives some guide to the 
probability  of  a  future  tail  event,  such  as  a  recession.  As  Chart  8  illustrates,  the  historical 
distribution of growth is fat-tailed and negatively skewed (Haldane (2012)). Large recessions 
are  significantly  more  likely  than,  for  example,  the  normal  (or  bell)  curve  might  lead  us  to 
expect. 
Based on historical data, the probability of a recession (defined here as a negative rate of 
annual  GDP  growth)  over  the  following  year  lies  between  17%  (taking  cross-country 
evidence since 1870) and 30% (if we take the UK since 1700). In other words, a recession 
should be expected one in roughly every 3 to 6 years. Of course, the distant past might be a 
poor  guide  to  the  future.  But  even  if  we  took  the  period  since  1945,  the  probability  of 
recession would only fall to 12%, or one year in around every 10. 
These are probabilities over a one year horizon. In practice, what matters for spending and 
saving  are  people’s  risk  perceptions  over  a  longer-term  horizon.  By  making  some 
assumptions  about  how  these  probabilities  evolve  over  time,  it  is  possible  to  construct 
cumulative probabilities of recession. 
Chart 11 shows the cumulative probabilities of recession over a ten year horizon using two 
long-run cross-country GDP samples.5  
Over the course of a decade, the risk of experiencing at least one recession rises steadily, 
reaching between 85–90% after ten years. Using post-war data, this cumulative probability is 
just less than 80%. So over any plausible sample period, a recession remains considerably 
more likely than not over the course of a decade.6  
That is not to say longer periods of interrupted growth are impossible. The world has in the 
past  experienced  lengthy  periods  of  continuously  positive  annual  growth:  in  the  UK,  for  a 
remarkable  26  years  after  the  Second  World  War  and  for  16  years  during  the  Great 
Moderation  starting  in  the  late  1990s.  As  Chart  12  shows,  however,  these  are  extreme 
outliers in the distribution of expansions. The probability of an expansion lasting for longer 
than 10 years is, on past evidence, less than 10%. 
                                                
5  Assuming these probabilities evolve according to a Bernoulli distribution – that is to say, the probability of a 
recession  triggering  shock  occurring  in  one  year  is  independent  of  the  probability  of  a  shock  occurring  in 
another  year.  This  probability  is  calculated  by  looking  at  data  on  the  frequency  of  negative  annual  growth 
rates.  The  cumulative  probability  is  the  probability  that  there  will  be  at  least  one  such  shock  over  a  given 
horizon. 
6  Using conditional probabilities – for example, on starting in recession or expansion – does not dramatically 
alter these cumulative probabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  If a recession were to strike in the period ahead, a relevant question for monetary policy is 
how much room for manoeuvre might be necessary to cushion its effects. History can again 
offer some guide. Table 1 looks at loosening cycles in the UK, US, Germany and Japan in 
the period since 1970 and in the period since 1994. 
There  has  been  considerable  variation  in  the  scale  and  duration  of  loosening  cycles  over 
time  and  across  countries.  Nonetheless,  Table  1  suggests  that  the  average  cycle  has 
typically been in the range 3 to 5 percentage points – towards the upper end in the period 
since  1970,  towards  the  lower  end  in  the  period  since  1994.  Fairly  sizeable  degrees  of 
interest rate headroom have been necessary in the past. 
An interesting thought-experiment is to assess the likelihood of future interest rates having 
risen  sufficiently  to  give  monetary  policy  the  headroom  necessary  to  cushion  a  recession. 
Chart  13  plots  a  set  of  cumulative  probabilities  of  official  interest rates exceeding  a  set  of 
interest  rate thresholds –  2% (the  “John  Bull  threshold”),  3%  (the  average  loosening cycle 
since the 1990s) and 5% (the average loosening cycle since the 1970s).7  
With  yield  curves  currently  low  across  the  major  advanced  economies,  the  probabilities  of 
interest  rates  exceeding  these  thresholds  are  modest.  Even  at  a  ten-year  horizon,  the 
probability of UK rates exceeding 2% is only around 50%, 3% around 40% and 5% around 
20%. If financial markets’ guesses about interest rates are realistic, it is odds-against there 
being sufficient monetary policy headroom to cushion a typical recession. 
If  we  now  compare  the  probabilities  of  interest  rates  being  at  these  thresholds  with  the 
probabilities  of  recession,  a  striking  conclusion  emerges.  Recession  probabilities  exceed 
interest rate threshold probabilities by a factor of anywhere between 1.5 and 4 (Chart 13). 
For example, a conservative estimate of the probability of recession over a ten-year horizon 
is around 80%. The probability of interest rates having 3 percentage points of headroom over 
this horizon is around 40%. 
Put differently, based on these estimates there is a considerably greater chance of interest 
rates needing to be cut to their floor to meet recessionary needs than of them gliding back to 
levels that could safely cushion a recession. Even after interest rates have lifted off from their 
floor,  it  is  more  likely  than  not  they  may  return  there  over  a  ten-year  horizon.  For  the 
foreseeable future, the effective lower bound will exert a strong magnetic pull. 
Another  way  of  illustrating  the  same  point  is  through  the  lens  of  real  interest  rates.  In  the 
1990s, they were around 4%. With a 2% inflation target, that meant nominal interest rates 
would be expected to average around 6% over the cycle. That would give more than enough 
room to cut interest rates to cushion recession in a typical loosening cycle. 
Today, global real rates are around zero. With 2% for inflation, that gives a nominal interest 
rate of only around 2% over the cycle. That would give insufficient room above the effective 
lower bound to accommodate a typical loosening cycle. Provided real rates remain low, the 
lower bound constraint is likely to form part of the new normal. 
Of course, part of the reason the yield curve is low in the first place is because markets are 
weighing  recession  risk,  perhaps  using  historical  probabilities.  That  drags  down  the  yield 
curve by an amount equal to the probability of recession multiplied by the lower interest rate 
bound.  As  recession  probabilities  dominate  over  medium-term  horizons,  so  too  does  the 
magnetic attraction of the lower bound on the yield curve. 
There are plausible reasons why financial markets might currently be over-pricing recession 
risk,  causing  an  excessive  downdraught  to  the  yield  curve.  Psychological  scarring  is  one 
such explanation. Nonetheless, historical experience suggests these recessionary fears are 
                                                
7  These probabilities are drawn from estimated distributions using data from interest rate options contracts. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  not unreasonable. Those fears provide a plausible explanation for why interest rates are, and 
are expected to remain, resolutely stuck to their floor. 
Monetary policy implications 
Given these risks, what are the implications for monetary policy? Growth in the UK remains 
solid. Robust private sector demand has been a key contributor, with household consumption 
growing  steadily  for  two  years,  largely  funded  by  a  pickup  in  real  incomes.  Despite  some 
signs of slowing recently, business investment has also remained robust. We have seen a 
reasonable, and reasonably balanced, recovery. 
The forecasts for GDP and inflation contained in the Bank’s May Inflation Report envisaged 
these  broad  patterns  continuing.  Growth  was  expected  to  remain  around  its  historical 
average rates over the next few years, while inflation was expected to rise from its current 
near-zero rates to reach 2% after two years. Earlier this year, I used the central paths from 
the February Inflation Report to generate some interest rate trajectories, assuming monetary 
policy  was set to minimise current and future deviations of inflation from target and output 
from trend (Haldane (2015b)). It is useful to update these interest rate paths for the MPC’s 
latest GDP and inflation forecasts. 
These  are  shown  in  Chart  14.  The  interest  rate  profiles  are  relatively  similar  to  those  in 
February. As then, they suggest the optimal path for interest rates involves an immediate cut 
in rates for about a year, which pushes inflation back to target and closes the output gap. 
Thereafter, interest rates rise gradually in line with the market curve. 
As with any model-based simulation, these interest rate paths are no more than illustrative. 
Nonetheless,  I  find  they  serve  as  a  useful  benchmark:  what  is  it  about  the  economy,  not 
captured by the model, which would cause me to deviate from this path? Earlier in the year, 
these  types  of  simulations  played  a  role  in  my  judging  that  a  neutral  stance  on  the  future 
direction of interest rates was a prudent course. 
One important drawback of these model-based simulations is that they tend to underplay the 
effects of risk, focussing instead on central paths for growth and inflation. So how might risks, 
including dread and recession risk, affect the path of demand and the optimal interest rate 
trajectory in the period ahead? 
In principle, dread risk affects demand in two ways. First, it generates an attitude of caution 
when making major decisions – moving house or job or making an investment. People will 
tend to look before they leap, to think twice before diving in. It creates the mind-set of the 
glass being half empty. 
Second,  insecurity  generates  an  asymmetric  response  to  news  flow.  Good  news  will  be 
banked or used to strengthen balance sheets. Roofs get repaired during the sunshine. But 
when  bad  news  strikes,  the  response  is  immediate  and  defensive.  There  is  a  hunkering 
down, with cuts in spending and risk-taking. 
The exact opposite psychological traits are, of course, exhibited during a boom. Then, good 
news  is  spent  and  bad  news  borrowed  against.  Roof  repairs  are  deferred,  whatever  the 
weather. The glass is half full. There is a wealth of experimental evidence documenting these 
psychological swings and asymmetries. 
Despite the recovery, evidence continues to suggest a “half-empty” mind-set. World growth 
has, since 2010, averaged less than 4%. Forecasts have been consistently over-optimistic by 
½  percentage  point  per  year.  The  evidence  so  far  during  2015  suggests  this  pattern  may 
continue. Caution is a plausible explanation for this dragging anchor. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The  household  sector  has  undertaken  significant  balance  sheet  repair  since  the  crisis, 
dragging  on  spending.8  This  can  be  seen  in  the  proportionately  greater  belt-tightening 
exhibited among highly-indebted consumers (Chart 15)). These debt-induced adjustments in 
spending have also been important among US consumers (Mian and Sufi (2014)). 
Several other features of household decision-making over recent years might also plausibly 
reflect  the  effects  of  insecurity:  weak  transactions  in  the  housing  market,  which  are  20% 
lower  than  their  pre-crisis  average;  subdued  job-to-job  flows  in  the  labour  market,  which 
remain  below  their  pre-crisis  average;  and  real  wages  which  remain  lower  than  historical 
relationships can explain, as workers’ bargaining power has been sapped. 
Over the past year, this cautious behaviour has been evident in households’ response to the 
income windfall arising from the fall in oil prices. This has boosted real incomes by perhaps 
0.4%.  And  it  appears  also  to  have  boosted  consumer  confidence.  What  it  appears  not  to 
have translated into, or at least not yet, is higher consumption: retail spending growth is little 
different than before the oil price fall (Chart 16). 
One interpretation is that consumers are simply waiting to see if the fall in oil prices persists. 
My preferred interpretation is that it reflects instead the asymmetric response of a cautious 
consumer: good news has been banked, not blown. Consumers are pleased their glass is 
now less than half empty. But they are no more willing to drink it. 
This cautious behaviour is, to a degree, also mirrored among companies. This can be seen 
in the weakness of global investment since the crisis, despite the cost of company borrowing 
being at its lowest-ever levels (Chart 17). Uncertainty-induced weakness in investment has 
provided a continuing drag on recovery, globally if not nationally. 
This  uncertainty  can  be  seen,  too,  in  how  companies  are  reinvesting  their  earnings.  The 
trend over the past 20 years has been for companies to invest more in passive assets such 
as  cash,  than  active  ones  such  as  physical  capital.  But  this  trend  has  been  accentuated 
since  the  crisis.  Table  2  looks  at  the  ratio  of  liquid  assets  to  investment  by  the  corporate 
sectors in the UK, US, France and Germany. 
These ratios have risen sharply since the crisis, on average by around 70 percentage points. 
Companies  are  not  just saving  more  of their  earnings. They  are  doing so  in  a  more  liquid 
form than previously. As among consumers, business confidence has risen in lockstep with 
profits.  But  this  good  news  has  been  banked,  not  invested.  Despite  the  sunshine,  many 
companies are still engaged in roof-repair. 
Growth  in  the  UK,  the  US  and  some  other  countries  remains  solid,  if  unspectacular.  But 
caution increases the chances of world growth continuing systematically to underperform, as 
it has since the crisis. By generating an asymmetric response to good and bad news, it may 
also skew growth risks to the downside, again as we have seen. 
While emphasizing the downside, it is important not to forget the potential for upside risks. 
The upside risk that has generated most attention over recent weeks has been wage growth. 
At a headline level, this picked up to 2.7% for regular pay growth on an annual basis in April, 
from a low of 0.7% as recently as the summer of last year. This is around 0.2 percentage 
points higher than forecast in the Bank’s May Inflation Report. 
This  pick-up  in  wage  growth  is  welcome.  Indeed,  this  rise  is  a  necessary  ingredient  for 
getting inflation back to target in the period ahead. Equally, were wage inflation to continue to 
surprise  to  the  upside  as  the  labour  market  tightens,  this  could  pose  an  upside  risk  to 
inflation, with corresponding implications for the MPC’s monetary policy stance. 
                                                
8  See Bunn and Rostom (forthcoming). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is important also, however, to place this wage news in context. This most recent upside 
surprise  comes  against  a  backdrop  of  wage  growth  having  surprised  to  the  downside  for 
much  of  the  past  two  years.  Up  until  last  month,  wages  had  surprised  to  the  downside  in 
11 of the past 18 months. That has left the level of regular pay in the economy 2% lower than 
we expected 18 months ago, even with the recent news. 
Second,  one  explanation  for  the  recent  weakness  of  wages  has  been  the  compositional 
effects of a greater number of lower-skilled, lower-paid workers entering the job market. This 
has clearly had some, probably temporary, depressing effect on wage growth. Over the post-
crisis period as a whole, however, compositional effects have not depressed wages. Rather, 
they  have  inflated  them.  Without  composition  effects,  the  level  of  wages  today  would  be 
around 1% lower, not higher. 
Third,  my  visits  to  the  Bank’s  regional  agencies  over  the  past  few  weeks  talking  to 
businesses leave me confident wages are not about to embark on a rocket-propelled ascent. 
Settlements  seem  to  have  edged  up  from  first  to  second  gear:  they  are  now  often  in  the  
“2–point-something” zone. But with the exception of a few regions and sectors, I do not yet 
see evidence of wage inflation going through the gears into third or fourth. 
Fourth, since the May Inflation Report sterling’s effective exchange rate has appreciated a 
further 3%. That will exert a downward drag on demand and inflation over the policy horizon: 
using the  Bank’s model ready-reckoners,  by  around  0.2  percentage  points  at  the  two-year 
horizon. In other words, the exchange rate news may be more important quantitatively for the 
two-year-ahead inflation outlook than the recent news from wages. 
April’s  wage  data  was  news,  encouraging  news.  And  the  Phillips  curve  may  well  be  re-
emerging after several years in hibernation. But one swallow does not a summer make. As 
Aristotle inexplicably did not add, “especially once you adjust for compositional shifts”. Wage 
growth is causing some fluttering, but not in this dovecote. 
One reason for that is because expectations of inflation (the MPC’s primary objective) at the 
two-year-ahead point (the MPC’s preferred horizon) are skewed, if anything, to the downside. 
Chart 18 plots the MPC’s forecasts for inflation at different horizons, alongside companies’, 
households’, financial markets’ and professional forecasters’ projections. 
At the two-year point, outside forecasters’ inflation projections lie below the MPC’s. The MPC 
sees a 50% chance of inflation exceeding its target two years hence. Outside professional 
forecasters  put  that  probability  at  just  over  40%.  Only  around  a  third  of  companies  and  a 
quarter of households expect inflation to be above the target at that point.9 The balance of 
risks,  as  perceived  by  those  setting  and  receiving  wages,  is  skewed  squarely  to  the 
downside. 
That leads naturally to questions of monetary policy strategy. There is clearly a tightrope to 
walk here: lean too much in an expansionary direction and the inflationary cat is let out of the 
bag  (assuming  it  isn’t  already  stuck  in  the  tree  with  that  kite);  lean  too  much  in  a 
contractionary direction and the recessionary gorilla is unleashed (ditto). 
The asymmetric risks posed by the effective lower bound have led some to suggest that the 
optimal strategy is to leave rates “lower for longer” (Evans et al (2014)). The argument here 
is that it is better to err on the side of over-stimulating, then course-correcting if need be, than 
                                                
9  The professional forecasters’ probability is taken from the Bank’s Survey of External Forecasters for 2015 Q2. 
The company data are from the Deloitte CFO survey for 2015 Q1, and are based on an assumption that half 
of those companies that report that their two year ahead CPI inflation expectation is in the 1.5–2.5% bucket 
expect inflation to be above 2%. The household data are derived from the Bank/GfK inflation attitudes survey 
for 2015 Q2. That survey does not refer to a specific price index, so given that the average wedge between 
perceived  inflation  in  the  survey  and  actual  CPI  inflation  is  1  percentage  point,  the  proportion  refers  to  the 
households that expect that inflation will be 3% or higher two years ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  risk  derailing  recovery  by  tightening  and  being  unable  then  to  course-correct.  I  have 
considerable sympathy with this risk-management approach. 
Table  3  provides  an  illustrative  list  of  countries  which  have  pursued  the  latter  strategy  – 
tightening during a post-crisis recovery and then course-correcting. The most celebrated (if 
that is the right word) was the Fed’s tightening in 1937. This is felt by many to have sent the 
US economy back into recession (Friedman and Schwartz (1963)). Almost 80 years on, the 
scars from that experience have yet to fade. 
The US experience in the 1930s was special, but not unique. In few of the cases in Table 
3 did things go well. In each case the tightening was subsequently unwound. In a number of 
cases it had to be more than unwound due to its contractionary effects on the economy. 
Chart  19  shows  the  average  path  of  output  either  side  of  the  tightening.  Most  of  these 
countries experienced several years of robust growth prior to the tightening, suggesting the 
economy was primed for lift-off. Yet when lift-off came, annual output growth weakened by 
around  2  percentage  points  in  the  following  year,  in  the  US  by  much  more.  Lift-off  was 
quickly  aborted  as  the  economy  came  back  to  earth  with  a  bump.  In  trying  to  spring  the 
interest rate trap, countries found themselves being caught by it. 
Why did this happen? One plausible explanation is the asymmetric behavioural response of 
the  economy  during  periods  of  insecurity.  Dread  risk means that good  news  –  such  as  oil 
windfalls  –  is  banked.  But  it  also  means  that  bad  news  –  9/11,  the  Great  Depression  – 
induces a hunkering down. It risks shattering that half-empty glass. 
A rate tightening, however modest, however pre-meditated, is an example of bad news. Its 
psychological impact on still-cautious consumers and businesses may be greater, perhaps 
much  greater,  than  responses  in  the  past.  Or  that,  at  least,  is  what  historical  experience, 
including monetary policy experience, suggests is possible. 
Another way of illustrating this point is to imagine you were concerned with the low path of 
the yield curve and the  limited monetary policy  space this implied. And  let’s say  you  were 
able  to  lift  the  yield  curve  to  a  level  which,  for  the  sake  of  illustration,  equalised  the 
probabilities of recession striking and interest rates being at a level at which they could be 
cut sufficiently to cushion a recession. 
With  monetary  policy  space  to  play  with,  this  might  seem  like  a  preferred  interest  rate 
trajectory. But it comes at a cost, potentially a heavy one. The act of raising the yield curve 
would itself increase the probability of recession. If we calibrate that using multipliers from 
the Bank’s model, cumulative recession probabilities would rise from around 45% to around 
65%  at  a  3-year  horizon.  These  ready-reckoners  are,  if  anything,  likely  to  understate  the 
behavioural impact of a tightening in a nerve-frazzled environment. 
This suggests that a policy of early lift-off could be self-defeating. It would risk generating the 
very recession today it was seeking to insure against tomorrow. In that sense, the low current 
levels of interest rates are a self-sustaining equilibrium: moving them higher today would run 
the  risk  of  a  reversal  tomorrow.  These  self-reinforcing  tendencies  explain  why  the  glue 
sticking interest rates to their floor has been so powerful. 
Taking these risks together, my judgement on the appropriate monetary stance in the UK is 
relatively little altered from earlier in the year. The current level of interest rates remains, in 
my  view,  appropriate  to  assure  the  on-going  recovery  and  to  insure  against  potential 
downside risks to demand and inflation. Looking ahead, I have no bias on either the size or 
direction of future interest rate moves. 
Conclusion 
In Stuck, the boy’s attempts to unstick his kite from the tree come, well, unstuck. The cat, the 
gorilla and the ocean-liner, along with assorted other objects, get stuck up the tree too. In 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  trying too hard to unstick his kite, the boy makes a difficult situation worse. Eventually, with 
the passage of time, the kite comes free of its own accord. 
Trying too hard to unstick interest rates, or doing so too quickly, also runs the risk of making 
a difficult situation worse. It runs 1937 risk. That is one reason why the glue holding interest 
rates to their floor has remained so strong. And it is why I feel no immediate need to loosen 
that glue. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  ‘Dread  Risk,  September  11,  and  Fatal  Traffic  Accidents’, 
References 
Barro, R (2005), ‘Rare Events and the Equity Premium’, NBER Working Paper No 11310, 
available here: http://www.nber.org/papers/w11310. 
Bernanke,  B  (2005),  ‘The  Global  Savings  Glut  and  US  Current  Account  Deficit’,  speech 
given at the Virginia Association of Economists, available at: http://www.federalreserve.gov/ 
boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/. 
Bunn,  P  and  Rostom,  M  (forthcoming),  ‘Household  debt  and  spending  in  the  United 
Kingdom’, Bank of England Working Paper. 
Caballero,  R  and  Farhi,  E  (2014),  ‘On  the  role  of  safe  asset  shortages  in  secular 
stagnation’, Chapter 9 in the VoxEU e-book ‘Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures’ 
available here: http://www.voxeu.org/sites/default/files/Vox_secular_stagnation.pdf. 
Cogley, T and Sargent, T (2005), ‘The conquest of US inflation: Learning and robustness to 
model uncertainty’, Review of Economic Dynamics No 8 p528–563. 
Evans, C, Fisher, J, Gourio, F and Krane, S (2015), ‘Risk Management for Monetary Policy 
Near the Zero Lower Bound’, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, available at: 
http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Spring-2015/2015a_evans.pdf. 
Friedman,  M  and  Schwartz,  A  (1963),  ‘A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  
1867–1960’, ISBN: 9780691003542. 
Galbraith, J (1954), ‘The Great Crash 1929’, ISBN: 978-0141038254. 
Gigerenzer,  G  (2004), 
Psychological Science Vol 15 No 4. 
Gigerenzer, G (2014), ‘Risk Savvy: How To Make Good Decisions’, ISBN: 978-0241954614. 
Guttentag, J and Herring, R (1986), ‘Disaster Myopia in International Banking’, Essays in 
International Finance No 164. 
Haldane, A (2015a), ‘Growing, Fast and Slow’, speech given at the University of East Anglia, 
available here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech797.pdf. 
Haldane, A (2015b), ‘Drag and Drop’, speech given at the BizClub lunch, Rutland, available 
here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech810.pdf. 
Haldane, A and Nelson, B (2012), ‘Tails of the Unexpected’, speech given at the University 
of Edinburgh Business School, available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech582.pdf 
Heim, C and Mirowski, P (1987), ‘Interest rates and crowding-out during Britain’s industrial 
revolution’, Journal of Economic History Vol 47 Pages 117–139. 
Hills, S, Thomas, R and Dimsdale, N (2010), ‘The UK recession in context — what do three 
centuries of data tell us?’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin 2010 Q4. 
Hills,  S,  Thomas,  R  and  Dimsdale,  N  (2015),  ‘Three  Centuries  of  Data  -  Version  2.1’, 
available here: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/onebank/datasets.aspx. 
Homer, S and Sylla, R (1991), ‘A history of interest rates’, ISBN: 978-0471732839. 
Jeffers, O (2012), ‘Stuck’, ISBN: 978-0007263899. 
Keynes,  J  (1936), 
ISBN: 978-1494854744. 
‘The  General  Theory  Of  Employment, 
Interest,  And  Money’,  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
King,  M  and  Low,  D  (2014),  ‘Measuring  the  “World”  Real  Interest  Rate’,  NBER  Working 
Paper 19887, available at: http://www.nber.org/papers/w19887.pdf. 
Malmendier, U and Nagel, S (2011), ‘Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences 
Affect Risk Taking?’, Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol 126 Issue 1. 
Mehra,  R  and  Prescott,  E  (1985),  ‘The  Equity  Premium:  A  Puzzle’,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics No 15. 
Mian, A and Sufi, M (2014), ‘House of Debt’, ISBN: 978-0226271651. 
Slovic, P (1987), ‘Perception of risk’, Sciences, New Series, Vol 236 No 4799. 
Shafik, M (2015), ‘Interpreting the yield curve: pessimism or precaution?, VOX-EU, available 
at: http://www.voxeu.org/article/interpreting-yield-curve-pessimism-or-precaution. 
Summers,  L  (2014),  ‘U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  the 
Zero Lower Bound’, Business Economics Vol 49 No 2. 
Velde,  F  (2009),  ‘The  Recession  of  1937—A  Cautionary  Tale’,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Chicago Economic Perspectives 2009 Q4, available at:  
https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/economicperspectives/2009/4qtr2009-part2-velde. 
Weiller, K and Mirowski, P (1990), ‘Rates of interest in 18th century England’, Explorations 
in Economic History Vol 27 Issue 1. 
Wolf, M (2014), ‘The Shifts and the Shocks: What we've learned - and have still to learn - 
from the financial crisis’, ISBN: 978-1846146978. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
