  Raghuram Rajan: Going bust for growth 
Remarks by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, to the Economic 
Club of New York, New York City, 19 May 2015. 
 Raghuram Rajan thanks Dr. Prachi Mishra of the Reserve Bank for very useful comments and research support. 
There are few areas of robust growth around the world, with the IMF repeatedly reducing its 
growth  forecasts  in  recent  quarters.  This  period  of  slow  growth  is  particularly  dangerous 
because  both  industrial  countries  and  emerging  markets  need  high  growth  to  quell  rising 
domestic  political  tensions.  Policies  that  attempt  to  divert  growth  from  others  rather  than 
create new growth are more likely under these circumstances. Even as we create conditions 
for sustainable growth, we need new rules of the game, enforced impartially by multilateral 
organizations, to ensure countries adhere to international responsibilities. 
The conventional diagnosis and remedy 
Why is the world finding it so hard to restore pre-Great Recession growth rates? The obvious 
answer is that the financial boom preceding the Great Recession left industrial countries with 
an overhang of debt, and debt, whether on governments, households, or banks, is holding 
back growth.1 While the remedy may be to write down debt so as to revive demand from the 
indebted, it is debatable whether additional debt fuelled demand is sustainable in the long 
run. At any rate, large-scale debt write-offs (or fiscal transfers to the heavily indebted) seem 
politically difficult even if they are economically warranted. 
How does one offset weak household and government demand if debt write-downs are off 
the table? Ideally, the response would be to incentivize investment and job creation through 
low interest rates and tax incentives. But if final demand from consumers is likely to be very 
weak  for  a  considerable  period  of  time  because  of  debt  overhang,  the  real  return  on  new 
investment  may  collapse.  The  Wicksellian  neutral  real  rate  –  loosely  speaking  the  interest 
rate required to bring the economy back to full employment with stable inflation – may even 
be  strongly  negative.2  This  typically  has  been  taken  as  grounds  for  aggressive  monetary 
policy. Because policy rates cannot be reduced significantly below zero (though a number of 
European  countries  are  testing  these  limits),  equilibrium  long  term  interest  rates  may  stay 
higher than levels necessary to incentivize investment. Hence, central banks have embarked 
on unconventional monetary policy (UMP), which would directly lower long rates. 
Another way to stimulate demand is for governments that still have the ability to borrow to 
increase  spending.  Since  this  will  increase  already-high  levels  of  government  debt, 
proponents  suggest  investing  in  infrastructure,  which  may  have  high  returns  today  when 
construction costs and interest rates are low. However, high-return infrastructure investment 
is harder to identify and implement in developed countries where most obvious investments 
have  already  been  made  –  political  influence  is  as  likely  to  create  bridges  to  nowhere  or 
                                                 
1   See  the  interesting  evidence  in  Atif  Mian  and  Amir  Sufi,  House  of  Debt  (Princeton  University  Press,  New 
Jersey, 2014) and the cross-country evidence in Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different 
(Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2008). For an illuminating overall view of the global financial crisis 
and the policy remedies, see Martin Wolf, The Shifts and the Shocks: What We’ve Learned and Have Still to 
Learn from the Financial Crisis (Penguin USA 2015). 
2   Though see a thoughtful piece by Claudio Borio and Piti Disyatat at http://www.voxeu.org/article/low-interest-
rates-secular-stagnation-and-debt  suggesting  that  the  real  neutral  interest  rate  may  be  influenced  by  low 
policy rates. Intuitively, the authors argue that low policy rates can sow the seeds for investment misallocation, 
financial  distress,  and  debt  overhang,  all  of  which  can  combine  to  drive  down  the  future  real  return  on 
investment, and therefore the real neutral long term rate today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
unviable high speed train networks as needed infrastructure. Also, while everyone can see 
the  need  for  repair  and  renovation  of  existing  infrastructure,  this  requires  far  more 
decentralized spending than mega projects, and may be harder to initiate and finance from 
the centre. 
Put  differently,  high-return  infrastructure  investment  is  a  good  idea  but  may  be  hard  to 
implement on a large scale for most advanced country governments. To the extent that such 
debt fuelled spending creates a self-fulfilling virtuous cycle of confidence and activity, it can 
be a bridge to sustainable growth. But to the extent that it misallocates capital (because there 
are  insufficient  “shovel-ready”  projects,  so  much  of  the  emergency  spending  is  diverted  to 
rent-seeking  pork),  it  can  worsen  public  anxieties  about  the  future,  reducing  corporate 
investment and increasing household savings. 
All this highlights another concern. Even if stimulus works in raising growth temporarily – and 
the  above  discussion  suggests  it  may  not  –  this  growth  has  to  be  a  bridge  to  sustained 
aggregate demand. But what if it isn’t? 
The productivity puzzle, secular stagnation, and other concerns. 
The  arguments  I  have  just  enunciated  for  action  apply  to  an  economy  where  nothing 
fundamentally is wrong except perhaps excessive debt – what is needed is a cyclical return 
of  growth  to  potential  growth.  Yet  a  number  of  economists  such  as  Tyler  Cowen,  Robert 
Gordon,  and  Larry  Summers  have  raised  the  possibility  that  potential  growth  in  industrial 
countries had fallen even before the Great Recession. Perhaps then the growth that we are 
trying to return to is unachievable without serious distortions. 
The  term  “secular  stagnation”  used  by  Larry  Summers  to  describe  the  current  persistent 
economic  malaise,  echoing  Alvin  Hansen’s  speech  in  1938  in  the  midst  of  the  Great 
Depression, has caught on.3 But different economists focus on different aspects and causes 
of the stagnation.4 Summers emphasizes the inadequacy of aggregate demand, and the fact 
that the zero lower bound as well as the potential for financial instability prevents monetary 
policy  from  being  more  active.  Among  the  reasons  for  weak  aggregate  demand  include 
ageing populations that want to consume less and the increasing income share of the very 
rich, whose marginal propensity to consume is small. 
Tyler  Cowen  and  Robert  Gordon  on  the  other  hand,  emphasize  a  weak  supply  potential.5 
They argue that the post-World War II years were an aberration because growth was helped 
in  industrial  countries  by  reconstruction,  the  spread  of  technologies  such  as  electricity, 
telephones, and automobiles, rising educational attainment, higher labour participation rates 
as women entered the work force, a restoration of global trade, and increasing investments 
of capital. However, post-war total factor productivity growth – the part of growth stemming 
from new ideas and methods of production – was lower than its 1920–50 high. More recently, 
not only has productivity growth fallen further (with a temporary positive uptick towards the 
end  of  the  1990s  because  of  the  IT  revolution),  but  growth  has  been  held  back  by  the 
headwinds  of  plateauing  education  levels  and  labour  participation  rates,  as  well  as  a 
shrinking labour force in some countries because of population ageing. 
                                                 
3   Summers,  L.  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysterisis  and  Zero  Lower  Bound”, 
speech  delivered  to  the  National  Association  for  Business  Economics,  Economic  Policy  Conference, 
February 24, 2014. 
4   See, for example, “The Crises of Democratic Capitalism”, Wolfgang Streeck, New Left Review 71, Sept/Oct 
2011  or  “The  True  Lessons  of  the  Recession:  The  West  Can’t  Borrow  and  Spend  its  Way  to  Recovery”, 
Raghuram Rajan, Foreign Affairs, Volume 91, no 3, May/June 2012. 
5   Tyler  Cowen  (2013),  The  Great  Stagnation,  Ebook,  Gordon,  R.  (2012),  “Is  US  Economic  Growth  Over? 
Faltering Innovation Confronts Six Headwinds”, NBER Working Paper 18315. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
It  is  obvious  from  these  lists  of  factors  that  it  is  hard  to  disentangle  the  effects  of  weak 
aggregate  demand  from  slow  growth  in  potential  supply.  Population  ageing  contributes  to 
both.  Indeed,  one  may  cause  the  other.  For  example,  anticipating  a  slowdown  in  growth 
potential,  households,  worried  about  impending  retirement  in  the  face  of  undeliverable 
pension and healthcare entitlements, may try and build savings. This will depress demand 
further.  Conversely,  anticipated  weak  demand  may  reduce  incentives  for  corporations  to 
invest in physical and human capital, causing supply potential to grow more slowly. 
Structural  reforms,  typically  ones  that  increase  competition,  foster  innovation,  and  drive 
institutional  change,  are  the  way  to  raise  potential  growth.  But  these  immediately  hurt 
protected constituencies that have become accustomed to the rents they get from the status 
quo. Moreover, the gains to constituencies that are benefited are typically later and uncertain 
while the pain is immediate and its incidence clear. No wonder Jean-Claude Juncker, then 
Luxembourg’s prime minister, said at the height of the Euro crisis, “We all know what to do, 
we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we’ve done it!” 
The growth imperative 
If indeed fundamentals are such that that the industrial world has, and will, grow slowly for a 
while before new technologies and new markets come to the rescue, would it be politically 
easy to settle for slower growth? After all, per capita income is high in industrial countries, 
and a few years of slow growth would not be devastating at the aggregate level. Why is there 
so much of a political need for growth? 
One reason is the need to fulfil government commitments. As sociologist Wolfgang Streeck 
writes, in the strong growth years  of the 1960s when visions of a “Great Society” seemed 
attainable,  industrial  economies  made  enormous  promises  of  social  security  to  the  wider 
public.6  Promises  have  been  augmented  since  then  in  some  countries  by  politically 
convenient (because hidden from budgets) but fiscally unsound increases in pension and old 
age  healthcare  commitments  to  public  sector  workers.  And  most  recently,  the  government 
debt taken on before and after the Great Recession has added to government commitments, 
even while the Baby Boomer generation has started retiring in large numbers. Without the 
immediate promise of growth, all these commitments could soon be seen as unsustainable. 
Another reason to desire growth is that economies tend to favour insiders – those who have 
jobs  for  example.  The  brunt  of  the  joblessness  caused  by  slow  growth  is  born  by  new 
entrants  to  the  labour  market.  Not  only  are  they  unemployed  in  larger  numbers,  but  the 
lifetime earnings of cohorts that enter the labour force in difficult times is lower. Growth is 
necessary  for  inter-generational  equity,  especially  because  these  are  the  generations  that 
will be working to pay off commitments to older generations. Given these are also the cohorts 
that can take to the streets, growth is essential for social harmony. 
Not only are the benefits of growth unequally distributed across generations, they are also 
very  unequally  distributed  within  generation.  Because  of  changes  in  technology  and  the 
expansion of global competition, routine repetitive jobs, whether done by the skilled or the 
unskilled, have diminished greatly in industrial countries. Many of these jobs, ranging from 
assembly  line  worker  to  legal  aides  or  insurance  clerks,  have  either  been  automated  or 
outsourced.  The  desirable  high-paying  jobs  are  non-routine  skilled  ones  such  as  that  of  a 
consultant or an app designer, but they require skills. The middle class recognizes that they 
need quality higher education and training to not slip into competing with the poor for low-
skilled  non-routine  jobs  such  as  security  guard  or  gardener.  But  the  poor  quality  early 
education they have received, as well as the prohibitive cost of quality higher education, puts 
many better livelihoods out of reach. With every percentage point of growth creating fewer 
                                                 
6   See “The Crises of Democratic Capitalism”, Wolfgang Streeck, New Left Review 71, Sept/Oct 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
“good”  jobs  for  the  unskilled  or  moderately  skilled,  more  growth  is  needed  to  keep  them 
happily employed. Equally, the rapid deterioration in skills for the unemployed is an additional 
reason to push for growth. 
The deflation fear 
Finally, a big factor persuading authorities in industrial countries to push for higher growth is 
the fear of deflation. The canonical example here is Japan, where many are persuaded that 
the key mistake it made was to slip into deflation, which has persisted and held back growth. 
A  closer  look  at  the  Japanese  experience  suggests  that  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  its 
growth has been slower than warranted let alone that deflation caused slow growth. It is true 
that after its devastating crisis in the early 1990s, Japan may have prolonged the slowdown 
by  not  taking  early  action  to  clean  up  its  banking  system  or  restructure  over-indebted 
corporations. But once it took decisive action in the late 1990s and early 2000s, Japanese 
growth per capita or per worker looks comparable with other industrial countries (Table 1).7 
Slow  aggregate  Japanese  economic  growth  may  simply  be  because  its  population  is 
shrinking,  and  fewer  people  are  entering  the  labour  force  rather  than  because  it  is 
underperforming other developed economies. 
 What about the deleterious effects of deflation? One worrisome effect of deflation is that if 
wages  are  downwardly-sticky,  real  wages  rise  and  cause  unemployment.  Yet  Japanese 
unemployment has averaged 4.5% between 2000–2014, compared to 6.4% in the US and 
9.4% in the Euro area during the same period.8 In part, the Japanese have obtained wage 
flexibility by moving away from the old lifetime unemployment contracts for new hires to short 
term contracts. Indeed, with the decline in union power across industrial countries and the 
increase  in  temporary  or  even  “zero  hour”  workers,  downward  wage  flexibility  may  be 
significantly higher than previously estimated. While not without social costs, such flexibility 
allows an economy to cope with sustained deflation. 
Another  concern  has  been  that  moderately  low  inflation  spirals  down  into  seriously  large 
deflation,  where  the  zero  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  keeps  real  interest  rates 
unconscionably high. Once again, it is not clear this happened in Japan. In the years 1999 to 
2012, average CPI deflation ranged between –0.01% in 2004 to –1.3% in 2009, but without 
any clear spiralling pattern (Figure 1). 
                                                 
7  
I first learnt of these facts from Jean Claude Trichet. For a more comprehensive look at deflation, see Claudio 
Borio,  Magdalena  Erdem,  Andrew  Filardo  and  Boris  Hofmann,  “The  costs  of  deflations:  a  historical 
perspective”, BIS Quarterly Review March 2015. 
8   Source. World Economic Outlook Database, IMF. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Even if deflation is moderate, it may cause customers to postpone purchases and increase 
savings in anticipation of a lower price in the future, especially if the zero lower bound raises 
real interest rates above their desired value. In Fig 2, we plot household savings as a share 
of  GDP  in  Japan  against  the  deflation  rate.  Again,  it  is  hard  to  see  a sustained  pattern  of 
higher savings with higher deflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
  
 
Finally, it is true that deflation increases the real burden of existing debt, thus exacerbating 
debt  overhang.  But  this  is  true  of  any  unanticipated  disinflation,  and  is  not  specific  to 
deflation. If debt is excessive, a targeted restructuring is better than inflating it away across 
the board. 
Regardless  of  all  these  arguments,  the  spectre  of  deflation  haunts  central  bankers.  When 
coupled with the other political concerns raised by slow and unequal growth listed above, it is 
no wonder that the authorities in developed countries do not want to settle for low growth, 
even if that is indeed their economy’s potential. 
So  the  central  dilemma  in  industrial  economies  has  been  how  to  reconcile  the  political 
imperative  for  strong  growth  with  the  reality  that  cyclical  stimulus  measures  have  proved 
ineffective in restoring high growth, debt write-offs are politically unacceptable, and structural 
reforms have the wrong timing, politically speaking, of pain versus gain. There is, however, 
one other channel for growth – exports. 
Emerging market response 
If industrial countries are stuck in low growth, can emerging markets (I use the term broadly 
to also stand for developing or frontier markets) take up the global slack in demand? After all, 
emerging  markets  have  a  clear  need  for  infrastructure  investment,  as  well  as  growing 
populations that can be a source of final demand. Why cannot industrial countries export to 
emerging markets as a way to bolster growth? After all, they have done so in the past. 
Emerging markets have no less of an imperative for growth than industrial countries. While 
many  do  not  have  past  entitlement  promises  to  deliver  on, some  have  ageing  populations 
that  have  to  be  provided  for,  and  many  have  young,  poor,  populations  with  sky-high 
expectations of growth. Ideally, emerging markets would invest for the future, funded by the 
rich world, thus bolstering aggregate world demand. 
The 1990s were indeed a period when emerging markets borrowed from the rest of the world 
in  attempting  to  finance  infrastructure  and  development.  It  did  not  end  well,  with  credit 
booms, large unviable prestige projects, and eventual busts. The Mexican Crisis of 1994, the 
Asian  Crisis  of  1997–98,  and  the  Argentinian  Crisis  of  2001  highlighted  the  inability  of 
emerging  markets  to  manage  large  increases  in  domestic  investment  funded  by  foreign 
capital  inflows.  The  lesson  from  the  1990s  crises  was  that  emerging  market  reliance  on 
foreign  capital  for  growth  was  dangerous.  With  investment  prudently  limited  to  domestic 
savings, this naturally curtailed their ability to serve as growth engines for the world. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Following the 1990s crises, as the dotted line in Figure 3 indicates, a number of emerging 
markets went further to run current account surpluses after cutting investment sharply, and 
started  accumulating  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  preserve  exchange  competitiveness. 
Rather  than  generating  excess  demand  for  the  world’s  goods,  they  became  suppliers  (or 
equivalently,  savers),  searching  for  demand  elsewhere.  And  the  debt-fuelled  demand  from 
the  industrial  countries  before  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  as  indicated  by  their  current 
account deficits, spilled over into a demand for emerging market goods. The years before the 
crisis were years of plenty for countries like China that catered directly to industrial country 
demand,  and  countries  in  Africa,  Asia,  and  Latin  America  that  sold  commodities  and 
intermediate goods to the direct suppliers. 
In  2005,  Ben  Bernanke,  then  a  governor  at  the  Federal  Reserve,  coined  the  term  “Global 
Savings Glut” to describe the current account surpluses, especially of emerging markets, that 
were finding their way into the United States.9 He argued that these depressed U.S. interest 
rates, enhancing consumption, and the U.S. current account deficit. Bernanke pointed to a 
number  of  adverse  consequences  to  the  United  States  from  these  flows  including  the 
misallocation  of  resources 
tradable 
manufacturing. He suggested that it would be good if United States’ current account deficit 
shrank,  but  that  primarily  required  emerging  markets  to  reduce  their  exchange  rate 
intervention rather than actions on the part of the United States. 
to  non-traded  goods 
like  housing  away 
from 
                                                 
9   “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”,  remarks  by  Governor  Bernanke  at  the 
Sandridge  Lecture,  Virginia  Association  of  Economists,  Richmond,  Virginia  on  March  10,  2005, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  
 
So  pre-global  financial  crisis,  emerging  markets  and  industrial  countries  were  locked  in  a 
dangerous  relationship  of  capital  flows  and  demand  that  reversed  the  equally  dangerous 
pattern  before  the  emerging  market  crises  in  the  late  1990s.  Sustained  exchange  rate 
intervention  by  emerging  market  central  banks,  as  well  as  an  excessive  tolerance  for 
leverage in industrial countries contributed to the eventual global disaster. But post-financial 
crisis, the pattern is reversing once again. 
Post  global  financial  crisis,  much  like  the  emerging  markets  in  the  early  2000s,  industrial 
countries have curtailed their investment without increasing their consumption (as a fraction 
of GDP), thus reducing their demand for foreign goods and their reliance on foreign finance. 
Indeed,  as  the  solid  line  in  Figure  3  indicates,  advanced  economies  ran  current  account 
surpluses  in  2013  and  were  also  projected  to  do  so  in  2014,  a  shift  in  current  account 
balances of about 1.5 percentage points of GDP since 2008. 
The  counterpart  of  this  shift  of  advanced  economies  from  current  account  deficit  (demand 
creating) to surplus (supply creating) has been a substantial fall in current account surpluses 
in  emerging  markets  over  the  same  period.  This  relative  increase  in  demand  for  foreign 
goods from emerging markets has come about through a ramp up in investment from 2008, 
rather  than  a  fall  in  savings  –  a  shift  of  2.7  percentage  points  of  GDP  in  current  account 
balances  between  2008  and  2014.  Facilitating  or  causing  this  shift  has  been  a  broad 
appreciation  of  real  effective  exchange  rates  in  emerging  markets  and  a  depreciation  in 
industrial country rates between 2006–2014. 
Have  industrial  country  central  banks  policies,  similar  to  the  sustained  exchange  rate 
intervention by emerging market central banks in the early  2000s, accelerated this current 
account  adjustment?  Possibly,  and  likely  candidates  would  be  what  are  broadly  called 
unconventional monetary policies (UMP). 
Unconventional monetary policy 
Unconventional monetary policies include both policies where the central bank attempts to 
commit to hold interest rates at near zero for long, as well as policies that affect central bank 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
balance  sheets  such  as  buying  assets  in  certain  markets,  including  exchange  markets,  in 
order to affect market prices.10 
There  clearly  is  a  role  for  unconventional  policies  –  when  markets  are  broken  or  grossly 
dysfunctional, central bankers may step in with their balance sheets to mend markets. The 
key  question  is  what  happens  when  these  policies  are  prolonged  long  beyond  repairing 
markets to actually distorting them. The benefit to cost ratio there is less clear. 
Take, for instance, the zero-lower-bound problem. Because short term policy rates cannot be 
pushed  much  below  zero,  and  because  long  rates  tack  on  a  risk  premium  to  short  rates, 
central  banks  may  use  UMP  to  directly  affect  long  rates.  Direct  action  by  a  risk  tolerant 
central bank, such as purchasing long bonds, effectively shrinks the risk premium available 
on remaining long assets.11 
This  has  two  effects.  First,  those  who  can  rebalance  between  short  and  long  assets  now 
prefer holding short term assets because, risk adjusted, these are a better deal. Thus as the 
central  bank  increases  bond  purchases  under  quantitative  easing,  the  willingness  of 
commercial banks to hold unremunerated reserves rather than long term assets increases. 
Second, those institutions that cannot shift to short term assets, such as pension funds, bond 
mutual funds, and insurance companies, will either continue holding their assets and suffer a 
relative under-compensation for risk, or turn to riskier assets. This behaviour, also termed the 
search for yield, will occur if the relative under-compensation for risk in more exotic assets is 
lower, or simply because institutions have to meet a fixed nominal rate of return constraint on 
their portfolios. Of course, such portfolio rebalancing will also take place because the central 
bank buys long duration bonds out of institutional portfolios, leaving them cash to redeploy. 
None of this need be a problem if everyone knows when to stop. Unfortunately, there are few 
constraints  on  central  banks  undertaking  these  policies  since  they  are  self-financing 
(commercial banks become more willing to hold central bank reserves as the risk premium 
on long bonds shrinks). If the policy does not seem to be increasing growth, one can simply 
do  more.  All  the  while,  the  distortion  in  asset  prices  and  the  mis-allocation  of  funds  can 
increase, which can be very costly when the central bank decides to exit. 
Equally  important  though,  is  that  domestic  fund  managers  can  search  for  yield  abroad, 
depreciating the sending country’s currency and causing the receiving country’s currency to 
appreciate,  perhaps  significantly  more  so  than  ordinary  monetary  policy.  This  may  indeed 
cause  the  increase  in  domestic  competitiveness  that  could  energize  the  sending  country’s 
exports.  But  such  increases  in  competitiveness  and  “demand  shifting”  can  be  very 
detrimental for global stability, especially if unaccompanied by domestic demand creation. 
Spill overs to emerging markets and musical crises 
If UMP enhances financial risk taking in the originating country without enhancing domestic 
investment  or  consumption,  the  exchange  rate  impact  of  UMP  may  simply  shift  demand 
away  from  countries  not  engaging  in  UMP,  without  creating  much  compensating  domestic 
demand  for  their  goods.  If  so,  UMP  would  resemble  very  much  the  exchange  rate 
intervention policies of the emerging markets pre-global financial crisis. 
Indeed, the post-global crisis capital flows into emerging markets have been huge, despite 
the  best  efforts  of  emerging  markets  to  push  them  back  by  accumulating  reserves  (net 
capital flows to emerging economies reached US$ 550 bn in 2013 compared to US$120 bn 
                                                 
10   For  an  excellent  overview,  see  Claudio  Borio  and  P.  Disyatat,  “Unconventional  monetary  policies:  An 
appraisal”, The Manchester School; Vol. 78, Issue s1, pp. 53–89, September 2010. 
11   For instance, because the most risk averse holders of existing long bonds sell first and move to holding short 
term assets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  
 
in 2006).12, 13 These flows have increased local leverage, not just due to the direct effect of 
cross-border banking flows but also the indirect effect, as the appreciating exchange rate and 
rising asset prices, especially of real estate, make it seem that emerging market borrowers 
have more equity than they really have. Bernanke’s concerns in 2005 about mal-investment 
in the United States resulting from capital inflows from emerging markets have surfaced in 
emerging markets post-crisis as a result of capital inflows from industrial countries. 
Have  crises  in  emerging  markets  in  the  1990s  been  transformed  into  crises  in  industrial 
countries in the 2000s and once again into vulnerabilities in emerging markets in the 2010s, 
as countries react to the problem of inadequate global demand by exporting their problems to 
other countries? The “taper tantrum” in July 2013 certainly seemed to suggest that emerging 
markets  that  ran  large  current  account  deficits  were  vulnerable  once  again.14  Is  the  world 
engaged in a macabre game of musical crises as each country attempts to boost growth? If 
possibly yes, as suggested by the previous discussion, how do we break this cycle? 
Good policies…and good behaviour 
In  an  ideal  world,  the  political  imperative  for  growth  would  not  outstrip  the  economy’s 
potential.  Given  that  we  do  not  live  in  such  a  world,  and  given  that  social  security 
commitments, over-indebtedness, and poverty are not going to disappear, it is probably wiser 
to look for ways to enhance sustainable growth. 
Clearly,  the  long  run  response  to  weak  global  growth  should  be  policies  that  promote 
innovation  as  well  as  structural  reforms  that  enhance  efficiency.  Given  that  growth  within 
countries is poorly distributed, policies that improve the domestic distribution of capabilities 
and opportunities without significantly dampening incentives for innovation and efficiency are 
also needed. 
In  the  short  run  though,  the  need  for  sensible  investment  is  paramount.  In  industrial 
countries,  green  energy  initiatives  such  as  carbon  taxes  or  emission  limits,  while  giving 
industry  clear  signals  on  where  to  invest,  also  have  the  ability  to  move  the  needle  on 
aggregate investment and help long run goals on environment protection. 
Most  emerging  markets  have  large  infrastructure  investment  needs.  We  still  need  to 
understand  how  to  improve  project  selection  and  finance  –  too  much  public  sector 
involvement results in sloth and rent seeking, too much private sector involvement leads to 
risk  intolerance  and  profiteering.  Going  forward,  well-designed  public  private  partnerships, 
drawing on successful experiences elsewhere, should complement private initiative. 
The  Australian  Presidency  of  the  G  20  created  a  welcome  mechanism  to  share  best 
investment practices across countries. At the same time, we must recognize that large scale 
investment projects need patient risk capital, which is in short supply in emerging markets. 
Private investors rarely have the risk tolerance that governments or multilateral institutions 
                                                 
12   Based  on  the  World  Economic  Outlook  database.  Emerging  economies  include  “emerging  and  developing” 
countries. Net capital flows include net direct investment, net portfolio investment, and “other” net investment. 
13   Indeed, similar to the behavior of commercial banks, the willingness of emerging market central banks to hold 
short term paper in response to capital inflows enhances the ability of the industrial country central bank to 
engage in further UMP. In a sense, emerging market central banks provide liquidity for foreign investors by 
holding precautionary reserves. 
14   For those  who advocate allowing exchange rate adjustment as central to macro-management, it should be 
sobering that countries that allowed the real exchange rate to appreciate the most during the prior period of 
quantitative easing suffered the greatest adverse impact to financial conditions (see Eichengreen, Barry and 
Poonam  Gupta  (2013),  “Tapering  Talk:  The  Impact  of  Expectations  of  Reduced  Federal  Reserve  Security 
Purchases on Emerging Markets”, Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley and Mishra, Prachi, Kenji 
Moriyama, Papa N’Diaye and Lam Nguyen (2014), “The Impact of Fed Tapering Announcements on Emerging 
Markets”, IMF working paper). 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
have.  So,  in  addition  to  knowledge  sharing,  global  growth  would  benefit  from  an 
augmentation of the capital base of multilateral institutions like the World Bank, the African 
Development Bank, and the Asian Development Bank, so that they can provide part of the 
patient risk tolerant capital the emerging world needs. Despite competing domestic demands, 
industrial countries should recognize the important catalytic role that the development banks 
can play and help bolster their capital. At the very least, they should not stand in the way of 
others augmenting capital and taking more ownership. 
Clearly,  sensible  investment  has  a  much  better  chance  of  paying  dividends  when 
macroeconomic  policies  are  sound.  And  such  policies  are  easier  when  the  adverse  spill 
overs from cross-border capital flows are limited. This may require new rules of the game for 
policy making. 
New rules of the game? 
How do we focus on domestic demand creation and avoid this game of musical crises with 
countries  trying  to  depreciate  their  exchange  rate  through  sustained  direct  exchange  rate 
intervention  or 
through  unconventional  monetary  policies  (where  demand  creating 
transmission  channels  are  blocked)?15  It  might  be  useful  to  examine  and  challenge  the 
rationales used to justify such actions. 
Rationale 1: Would the world not be better off if we grew strongly? 
Undoubtedly, if there were no negative spill overs from a country’s actions, the world would 
indeed  be  better  off  if  the  country  grew.  But  the  whole  point  about  policies  that  primarily 
affect  domestic  growth  by  depreciating  the  domestic  exchange  rate  is  that  they  work  by 
pulling growth from others, not creating growth for others. 
Rationale 2: We are in a deep recession. We need to use any means available to jump start 
growth. Once we get out of recession, the payoff for other countries from our growth will be 
considerable. 
This may be a legitimate rationale if the policy is a “one-off” and once the country gets out of 
its  growth  funk,  it  is  willing  to  let  its  currency  appreciate  so  that  it  absorbs  imports,  thus 
pulling other countries with it. But if the strengthening currency leads to a continuation of the 
unconventional policies as the country’s authorities become unwilling to give back the growth 
they  obtained  by  undervaluing  their  currency,  or  if  the  strengthening  currency  leads  to 
greater domestic political clamour about foreign countries undervaluing their currencies, this 
rationale  is  suspect.  Moreover,  policies  that  encourage  sustained  unidirectional  capital 
outflows to other countries can be very debilitating for the recipient’s financial stability, over 
and  above  any  effects  on  their  competitiveness.  Thus  any  “one-off”  has  to  be  limited  in 
duration. 
Rationale  3:  Our  domestic  mandate  requires  us  to  do  what  it  takes  to  fulfil  our  inflation 
objective, and unconventional monetary policy is indeed necessary when we hit against the 
zero lower bound. 
This  rationale  has  two  weaknesses.  First,  it  places  a  domestic  mandate  above  an 
international  responsibility.  If  this  were  seen  to  be  legitimate,  then  no  country  would  ever 
respect  international  responsibilities  when  inconvenient.  Second,  it  implicitly  assumes  that 
the  only  way  to  achieve  the  inflation  mandate  is  through  unconventional  monetary  policy 
(even assuming UMPs are successful in elevating inflation on a sustained basis, for which 
there is little evidence). 
                                                 
15   See also a very thoughtful piece by Fabrizio Saccomanni, “Monetary spillovers? Boom and bust? Currency 
wars?”, The international monetary system strikes back”, BIS Special Governors Meeting, Manila, February 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  
 
Rationale 4: We take into account the feedback effects to our economy from the rest of the 
world  while  setting  policy.  Therefore,  we  are  not  oblivious  to  the  consequences  of 
unconventional monetary policies on other countries. 
Ideally, responsible global citizenship would require a country to act as it would act in a world 
without boundaries. In such a world, a policy maker should judge whether the overall positive 
domestic  and  international  benefits  of  a  policy,  discounted  over  time,  outweigh  its  costs. 
Some  policies  may  have  largely  domestic  benefits  and  foreign  costs,  but  they  may  be 
reasonable in a world without boundaries because more people are benefited than are hurt. 
By this definition, Rationale 4 does not necessarily amount to responsible global citizenship 
because a country only takes into account the global “spillbacks” to itself from any policies it 
undertakes, instead of the spill overs also. So, for example, Country A may destroy industry I 
in country B through its policies, but will only take into account the spillback from industry I 
purchasing less of country A’s exports. 
Rationale 5: Monetary policy with a domestic focus is already very complicated and hard to 
communicate. It would be impossibly complex if we were additionally burdened with having 
to think about the effects of (unconventional) monetary policies on other countries. 
This  widely-heard  rationale  is  really  an  abandonment  of  responsibility.  It  amounts  to 
asserting  that  the  monetary  authority  only  has  a  domestic  mandate,  which  is  Rationale  3 
above. In an interconnected globalized world, “complexity” cannot be a defense. 
Rationale 6: We will do what we must, you can adjust. 
Adjustments are never  easy, and sometimes very costly – one reason why  Ben Bernanke 
placed  the  burden  of  change  in  his  “Savings  Glut”  speech  outside  the  United  States. 
Emerging markets may not have the institutions that can weather the exchange rate volatility 
and  credit  growth  associated  with  large  capital  flows  –  for  instance,  sharp  exchange  rate 
depreciations can translate quickly into inflation if the emerging market central bank does not 
have  credibility,  while  exchange  rate  depreciations  may  be  more  easily  endured  by  an 
industrial country. 
The bottom line is that multilateral institutions like the IMF should re-examine the “rules of the 
game” for responsible policy, and develop a consensus around new ones. No matter what a 
central  bank’s  domestic  mandate,  international  responsibilities  should  not  be  ignored.  The 
IMF  should  analyze  each  new  unconventional  monetary  policy  (including  sustained 
unidirectional exchange rate intervention), and based on their effects and the agreed rules of 
the game, declare them in- or out-of-bounds. By halting policies that primarily work through 
the  exchange  rate,  it  will  also  contribute  to  solving  a  classic  Prisoner’s  Dilemma  problem 
associated with policies that depreciate the exchange rate – once some countries undertake 
these  policies,  staying  out  is  difficult  (the  country  that  eschews  these  policies  sees  its 
currency  appreciate  and  demand  fall).  Exit  is  also  difficult  (the  exiting  country  faces  sharp 
appreciation). Therefore, in the absence of collective action, these policies will be undertaken 
even when sub-optimal, and will carry on too long. 
Of course, with country authorities in almost every industrial country focused on appeasing 
populist  anti-trade  anti-finance  (and  anti-central  bank)  political  movements,  there  is  little 
appetite  for  taking  on  further  international  commitments.  We  clearly  need  further  dialogue 
and public debate on the issues that have been raised, while recognizing that progress will 
require strong political leadership. 
International safety nets 
Emerging economies have to work to reduce vulnerabilities in their economies, to get to the 
point where, like Australia or Canada, they can allow exchange rate flexibility to do much of 
the adjustment for them to capital inflows. But the needed institutions take time to develop. In 
the  meantime,  the  difficulty  for  emerging  markets  in  absorbing  large  amounts  of  capital 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
quickly and in a stable way should be seen as a constraint, much like the zero lower bound, 
rather  than  something  that  can  be  altered  quickly.  Even  while  resisting  the  temptation  of 
absorbing flows, emerging markets will look to safety nets. 
So another  way to prevent a repeat of substantial emerging market reserve accumulation, 
this time for precautionary rather than competitive purposes, is to build stronger international 
safety nets. For instance, one possibility is an unsolicited liquidity line from the IMF, where 
countries are pre-qualified by the IMF and told (perhaps privately) how much of a line they 
would qualify for under current policy – with access limits revised in the annual dialogue the 
Fund has with a country, and any curtailment becoming effective 6 months later. Access to 
the line would get activated by the IMF Board in a situation of generalized liquidity shortage 
(as, for example, when policy tightening in source countries after an extended period of low 
rates causes investment managers to become risk averse). 
In turn, the Fund could finance this liquidity by intermediating swaps with central banks (and 
thus guaranteeing central banks against default). Such proposals allow countries access to 
liquidity  without  the  stigma  of  approaching  the  Fund,  and  without  the  conditionality  that 
accompanies  most  Fund  arrangements,  and  thus  are  more  likely  to  be  acceptable  as 
precautionary  measures.  It  would  also  be  a  useful  exercise  for  the  Fund,  in  a  period  of 
growing vulnerability to capital flow reversals, to determine those countries that do not have 
own, bilateral, regional, or multilateral liquidity arrangements to fall back on, and to work to 
improve their access to some safety net. 
Conclusion 
The  current  non-system  in  international  monetary  policy  is,  in  my  view,  a  source  of 
substantial  risk,  both  to  sustainable  growth  as  well  as  to  the  financial  sector.  It  is  not  an 
industrial  country  problem,  nor  an  emerging  market  problem,  it  is  a  problem  of  collective 
action. We are being pushed towards competitive monetary easing and musical crises. 
I  use  Depression  era  terminology  because  I  fear  that  in  a  world  with  weak  aggregate 
demand, we may be engaged in a risky competition for a greater share of it. We are thereby 
also creating financial sector risks for when unconventional policies end. 
We need stronger well-capitalized multilateral institutions with widespread legitimacy, some 
of which can provide patient capital and others that can monitor new rules of the game. We 
also need better international safety nets. And each one of us has to work hard in our own 
countries  to  develop  a  consensus  for  free  trade,  open  markets,  and  responsible  global 
citizenry. If we can achieve all this even as recent economic events make us more parochial 
and inward-looking, we will truly have set the stage for the strong sustainable growth we all 
desperately need. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
