  Guy Debelle: Global and domestic influences on the Australian bond 
market 
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the KangaNews Debt Capital Markets Summit 2015, Sydney, 16 March 2015. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  Emma  Doherty,  Suchita  Mathur  and  John  Boulter  for  their  assistance  in  preparing  these 
remarks. 
Accompanying graphs can be found at the end of the speech. 
Today I will talk about some of the global and domestic factors that are influencing conditions 
in the Australian bond market. I’ll start with a discussion on the decline in global bond yields 
that  we’ve  seen  over  the  past  year  or  so  before  turning  to  focus  on  how  these  and  other 
developments have played out in the Australian bond market. I will finish with some recent 
and prospective regulatory developments affecting the local market.  
Global influences  
At the beginning of 2014, the 10-year Treasury yield in the US was around 3 per cent. At that 
yield,  investors  were  getting  some  compensation  for  duration  risk  in  the  form  of  a  term 
premium; that is, some compensation for uncertainty about the future path of US monetary 
policy.  However,  over  the  course  of  2014  the  yield  declined  steadily,  reaching  a  low  of 
1.64 per cent in early 2015, close to the historical lows reached in July 2012. With a yield of 
1.64,  investors  were  getting  little  or  no  compensation  for  term  risk  or  the  risk  of  inflation. 
Indeed, one could argue that the term premium was even negative. There was no meaningful 
compensation for uncertainty about the path of US monetary policy or inflation.  
This decline in US yields was also evident in nearly all advanced economies and occurred 
despite some notable variations across countries at the shorter end of the curve (Graph 1). 
Over recent months, it has looked more like yields in Germany driving those in the US and 
elsewhere rather than the traditional relationship of US yields driving those in other markets.  
In recent weeks, some of the decline in yields has been unwound in the US and a few other 
economies such as the UK, but 10-year yields in the euro area have fallen further to reach 
new historic lows, with the 10-year yield in Germany now noticeably below that in Japan. As 
has been remarked on frequently, the 10-year yields in Spain and Ireland are currently below 
that in the US.  
At the shorter end of the yield curve, expectations for future monetary policy settings are an 
important  driver.  There  has  been  a  notable  divergence  in  expectations  for  the  path  of 
monetary policy in major developed economies since the middle of 2013. In the US, the Fed 
gradually  slowed  the  pace  of  its  asset  purchases  from  January  2014  and  ceased  them 
altogether  in  October.  More  recently,  it  has  indicated  that  it  is  getting  closer  to  raising  the 
level of the federal funds rate target for the first time in nearly a decade.  
In contrast, over the same period the European Central Bank (ECB) has moved  to further 
loosen monetary policy settings in the euro area, culminating with the announcement in early 
2015  of  a  sovereign  bond  purchase  program.  Several  European  countries  that  are  not 
members of the euro area have lowered the interest rate paid on deposits with the central 
bank to negative territory, a move that the ECB made in September 2014. Meanwhile, the 
Bank of Japan (BoJ) has continued its quantitative easing program, increasing the scale of 
its asset purchases in late October.  
The influence of this divergence in monetary policy on the relevant sovereign bond markets 
is evident in the movements in yields on 2-year government bonds over the past 18 months 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  falling  consistently 
throughout  2014.  The  uniformity  of 
(Graph 2). In particular, 2-year US Treasury yields have risen a little since late 2013 while 
2-year German government bond yields have declined steadily and turned negative.  
At the longer end of the curve, as I noted earlier, the trajectory of sovereign yields has been 
more uniform, with the implied yield on a 5-year bond starting in 5 years’ time (the 5-year, 
5-year-forward  yield) 
these 
movements  suggests  that  global  factors  have  played  a  role.  While  it  is  straightforward  to 
come up with explanations for the direction of movement in yields, I do not find any of them 
compelling in explaining the size of the downward movement.  
One possible contributor to the decline in yields has been concerns about the global growth 
outlook, but expectations for global growth over the medium term haven’t changed all that 
much. Secular stagnation is also another popular explanation as lower real growth implies 
lower  real  yields  (although  I  am  more  optimistic  about  the  world  than  the  one  this  theory 
implies).  Yields  may  also  have  been  influenced  by  the  prospective  reduced  supply  of 
government  bonds:  the  gradual  improvement  in  governments’  fiscal  positions  is  reducing 
funding  needs  and  government  bond  issuance.  At  the  same  time,  the  quantitative  easing 
programs  of  the  ECB  and  the  BoJ  have  also  worked  to  increase  actual  and  anticipated 
demand  for  bonds,  and  there  is  increased  demand  from  banks  to  hold  sovereign  debt  to 
meet  liquidity  requirements.  While  the  Fed  is  no  longer  making  net  purchases,  it  has 
indicated that it will keep the stock of its asset holdings constant for some time by reinvesting 
maturing holdings in US Treasuries.  
One  remarkable  outcome  is  that  a  large  proportion  of  developed  countries’  government 
bonds are now trading at negative yields in secondary markets. Two-thirds of the German 
and Swiss government bonds on issue are currently trading at negative yields, while yields 
on  bonds  of  up  to  five  years  in  maturity  from  the  Japanese  and  a  variety  of  European 
governments have recently traded at negative yields.  
Five-year, 5-year-forward real yields have generally followed the trajectory of nominal yields, 
but have declined by less over 2014. With larger declines in nominal yields than real yields, 
estimated breakeven inflation rates – the spread between nominal and inflation-linked bond 
yields – have declined (Graph 3). (This calculation is complicated somewhat by the relatively 
lower liquidity in indexed bond markets.)  
One interpretation of this is that expectations for inflation have fallen considerably. The sharp 
decline in oil prices has certainly reduced near-term inflation expectations as most advanced 
economies  are  net  oil  importers.  But  this  would  only  account  for  a  decline  in  inflation 
expectations in the short term. A substantial decline in medium-term inflation expectations is 
more  difficult  to  explain.  Survey-based  inflation  expectations  from  market  economists  and 
consumers  do  not  appear  to  have  declined  substantially  over  the  same  period.  It  is  also 
worth noting that the decline in longer-run inflation expectations over the past six months is 
not a universal phenomenon – Australian breakeven rates were broadly flat over the second 
half of 2014 (and consistent with the RBA’s inflation target).  
Finally, one potential explanation that I have only briefly discussed above is that yields are 
being  held  down  by  a  shortage  of  risk-free  assets  as  demand  for  these  assets  has 
increased.1 I find this explanation of increased demand for such assets in the face of slower 
growth  in  the  supply  to  be  the  most  plausible.  But  even  so,  term  premia  are  unusually 
compressed and there is little overall compensation for risk.  
                                                 
1   Zoltan Pozsar has some interesting work on this; see Pozsar Z (2015), “A Macro View of Shadow Banking: 
Levered Betas and Wholesale Funding in the Context of Secular Stagnation”, mimeo, 31 January, available at 
<http://ineteconomics.org/sites/inet.civicactions.net/files/Macro_View_Final.XcxMB4_.pdf>.  Ricardo  Caballero 
has also written on this topic; see Caballero R (2013), “The Shortage of Safe Assets: Macroeconomic Policy 
Implications”,  presentation  at  the  Bank  of  England,  May,  available  at  <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
research/Documents/ccbs/cew2013/presentation_caballero.pdf>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Australian Government Bond Market  
Yields  on  Australian  Government  bonds  have  been  affected  by  these  international  factors 
over recent months as well as some domestic influences. At the shorter end, the February 
reduction in the cash rate target and associated repricing of market expectations for future 
monetary policy have contributed to a decline in yields. At the longer end, there has been a 
tendency  for  yields  to  follow  developments  in  global  markets.  While  the  strong  historical 
correlation  between  yields  on  long-term  Australian  and  US  government  bonds  has  been 
evident,  the  spread  between  10-year  yields  has  narrowed  considerably,  declining  from 
100 basis points in the middle of last year to be as low as 40 basis points. The net outcome 
of these developments has seen yields on Australian 10-year Commonwealth Government 
securities (CGS) decline to their lowest level since Federation with an all-time low of 2.28 per 
cent being recorded in February (Graph 4).  
These  declines  in  CGS  yields  over  recent  years  –  and  similar  declines  in  yields  on  state 
government bonds (“semis”) – have occurred notwithstanding an increase in the supply of 
CGS  and  semis  on  issue.  But  the  stock  of  debt  on  issue  remains  considerably  less  as  a 
share of GDP than nearly all other jurisdictions (Graph 5).  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The  vast  majority  of  the  post-crisis  CGS  issuance  has  been  purchased  by  non-residents 
attracted  to  the  Australian  Government’s  AAA  credit  rating  and  favourable  level  of  yields 
relative  to  other  highly  rated  sovereign  issuers.  The  six-fold  increase  in  non-residents’ 
holdings of CGS since late 2007 took non-residents’ ownership of the outstanding stock of 
CGS  to  just  under  80  per  cent  in  2010,  although  this  share  has  declined  a  little  recently 
(Graph 6). The recent decline is not because of any net selling, but rather because buying 
has not quite kept pace with recent issuance.  
The increased foreign holdings of government debt have been reflected in a notable change 
in the composition of Australia’s foreign liabilities (Graph 7). The stock of net foreign liabilities 
has remained steady at around 55 per cent of GDP for the past decade. But over the past 
five years, foreign holdings of Australian government debt have risen to around 20 per cent 
of  GDP,  with  a  broadly  offsetting  decline  in  foreign  holdings  of  Australian  bank  debt  as  a 
share of GDP.  
Turning  to  developments  in  the  semis  market,  yields  on  semis  have  fallen  by  more  than 
those on CGS, such that secondary market spreads have fallen to around 30 basis points. 
This is around the lowest spread seen since the early 2000s and semi yields are at historical 
lows. State governments are able to borrow on average at rates under 3 per cent (Graph 8). 
In terms of ownership, since 2007 there has been a marked increase in the share held by 
banks in Australia. This is a consequence of banks’ desire to hold more high-quality liquid 
assets (HQLA) in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and, more recently, the Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  (LCR)  prudential  requirements  that  came  into  effect  in  Australia  at  the 
beginning of 2015.  
APRA has determined that the Australian banking system needs to hold around $410 billion 
of HQLA in 2015. Of this amount, and based on RBA advice, up to $175 billion could be met 
through holding CGS and semis. The Bank’s assessment is that larger holdings by Australian 
banks  could  impair  liquidity  of  these  securities,  undermining  the  purpose  of  the  LCR.  The 
introduction  of  the  LCR  has  proceeded  smoothly,  but  of  course  APRA  and  the  RBA  will 
continue  to  monitor  developments  in  markets  to  ensure  that  liquidity  conditions  remain 
appropriate.  
The increased demand  from banks for semis is  having a noticeable impact on the type of 
debt securities being issued by the states (Graph 9). In line with the banks’ preference for 
floating-rate debt – which can be better matched to banks’ floating-rate liabilities – the share 
of floating-rate semis in recent years has increased. Consequently, the share of floating-rate 
notes in the outstanding stock of semis has increased from 2 per cent at the end of 2012 to 
around 10 per cent at present. Similarly, the preference of banks for shorter term debt has 
led to a decline in the average tenor of semis outstanding.  
Regulatory developments  
I  will  finish  by  discussing  the  effect  of  some  recent  regulatory  changes  in  the  local  fixed 
income market.  
One global development that has garnered a large amount of comment of late is the effect of 
reduced  market-making  capacity  in  fixed  income.2  The  Bank  for  International  Settlements 
(BIS) Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS), of which I am a member, issued a 
report on this topic late last year.3 That report documents the intended effect of regulation in 
                                                 
2   Debelle  G  (2014),  “Volatility  and  Market  Pricing”,  Speech  to  Citi’s  6th  Annual  Australian  and  New  Zealand 
Investment Conference, Sydney, 14 October. 
3   CGFS  (2014),  “Market-making  and  Proprietary  Trading:  Industry  Trends,  Drivers  and  Policy  Implications”, 
CGFS Papers No 52. Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs52.htm>. Jon Cheshire, who was a member of 
the  working  group,  has  an  article  in  the  March  RBA  Bulletin  discussing  this  issue  from  an  Australian 
perspective. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  bringing about this reduction. There is a debate as to whether the reduction has gone too far, 
but the fact that market-making activity is lower than it was pre-crisis is a desirable outcome 
given liquidity risk was under-priced pre-crisis.  
Rather than describing it as a reduction in market-making, I think it is more useful to think of 
it as a reduction in the risk-absorption capacity of intermediaries. Their ability to warehouse 
portfolio  adjustments  of  asset  managers  is  curtailed.  In  the  past,  asset  managers  were 
dealing bilaterally with individual trading desks that each had their own limit. Now these limits 
are applied holistically across the trading desks so that selling one part of a portfolio to one 
desk will reduce the capacity to sell another part of the portfolio to another desk in the same 
institution.  Asset  managers  need  to  take  account  of  these  changes  in  market  dynamics  in 
thinking  about  how  they  adjust  their  portfolios.  Transactions  costs  are  higher  and,  in 
particular,  liquidity  costs  are  higher.  I  am  not  sure  that  all  market  participants  have  fully 
appreciated this yet and are fully cognisant of the impact of the post-crisis changes.  
The  second  development  to  note  is  in  the  asset-backed  security  space.  As  many  of  you 
know, as of 30 June this year, the Bank will introduce mandatory reporting requirements for 
repo-eligible asset-backed securities (ABS). The Bank continues to work with the industry to 
ensure  the  timely  implementation  of  these  requirements.  The  required  information,  which 
must  also  be  made  available  to  permitted  users,  will  promote  greater  transparency  in  the 
market, supporting investor confidence in these assets. These requirements will also provide 
the Bank with standardised and detailed data on ABS, which are a major part of the collateral 
eligible to be used under the CLF.  
In preparation for the introduction of these reporting requirements and to facilitate industry 
readiness, the reporting system for securitisations was made available for industry testing in 
November  2014,  with  voluntary  reporting  accepted  from  31  December  2014.  The  Bank  is 
currently  working  with  a  number  of  institutions  undertaking  test  submissions,  with  some 
institutions  expecting  to  commence  regular  reporting  shortly.  The  industry  is  strongly 
encouraged  to  undertake  testing  early  to  ensure  readiness  for  the  commencement  of 
mandatory reporting on 30 June 2015.  
The third development is the proposed changes to the settlement convention to T+2 for over-
the-counter  (OTC)  transactions  in  domestic  fixed  income  securities.  The  Bank  strongly 
encouraged this initiative. The current standard of T+3 settlement in the Australian market 
compares unfavourably with many other jurisdictions that have already progressed to shorter 
settlement  cycles  for  OTC  transactions  in  their  domestic  fixed  income  markets.  A  shorter 
settlement cycle will reduce the risks associated with settlement, in particular, counterparty 
risk. Market makers in OTC fixed income securities may particularly benefit from the reduced 
period of counterparty exposure, as any given trade will count towards internal credit limits 
for  a  shorter  period  of  time.  This  could  boost  market  turnover  and  trading  capacity  for 
participants. Further, moving to T+2 is likely to encourage straight-through processing, which 
could reduce the risk of an operational issue affecting the settlement of OTC fixed income 
securities. Ideally, this would be implemented by the end of 2015.  
Finally, a few words on interest rate benchmarks. The RBA, together with ASIC, is working 
with the industry through AFMA to develop a robust risk-free interest rate benchmark in the 
local market, likely based on overnight indexed swap (OIS) rates. Once this is operational, 
this will help engender a movement of products towards referencing a risk-free benchmark 
rather  than  a  credit  benchmark  such  as  bank  bill  swap  (BBSW)  rates.4  We  expect  to  see 
progress on this in the coming months.  
                                                 
4   This is part of a global initiative that is part of the FSB work agenda. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  Conclusion  
To  conclude,  there  are  a  large  number  of  moving  parts  in  fixed  income  at  the  moment.  A 
number of international and domestic factors are having an important influence on Australian 
bond markets. The low levels of yields globally and domestically are difficult to explain, most 
notably the low level of term premia. The most plausible explanation relates to a shortage of 
“risk-free” assets although with term premia so low, it’s not clear how risk-free they actually 
are.  
At the same time as grappling with these developments, investors need to be aware of the 
changed  market  dynamics  and  factor  the  higher  transactions  costs  in  fixed  income,  and 
particularly the higher cost of liquidity provision, into their decision-making.  
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 1 
 
Graph 2 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Graph 3 
 
Graph 4 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 5 
 
Graph 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
 Graph 7 
 
Graph 8 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 9 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
