  Lesetja Kganyago: Monetary policy and South Africa’s economic 
objectives 
Keynote address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the Fedusa Collective Bargaining Conference 2015, Muldersdrift, 17 February 2015. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  address  you  today  as  you  prepare  to  participate  in  collective 
bargaining  across  a  range  of  industries.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  Koos 
Bezhuidenhout,  the  President  of  Fedusa  and  Mr.  Dennis  George,  General  Secretary  of 
Fedusa. The South African Reserve Bank has enjoyed a healthy and productive relationship 
with your Federation for many years, a relationship I wish to continue. 
You  have  asked  me  to  address  the  pertinent  question  of  whether  monetary  policy  is  still 
supportive and accommodative of South Africa’s economic objectives. My emphatic answer 
to  the  question  is  yes,  monetary  policy  is  still  accommodative  and  supportive  of  South 
Africa’s economic objectives. In elaborating on this short answer, I will discuss three broad 
issues.  Firstly,  what  is  the  mandate  of  the  Bank  in  achieving  South  Africa’s  economic 
objectives?  Secondly,  I  will  explain  in  an  historical  context  why  monetary  policy  at  the 
present moment is highly accommodative; and thirdly, I will discuss some of the longer term 
policy challenges confronting workers and the South African economy in general. This third 
part of the answer will provide some context, both in answering your question and points for 
you to ponder as you prepare for the next round of collective bargaining. 
The Constitution mandates the Bank to protect the value of the currency in the interests of 
balanced  and  sustainable  growth.  The  value  of  the  currency  in  your  pocket  is  its  buying 
power. Our aim is to maintain the buying power of each rand you earn or have saved. We do 
this by aiming to keep inflation low. Hence our primary mandate is price stability. The Bank 
also plays a key role in regulating the financial sector with the aim of maintaining financial 
stability. We do this to protect workers and the economy from shocks that may arise in the 
financial system. 
Why do we pursue price stability and how does this objective fit into South Africa’s overall 
economic objectives? Indeed, you may legitimately ask, what does balanced and sustainable 
growth mean and is low inflation a prerequisite for balanced and sustainable growth? These 
are critical questions in understanding South Africa’s economic policy architecture. There are 
very few things that economists generally agree on. The necessity of price stability for the 
sound  functioning  of  an  economy  is  one  of  the  few  elements  of  economics  that  most 
economists agree on. With about two hundred years of evidence and hundreds of countries 
as  natural  experiments,  countries  with  low  and  stable  inflation  generally  grow  faster  and 
more sustainably over a longer period of time than countries with higher inflation or erratic 
price changes. 
Since these conversations take place not only here in South Africa, but also in other parts of 
the world, allow me to quote Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England addressing 
the 2014 Trade Union Council congress in the UK: 
“By maintaining price and financial stability, we put in place the foundations for sustainable 
job creation and income growth. Stability gives workers the confidence to invest in skills or to 
change jobs. And it gives firms the confidence to hire new workers, invest in new equipment, 
introduce new products and pursue new markets. We need workers with the right skills and 
we  need  companies  taking  strategic  initiatives  to  grow  productivity.  That  productivity  is 
needed to ensure real wage increases over the medium term.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  These words although referring to the UK economy, they could be easily applicable to the 
South African economic situation as well. We pursue price stability not because it is good for 
government  or  for  the  financial  sector.  We  pursue  price  stability  because  it  is  good  for 
workers, for job creation and for poorer sections who lack the means to hedge or to protect 
themselves against inflation. 
It is true that there can be short term economic and indeed employment benefits from more 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  It  might  be  the  case  that  if  we  lowered  interest  rates 
substantially, for a short period of time, consumption and possibly employment would rise. If, 
however,  the  economic  conditions  do  not  warrant  such  policy,  then  the  effect  will  be 
temporary. Worse still, the effect could be to raise employment for a short period of time only 
to lower it by much more a few quarters down the road. South Africa, under apartheid, had a 
history of boom bust episodes. So yes, it is possible to increase employment with monetary 
policy and monetary policy has a special role to play to support employment during economic 
downturns. Monetary policy, however, cannot affect the level of employment over the longer 
term. 
Monetary  policy  is  only  one  aspect  of  economic  policy.  Together  with  fiscal  policy  and 
exchange rate policy, form our macroeconomic policy stance. Our priority for macroeconomic 
policy  is  to  provide  a  stable  environment  for  business  and  workers  to  pursue  growth, 
employment and investment opportunities. If we do our job well, we create a foundation for 
sustained prosperity. Without such a foundation, sustained wealth creation by households is 
unlikely.  Despite  its  fanciness,  macroeconomic  policy  has  little  influence  over  the  level  of 
potential or trend growth. Therefore, we actually play little role in the size or speed of wealth 
accumulation or employment creation. 
Other  policies,  policies  ranging  from  education  to  broadband  connectivity,  economic 
regulation to agriculture, trade policies and the quality of infrastructure (especially electricity 
provision) all play a role in determining the speed limit or potential growth of an economy. 
It is important for policy makers, such as ourselves, to understand the limits of our powers, 
but  it  is  also  important  for  South  Africans  to  understand  the  limitations  of,  in  this  case, 
monetary policy. 
Most  countries,  including  our  own,  have  independent  central  banks  because  it  could 
sometimes  be  in  the  short  term  interests  of  governments  and  even  firms  to  borrow  from 
tomorrow  to  deliver  goods  today.  Naturally,  a  key  role  of  the  financial  sector  is  to 
intermediate between savers and borrowers, including between generations. However, some 
economic actors have the power to borrow more from future generations than they have the 
capacity to repay. Governments do this by running unsustainable budget deficits. Firms could 
pursue short term profits but leave society with longer term costs; such as with events that 
led to the financial crisis. The task of the Reserve Bank is to dissuade governments, firms 
and  households  when  they  attempt  to  borrow  too  much  from  tomorrow.  Because  this  is 
sometimes  a  politically  difficult  task,  our  Constitution  assigns  this  role  to  an  independent 
central bank. 
Government  has  a  set  an  inflation  target  of  between  3  to  6  percent.  They  set  this  target 
because, at the time that it was set, this target was broadly in line with the inflation rates of 
our  major  trading  partners.  It  is  important  that  we  keep  our  inflation  rate  broadly  at  these 
levels.  If  we  fail  to  do  so,  it  means  that  we  are  losing  competitiveness.  Some  unions  and 
indeed  some  workers  argue  that  inflation  doesn’t  matter. Whether  inflation  is  5  percent  or 
20 percent, they say, I’ll still get an inflation-related salary increase at the end of the year, so 
I am okay. This is patently untrue and I will illustrate with an example. If inflation is 20 percent 
a year, it means that prices rise by about 1.5 percent a month. Each month, the purchasing 
power of your salary is eroded by 1.5 percent. By the twelfth month, just before your salary 
increase, you would have lost a major part of the buying power of your monthly salary. Let’s 
assume  that  at  the  end  of  each  year,  you  receive  a  20  percent  salary  increase.  After five 
years, your purchasing power has been eroded by a cumulative 40 percent; even though you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  think  you  are  doing fine  because  you  receive  an  annual  salary  increase  equal  to  inflation. 
Now  let’s  assume  that  inflation  averages  5  percent  a  year  for  those  five  years.  After  60 
months, the cumulative loss of purchasing power is about 10 percent; a loss nonetheless, but 
a far smaller one. This simple example illustrates that higher inflation is not good for workers, 
even if your salary gets topped up by inflation each year. Lower inflation is more conducive to 
rising real incomes. Lower inflation begets lower interest rates; higher inflation begets higher 
interest rates. 
Having  made  the  case  for  low  inflation,  let  me  also  argue  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  not 
populated  by  inflation  nutters.  Within  our  mandate,  we  have  been  tolerant  of  periods  of 
higher inflation when we think that higher inflation would be temporary or has been caused 
by  an  external  shock.  There  have  been  several  periods  in  the  15  year  history  of  inflation 
targeting where inflation increased either because of once-off shocks to the price of fuel or 
food or because of a sharp exchange rate movement. Our pattern has been to see through 
the first round effects of such shocks and to respond only if we think that there is a likelihood 
of second round effects (that is, a feed through into more generalised inflation) or if we think 
inflation would be permanently higher as a result of the shock. In 2013, inflation breached the 
target band for one quarter. We did not raise interest rates. In 2014, inflation breached the 
target for much of the year. Over 2013 and 2014, the rand depreciated by over 40 percent. 
Notwithstanding  the  breach  of  the  inflation  target  and  the  risks  of  an  even  longer  breach 
posed  by  the  exchange  rate;  we  raised  rates  by  a  modest  75  basis  points.  That 
demonstrates the benefits of our flexible inflation targeting framework. 
The  SARB  has  been  accommodative,  without  compromising  our  primary  mandate.  In 
historical terms, South Africa’s interest rates are lower in real and nominal terms than at any 
point in our recent economic history. It is true that there were periods during the late 1970s 
and 1980s when real interest rates were negative. In our view, negative real interest rates for 
such  a  long  time  structurally  damaged  the  savings  performance  of  the  economy.  In  2008, 
when  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  became  evident,  we  reduced  interest  rates 
sharply to 5.5 percent. In 2009, inflation spiked to over 11 percent, leaving real interest rates 
highly negative. As the crisis abated, real interest rates increased, but remained negative for 
several years and only in late 2014 did they become positive. 
In our view, this was the correct response to the global financial crisis. It helped mitigate the 
effect  of  the  crisis  on  workers  and  on  firms.  Together  with  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policy, 
monetary  policy  helped  to  support  the  recovery.  But  real  interest  rates  cannot  remain 
negative for ever. They were a specific response to an economic crisis. Over time, interest 
rates will have to normalise. It is unsustainable to provide savers with negative returns while 
enabling borrowers to borrow at artificially low rates forever. As pointed out earlier, the long 
period  of  negative  interest  rates  in  the  1980s  structurally  damaged  South  Africa’s  savings 
performance; a trend we are yet to truly recover from. 
Workers  of  the  world  have  not  had  a  good  millennium.  In  general,  workers  have  seen 
increased job insecurity and depressed wage growth, while younger workers have found it 
hard to break into stable, formal employment. There are three broad factors that explain this 
negative situation for workers. Firstly, the fall of the Berlin Wall and China’s embrace of the 
global  trading  system  saw  over  a  billion  workers  enter  the  global  economy.  This  greater 
competition  amongst  workers  depressed  wages  for  most  workers  around  the  world. 
Secondly, work has become more skills intensive, implying higher rates of return for skilled 
workers and, in many cases, falling returns for lower skilled workers. These pressures were 
partly offset by lower-priced goods from China and from an abundance of credit for workers. 
Then came the financial crisis; a direct result of global imbalances and an excess of credit in 
advanced economies. Since the financial crisis, employment gains have been modest whilst 
income growth has stagnated. Increased globalisation and financial integration has increased 
the returns to capital, further pressurising workers’ wages. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  While South African workers have had to bear the consequences of these global trends, the 
picture  in  South  Africa  has  some  interesting  nuances.  In  general,  workers’  wages  have 
increased in real terms throughout this millennium; albeit at a slower pace than profit growth. 
In South Africa, the bulk of these global adjustments have been placed on young workers, 
new entrants and those with minimal skills. Unlike in many other countries, workers’ wages in 
South Africa did not fall during the global financial crisis. In SA, the burden on the crisis was 
felt  on  vulnerable  workers  and  on  new  entrants  into  the  labour  market.  Most  of  the  one 
million or so workers who lost their jobs in 2009 were young, unskilled and new entrants into 
the  workplace.  In  many  ways,  we  traded  better  pay  for  fewer  jobs,  a  trade-off  that  has 
significant social consequences for the present unemployed and for future generations. 
Unemployment is South Africa’s single biggest challenge. It is simply unsustainable to run an 
economy when fewer than half of all adults are in employment. The inevitable social strains 
will quickly undermine even the best of policies and drag the country down. South Africa’s 
unemployment  challenge  is  neither  new  nor  under-analysed. We  know  what  the  problems 
are  and  we  know  what  to  do  about  them.  The  National  Development  Plan  provides  a 
comprehensive diagnostic analysis of our challenges and a plan to remedy these flaws. In 
the main, key structural rigidities in the economy include poorly functioning labour markets, 
uncompetitive  product  markets,  a  poor  skills  profile,  spatial  development  patterns  that 
exclude the poor and a low savings ratio which makes us heavily reliant on foreign capital 
flows, which are often fickle and short-term in nature. These structural rigidities occur on top 
of  already  high  levels  of  poverty,  inequality  and  unemployment;  the  major  legacies  of 
apartheid. 
South  Africa’s  recovery  after  the  financial  crisis  was  in  line  with  the  global  recovery. 
Economic growth recovered to 3.0 percent in 2010 and to 3.2 percent in 2011. Since 2011, 
our  economy  has  slowed  again.  There  is  an  international  and  domestic  dimension  in 
explaining  this  slowdown.  Globally,  the  recovery  began  to  falter  in  late  2011  with  Chinese 
growth slowing, commodity prices falling and Europe re-entering recession territory. Europe 
and China are our two largest export markets. Slower growth there and in particular falling 
demand  for  commodities  has  impacted  on  our  growth  levels.  Since  its  peak  in  2011,  the 
platinum  price  has  fallen  by  35  percent,  coal  prices  by  49  percent  and  iron  ore  prices  by 
63 percent  (in  dollar  terms).  Added  to  this  mix,  the  past  three  years  have  seen 
unprecedented volatility in global financial markets, impacting on the rand exchange rate and 
on capital flows to emerging markets. Depending on whether it is a risk on or risk off day in 
the markets, the rand could strengthen or weaken by over a percentage point in a day. 
In addition to these global factors, domestic growth has been weak because of our own own-
goals. Lengthy and sometimes violent strikes, electricity supply constraints, perceived or real 
concerns  about  economic  policies  and  a  slow  breakdown  in  trust  between  major  social 
partners  have  deducted  from  growth  and  investment.  In  2012,  the  Marikana  strike  and  its 
consequences knocked exports as well as confidence; confidence in our ability to manage 
our social stresses. In 2013, the motor industry strike and related strikes in the automotive 
component sectors and transport sectors knocked over 0.5 percent off our growth. In 2014, 
the five-month-long platinum strike and the four week manufacturing sector strike knocked 
over one percentage point off our GDP growth. 
While electricity constraints have become more binding in recent months, the lack of supply 
capacity has cost us foregone investment for much of the past five years. National Treasury 
estimates these costs to be about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points of GDP a year, and this was 
before  load-shedding  resumed  in  December  2014.  Lower  electricity  capacity  for  the  next 
three to four years is a major reason behind the Bank’s downward revision to GDP growth for 
2015 from 2.5 percent to 2.2 percent. We hope that business, labour and government can 
join together to manage the electricity constraint in a manner that does least damage to the 
economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Strike activity and a slow breakdown in trust between major social partners have impacted on 
business confidence and hence on investment. Add to this weak consumer demand, and it 
appears  as  though  the  economy  is  in  a  rut:  weak  demand  leads  to  low  investment,  weak 
investment means no growth in employment and household incomes. 
How does one break out of such a rut? There is little space for macroeconomic policy in this 
context.  Fiscal  policy,  having  been  used  successfully  to  offset  weak  demand  for  six  years 
has  reached  its  limits.  A  failure  to  consolidate  the  fiscal  position  would  leave  the  country 
vulnerable  in  the  face  of  another  global  shock,  and  if  the  country’s  credit  rating  is  further 
downgraded, would raise borrowing costs for the entire economy. Fortunately, in the 2014 
MTBPS, the Minister of Finance outlined a clear path towards fiscal consolidation in South 
Africa.  Monetary  policy  is  constrained  by  the fact  that  inflation  has  either  been  close  to  or 
above the target band for a significant period over the past two years. 
In  the  absence  of  macroeconomic  policy  space,  which  has  to  be  gradually  rebuilt,  faster 
employment and economic growth can only come about through selling more to the rest of 
the world or through implementing the well-known structural reforms outlined in the NDP to 
get us to a higher growth path. 
The lower oil price does provide us with a shot in the arm. It will boost the economy through 
greater discretionary spending amongst households and through a lower imported fuel bill. If 
however,  because  of  the  tighter  electricity  constraints,  the  economy  cannot  supply  the 
additional goods demanded, the benefit to the economy may be smaller than we think. The 
lower oil price provides an opportunity for households to pay down debt. 
Furthermore, even though the lower oil price provides a boost to consumers, lower prices for 
our key export commodities such as coal, iron ore and platinum mean that South Africa loses 
out  on  valuable  export  earnings.  Because  the  prices  of  both  imported  oil  and  exported 
commodities have fallen, the net positive effect for South Africa is still positive, but minimal. 
The benefit from the lower oil price, even if it is to be realised, is likely to be temporary, for 
two reasons. Firstly, unless oil prices continue falling, the lower oil price provides a once-off 
reduction in inflation. We do expect the oil price to recover, and so it has recently, rising by 
over 25 percent from its low point in January. We expect oil prices to recover further, even 
though we do not think it would go back up to $100 a barrel anytime soon. 
The second reason why we think that the benefit from the lower oil price is only transitory is 
that  price  setters  in  the  economy  do  not  appear  to  be  using  the  lower  oil  price  and  lower 
inflation in the present to lower price expectations about the future. Put bluntly, even though 
inflation in January came in at 5.3 percent and the February number is likely to dip below 
4 percent, average wage settlements are still in the realms of 8 percent. Similarly, many price 
setters for goods and services are not passing on the benefits of lower prices to consumers. 
A  classic  example  is  taxi  fares.  Do they  ever  come  down  when  petrol  prices fall?  Another 
example  is  retailers,  who  are  quick  to  adjust  their  prices  in  response  to  rising  distribution 
costs when the fuel prices rise, but not so quick to reduce them when fuel prices fall. The 
reason why these prices remain high even with lower cost structures suggests that there is a 
lack of adequate levels of competition in some of these industries. 
If  however,  we  can  dream;  and  lower  fuel  prices  are  passed  on  to  consumers  and  lower 
prices are reflected in lower nominal salary settlements, then inflation could be structurally 
lower  than  it  has  been.  This  would  give  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  serious  food  for 
thought and in general would imply lower rates or at least a more gradual normalisation of 
interest rates. It could be a win-win-win scenario. If only we could dream! 
The  South  African  economy  is  in  a  difficult  space.  We  are  negatively  impacted  by  global 
developments, especially in Europe and in China. Combined with domestic concerns that I 
have outlined earlier, we do not anticipate robust economic growth or employment creation in 
the medium term. We hope we are wrong. It is possible for South Africa to enter a virtuous 
cycle of rising confidence, rising investment and stronger growth fuelling employment gains; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  leading  to  still  higher  levels  of  confidence.  It  will  require  strong  leadership  across  the 
economy to create such a virtuous cycle. 
Let me turn more directly to the challenges of collective bargaining. Wage negotiations and 
the process of wage setting are important in the central bank’s thinking because wages are a 
key price in the economy. You would have often heard central bank governors decry periods 
when  salary  settlements  are  in  excess  of  inflation  and  productivity  growth.  I  would  like  to 
make  clear  what  the  Bank’s  thinking  on  this  matter  is.  We  are  not  opposed  to  workers 
receiving real salary increases. Firstly, we feel that there should be an equitable sharing of 
productivity gains between workers and investors. An unequal sharing of such gains in either 
direction is unsustainable. Secondly, there must, especially in the South African context, be 
an appropriate sharing of productivity gains between workers and senior managers. Thirdly, 
productivity  gains  should  be  shared  between  existing  workers  and  new  additions  to  the 
workplace.  If  existing  workers  take  all  the  productivity  gains,  then  there  is  little  scope  to 
increase employment. 
The trend in recent years in South Africa has been for workers to receive salary settlements 
in excess of inflation and productivity gains. Firms respond to this situation by reducing staff 
numbers. This is clearly an unsustainable and undesirable development. 
The  simple  point  that  successive  Reserve  Bank  governors  are  making  is  that  in  general, 
lower  inflation  enables  larger  real  salary  increases  and  higher  productivity  leads  to  higher 
incomes, higher investment and more employment. 
In conclusion ladies and gentlemen, I would like to leave you with a lesson from John Nash, 
who won the Nobel prize in economics for his work on game theory. His simple lesson is as 
follows:  In  a  one  shot  game,  a  player  may  win  by  cheating  or  by  deceit  (withholding 
information  from  an  opposing  player).  However,  in  a  game  with  multiple  rounds,  the  best 
strategy to survive and win is by always being trustworthy and by cooperating. If you have to 
approach wage negotiations as a one-shot game, you could probably win by taking the most 
reckless or deceitful strategy. However, in the world where there are repeated rounds, the 
best strategy is to build trust by being open about one’s intentions and building a cooperative 
relationship.  It  is  about  taking  a  long  view.  I  appeal  to  you  as  you  enter  into  this  round of 
bargaining by taking a long view. This call is not just to workers but also to the employers 
and other price setters in the economy to take a long view; as such an approach is in our 
collective best interest. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
