  Patrick Honohan: Some lessons learnt from the EU-IMF Programme 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the IMF-CEPR-
Central Bank of Ireland Conference, Dublin, 19 January 2015. 
 This occasion is of course an opportunity to mark the successful conclusion of the EU-IMF 
Programme of assistance to Ireland. I share the assessment that the Programme has been a 
significant success, without which the wellbeing of the people of Ireland would be very much 
lower than it is today. 
Reading social media and other populist commentary might suggest otherwise, but (without 
in any way suggesting that economic policy could not have been improved over the past four 
years) I want to begin by insisting that such commentary is poorly informed. The Programme 
helped Ireland a lot. 
Indeed  I  would  go  further  to  say  that,  partly  due  to  some  good  fortune  as  well  as  to  the 
sustained  adherence  to  an  effective  fiscal  adjustment  programme,  Ireland  has  done  much 
better than it might have – and much better than I and others expected – in turning around a 
situation, the gravity of which became increasingly evident during 2009 and 2010. 
Still,  it  would  be  incorrect  to  insist  on  unqualified  positivity  about  the  Programme,  in  the 
context  of  an  overall  economic  situation  in  Ireland  which  has  been  fraught,  looked 
unpromising,  and  still  leaves  a  long-lasting  residue  of  high  unemployment,  and  financial 
distress related to the over-indebtedness of households and firms. 
So  I  would  like  us  to  take  a  few  minutes  to  recall  that  this  started  out  as  a  high-risk 
Programme, why that was so, and how things evolved so that it ended up being a success. 
A high-risk Programme 
As designed in November 2010, the EU-IMF Programme of assistance was acknowledged to 
be one that lacked a strong probability of success (in the limited sense of the country’s return 
to a sustainable fiscal position, recognised as such by private investors). This was the view 
of the IMF staff,1 and it was also the view of the Irish staff negotiating the programme. 
Three elements in particular were lacking. First, the interest rate was too high, considering 
the starting debt-to-GNP ratio. Second, the high tail-risks associated with the loan portfolio of 
the banking system were not being addressed with an efficient instrument: an additional debt 
burden was placed on the Irish State, whereas a tail-risk insurance or direct capital injection 
from external sources would have been appropriate. Third, the speed of the required bank 
deleveraging risked imposing substantial fire sales of assets, which would add to the losses 
of the Irish Government. 
Accordingly  the  risk  was  high  that,  at  the  end  of  the  three  years  of  the  programme,  the 
indebtedness  of  the  Government,  taking  account  also  of  the  servicing  costs  of  that 
indebtedness,  would  be  too  high  for  the  government  to  have  access  to  the  market  at  any 
reasonable terms, and would give rise to the need for a second programme and a prolonged 
period of uncertainty. 
So  why  then  did  Ireland  agree  to  enter  the  Programme?  First,  because  despite  these 
shortcomings, it nevertheless offered the least painful path for fiscal adjustment: that is, the 
                                                
1   Who  placed  on  record  that  it  was  “difficult  to  state  categorically”  that  government  debt  would,  “with  a  high 
probability”, “be reduced to sustainable levels in the medium-run”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  most gradual path relative to anything else that could reasonably have been expected at that 
time.2  
Essentially, no-one was willing to lend to Ireland any more money to allow a more gradual 
adjustment. Indeed, a comparison of the Irish Programme with what was called for in other 
Programme  countries  reveals  that  the  Irish  fiscal  adjustment,  though  effective,  was  more 
gradual than most others. That the Troika were prepared to go along with a more gradual 
path may be attributable to the fact that Ireland entered the Programme with still sizable cash 
balances,  which  could  be  employed  alongside  the  available  official  funds  to  smooth  the 
adjustment  path.  In  this  way  Ireland’s  prompt  entry  into  the  Programme  (not  waiting  for 
months until all cash had been exhausted) provided valuable room for manoeuvre. 
From the lenders’ point of view, it was thought appropriate to proceed with the loan despite 
the unpromising calculations, in the light of the likely spillover effects on other member states 
of an Irish sovereign default. 
In short, from the Irish point of view, proceeding with the official borrowing was the best thing 
to do, even though what was on offer was disappointing. Given the large primary deficit that 
then  prevailed,  any  alternative  would  have  been  much  more  painful for the  Irish  people  in 
terms of drastic cuts in services and increases in taxation. What this involved was not merely 
substituting  official  for  privately-held  debt,  but  also  a  substantial  part  of  what  was  being 
provided was going to pay for further primary (i.e. non-interest) deficits for the full period of 
the Programme. 
If the Programme did fail to restore market confidence, that would have to be dealt with when 
the time came: holding out for better terms at the outset would have been self-defeating. 
As  the  Programme  proceeded,  the  severity  of  the  three  risk  factors  that  I  mentioned 
dissipated.  The  interest  rate  was  sharply  reduced;  the  tail  risk  on  bank  losses  did  not 
materialise as much as many feared, and the additional cost of rapid deleveraging turned out 
to  be  less  severe  than  it  might  have  been.  The  two  successive  Irish  Governments’  firm 
adherence  to  the  Programmed  fiscal  adjustment  was  a  key  element:  without  it,  external 
official and market confidence in the policy path would not have been restored. (It is worth 
recalling that fiscal adjustment was already well under way for more than a couple of years 
when  the  Programme  began.)  Close  attention  to  the  details  of  implementation  and  a  solid 
record of working closely with Troika officials to tweak Programme conditionality in order to 
avoid self-defeating actions also helped in delivering this outcome. (Examples relating to the 
banking sector included small but important operational adjustments to the deleveraging path 
and the timing of stress tests). 
While the Programme’s aggregate story thus ends well, it is instructive to consider in some 
detail how it might have been better designed. I will focus on some of the financial aspects, 
which, after the fiscal component, were indeed the Programme’s centre-piece. 
The bank bond issue 
Much has been made of the issue of “burning bondholders”, and rightly so. Just as the scope 
of the two-year blanket guarantee of September 2008 had been criticised, the idea that the 
newly-unguaranteed remaining bondholders in the failed banks Anglo and INBS might now 
receive Government largesse was rightly repugnant to many observers at home and abroad. 
The Irish government was very interested in seeking some form of bail-in to undo some of 
the damage caused by the original guarantee, especially if done as part of an international 
assistance  Programme.  It  was  unclear  how  much  burden-sharing  could  in  practice  be 
                                                
2   This  is  especially  true,  given  the  prevailing  reluctance  in  official  Europe  to  rely  to  a  greater  extent  on 
Keynesian reasoning which, in the interests of maintaining higher levels of economic activity and employment, 
might have tolerated a more gradual fiscal correction path in the post-crisis adjustment phase. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  achieved  for  the  going-concern  banks  (discussions  in  the  corridors  around  during  the 
negotiations  included  suggestions  that  some  form  of  debt-equity  swap  might  have  been 
achievable).  But,  for  the  gone-concern  banks  being  wound  down,  the  question  of  whether 
repayment at maturity of these bonds could be avoided, while legally complex,3 was already 
being closely examined by the Irish authorities quite independently of the Troika. 
Pre-emptively, though, the Troika made it clear that no bail-in of senior bondholders could 
form part of the Programme.4 This must be considered a significant flaw in the Programme 
design. If the reason was potential spillover effects onto international banking markets from a 
bail-in, then it would only have been fair, and very much feasible, for the Troika to arrange 
the  difference  being  made  available  from  other sources.  (True,  there  would  probably  have 
been some adverse reputation effect for Ireland from a bail-in, but very limited if it had been 
part of the Programme design as was envisaged by some Troika officials.) 
However, this matter must be kept in perspective. Most of the bonds outstanding from the 
Irish banks at that time were not in practice bailable because they were either Government 
guaranteed  or  asset-covered  bonds.  The  corridor  discussions  related  to  a  figure  of  about 
€16 billion of unguaranteed bonds, of which the two gone-concern banks accounted at stage 
for less than a third. This is still a lot of money of course, but would not have resulted in any 
relatively large or noticeable alleviation of the belt-tightening, bearing in mind that each year 
from 2008 saw an additional fiscal consolidation effort to reach an annual figure of around 
€30 billion by 2014. I leave it to others to choose how exactly to add up the cumulative total 
of “austerity” measures since 2009, but it’s a large multiple of what might have been saved 
by any technically feasible bank creditor bail-in in 2010 or 2011.5  
It  is  worth  noting  that  the  new  European  BRRD  legislation  which  was  negotiated  in  2012 
completely  reverses  the  earlier  presumption  and  explicitly  calls  for  bail-in  of  unsecured 
wholesale funding of this type in banks with losses of the scale of Anglo and INBS, in order 
to reduce the subsequent burden put on taxpayers. This indeed has been a remarkable and 
welcome turnaround in European policy attitudes, but it came too late for Ireland.6  
In the end, of course, the sums injected by the Government into these two banks have been 
financed at very low interest cost following the liquidation of IBRC and the exchange of the 
Promissory Notes for long-term bonds. Nevertheless, the pressure that was brought to bear 
on the Government in this episode continues to rankle in Ireland. 
Capital injection into the banks 
Not helped by the decision not to include a bondholder bail-in in the Programme, the amount 
of new government borrowing that the Troika team pencilled-in as being required to put the 
banks on a more solid capital basis was high. 
This was one of the major reasons for doubts as to the likely success of the Programme at 
the outset. The new and more onerous capital requirements that were set for the banks gave 
rise to a government cash injection as high as the €35 billion projected by the Troika staff. It 
                                                
3   This is because of the pari passu nature of bond and deposit liabilities of Irish banks at the time (unlike in the 
US), and because the two banks involved had had to be recapitalised to maintain their access to central bank 
refinancing. 
4   This  despite  much  discussion  in  the  corridors  of  the  negotiations  –  and,  I  understand,  pre-negotiation 
discussion of this point between the members of the Troika team of experts. 
I am speaking here of the situation at November 2010. The overall fiscal and economic costs imposed by the 
bank failures, by the September 2008 guarantee, and above all by the collapse of the distorted productive and 
fiscal structures which had been generated by the bank credit excesses, are a different matter. 
5  
6   Although in some important respects not well implemented, a version of this principle was applied in Cyprus in 
2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  was striking how little some of the Troika staff seemed to appreciate that over-indebting the 
Government  in  order  to  recapitalise  the  banks  could  be  counterproductive.  A  national 
banking system will not long be healthy if the Sovereign’s finances are shaky: this has been 
known for centuries! 
In the event, taking account of the March 2011 stress test, and the burden-sharing with – or 
bail-in of – holders of bank subordinated debt, the ultimate cash injection requirement came 
out at just €14 billion. This was the first piece of good news in the  working through of the 
Programme and indications of a lower-than-feared tail-risk.7  
Interest rate and maturity 
The  IMF  interest  rates  are  set  in  relation  to  the  scale  of  borrowing  (by  reference  to  each 
country’s  quota).  Where  very  high  borrowing  is  employed  in  IMF  programmes,  its  early 
repayment is encouraged by means of interest rate surcharges, and similar pricing was at 
first built into this wave of official European lending to distressed euro area member states 
when the Greek Programme was designed in May 2010. But these “disciplining” surcharges 
result in interest rates which are dangerously destabilising when applied to high percentages 
of a country’s GDP. In practice, the least problematic way of dealing with government over-
indebtedness on the scale that has been observed in the present crisis is to pass on funds 
borrowed  by  official  agencies  at  close  to  cost,  still,  of  course,  as  part  of  a  strict  fiscal 
adjustment Programme. This was eventually recognised and implemented from the middle of 
2011,  with  Ireland  benefitting  significantly  from  this  and  from  successive  extensions  of  the 
maturities  involved.  Examination  of  the  market  yields  on  Irish  Government  bonds  shows 
clearly  that  this  alleviation  of  the  financial  terms  of  the  assistance  was  a  turning  point  in 
achieving the restoration of market confidence. 
Combined  with  the  fact  that  tail-risk  on  banking  losses  did  not  materialise  on  the  feared 
scale,  and  the  success  with  the  liquidation  of  IBRC,  this  meant  that,  provided  the 
Government stuck to its promised fiscal adjustment path8 – which it did – what had been a 
high  risk  Programme turned  out  a  success  in  the  end. Thus, the fear  that  the  Programme 
would have to be extended or renegotiated receded sharply in the course of 2013, so that 
plans  for  a  possible  follow-on  precautionary  programme  could  be  shelved;  a  decision 
welcomed  in  many  quarters  as  showing  that  adjustment  was  possible  –  at  least  in  the 
conditions faced by Ireland. 
Private sector indebtedness 
One  aspect  which  has  not  been  fixed  as  quickly  as  had  been  envisaged  and  indeed 
worsened during the course of the Programme is the extent of non-performing bank loans, 
reflecting  the  over-indebtedness  of  many  households  and  firms.  Troika  and  Irish  officials 
                                                
7  
It may be asked why it was necessary to get the consultants BlackRock Solutions to design the models used 
in the 2011 stress test and why the needed capital had not already been identified. This story has been dealt 
with in detail in my 2012 lecture on bank recapitalization (reprinted as Honohan, Patrick, “Recapitalization of 
Failed Banks: Some Lessons from the Irish Experience” Manchester School Vol. 81, No. S1, 2013, pp. 1–15). 
One aspect not addressed in that paper is why external consultants such as BlackRock had not been used in 
the  2010  capital  adequacy  exercise.  The  answer  to  that  is  that  several  high  profile  international  firms  had 
indeed  been engaged  by  the Irish  authorities  during 2008 and  2009  with a  view  to  finding  out  how  big  the 
capital  hole  was.  Each  of  these  firms  had  proposed  what  soon  proved  to  be  absurdly  low  numbers,  an 
experience which encouraged the more home-grown approach of March 2010. Actually, as noted in Honohan 
(2012) much of the additional capital called-for in the March 2011 exercise relates to the higher capital ratios 
and  projected  added  costs  of  the  faster  deleveraging  required  by  the  Programme.  In  the  event,  the 
deleveraging was achieved with lower costs than projected at March 2011. 
8   As it had already been doing for over two years before the Programme. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  shared the  view  that  this  debt overhang  was  holding  back the recovery  and  needed  to  be 
dealt with quickly. Why did that not happen? 
There is room for different views as to why this situation has persisted. I think that both the 
Troika  and  the  Irish  officials  began  with  the  presumption that,  once  sufficiently  capitalised, 
and when appropriate amendments had been made to the legislation on insolvency and on 
repossession of the security on defaulted mortgages, the lenders would proceed speedily to 
deal  with  the  arrears,  efficiently  making  the  triage  between  those  loans  that  should  be 
restructured  (potentially  with  a  sizable  NPV  concession)  and  those  that  needed  to  be 
foreclosed  on.  The  Programme  thus  relied  mainly  on  capitalisation  and  these  pieces  of 
legislation. The fact that there were delays in finalising the legislative changes, allowed this 
belief to persist. 
By late 2011 however, the Central Bank realised that most of the banks had not developed 
sufficiently effective policies or operational capacity to deal with the arrears situation given 
the still growing number of cases involved. It took more than a year for this challenge to be 
adequately  met.  Even  then,  and  with  the  legislation  fixed  by  early  2013,  progress  has 
remained slow – and not just because court proceedings entail substantial delays. 
To be sure, although on the official side there has been consistency in wanting the problem 
to be addressed quickly, there has also been a wide divergence between those who see the 
problem  as  chiefly  one  to  be  resolved  through  repossessions  and  improved  payments 
discipline, and those who argue for greater use of concessionary restructuring of loans. 
In  my  own  view,  a  major  factor  behind  the  slow  progress  has  been  the  banks’  persistent 
optimism about their ability to recover on the loans (especially the mortgage loans) if they 
wait  long  enough.  While  they  have  been  restructuring  loans  in  a  way  designed  to  ensure 
sustainability as we have defined it, as well as proceeding to legal recovery action as part of 
their response to the central bank’s Mortgage Arrears Resolution Target process, the banks 
have certainly not been inclined to err on the side of pessimism in calibrating restructures. 
Matters  are  indeed  improving  for  the  mortgage  arrears  situation,  with  house  prices 
recuperating  from  the  undershooting  that  followed  the  collapse  of  the  bubble,  but  it  is 
arguable that future redefaults on mortgages would be lower with a more liberal approach to 
restructures. The vigour of the economic recovery would be enhanced by such an approach. 
However, given the large sums and the large numbers of individual loans involved, it is not 
clear what additional policy tools could cost-effectively be brought to bear on this problem by 
the authorities. 
Could a programme have been avoided? 
Let me conclude with a few words on the interesting question of whether, given the fall-out 
from the boom-and-bust, and the guarantee of September 2008, a programme could have 
been avoided. The drip-feed of bad bank-loss news in August and September of 2010 was 
the main trigger of the loss of financial market confidence. But if the full extent of the losses 
had been known and made public all in one go (say in March of 2010 when the first NAMA 
purchases happened) it is likely that this would have immediately triggered the same loss of 
confidence. In theory the ECB might have done more to reassure bank creditors that, come 
what may, Irish banks would continue to be provided with sufficient liquidity. But that would 
have  generated  a  sizable  moral  hazard.  Indeed,  the  ECB  can  hardly  be  faulted  as  far  as 
actual  provision  of  liquidity  is  concerned.  By  the  time  the  Programme  began,  Eurosystem 
lending  to  Irish  banks  far  exceeded  Irish  annual  GDP  –  an  astonishingly  large  figure:  no 
wonder there was concern in Frankfurt. No, by August 2010, with the markets already jumpy 
because of Greece, and the fiscal prospects deteriorating, the mounting loan losses removed 
the small but distinct prospect of avoiding a bail-out that had still remained in the spring. 
Thanks  to  robust  interaction  and  good  cooperation,  despite  the  various  missteps  which 
inevitably accompanied  the initial design of the Programme of assistance, it worked out to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  deliver,  as  I  have  said  on  a  previous  occasion,  what  it  said  on  the  tin:  restoring  market 
confidence and stabilising not only the public finances but also the economy. 
The rest is up to us, the Irish policy makers and the Irish people, to complete the recovery of 
the  economy  –  which  has  been  on  a  persistent  growth  path  both  in  terms  of  output  and 
employment for the past three years – and to rebuild the economic aspects of Irish society in 
a way which fully resonates with our shared vision and goals. 
It is often observed these days that key among the characteristics needed to prosper in what 
seems to be a rapidly changing and increasingly unpredictable global economic environment 
are  resilience  and  the  adaptability  to  take  advantage  of  new  opportunities  and  trends.  I 
believe that Irish resilience has been fully demonstrated in the way in which the economy has 
been recovering from the disaster that struck in 2008. Ireland’s adaptability and openness to 
the  opportunities  that  emerge  in  the  world  have  been  well  demonstrated  in  the  rapid  and 
firmly founded growth of the mid- to late-1990s – the true “Celtic Tiger” period. That is why I 
believe  there  are  solid  reasons  for  optimism  about  the  future,  building  on  the  platform  of 
restored financial stability which the EU-IMF Programme helped us rebuild. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
