  Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: Managing currency stability 
Speech by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor for Monetary Stability of the Bank 
of Thailand, at the SCB Collaboration with Myanmar Banks Dinner Talk, Yangon, 13 August 
2015. 
 Good evening, 
Excellencies, Governor of the Central Bank of Myanmar, 
Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Siam Commercial Bank for inviting me to give a keynote speech on 
this  occasion.  Myanmar  and  Thailand  have  a  long-standing  cultural  and  economic 
relationship,  particularly  in  trade  and  investment.  This  auspicious  event  marks  yet  another 
crucial step forward in promoting Myanmar-Thailand friendship, especially through financial 
and banking system. It is my hope that our two nations will continue to mutually benefit from 
their strong economic bind for many generations to come. 
Living in a more volatile and interconnected world 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
One  of  the  most  important  trends  over  the  past  decades  is  the  rapid  integration  of 
international finance. From the perspective of our ASEAN economies, we have also gone 
through  both  regional  and  global  interconnectedness.  This  is  especially  apparent  for 
Myanmar,  whose  pace  of  integration  is  among  the  fastest,  with  ongoing  liberalization  on 
many  fronts.  Myanmar  is  thus  becoming  one  of  the  attractive  destinations  for  foreign 
investments. 
This configuration of financial integration is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, it 
helps  distribute  and  diversify  risk,  raising  economic  efficiency  and  strengthening  system 
stability.  On the  other  hand, tighter financial  linkages  imply  large  and  swift  transmission of 
shocks across countries, particularly through a large expansion in gross capital flows with an 
increased volatility of those flows and exchange rates. The challenges we face in Thailand to 
large  extent  also  apply  to  emerging  markets  as  a  group. The  massive  equities  and  bonds 
sell-offs in emerging markets during the taper tantrum episode in 2013 were vivid examples 
of “financial spillovers”. There is no doubt that the benefits of integration into global economic 
and  financial  markets  outweigh  their  costs.  Therefore,  the  relevant  question  is  thus  how 
countries should respond to increased capital flows volatility.  
This year, we gather here at an important juncture of what seems to be yet another 
shift  in  global  economic  and  financial  landscape.  This  may  create  a  challenging 
environment  for  small  open  economies  to  conduct  policy,  particularly  capital  flows  and 
exchange rate policy. Given recent economic and financial development, it is clear that 
the main drivers of ensuing volatility in capital flows and exchange rates are threefold. 
First,  policy  divergences  among  advanced  economies  appear  to  be  on  course  recently. 
While the US is expected to raise its policy rate, likely by the end of this year, recovery of the 
euro area economies and Japan remains unsteady, with ultra-loose monetary policies put in 
place for a longer period. Second, uncertainties surrounding Greece’s bailout program have 
rendered great shifts in market players’ risk on and off sentiments. Third, growth momentum 
and prospects in China and some other emerging markets are deteriorating. These changing 
global  dynamics,  interacting  with  market’s  reactions  to  potential  US  rate  hike,  may  cause 
volatile ups and downs of financial markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
I  will  not  discuss  these  at  length.  Rather,  at  this  juncture,  the  key  question  is  how  to 
design or adjust policy frameworks to cope better with these financial spillovers while 
preserving monetary policy independence. Undoubtedly, there is no single recipe that fits 
all central banks. Thus the aim of my talk is to offer a central bank’s overall perspectives and 
Thailand’s  experiences  on  policy  framework  in  managing  capital  flow  and  exchange  rate 
stability. I will also touch on some beneficial policy cooperation among regional countries. 
A brief background of Thailand’s monetary policy framework 
Let’s begin with a broad perspective of Thailand’s monetary policy framework. The Bank of 
Thailand  (BOT)  has  been  conducting  monetary  policy  under  “Flexible  Inflation 
Targeting” framework since May 2000. As a pragmatic response to the failure of a pegged 
exchange  rate  system,  transparency  of  the  policy  making  process  under  IT  was  deemed 
appropriate for Thailand, particularly after the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis. Under this regime, 
price  stability  is  the  overriding  and  explicit  objective,  while  economic  growth  and  financial 
stability  are  also  taken  into  policy  deliberation.  The  policy  interest  rate  is  our  main  tool  in 
achieving the mandate. 
With  managed-float  exchange  rate  regime,  the  Thai  baht  is  generally  allowed  to  be 
determined  by  the  market.  In  this  regard,  flexible  exchange  rate  serves  as  an  automatic 
stabilizer to cushion against external shocks and economic imbalances in the short-term, and 
as an important price signal for resource allocations and catalyst for structural changes in the 
long term. 
In  some  cases,  however,  exchange  rate  flexibility  and  fluctuations  can  have  costly 
consequences  given  some  economic  contexts,  particularly 
in  emerging  market 
economies,  including  Thailand.  First,  financial  markets  in  these  economies  are  less 
developed  and  relatively  illiquid  compared  to  advanced  economies.  This  may  potentially 
cause extremely large asset prices and exchange rate movements in response to capital flow 
volatility. Additionally, the availability of foreign currency hedging instruments, especially to 
small enterprises, remains limited, amplifying the negative repercussions from exchange rate 
volatility. Moreover, many emerging market economies, including Thailand, rely on exports 
as  the  main  engine  of  growth.  Many  of  their  export  items  often  command  little  bargaining 
power and hence need to compete on the basis of price. As a result, extreme and sudden 
exchange  rate  movements  would  affect  firms’  competitiveness.  For  these  reasons,  many 
emerging market economies cannot neglect the implications of exchange rate movements. 
This leads us to the next part of my talk this evening. 
Managing capital flow and exchange rate stability 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
There is no one-size-fits-all measure to deal with capital flow and currency volatility, 
as well as its impacts on the real economy. Take Thailand as an example. We have 
adopted  multi-dimensional  responses  to  the  financial  spillovers.  The  exchange  rate 
management framework focuses on mitigating short-term excessive exchange rate volatility 
and ensuring alignments with economic fundamentals in the medium to long term. Exchange 
rate flexibility constitutes the primary buffer to cushion the effects of capital flow volatility. In 
the case that resulting movements in exchange rates are deemed excessive and unjustified 
by fundamentals, foreign exchange interventions can be undertaken. More controversial, 
but now increasingly accepted internationally as one of the policy options, are capital flow 
management measures (CFMs), aimed at directly curbing international financial flows  via 
regulations  and  taxes.  While  there  are  clear  economic  rationales  for  CFMs,  given  the 
abundance  of  market  inefficiencies  and  externalities,  many  countries  tend  to  regard  these 
measures only as a last resort. As such, reputation costs, asymmetric effects in managing 
outflows versus inflows, lack of long-term effectiveness, and limited room for calibration are 
but a few considerations that policy makers need to take into account. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Regarding foreign exchange rate interventions, we are always mindful of its costs and 
limited effectiveness. In particular, interventions against market views would employ large 
financial resources while yielding limited success, usually only to delay the pace of exchange 
rate  movements.  Active  interventions  under  the  inflation  targeting  framework  regime  may 
also  have  unintended  consequences  on  policy  framework  credibility,  as  the  central  bank’s 
commitment to safeguard the overall macroeconomic stability may be called into question by 
the public. For this, consistent communications about monetary policy framework and stance 
would help increase central bank’s transparency and public understandings. 
From a longer-term perspective, currency should be able to move flexibly in line with 
economic  fundamentals.  Active  foreign  exchange  interventions  can  cause  potential 
distortions.  First,  financial  market  development  would  be  hindered.  A  certain  level  of 
exchange  rate  volatility  is  often  a  pre-condition  for  market  development.  Without  sufficient 
volatility, there would be no incentive for firms to hedge themselves against currency risks 
and for financial institutions to start offering currency hedging tools. It should also be noted 
that  heavily  managed  exchange  rate  may  discourage  businesses  from  upgrading  their 
technology, productivity, and competitiveness, so as to command more bargaining power in 
the global market and better withstand exchange rate volatility. 
Given limitations and side effects of short-term exchange rate management strategies, 
exchange  rate  interventions  should  only  be  employed  to  deal  with  excessive 
movements or special circumstances when the market needs anchoring. Interventions 
should also be two-way, not aiming to resist trend movements but to cushion the impact of 
extreme movements. For normal times, the exchange rate should move flexibly to serve its 
role as shock absorber for the economy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now, policymakers have to strike the right balance between implementing short-term 
measures  and  building  long-term  capacity  for  the  economy  to  better  withstand 
external  shocks.  To  promote  economic  resilience  in  the  long  run,  it  is  important  to  press 
ahead  with reforms that deepen local capital markets.  Deeper  and more  liquid markets 
help absorb higher capital flow volatility and large shocks, preventing large swings in price 
movements.  In  addition,  active  and  widespread  use  of  foreign  currency  hedging 
instruments is also beneficial to mitigate the negative knock-on effects from exchange rate 
volatility. 
Liberalization  of  outward  investment  by  domestic  investors  also  helps  promote  more 
balanced  capital  inflows  and  alleviate  upward  pressure  on  the  exchange  rate.  These 
international asset holdings can provide a buffer when domestic market faces rigorous tests 
of volatility. Nevertheless, liberalization needs to be well planned, timed, and sequenced in 
order to ensure that its benefits outweigh costs. The appropriate degree of liberalization for a 
country  at  a  given  time  depends  on  its  specific  circumstances,  notably  its  financial  and 
institutional  development.  More  stable  and  long-term  flows,  particularly  direct  investment 
flows,  should  be  liberalized  prior  to  short-term  portfolio  flows,  which  are  more  volatile  and 
sensitive to cyclical factors. 
In  October  2012,  the  BOT  launched  the  Capital  Account  Liberalization  Master  Plan. 
This was part and parcel of our longer-term plan to facilitate Thai companies to diversify their 
investments  abroad,  especially  in  neighboring  countries.  This  would  encourage  private 
companies  to  operate  their  businesses  more  efficiently  by  expanding  their  markets  and 
production bases. In turn, such diversification will help strengthen their competitiveness and 
absorptive capacity. At the other end of the spectrum, limiting leverage in the banking 
system would add more cushions to the economy against external shocks. 
Last  but  not  least,  developing  fundamental  economic  strengths  to  enhance  countries’ 
resiliency to external shocks can work through well-diversified export items focusing on 
high  value-added  products.  This  would  lead  to  more  bargaining  power,  and  hence  less 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
sensitive to exchange rate fluctuations. Stronger domestic consumer base would also help 
lessen the dependence on external demand. 
All  reforms  I  mentioned  require  concerted  efforts  from  all  public  and  private 
stakeholders.  Policymakers  should  provide  economic  environment  and  infrastructure 
conducive to reforms. Particularly, financial literacy and risk management awareness should 
be  fostered  at  all  levels  and  sectors.  Financial  institutions  also  play  a  crucial  role  in 
developing  financial  products  to  facilitate  transactions  and  risk  managements.  Businesses 
should  upgrade  productivity  to  enhance  industry’s  resilience  to  shocks.  Advanced 
preparations will surely pay off. 
Lessons learned, challenges ahead, and policy implications 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As we are approaching the end of my talk, let me now share some final thoughts on 
lessons  learned  and  challenges  ahead.  First,  for  countries  that  want  to  maintain 
autonomy on interest rate policy, exchange rate flexibility is a pre-requisite to living 
with  capital  flows.  Nevertheless,  extreme  exchange  rate 
fluctuations  may  cause 
misalignments.  A  trade-off  between  flexibility  and  stability  thus  requires  policymakers  to 
identify the exchange rate framework suitable for the economy. This can be a daunting task 
in  practice,  as  the  target  is  often  country-specific  and  subject  to  dynamic  economic 
developments.  Keep  in  mind  that  monetary  policy  can  do  little  to  influence  real  exchange 
rates in the long term. Attempts to give the exchange rate more weight in monetary policy 
deliberations  will  also  reduce  the  autonomy  in  controlling  interest  rate,  leading  to  more 
interest rate volatility. In any case, policymakers need to be more practical and innovative in 
detecting and assessing impacts of the exchange rate on real economy. An ability to monitor 
adjustments at the micro or firm levels is also a helpful guide on when and how to manage 
currency risk. 
Second,  amidst  an  increasing  global  interconnectedness,  policymakers  should  also 
be  mindful  of  policy  externalities  on  other  economies.  Policy  coordination  and 
information sharing are thus needed for the optimal policy setting. Of course none of 
this  is  entirely  new  for  ASEAN  countries.  One  example  is  the  strengthening  of  regional 
financial  safety  net  through  institutional  mechanisms  and  arrangements  such  as  the 
development  of  Chiang  Mai  Initiative  Multilateralization  (CMIM),  which  will  increase  the 
region’s  ability  to  respond  to  crises,  build  confidence,  and  hence  lessen  possible  market 
turbulence  during  times  of  financial  stress.  Going  forward,  further  collective  actions  in  the 
region can help mitigate market volatility and enhance countries’ resilience to global shocks. 
These include promotion of regional currencies as invoice currencies in addition to the US 
dollar  or  the  Euro,  and  a  bilateral  swap  agreement  as  a  last  resort  for  foreign  currency 
liquidity. 
Last,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  sound  economic  fundamentals  and  policy  credibility 
provide  a  solid  first  line  of  defense,  probably  the  best  defense,  against  capital  flow 
and exchange rate volatility. Despite the global nature of volatility, not all emerging market 
economies suffer equally. Domestic fundamentals are subject to unrelenting scrutiny by the 
financial  market.  Countries  with  stronger  macroeconomic  fundamentals  experience  less 
volatile capital flows and are therefore less disrupted by them. “Fragile five” episode was a 
case in point for the market to differentiate countries, with high current account deficits and 
high inflation as the focal point. In most cases, strong macroeconomic fundamentals include 
both  internal  and  external  fronts.  Internal  front  involves  improved  fiscal  discipline,  banking 
system  with  prudent  supervisory  and  regulatory  frameworks,  stabilized  inflation,  well-
equipped financial markets, and credible monetary policy framework. External front includes 
sufficiently flexible exchange rate, adequate foreign reserves, and manageable external debt 
levels.  In  addition,  well-diversified  sources  of  finance  among  bank-based,  debt  and  equity 
markets would be supportive of financial stability. 
Concluding remarks 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have spoken at length, from the subject of global volatility, onto more policy options issue 
based on central banks’ perspectives. Let me now wrap up by leaving you with a final 
remark on these issues. 
In the world of increased financial integration, volatility of capital flow and exchange 
rate  is  unavoidable.  A  sustainable  path  forward  requires  going  beyond  coping  with 
capital  flows  to  living  with  them.  Therefore,  public  and  private  stakeholders  must 
remain vigilant of any impacts they may have on real economy. Thailand’s approach so 
far has been to allow the exchange rate to act as an automatic stabilizer, while its extreme 
movements are carefully managed. At the same time, reforms are actively pursued with the 
economy’s long-term resilience as our ultimate goal. It is also imperative for central banks to 
continue  exploring  various  policy  toolkits  to  bolster  resilience  against  volatile  capital  flows 
and exchange rate in the near future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
