  Peter Pang: Asia Treasury Trailblazer Summit 2015 
Speech by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Asia Treasury Trailblazer Summit 2015, Hong Kong, 30 April 2015. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
1. 
I  am  delighted  to  join  you  this  morning  to  take  part  in  The  Asset’s  inaugural  Asia 
Treasury Trailblazer Summit. I like the buzz word “Trailblazer” in the banner and the chosen 
theme of this event: “Taking Treasury to the Next Level’. 
2.  
“Trailblazer”  quite  rightly  describes  the  role  and  requisite  mentality  of  corporate 
treasurers now operating in Asia. The region is in unchartered waters awash with ground-
breaking opportunities and, at the same time, unprecedented challenges. If we can rise up to 
the  challenges  and  capitalise  on  the  opportunities,  multinational  companies  (MNCs), 
leveraging  on  strategic  application  of  their  treasury  capabilities,  can  certainly  raise  their 
business to the next level. 
3.  
Let’s  take  a  closer  look  at  these  opportunities  and  challenges  and  give  some 
thoughts  on  how  the  public  and  private  sectors  can  work  together  to  engineer  a  win-win 
solution. 
4.  
After three decades of high speed growth, propelled by China’s rise to become the 
second largest economy and the largest trading nation, all global MNCs are expanding their 
presence in Asia, and the share of global revenues generated in Asia continue to rise at a 
staggering  speed.  According  to  the  Asia  Business  Outlook  Survey  by  the  Economist,  “In 
2011, Western firms said that Asia contributed 19% of their global revenues. In 2012, that 
figure rose to 22%. By 2017, Western firms expect Asia to contribute 32%. However, this will 
still be below Asia’s estimated 35% share of the global economy in 2017.” 
5.  
The use of RMB is now catching up with China’s rising economic clout. Starting from 
scratch  in  2009,  the  portion  of  China’s  trade  settled  in  the  RMB  quickly  surged  to  20%  in 
2014, amounting to 6.6 trillian yuan, equivalent to more than US$1 trillion. And, in the same 
year, over 30% and 16% of China’s inward and outward direct investment respectively were 
denominated  in  the  RMB.  Increasingly,  MNCs  will  find  it  advantageous  and  necessary  to 
trade  with  their  Asian  counterparts,  and  to  conduct  the  related  financing,  investment  and 
hedging activities in the RMB. 
6.  
In parallel, riding on her rapid economic growth in the past decades, Mainland China 
now  has  a  growing  cluster  of  home  grown  MNCs  in  a  wide  range  of  sectors.  Chinese 
companies now account for 95 of the Fortune 500 companies. These MNCs are now flexing 
their muscles in the international arena, typically starting with trade and eventually venturing 
into  mergers  and  acquisitions  and  global  portfolio  investment.  We  can  safely  assume  that 
they will take even bolder steps with the supportive policies under the “One Belt, One Road” 
strategy, bringing new business and business partners for other global MNCs. 
7.  
These favourable macro trends are indeed good news to the corporate treasurers. 
Yet, in shaping strategies to capture these opportunities, there is also a realization that the 
business  environment  has  become  significantly  more  challenging  after  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
8.  
The quantitative easing by the G3 economies is causing wide swings in exchange 
rates,  asset  and  commodity  prices  which  have  heightened  the  need  for  hedging  and  risk 
management.  The  ultra-low  yields  of  their  treasuries  (for  example,  yields  of  government 
bonds of Germany and France of maturity less than 6 years and 4 years respectively are in 
the negative zone) in turn has made cash management and portfolio investment difficult. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 for  hedging 
tools  has  become  more  constraint  due 
 
 
alternative of searching for yields in emerging markets has resulted in more risks to manage. 
The interbank market as a source of liquidity also can no longer be taken for granted. 
9.  
Compounding  the  challenge  of  treasury  management  is  the  regulatory  landscape 
after  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  capability  of  banks  in  providing  funding  and  making 
market 
to  deleveraging  and 
implementation  of  the  global  regulatory  reform,  in  particular  the  Basle  III  requirements  on 
capital and liquidity. The increased market volatility has also made the raising of funds in the 
capital markets more challenging. 
10.  
To stay ahead of the game, corporate treasurers need to ensure that the treasury 
function  can  be  transformed  to  better  support  international  growth  in  order  to  capture  the 
immense  opportunities in  Asia,  and  at  the  same  time  sharpen  the  management  of  capital, 
liquidity,  funding  and  treasury  related  risks  in  order  to  navigate  safely  in  the  post  crisis 
intricate market environment. 
11.  
So, as the agenda of this Summit suggests, corporate treasury management can no 
longer afford to remain in a passive maintenance mode, but need to adopt a proactive and 
strategic mode. To use a soccer analogy, an effective corporate treasurer needs to be like a 
good mid-fielder who is able to make lethal passes to the strikers to score goals, and at the 
same time organise and support the defence to consolidate the victory for the team. 
12.  
Like the mid-fielder in the soccer team, the corporate treasury function needs to be 
strategically located to support the front line business team in spots where they can strike 
business deals and where defence can be efficiently organise to handle the risks that may be 
encountered by the team. In the context of Asia, there is a compelling case for MNCs to set 
up corporate treasury centres in a financial centre where they can easily capture the China 
opportunities and where the key treasury functions can be organised efficiently. 
13.  
This  can  be  better  achieved  by  the  formation  of  a  regional  CTC  to  centralise  the 
management of treasury activities which is essential for advancing operational efficiency, risk 
management  and  cost  reduction.  The  business  case  is  obvious  and  compelling.  Regional 
cash pooling reduces idle cash and transaction costs by standardising payment systems and 
centralizing  foreign  exchange  management.  Cost  of  capital  can  be  reduced  by  optimising 
external and internal funding. It can also optimize the corporate tax structure and compliance 
with international regulatory requirements to support global business expansion. 
14.  
Hong Kong is keen to be considered by MNCs as a location for setting up CTCs as 
we  see  huge  benefits  in  becoming  a  CTC  hub  in  the  region.  The  cash  pooling  function  of 
CTCs  will  enlarge  Hong  Kong’s  liquidity  pool  and  strengthen  Hong  Kong’s  role  as  an 
international financial centre as CTCs are major users of financial services, capital markets 
and  professional  services.  It  is  our  goal  to  capture  in  particular  the  high  value-added 
segments  of  the  CTC  value  chain,  including  cash  and  liquidity  management,  corporate 
finance  activities  and  financial  risk  management.  By  attracting  more  CTCs  and  corporate 
activities here, we will not only bolster our financial sector but also advance the development 
of headquarters economy in Hong Kong. 
So the interests of MNCs and Hong Kong are very much aligned. That said, we are 
15.  
fully aware that the competition to become the Asian CTC hub is very keen within the region. 
There is a need to understand our competitive position, amplify our strengths and double our 
efforts in areas that we need to catch up. 
16.  
For  this  purpose,  the  Financial  Secretary  tasked  the  HKMA  in  2014,  with  the 
assistance of consultants, to conduct a reality check on Hong Kong’s competitiveness vis-a-
vis our competitors and to devise a strategy to promote Hong Kong as the CTC hub in the 
region. 
17.  
The  reality  check  shows  Hong  Kong  excels  in  many  of  the  key  factors  that 
determine  the  competitiveness  of  CTCs.  In  terms  of  strengths  as  a  business  location, 
Hong Kong ranks third in the World Bank’s “Ease of Doing Business” ranking and third in the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Global  Financial  Centres  Index  after  only  London  and  New  York.  We  are  also  a  leader  in 
terms of access to capital markets. Hong Kong is a major international banking centre, with 
the presence of over 70 of the world’s top 100 banks. Our equity market is one of the most 
active in initial public offers. Benefited from the recent launch of the Shanghai-Hong Kong 
Stock Connect, the market capitalization of the Hong Kong Exchange  has reached almost 
US$4 trillion as of two days ago. As of March 2015, it was the third largest exchange in Asia 
and the sixth largest in the world. In terms of foreign exchange market efficiency, Hong Kong 
is  the  fifth  FX  activity  centre  supported  by  a  unique  network  of  real  time  gross  settlement 
systems  in  USD,  Euro,  RMB  and  the  HKD.  Hong  Kong  has  a  high  standard  of  market 
transparency, disclosure, prudent supervision and without exchange controls which is crucial 
for centralized treasury functions. 
18.  
A unique advantage of Hong Kong, which is difficult for other centres to match, is its 
proximity to Mainland China and status as the premier offshore RMB centre. For managing 
treasury activities denominated in the RMB, we have the largest offshore RMB liquidity pool 
exceeding  RMB  1.1  trillion,  a  vibrant  CNH  market  with  daily  settlement  exceeding 
RMB 800 billion, the deepest offshore RMB (or Dim Sum) bond market, the unique access to 
the  A  share  market  through  the  Shanghai  Hong  Kong  Stock  Connect  (which  will  soon  be 
extended to include the Shenzhen Stock Exchange), and critical market infrastructure such 
as  the  CNH  HIBOR  fixing  benchmark  for  pricing  RMB  financial  products  and  the 
development of related risk hedging instruments. 
19.  
We, of course, cannot afford to be complacent. Our study has also identified room 
for improvement in particular in the tax regime for corporate treasury activities. Hong Kong’s 
tax system has many strengths: tax rates are low and the tax regime is simple with no tax 
imposed  on  dividends  and  capital  gain.  Hong  Kong  is  also  probably  the  only  major 
jurisdiction in Asia without an interest withholding tax. That said, unlike some other financial 
centres, the tax regime has yet to make provisions that are customized for CTC activities. 
Underscoring  the  Government’s  determination  to  promote  Hong  Kong  as  a  CTC 
20.  
hub,  and  having  considered  the  study’s  recommendations,  the  Financial  Secretary  in  his 
latest budget speech announced two tax measures that will make Hong Kong’s tax regime 
even more attractive for MNCs to set up CTCs in Hong Kong. 
21.  
First,  the  interest  deduction  rules  under  the  Inland  Revenue  Ordinance  will  be 
amended  such  that  interest  expense  arising  from  genuine  inter-company  borrowing  and 
lending will be deductible. This will resolve the “tax asymmetry” issue currently perceived by 
some  MNCs  as  an  impediment  to  their  establishing  or  expanding  CTC  operations  in 
Hong Kong. 
22.  
Second, profits derived from qualifying activities of eligible CTCs will benefit from a 
half-rate concession. In other words, the applicable tax rate will be reduced from the current 
16.5%  to  8.25%.  We  will  define  the  scope  of  qualifying  activities  in  consultation  with  the 
industry later this year. But broadly speaking, the scope will encompass corporate finance, 
liquidity management and risk management activities typically conducted by CTCs for their 
overseas associated companies. 
23.  
The  HKMA  is  working  closely  with  the  Government  to  take  forward  the  legislative 
work  with  a  view  to  introducing  the  relevant  bill  to  the  Legislative  Council  in  the  2015–16 
legislative session. 
I believe, and certainly hope that, with these latest refinements of the tax regime for 
24.  
CTC activities, we should be able to remove any remaining reservations that your firm may 
have in considering setting up CTCs in Hong Kong. 
25.  
Coming back to my soccer analogy, setting up a CTC in Hong Kong will offer MNCs 
a  home  game  advantage.  For  Mainland  corporations,  Hong  Kong  offers  unmatched  home 
turf  advantage  under  the  “one  country,  two  systems”  framework.  They  are  familiar  and 
comfortable  with  using  Hong  Kong’s  financial  platform  to  advance  their  global  business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
objectives.  For  the  other  global  MNCs,  Hong  Kong  is  the  ideal  place  for  centralizing  their 
treasury operations in Asia, in particular those that are tied to the rising use of the RMB. We 
are right at the door step of China, the perfect spot for the CTC, the mid-fielder, to support 
their  front  line  teams  to  strike  deals  and  score  business  goals  with  their  Chinese 
counterparts. 
26.  
Looking  at  the  very  comprehensive  agenda  today,  I  am  sure  you  will  have  very 
fruitful  discussion  on  how  to  ride  on  the  different  industry  trends  and  create  cutting-edge, 
innovative treasury solutions. May I wish this Summit a great success. 
27.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
