  Harun R Khan: Financial market regulation in India – looking back, 
looking ahead 
Keynote address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FIMMDA (Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India) – PDAI (Primary 
Dealers’ Association of India) 16th Annual Conference 2015, Prague, 17 August 2015. 
 The  speaker  acknowledges  the  contributions  of  Shri  Vaibhav  Chaturvedi  and  Shri  Vivek  Singh  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India. 
1. 
Mr.  Jiri  Rusnok,  Former  Prime  Minister  &  Member  of  the  Board  of  the  Czech 
National Bank; Dr. M. Venkatachalam, Charge d’Affairs Indian Embassy, Prague; Mr. N. S. 
Venkatesh, Chairman FIMMDA; Mr. Pradeep Madhav, PDAI; distinguished panelists and all 
the  delegates.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  delivering  the  keynote  address  for  the 
FIMMDA  –  PDAI  Annual  Conference  in  this  culturally  rich,  historically  vibrant,  naturally 
blessed city of Prague which still maintains its old-world charm. 
2. 
The theme for this year’s conference Evolving Markets –Institutions & Regulations 
rightly  underscores  the  role  of  both  the  regulations  as  well  as  institutional  practices  in 
influencing  the  market  development.  The  post-crisis  overhaul  of  the  global  financial 
regulatory  regime  may,  however,  have  altered  the  balance  between  the  two  as  newer 
regulations  have  been  changing  the  institutional  practices  themselves  in  very  fundamental 
ways in many jurisdictions. It may still be a bit early to definitively conclude about the impact 
of these changes on evolution of markets going forward. The shift to CCPs and increased 
costs of OTC transactions; increased capital requirements for trading activities; new leverage 
and liquidity regimes, etc. all are contributing to reshaping the financial markets landscape 
globally.  While  the  state  of  financial  markets  may  be  qualitatively  heterogeneous  across 
countries,  the  harmonized  implementation  of  the  reform  program  is  an  essential  necessity 
countries are confronted with. 
Given the above backdrop, I thought it appropriate on this occasion to undertake a 
3. 
broad assessment of the evolution of our own financial markets and the issues we have been 
grappling  with.  It  is  critical  for  us  to  learn  the  right  lessons  from  the  experience  of  other 
countries in reshaping their regulatory frameworks while  we debate the right model. There 
could be different viewpoints and perspectives but it is imperative that certain basic principles 
are agreed upon. 
(entity-based 
regulation),  Functional  Approach 
Introduction 
4. 
Regulation  of  financial  sector  internationally  is  broadly  guided  by  two  objectives: 
prudential regulation and conduct of business regulation, including consumer protection. The 
four  key  institutional  frameworks  for  regulation  of  the  financial  sector  internationally  – 
Institutional  Approach 
(activity-based 
regulation),  Integrated  Approach  (universal  regulator  model)  and  Twin  Peaks  Approach 
(separation  of  prudential  regulation  and  conduct  of  business  regulation)  –  all  attempt  to 
address  the  above  objectives  through  different  formal  structures.  Post-crisis,  a  new 
dimension of “systemic stability” is being sought to be added as another objective of financial 
sector regulation but the exact contours in this regard are still in the works. 
5. 
Financial markets in India have evolved, as has the regulatory framework for them, 
historically in the context of a primarily bank-dominated financial system. It was only after the 
financial reform process was initiated in the early nineties and the regulation of banks started 
getting  aligned  to  the  international  best  practices  that  gradually  different  market  elements 
were introduced as part of the market development agenda. This agenda focused, first and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  foremost,  on  putting  in  place  the  requisite  market  microstructure  in  terms  of  institutions, 
technology, market participants and appropriate regulations. 
6. 
Study of the development of the financial markets in India provides an opportunity to 
analyse  an  alternate  and,  more  importantly,  functioning  model  of  regulation  of  financial 
markets.  It  may  have  evolved  out  of  legacy  factors  and  contextual  considerations  but  in 
terms of regulatory orientation, this approach contained many elements of a “systemic focus” 
as  is  being  sought  to  be  incorporated  globally  in  the  post-crisis  scenario.  The  instruments 
and objectives entailed balancing the given systemic imperatives with the need for bringing 
about changes in a non-disruptive manner. The major elements implicit in the regulation of 
different market segments included the following: 
Nature of participants in the markets; 
• 
Broad specification of products to be permitted; 
• 
Effective reporting systems for capturing systemic information; and 
• 
Market infrastructure 
• 
7. 
The  absence  of  an  efficient  “bond-currency-derivative”  construct,  so  called  BCD 
nexus,  is  sometimes  held  against  the  entire  market  development  process.  However,  the 
conception of a synergistic, harmonized BCD nexus implies a perfect seamless market with 
enormous  possibilities  of  risk-payoff  combinations  using  some  basic  instruments.  Implicit 
behind it is the efficient market hypothesis which itself is being reinterpreted. Though it might 
seem  that  the  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  was  one  of  fundamental,  sacrosanct  tenets  of 
finance, there  is  a  long history  of  divided  opinion  among  leading  academics  on this  issue, 
eloquently captured in the book “The Myth of Rational Markets” by Justin Fox. Way back in 
1984, in one of his seminal papers, Robert Shiller had commented that the Efficient Market 
Hypothesis was “one of the most remarkable errors in the history of economic thought”1. The 
BCD  construct  is  fundamentally  premised  on  complete  absence  of  any  kind  of  market 
frictions and policy interventions. Obviously such a pre-requisite cannot be interpreted in an 
absolute sense and must be contingent on several factors including the state of development 
of  markets  and  the  broader  macro-economy  that  is  influenced  by  both  local  and  global 
factors. There are certain macroeconomic policy objectives, in particular the capital account 
management  framework,  which  need  to  be  pursued  for  their  own  sake  instead  of  solely 
addressing  the  need for  market  development.  Even  in  the  most  developed  of markets  this 
“nexus” is being made subservient to broader stability objectives, for example the restrictions 
placed on short selling by many regulators in the wake of the crisis. In fact, one of the major 
criticisms  of  the  ongoing  work  by  the  international  standard  setting  bodies  is  that  their 
prescriptions amount to “regulatory overreach” which severely impact market functioning. 
Evolution of markets and market regulation in India 
8. 
From  a  regulatory  perspective,  one  of  the  biggest  challenges  is  to  recognize  the 
inherent market imperfections and build a framework around that to leverage the benefits of 
well-functioning, deep, liquid markets. Over more than a decade, the Reserve Bank has been 
firmly committed to financial sector reforms. A lot of has already been achieved with active 
participation of regulators, the Government, market bodies like FIMMDA, PDAI and market 
participants.  Specifically  in  the  area  of  debt  markets,  these  achievements  include  the 
introduction  of  NDS-OM  platform,  setting  up  of  CCPs  like  CCIL,  introduction  of  short 
sale/When-Issued market (WI), repo in G-Sec/Corp bonds, Trade Repository (TR) for OTC 
derivatives,  introduction  of  credit  default  swaps  (CDS),  etc.  and  most  recently  the 
introduction of 6 year & 13 year IRFs and electronic trading platform for IRS. But there is still 
                                                
1  Shiller, R. J. (1984), ‘Stock Prices and Social Dynamics’, The Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  much to do. There are many issues with the existing products which we need to address. I 
will take this opportunity to highlight those issues and measures under consideration within 
the  Reserve  Bank  towards  the  next  phase  of  reform  and  the  role  market  bodies  like 
FIMMDA, PDAI and market participants can play in making the market robust, efficient and 
liquid. 
Interest rate derivatives 
9. 
IRS market in India is in place since 1999 and it has evolved over a period of time 
as  may  be  observed  from  the  data  given  in  the  table  below.  Daily  trading  volumes  have 
improved significantly over a period of time. Though RBI did not mandate any benchmark for 
IRS, market on its own has primarily used three benchmarks viz. MIBOR, MIFOR, INBMK. Of 
the  three  benchmarks  currently  being  used  in  the  market,  MIBOR  is  the  most  liquid 
benchmark in IRS with a current share of around 92% of total trades. Trading in other two 
benchmarks  is  almost  negligible  (Table  1).  This  is  an  area  where  efforts  are  required  to 
encourage trading in other benchmarks. 
Table 1  
IRS Trade Summary 
(₹ in billion) 
Source: CCIL’s Rakshitra, July 2015. 
10. 
Another  issue  with  the  IRS  market  is  the  activity  being  concentrated  at  few  tenor 
points,  mostly  upto  5  year  (Chart  1).  In  view  of  long  term  funding  requirements  for 
infrastructure  sector,  there  is  a  need  to  develop  long  term  IRS.  FIMMDA  or  the  Financial 
Benchmarks India Pvt. Ltd. (FBIL) may consider developing appropriate benchmark for long 
tenors which can be used by the market participants to take long tenor position in IRS. This 
will help in the development of term money market in India. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   11. 
Further, IRS market is mostly inter-bank and customer related transactions comprise 
less than 1 per cent of the volume. It is also observed that the participation in IRS market is 
dominated  by  foreign  banks  (around  70–80%  of  total  trades)  followed  by  private  banks 
constituting around 12–15% (Chart 2). There is a need to diversify the participation base in 
IRS.  To  encourage  wider  participation,  Reserve  Bank  has  allowed  CCIL  to  introduce 
anonymous  electronic  trading  platform.  To  address  counterparty  credit  risk,  Reserve  Bank 
has also permitted CCIL to provide guaranteed central clearing of IRS contracts. With these 
measures,  we  expect  active  participation  from  various  segments  of  the  market.  Recent 
introduction  of  anonymous  trading  platform  with  CCP  facility  has  many  benefits  like 
availability  of  transparent  quotes,  less  documentation  requirement,  reduced  credit  risk, 
saving of capital, higher credit exposure etc. I will urge banks to actively use the interest rate 
derivative products like IRS and IRF to manage interest rate risk in their portfolio so that the 
need for seeking regulatory relief during periods of stress could be avoided. 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  12. 
When  we  come  to  Interest  Rate  Futures,  unlike  IRS,  the  experience  was  not 
encouraging  till  the  launch  of  single  bond  cash  settled  IRF  in  January  2014.  The  earlier 
avatars  of  IRFs  contracts  did  not  attract  enough  market  interest  mainly  due  to  illiquid 
securities  in  the  underlying  basket  leading  to fear  of  receiving  illiquid  securities  in  delivery 
based settlement and complex theoretical calculations for cash settled contracts. Taking into 
account  the  feedback  of  the  market  participants,  it  was  decided  to  introduce  cash  settled 
single  bond  IRF  on  underlying  security  with  residual  maturity  between  9–10  years.  The 
10 year  single  bond  IRF  has  received  good  response  from  the  market  as  the  product  is 
simple to understand and is cash settled. In view of success of cash settled 10 year single 
bond IRF and taking into account the request of market participants, exchanges have been 
permitted to introduce single bond futures for the 4–8 year bucket and 12–15 year bucket as 
well. Though the daily average trading volume in IRFs has shown consistent growth since its 
introduction in January 2014, the participation in IRF is yet to become broad based (Chart 3). 
 
 13. 
We  also  hope  that  now  the  single  bond  cash  settled  futures  have  seen  some 
encouraging  response  from  the  market,  the  exchanges  could  also  consider  re-launching 
futures based on a basket, which could be a much more efficient instrument from a hedging 
perspective. It could also improve liquidity in some of the illiquid bonds. 
Ready forward facility 
You  all  know  that  Reserve  Bank  has  been  undertaking  repo/reverse  repo 
14. 
transactions with market participants as part of its monetary and liquidity management since 
1992.  Interbank  repo  facility  in  Government  securities  was  introduced  in  2003.  The  repo 
market  in  G-Sec,  has  witnessed  considerable  growth  during  the  last  10  years  (Chart  4). 
Leveraging  technology  and  the  availability  of  a  robust  clearing  and  settlement  mechanism 
have been instrumental in the migration of the repo market from a pure OTC market to an 
electronic  environment.  India  is  among  few  countries  to  have  anonymous  electronic  order 
matching  platform  with  CCP  facility  for  the  repo  market. The  growth  of the  repo  market  is 
evident  from  the  fact  that  the  daily  average  trading  volume  has  increased  from  ₹  106.72 
billion in 2004–05 to ₹ 548.28 billion in 2014–15. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   15. Though the repo market has witnessed reasonable growth over a period of time, the repo 
market  predominantly  remains  “overnight”.  The  per  cent  of  repo  trades  in  the  overnight  to 
3 day tenor bucket constitute around 95% of total trades (Table 2). Measures are being taken 
to  encourage  market  participants  to  enter  into  long  term  repo  contracts.  As  a  first  step, 
Reserve Bank has introduced term repos of 7 and 14-days in October 2013. However, from 
the  perspective  of  development  of  financial  market,  it  is  important  to  develop  term  repo 
outside the central bank’s window. Accordingly, re-repo of securities acquired under market 
repo was allowed in February 2015. With the availability of liquid overnight rates, RBI term 
repos of various tenures and T-Bill auctions of 91 and 182 days, many of the essential tenors 
of term repos are present in the market which can be used to develop the term yield curve. 
Table 2 
Repo term analysis 
 STRIPS (Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal of Securities) 
16. 
STRIPS were introduced in India in 2010 for developing a market determined zero 
coupon  yield  curve  (ZCYC)  and  help  institutional  investors  in  asset-liability  management. 
Further,  as  STRIPS  have  zero  reinvestment  risk,  it  was  felt  that  they  can  be  attractive  to 
retail/non-institutional  investors.  However,  except  for  a  few  trades  in  2010  (securities 
amounting to ₹.13 billion have been stripped till date), there has not been any activity in the 
STRIPS market. Reserve Bank would review the existing guidelines with regard to including 
more number of eligible securities for stripping, allowing banks in addition to PDs to initiate 
the  process  of  stripping  and  reconstitution.  In  parallel,  FIMMDA  and  PDAI  may  conduct 
awareness program for retail investors, insurance companies and mutual funds to encourage 
their participation in STRIPS. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Repo in corporate bonds 
17. 
To improve liquidity in the corporate bond market and provide an alternate source of 
funding, repo in corporate debt was introduced in January 2010. Since then, the guidelines 
have  been  relaxed  in  terms  of  minimum  haircut/margin  requirements  expanding  the  list  of 
eligible  bonds  by  allowing  short  term  instruments  like  CPs  and  CDs  as  eligible  underlying 
and  allowing  more  entities  like  multilateral  institutions,  Government  owned  NBFCs,  etc.  to 
participate  in  repo  market.  Internationally,  GMRA  is  used  as  standard  document  for  repo 
transactions  and  the  same  document  with  suitable  amendments  have  been  prescribed  in 
India  too.  Accounting  norms  have  been  revised  to  make  it  in  sync  with  globally  accepted 
norms.  Regulatory  reporting  and  DVP-I  settlement  have  been  prescribed  to  enhance 
transparency and reduce settlement risk. Still, participation in the repo market is almost nil. 
Though the Reserve Bank is aware of the structural issues of the corporate debt repo market 
and  is  examining  various  options  to  encourage  activity  in  the  repo  market,  FIMMDA  and 
PDAI  may  discuss  with  their  members  and  suggest  measures  for  activating  the  corporate 
debt repo market. 
Credit default swaps 
18. 
In  order  to  provide  an  avenue  for  participants  to  mitigate  credit  risk  and  enable 
effective redistribution of credit risk within the system, the Reserve Bank introduced CDS in 
the Indian market in December 2011. The guidelines on CDS  were framed after extensive 
market  consultations.  However,  there  was  hardly  any  market  interest  in  the  product. 
Subsequently  changes  were  made  in  the  guidelines,  such  as,  increasing  the  scope  of 
reference/deliverable  obligations  by  permitting  CDS  on  unlisted  but  rated  bonds  even  for 
issues  other  than  infrastructure  companies  andpermitting  CDS  on  securities  with  original 
maturity  up  to  one  year  like  CP,  CD  and  NCDs  as  reference  /  deliverable  obligations.  But 
investor interest is still elusive. Major reason cited for the lack of trading interest in CDS is 
restriction on netting of Mark to market (MTM)  position for capital adequacy and exposure 
norms.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  extant  instructions  on  computation  of  exposure  arising  out  of 
OTC derivative contracts do not permit bilateral netting of exposures due to uncertainty on 
legal enforceability of close-out netting in the event of liquidation of statutory corporations. 
To my mind, the issue needs to be addressed through legislative changes in one of 
19. 
the  two  possible  ways:  by  amending  Acts/Statutes  that  govern  statutory  corporations  and 
state  owned/nationalised  banks,  wherever  applicable.  Amendments  to  a  large  number  of 
enactments,  particularly  in  a  synchronised  manner,  may  be,  however,  practically  difficult. 
Accordingly,  as  an  alternative,  a  single,  harmonized  and  uniform  legislation  for  close-out 
netting with overriding powers on all other Acts/Statutes applicable to all types of banks and 
other entities may be enacted. This will provide transparency, comprehensiveness and clarity 
and provide ease of regulation and supervision to the Reserve Bank. The legislation can be a 
standalone law or can form part of existing laws – The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or 
the Payment & Settlement Systems Act, 2007.Pending legislative changes, feasible options 
could be explored based on understanding with the Government. 
20. 
There are examples in emerging markets which have attempted solving the netting 
issue, such as, the recent Malaysian example. Malaysia has enacted unified legislation for all 
kinds of financial services [Financial Services Act 2013] which provides a ‘safe harbour’ for 
“Qualified Financial Agreements” (QFAs). 
Approach to market regulation 
21. 
In  order  to  have  a  more  focused  approach  towards  market  development  and 
regulation along with a surveillance system for ensuring market integrity and stability, a new 
department called Financial Markets Regulation Department (FMRD) has been set up at RBI. 
The  Technical  Advisory  Committee  (TAC)  on  Financial  Markets  has  recently  been 
reconstituted  to  guide  our  future  agenda.  Going  forward,  the  explicit  entity-neutral  legal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  framework prevailing in India for regulation of money, interest rate and currency markets will 
be  leveraged,  to  put  in  place  a  structured  process  focusing  on  (i)  making  market  access 
norms easier for all participants (ii) expanding the menu of products and participants across 
all  segments  (iii)  strengthening  market  infrastructure  in  line  with  global  standards;  and 
(iv) leveraging the market and surveillance mechanism for policy inputs. 
Interest rate options 
22. 
In  line  with  the  above  approach,  introduction  of  interest  rate  options  in  the  Indian 
market  is  a key  part  of agenda.  A Working Group  has  already  been  constituted  under  the 
TAC to comprehensively look into all relevant issues and give its recommendations on the 
product design. 
23. 
The  Committee  is  deliberating  on  the  hedging  requirement  for  these  options.  For 
retail  participants,  a  small  threshold  without  explicit  underlying  requirement  is  being 
considered.  This  would  help  retail  participants  and  small  enterprises  to  hedge  their  risk 
without  much  documentation  burden.  For  larger  corporates,  while  the  underlying  exposure 
requirement may be necessary, but similar to forex hedging, concept of “anticipated interest 
rate exposures” is being explored. 
Review of FPI limits 
24. 
The limit for FPI investments in Government securities in India has been part of the 
larger  framework  for  capital  account  management.  The  risks  of  sovereign  borrowing  in 
foreign  currency,  the  “original  sin”,  have  been  extensively  analysed  over  the  years, 
particularly  after  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  nineties.  The  concerns  relating  to  sudden  stops, 
however, are as relevant for domestic currency denominated debt as foreign currency debt. It 
is therefore imperative to balance the benefits of lower yields in normal times and the costs 
associated with increased volatility and yield impact in crisis times. 
25. The Governor has recently announced a Medium Term Framework in this regard, which 
includes: 
• 
A target of what fraction of the sovereign bond market will be constituted by FPIs in 
the medium term. 
Announcement  of  staggered  increase  in  limits  every  six  months  and  these  being 
released on monthly/quarterly basis 
Limits  to  be  specified  in  Rupees  so  that  they  do  not  vary  with  exchange  rate 
movement. 
  The Framework will create space for participation of different kinds of investors (long term 
investors,  such  as,  Pension  Funds  and  Sovereign Wealth  Funds  as  well  as  medium  term 
investors  and  those  coming  through  International  Central  Security  Depositories,  such  as, 
Euroclear and Clearstream. 
26. 
We are in dialogue with the Government. Once the Framework is decided, we may 
wait  for  suitable  market  conditions,  including  possibly  greater  certainty  about  Federal 
Reserve  actions  and  appropriate  liquidity  conditions  in  domestic markets,  before making a 
public announcement. 
Permitting other regulated entities in OTC derivatives and repos 
27. 
As  I  have  mentioned  above,  explicit  regulation  of  OTC  markets  is  one  of  the 
cornerstones  of  the  financial  sector  regulatory  framework  in  India.  With  the  gradual 
strengthening  of  the  market  infrastructure,  greater  participation  of  different  entities  in  the 
OTC derivatives market can be considered other than the Reserve Bank regulated entities. It 
is  proposed  to  explore  various  options  in  consultation  with  the  Government  and  other 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  regulators  to  permit  a  wider  set  of  regulated  entities  greater  access  to  OTC  derivative 
markets subject to the laid down reporting requirements. 
Electronic dealing platform for repo in corporate bonds 
28. 
Guidelines on repo in corporate debt were issued in January 2010. Since then, the 
guidelines have been relaxed in terms of minimum haircut/margin requirements and allowing 
more  entities  like  multilateral  institutions,  Government  owned  NBFCs,  etc.  to  participate  in 
repo market. However, there is very limited trading volume in corporate debt repo market. In 
order to develop the repo market, it is proposed to introduce an electronic dealing platform 
for repo in corporate. To begin with, a Request for Quote System could be considered and 
depending  on  market  response,  it  could  slowly  graduate  to  a  full-fledged  order  matching 
system. 
Review of guidelines on repo in G-Sec and corporate bonds – expanding participation 
base and relaxing certain conditions 
29. 
Existing repo guidelines also put various restrictions on entities accessing the repo 
market through CSGL route, viz. prohibition on repo transactions between primary member 
and  its  client  and  two  clients  of  the  same  custodian,  etc.  We  are  in  process  of  reviewing 
these guidelines to facilitate wider participation. Since one of the subtheme of the conference 
is  “Term  Rate  Structure  and  Transmission  of  Rates”.  I  will  urge  the  panel  members  to 
discuss these issues relevant for further development of the repo market and forward their 
comments to RBI. 
Triparty repo 
30. 
Internationally,  various  jurisdictions  have  moved  to  tripartite  repo  to  improve 
operational efficiency in the repo market. In India, CBLO is somewhat akin to tripartite repo. 
However we do not have true tripartite repo. Substitution of securities in repo transactions is 
not  permitted  in  India.  This  has  discouraged  borrowers  to  enter  into  repo  transactions  for 
long tenors. Though introduction of re-repo has created enabling environment for lender of 
funds  to  go  for  long  term  funding,  borrower  of  funds  continue  to  have  the  problem  of 
securities being blocked for longer period. It is argued that the introduction of tripartite repo in 
G-Sec which allows substitution of securities will encourage market participants to enter into 
repo  contracts  for  longer  tenors.  The  Working  Group  on  Enhancing  Liquidity  in  the 
Government Securities and Interest Rate Derivatives Markets (Chairman: Shri R Gandhi) has 
also  made 
the 
recommendation. 
the  recommendation  and  Reserve  Bank 
in  process  examining 
is 
Market making in Government securities 
31. 
Secondary  market  liquidity  in  the  Government  securities  market  has  grown 
substantially in absolute terms during the past one decade. However, it is observed that the 
secondary market trading in is limited to about eight-ten securities out of a total number of 86 
securities. In fact, of late, liquidity in bond markets is becoming a problem in many countries 
for  various  reasons.  For  better  monetary  transmission,  it  is  necessary  to  improve  liquidity 
across yields curve. The issues have been examined in detail by the Gandhi Committee and 
recommendations made by the Committee are being implemented in phased manner. 
One  of  the  recommendations  which  is  crucial  for  enhancing  liquidity  across  the 
32. 
maturity  spectrum  is  introduction  of  market  making  scheme  for  the  PDs.  Various  options 
have been discussed with PDs in last few months, and a model based on market feedback is 
being discussed with the Government. I would also suggest that PDs may consider providing 
two  way  quotes  for  liquid  securities  in  various  tenors  in  the  odd  lot  segment.  The  list  of 
securities  can  be  identified  and  published  by  PDAI  on  quarterly  basis.  This  will  not  only 
encourage participation of retail and small investors in the G-Sec market but would also act 
as stepping stone towards implementation of market making scheme in the interbank market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  RBI  on  its  part  would  evaluate  the  proposal  of  allowing  higher  shorting  limits  for  such 
securities to facilitate PDs to provide two way quotes. 
Review of guidelines on LAF accounting 
33. 
The  revised  accounting  guidelines  for  market  repo  transactions  in  government 
securities  and  corporate  debt  securities  were  issued  in  March  23,  2010.  These  guidelines 
recognised  the  economic  essence  of  a  repo  transaction  as  a  collateralized  lending  and 
borrowing transaction, with an agreement to repurchase, on the agreed terms. These were, 
however,  not  to  apply  to  repo  /  reverse  repo  transactions  conducted  under  the  Liquidity 
Adjustment Facility (LAF) with RBI. We are in the process of converging the LAF accounting 
norms  as  well  to  the  market  repo  norms.  In  line  with  market  repo  guidelines,  securities 
acquired by entities under LAF reverse repo would be eligible for SLR. Further, we are also 
examining the feasibility of making these eligible for re-repo. This may significantly contribute 
to the development of a term money market. 
Electronic trading platforms for OTC derivatives 
34. 
Electronic trading and central clearing for all OTC derivatives has become one of the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  reform  of  the  financial  markets.  Several  models  are  being 
implemented  globally  (US,  UK,  EU)  to  bring  trading  of  OTC  derivatives  onto  electronic 
platforms with a central clearing. In India, CCIL has emerged as the major CCP for a large 
segment of OTC markets and is one of the recognized QCCP, apart from the three CCPs 
under SEBI. CCIL is also subjected, on an on-going basis, to rules and regulations that are 
consistent  with  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (PFMIs)  issued  by  the 
Committee on Payment and Markets Infrastructure (CPMI) and International Organisation of 
Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 
35. 
Ideally  all  trading  pools  on  whatever  platform  must  have  access  to  such  a  CCP 
arrangement.  We  are  in  the  process  of  preparing  a  broad  policy  framework,  based  on 
consultation with all stakeholders, on authorization of Electronic Trading Platforms for various 
asset classes and their access to CCP facilities. 
Issue of rupee bonds overseas 
36. 
The Reserve Bank had issued draft guidelines for public feedback on issuance of 
Rupee bonds overseas. Several comments have been received and the final guidelines are 
expected to be issued shortly covering a comprehensive review of the ECB guidelines. It is 
recognised that while the issuance of Rupee bonds will broadly be under the ECB norms, a 
differential  set  of  criteria  would  be  required for  such  issuances. The  objective  would  be  to 
prescribe a simpler regime addressing many of the issues raised by the respondents. Given 
the  fact  that  the  currency  risk  would  be  borne  by  the  investors,  from  an  external  debt 
perspective, raising of funds through the Rupee bond issuance should sit a tad higher in the 
hierarchy of preferences under the overall external debt framework. 
The  ongoing  international  efforts  towards  strengthening  OTC  markets  are  taking 
OTC market reforms – cross border issues 
37. 
place at two levels: 
• 
Global standard setters’ overarching frameworks and principles ensure that changes 
are implemented in an internationally consistent and non-discriminatory way; 
National authorities putting in place the appropriate legislation and regulations 
• 
38. 
However,  considerable  work  needs  to  be  done  in  the  area  of  equivalence  and 
substituted compliance across jurisdictions. Blanket application of such requirements, without 
recognition of the country-specific requirements, may have unintended consequences for the 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  development of markets. I would like to highlight the challenges being faced in us in three 
specific areas: 
Central counter-parties 
39. 
The approach being adopted in major international jurisdictions with regard to CCP 
requirements have raised concerns over possibilities of extra territorial regulatory jurisdiction 
leading  to  regulatory  conflict  and  disruptions  for  market  activity.  For  instance,  European 
Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  and  the  Commodity  Exchange  Act  (CEA)  as 
modified  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  contain  prescriptive  rules  that  may  prevent  European/US 
banks from participating in third-country clearing houses that have not applied for recognition 
by  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  or  that  are  not  registered  as  a 
Derivatives Clearing Organization (DCO) as per CFTC regulations. While the discussions are 
still on, the uncertainty over the inconsistencies between EU and US rules, the process and 
timeline for equivalence assessments may affect the trust in the functioning of international 
financial  markets  and  may  have  impact  on  progress  of  implementation  of  G-20  reform 
agenda. 
Trade repositories 
40. 
As per FSB commitments, jurisdictions should remove barriers to trade reporting by 
market participants, with particular attention to removing barriers to reporting of counterparty 
information and to information access by authorities. However, a distinction may need to be 
made between barriers to reporting to a domestic TR and reporting to foreign TR. As long as 
the one leg of the transaction is being reported to any one recognised TR in any jurisdiction, 
no other sharing requirement may be needed at the individual entity level. Efforts should be 
made to make the global TRs talk to each other, which could be greatly facilitated after full 
implementation of the LEI regime. Such measures would also reduce cost of compliance for 
the market participants without compromising on regulatory effectiveness. 
41. 
The  Payment  &  Settlement  Systems  Act  in  India  (under  which  the  TR  is  now 
governed)  has  enabled  RBI  to  disclose  such  document  /  information  to  any  person,  if  it 
considers  necessary  in  protecting  the  larger  public  interest.  At  the  entity  level,  sharing  of 
client/counterparty data with third party, which includes a non-domestic TR, is governed by 
the  contractual  relationship  and  being  done  after  obtaining  customer  consent.  Entities  are 
expected to keep into consideration the provisions under the various statutes, rules and case 
laws  dealing  with  bankers’  duty  of  confidentiality  of  customer  information  and  the  secrecy 
obligations. 
Benchmarks 
42. 
The European Commission has released a proposed regulation “on indices used as 
benchmarks in financial  instruments and financial contracts”. “Users” of benchmarks which 
are  EU  supervised  entities  may  not  use  benchmarks  provided  by  non-EU  benchmark 
administrators from jurisdictions which do not satisfy an equivalence requirement. There is 
an  urgent  need  for  all  jurisdictions  to  agree  to  a  set  of  harmonized  equivalence  criteria  to 
avoid any unintended consequences. 
Conclusion 
43.  
My  limited  objective  behind  sketching  a  broad  canvas  of  our  past  and  ongoing 
efforts was to bring home the point that development of financial markets is a complex web 
of  various  underlying  factors  and  processes  which  need  to  synergistically  come  together. 
While  it  definitely  cannot  happen  by  a  regulatory  fiat,  regulatory  nudges  are  indeed 
necessary. It is an incremental process based on adaptive learning. While central banks, as 
extended financial regulators, have been enjoined upon greater responsibilities in the post-
crisis context, they have also been at the center of criticism for not getting the balance right. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  This  is  a  judgement  issue  and  policy  makers  are  expected  to  carry  out  this  responsibility 
within a broad set of principles and an understanding shaped by various adaptive learning 
processes. It is difficult to codify this into a set of simple rules/laws. The draft Indian Financial 
Code (IFC), though an ambitious attempt in this direction, leaves large gaps unaddressed. 
44. 
Any  exercise  to  reshape  the  legislative  architecture  of  the  financial  sector  should 
evolve organically, starting with an objective reassessment of where the current system has 
failed.  In  this  regard  it  is  pertinent to  note the  observation  of  Joseph J. Norton,  that “each 
country  situation  is  sui-generis,  with  the  best,  informed  decision  dependent  on  and  taking 
regard of local historical, social, economic, financial market, regulatory and political factors 
and  conditions.”2  This  is  particularly  important  when  there  are  many  open  ended  policy 
issues which are being debated internationally. Post-crisis, there has been a comprehensive 
reassessment internationally of the approaches to financial regulation marked by clear shift 
in preferred models. The realignment in UK with the prudential regulation coming back to the 
Bank  of  England  was  the  strongest  statement  against  the  pre-crisis  regulatory  philosophy 
which lies at the core of some of the current proposals. 
45. 
We are fortunately not faced with severe system failures, the key trigger for other 
countries  to  overhaul  their  frameworks.  There  is  therefore  no  reason  for  a  hasty,  radical 
revamping. It must be kept in mind that from a public policy perspective the risk of getting the 
systemic costs and benefits wrong can be very serious as has been borne out by experience 
of many Asian and Latin American economies in the past few decades. The lessons of the 
last  crisis  are  getting  crystallised  and  addressed  through  the  work  of  various  international 
bodies  such  as  the  FSB,  BSBC,  CPMI,  IOSCO  etc.  where  India  is  a  prominent  member. 
Significant changes can be and are being brought about through this process itself towards 
achievement of the same objectives. 
46. 
The way forward should necessarily emerge out of a broad policy agreement and 
shared  commitment  among  various  stakeholders  including  the  Government,  the  regulators 
and the market participants about the direction and outcomes of the process. There should 
be a healthy, informed and robust debate on the specific issues. While there may be multiple 
expert committees giving their recommendations, the terms of the debate need to be set and 
discussed threadbare by the key policy stakeholders. Industry bodies such as FIMMDA and 
PDAI  must  contribute  actively  to  this  debate  and  provide  meaningful  feedback  to  the 
policymakers. 
Thank you very much for a patient listening. 
                                                
2  Joseph J. Norton, Global Financial Sector Reform: The Single Financial Regulator Model Based on the United 
Kingdom FSA Experience – A Critical Re-evaluation, 39 INT’L LAW. 15, 19 (2005). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
