  William C Dudley: The US economic and monetary policy outlook 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Club  of  Minnesota’s  June  Luncheon, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 5 June 2015. 
 Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here in Minneapolis today and to have the chance to 
speak to all of you. As chairman of the Economic Club of New York, I particularly appreciate 
the role that the Economic Club of Minneapolis has played in organizing this event. 
In  my  remarks,  I  am  going  to  focus  on  the  economic  outlook  and  the  implications  of  that 
outlook  for  monetary  policy.  Today,  I  come  before  you  as  the  proverbial  two-armed 
economist. On one hand, the economy’s forward momentum has slowed sharply during the 
first  half  of  the  year  and  inflation  remains  below  the  level  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) views as consistent with price stability. On the other hand, I think it is 
also  fair  to  say  that  we  are  still  making  progress  towards  our  dual  mandate  objectives. 
However,  recent  solid  job  gains  and  a  further  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate  have 
occurred only because productivity growth has slowed markedly. 
During  the  remainder  of  the  year,  I  expect  growth  to  pick  up  somewhat.  However, 
productivity  growth  will  also  likely  rise.  So  there  remains  some  uncertainty  about  whether 
growth will be strong enough to lead to further improvement in the labor market. 
With  respect  to  inflation,  as  long  as  growth  remains  strong  enough  to  lead  to  further 
improvement in labor market conditions – and this is an important caveat – I am becoming 
more confident that inflation will move up toward the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the 
medium term. The firming of inflation that I anticipate reflects my expectation that resource 
utilization will increase and the fact that some of the factors that have pulled down inflation, 
such  as  lower  oil  and  gas  prices  and  a  firmer  dollar,  have  already  stabilized  or  partially 
reversed. 
Putting  this  all  together,  I  still  think  it  is  likely  that  conditions  will  be  appropriate  to  begin 
monetary policy normalization later this year. But the likelihood and timing will depend on the 
economic outlook, and that will be largely shaped by the incoming economic data. 
When the FOMC begins to raise short-term interest rates, this will occur in a very different 
environment than in the past. Reserves in the banking system are very plentiful, reflecting 
the large increase in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the past few years. But this 
circumstance  should  not  adversely  affect  our  ability  to  push  the  federal  funds  rate  into  a 
higher  target  range.  We  have  the  appropriate  tools  to  push  up  short-term  interest  rates. 
However,  lift-off  may  not  go  so  smoothly  in  terms  of  the  impact  on  financial  asset  prices. 
After all, lift-off will represent a regime shift after more than six years at the zero lower bound. 
More  important  for  financial  market  asset  prices  than  the  precise  timing  of  lift-off  is  the 
expected trajectory of short-term rates over the next few years following lift-off. Most likely, 
this will be a shallow, upward path. Because of the persistent headwinds associated with the 
recent  financial  crisis,  the  level  of  real  short-term  interest  rates  consistent  with  a  neutral 
monetary policy seems considerably lower now than in the past. And, if potential GDP growth 
is  much  lower  –  due  to  slower  labor  force  growth  and  productivity  growth  –  the  long-run 
equilibrium real short-term rate is also likely to remain lower than normal in the future even 
after those headwinds fully dissipate. 
But there must be considerable uncertainty about the path for short-term interest rates. After 
all, the economic outlook is uncertain. Moreover, the appropriate stance of monetary policy 
will  be  influenced  by  how  financial  market  conditions  respond  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
actions. All else equal, if financial conditions tighten sharply, then we are likely to proceed 
more slowly. In contrast, if financial conditions were not to tighten at all or only very little, then 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
–  assuming  the  economic  outlook  hadn’t  changed  significantly  –  we  would  likely  have  to 
move more quickly. In the end, we will adjust the policy stance to support the financial market 
conditions that we deem are most consistent with our employment and inflation objectives. 
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the 
FOMC or the Federal Reserve System.1  
The economic outlook 
Turning  first  to  the  economic  outlook,  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  appears  to  have  slowed 
sharply  during  the  first  half  of  2015.  Based  on  the  revision  we  received  last  week,  first-
quarter  real  GDP  fell  by  0.7  percent  at  an  annualized  rate.  Although  most  projections 
anticipate  a  pickup  in  growth  to  around  2  percent  or  slightly  higher  in  the  current  quarter, 
there is little question that economic growth has slowed significantly from last year’s second-
half pace. 
What’s going on? Why has growth slowed and what does this portend for the remainder of 
the year? 
As  I  see  it,  the  contraction  in  GDP  growth  in  the  first  quarter represents  a  mix  of factors. 
These include another unseasonably cold and snowy winter, a sharp contraction in oil and 
gas  investment,  a  deterioration  in  the  trade  balance  due  –  in  large  part  –  to  the  stronger 
dollar and sluggish foreign demand, and a slowdown in consumer spending growth after a 
very strong fourth quarter. 
After adjusting for weather effects, I think seasonal adjustment issues probably also played 
some  role.  For  example,  real  defense  spending  has  declined  eight  times  in  the  past  nine 
years in the first quarter, suggesting there is a seasonal adjustment issue. But I judge that 
this has had only a modest effect on measured real GDP growth. 
Because weather effects are by their nature temporary, the widely held expectation coming 
into the second quarter was that there would be a sharp rebound in growth similar to what 
took place last year. But current data suggests that the rebound has been relatively muted. I 
think this is because some of the non-weather factors evident in the first quarter – such as 
the  drag  from  the  sharp  drop  in  oil  and  gas  investment  –  have  persisted  into  the  second 
quarter.  Also,  real  disposable  income  growth  has  slowed  over  the  past  three  months  as 
aggregate  hours  worked  have  grown  more  slowly  and  crude  oil  and  gasoline  prices  have 
partially  recovered.  This  means  that  the  fundamentals  for  consumer  spending  are  not  as 
strong as they were at the beginning of the year. 
Nonetheless, my view is that growth will  likely pick up further during the remainder of this 
year.  This  judgment  reflects  several  factors.  First,  some  of  the  forces  that  have  been 
restraining  growth  are  likely  to  fade  later  this  year.  For  example,  consider  oil  and  gas 
investment. The U.S. oil and gas rig count dropped precipitously during the first quarter, but 
the rate of decline has slowed during the current quarter. Combined with the partial recovery 
in  crude  oil  prices,  this  implies  that  oil  and  gas  investment  is  likely  to  stabilize  during  the 
second half of the year. 
Second, business fixed investment outside of oil and gas seems likely to advance, reflecting 
strong fundamentals. For example, the cost of capital remains low and cash flows are high. 
Third, there is plenty of room for further gains in residential investment. Housing starts have 
been running at an annual pace of only about one million so far this year. This is low relative 
to  both  the  rate  of  household  formation  that  one  would  expect  given  underlying 
demographics and the rate of job formation. Moreover, continued improvement in mortgage 
                                                
1   Jonathan McCarthy, Richard Peach, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
credit availability should support the demand for new housing. Household credit worthiness is 
improving as the scars of the financial crisis heal, and underwriting standards may be relaxed 
somewhat in response to the excellent performance of recent mortgage vintages. 
Fourth,  household  finances  generally  are  in  good  shape  with  debt  service  burdens  at 
historically low levels. Nonetheless, household borrowing has been rising only very slowly, 
and the personal saving rate is somewhat elevated relative to what one would expect given 
the level of household net worth relative to income. This suggests that if households become 
more  confident  about  their  finances,  consumer  spending  should  grow  at  least  as  fast  as 
income growth over the remainder of the year. 
But, I can’t  be  completely  confident  about  this forecast.  After  all,  several  times  during this 
expansion we have been fooled by sharp rises in the growth rate that appeared to presage a 
sustained  pickup,  but  that  subsequently  proved  fleeting.  Moreover,  faster  consumption 
growth is not a given. It will depend, in part, on the pace of employment and wage growth. A 
downside  risk  is  that  wage  growth  remains  subdued,  which  would  undercut  consumer 
spending. And, the trade sector looks likely to remain a drag on growth over the remainder of 
the  year.  Although  the  dollar  has  depreciated  slightly  on  a  broad  trade-weighted  basis 
recently, it still is more than 10 percent higher than it was a year ago. 
Despite the sharp slowdown in growth evident during the first half of the year, we have seen 
continued job gains and further falls in unemployment so far this year. Consequently, we still 
seem to be making progress toward our objective of maximum employment in a context of 
price stability. 
Today’s payroll and household employment reports indicate that this progress continued into 
May.  Even  with  a  weak  month  in  March,  job  gains  this  year  have  been  averaging  almost 
220,000  per  month.  The  gain  in  May  was  even  stronger  at  280,000  and  was  widespread 
across industries. Although the 12-month change in average hourly earnings is still  low at 
2.3 percent, it is a bit higher than we have seen in recent years. At the same time, there is 
still some ways to go. The unemployment rate has changed little in the past four months at 
about  5½  percent,  with  the  levels  of  part-time  workers  for  economic  reasons,  and  long-
duration unemployed, remaining elevated. 
This combination of slow output growth and continued job gains has meant that productivity 
growth has been unusually weak, with non-farm business productivity declining significantly 
during the past two quarters and rising by only 0.3 percent over the past year. It also implies 
that  the  future  path  of  productivity  growth  will  be  important  in  determining  the  outlook  for 
employment growth and the prospects for further progress in U.S. labor market conditions. 
Because it is unclear exactly why productivity growth has slowed recently, it is difficult to be 
confident  about  what  it  will  do  in  the  future.  One  reading  of  the  data  is  that  some  of  the 
slowing seems likely to be persistent. For instance, the weakness in capital spending evident 
during  much  of  this  economic  expansion  means  that  the  contribution  to  productivity  from 
capital deepening has dropped sharply in recent years.2 Also, the U.S. labor market appears 
to have become less dynamic – perhaps due, in part, to an older workforce. Less movement 
of workers across jobs could lead to a less efficient allocation of workers’ skills, which would 
hurt productivity growth. 
That said, it seems unlikely that productivity growth will remain as weak as it has been over 
the  past  year.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that  technological  progress  continues  at  a 
healthy  pace.  Just  look  at  the  advances  that  have  occurred  in  health  care,  oil  and  gas 
extraction  and  the  development  of  smartphones.  Moreover,  because  it  takes  time  for 
                                                
2   For example, see Alan Blinder, “The Mystery of Declining Productivity Growth,” Wall Street Journal, May 14, 
2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
technological  advances  to  be  adopted  broadly  throughout  the  economy,  it  seems  unlikely 
that the productivity gains from recent innovations have yet been fully realized. 
Because I am uncertain about the near-term trends of GDP growth and productivity growth, I 
am also uncertain about whether we will see further progress in the labor market over the 
remainder of the year. There are many possible outcomes to consider. For example, if real 
GDP growth were to pick up more than productivity growth, then employment growth would 
likely remain sufficiently firm to lead to further tightening of the U.S. labor market. But, if the 
reverse occurs, then payroll gains could slow even as GDP growth strengthens. 
In  contrast  to  my  uncertainties  about  growth  and  the  labor  market,  I  am  becoming  more 
confident that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term, as long as 
the  labor  market  continues  to  improve  –  an  important  caveat.  The  reasons  here  are 
straightforward. 
First, a number of factors that threaten to keep inflation below our 2 percent objective appear 
to be transitory. In this camp, I put the sharp decline in oil and gasoline prices that began in 
mid-2014,  and  the  weakness  we  have  seen  in  nonpetroleum  import  prices  due  to  the 
strength in the dollar. When the effects of these transitory influences wane, inflation will begin 
to move closer to our 2 percent objective for the personal consumption expenditures deflator. 
Second, the tightening of the labor market may soon lead to some strengthening in the labor 
compensation  trend.  Although  the  recent  data  are  as  a  whole  inconclusive,  I  find  it 
noteworthy  that  the  four-quarter  change  of  the  Employment  Cost  Index  for  all  civilian 
workers, which I view as the most reliable indicator of labor cost trends, rose by 2.6 percent 
as of the first quarter of this year, up from around 2 percent in the first quarter of 2014. Also, 
work done by my staff suggests that we are at that point in the labor market recovery where, 
in the past, we have typically seen a pickup in wage compensation. 
Third,  the  risk  that  inflation  expectations,  which  are  important  in  influencing  inflation 
outcomes,  might  become  unanchored  to  the  downside  seems  to  have  diminished.  In 
particular,  anxieties  created  by  the  decline  in  breakeven  inflation  compensation  measures 
based on the relative yields of nominal Treasuries versus TIPs have lessened. For example, 
the 5-year forward, 5-year inflation compensation measure has climbed by about 25 basis 
points from its low point in late January.3  
Implications for monetary policy 
So what are the implications of the economic outlook for U.S. monetary policy? As the FOMC 
noted in its most recent statement in late April, the Committee is looking for two conditions to 
be satisfied for the normalization of monetary policy to start: “further improvement in the labor 
market”  and  that  the  Committee  “is  reasonably  confident”  that  inflation  will  return  to  the 
FOMC’s objective over the medium term. I think these are reasonable criteria. 
I  would  note  that  these  criteria  are  not  independent.  All  else  equal,  for  example,  further 
improvement in the labor market should make one more confident about the inflation outlook. 
But  improvement  in  the  labor  market,  while  necessary,  is  not  a  sufficient  condition.  For 
example, if labor market improvement were not accompanied by a meaningful uptick in wage 
compensation and if inflation expectations also fell, then one likely would not be reasonably 
confident about inflation returning to 2 percent over the medium term. 
                                                
3   The  data  on  inflation  compensation  come  from  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  of  Governors  website  at 
www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2008/ and is based on Refet Gurkaynak, Brian Sack, and Jonathan 
Wright  (2010),  “The  TIPS  Yield  Curve  and 
Inflation  Compensation,”  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics 2(1), 70–92. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
For me, at present, the uncertainties rest more on the outlook of the labor market. If the labor 
market continues to improve and inflation expectations remain well-anchored, then I would 
expect – in the absence of some dark cloud gathering over the growth outlook – to support a 
decision to begin normalizing monetary policy later this year. 
When the normalization process starts and we raise the target range for the federal funds 
rate,  what  should  we  anticipate?  I  anticipate  a  smooth  lift-off  in  terms  of  the  ability  of  the 
FOMC to push the federal funds rate up into a higher range. Less clear is what the financial 
market reaction will be. Will it be more like the turbulent taper tantrum of 2013 in response to 
Chairman  Bernanke’s  remarks  that  we  might  at  some  point  begin  to  taper  our  asset 
purchases,  or  the  benign  response  when  the  FOMC  actually  tapered  in  2014?  Let  me 
consider these two issues in turn. 
I am very confident that the Federal Reserve has the tools in place to ensure that the FOMC 
can successfully raise the federal funds rate into a new, higher target range when the time 
comes to do so. This reflects several factors. Most importantly, we have demonstrated that 
the interest rate paid on banks’ reserve balances (IOER) – which is our primary tool to raise 
the federal funds rate target – and daily overnight reverse repo (ON RRP) operations – which 
is a supplementary tool to help put a floor under money market rates – have been effective in 
keeping the federal funds rate well within the FOMC’s desired target range. Moreover, in the 
unlikely event that the rates we initially selected for the IOER and ON RRP were insufficient 
to move the federal funds rate into the desired range, we could alter the level of these rates 
and/or the spread between these rates so as to move the federal funds rate into the desired 
range. Finally, we also have other tools, such as the Term Deposit Facility and term reverse 
repo that could be used if needed to help achieve the targeted range for the federal funds 
rate.  While  I  don’t  expect  that  these  tools  will  prove  necessary,  it  is  nice  to  have  them 
available should we need to deal with unanticipated contingencies. 
How  will  financial  markets  react  to  the  onset  of  normalization?  My  own  view  is  that  there 
likely will be some turbulence. After all, lift-off will represent a regime change after more than 
six years at the zero lower bound. Recognizing this, we have a responsibility to minimize the 
amount of potential turbulence by communicating clearly in order to reduce uncertainty about 
conditions surrounding lift-off and the likely aftermath of lift-off. This means being clear about 
what  factors  are  important  in  driving  the  timing  of  lift-off.  However,  this  does  not  mean 
providing advance notice about precisely when lift-off will occur because the timing should 
depend  on  the  incoming  economic  news  and  how  this  influences  the  economic  outlook. 
Instead, if you pay attention to the incoming economic news and listen to our assessment 
about how the outlook is evolving, then I think you will be able to judge for yourself when lift-
off is likely. 
What also matters for financial asset prices is the likely post-lift-off trajectory of short-term 
rates  over  the  medium-  to  longer-term.  In  fact,  this  should  be  more  important  than  the 
particular month in which the normalization process starts. On this score, I think it is hard to 
be precise about the expected path of short-term rates. That is because it depends on two 
important  factors:  (1)  how  the  economic  outlook  evolves,  which  depends,  in  part,  on  how 
loose  or  tight  monetary policy  actually  is  at  a  given  level  of  short-term rates,  and  (2)  how 
financial conditions broadly react to changes in the level of short-term rates. 
My own view is that the upward trajectory of short-term rates is likely to be relatively shallow. 
This  reflects  several  factors.  First,  the  lack  of  strong  forward  momentum  in  the  economy 
despite the low level of short-term interest rates suggests that U.S. monetary policy is not as 
accommodative as one might think. In particular, the lack of strong momentum suggests that 
the  real  equilibrium  federal  funds  rate today  is  considerably  lower  than  the  2  percent  rate 
assumed  in  the  standard  Taylor  Rule  formulation.  Work  done  by  my  Federal  Reserve 
colleagues,  Thomas  Laubach  and  John  Williams,  suggests  that  the  so-called  neutral  real 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
federal  funds  rate  today  may  be  close  to  zero.4  This  presumably  reflects  still-persistent 
headwinds from the financial crisis, such as the constraints on mortgage credit availability to 
prospective borrowers with lower FICO scores. Second, one might expect that it will still take 
additional time for these headwinds to fully subside. This implies that the neutral short-term 
rate may be depressed for some time. Third, my assessment is that the long-run equilibrium 
real federal funds rate is lower now than in the past, reflecting the likelihood that potential 
real  GDP  growth  is  lower  due  to  slower  growth  of  the  labor  force  and  more  moderate 
productivity growth performance. 
Another  important  factor  that  will  affect  the  trajectory  of  short-term  rates  is  how  financial 
market  conditions  respond  to  a  rise  in  short-term  rates.  Monetary  policy  works  on  the 
economy through how it affects financial market conditions. Economic conditions at any point 
in time warrant a particular set of financial market conditions so the FOMC can best achieve 
its  objectives  of  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  The  FOMC  chooses  a  policy 
stance  to  help  support  financial  market  conditions  that  will  lead  to  economic  outcomes 
consistent with its objectives. 
An important aspect of current financial market conditions is the very low bond term premia 
around the globe. If a small rise in short-term rates were to lead to an abrupt increase in term 
premia  and  bond  yields,  resulting  in  a  significant  tightening  in  financial  market  conditions, 
then the Federal Reserve would likely move more slowly – all else equal. As an example, 
consider the experience of the 1994–95 tightening cycle. Bond yields rose sharply and the 
Federal  Reserve  tightened  less  than  what  was  ultimately  priced  in  by  market  participants. 
Conversely, if term premia and bond yields  were to remain low and the economic outlook 
suggested that financial conditions needed to be tighter and a rise in short-term rates did not 
generate  this  outcome,  then  the  FOMC  would  likely  need  to  raise  short-term  rates  further 
than anticipated. The 2004–07 tightening cycle might be a good example of this. The FOMC 
ultimately pushed the federal funds rate up to a peak of 5.25 percent, in part, because the 
earlier  rise  in  short-term  rates  was  generally  ineffective  in  tightening  financial  market 
conditions sufficiently over this period.5  
This means that there is uncertainty about the trajectory of short-term rates from two distinct 
sources:  (1)  the  economic  outlook  and  what  setting  of  financial  conditions  this  implies  is 
appropriate,  and  (2)  what  setting  of  short  rates  is  consistent  with  the  financial  market 
conditions that the FOMC is seeking to generate. This also suggests that market participants 
should be cautious in interpreting the Summary of Economic Projection “dot plots” that show 
the FOMC participants’ modal outlooks for the short-term rate trajectory. If the participants 
were  to  provide  confidence  bands  around  their  paths,  they  probably  would  be  very  wide 
because  the  economic  outlook  is  uncertain  and  the  linkage  between  the  instrument  of 
monetary policy – the federal funds rate target range – to financial market conditions is loose 
and variable. 
In  conclusion,  I  believe  that  the  FOMC  is  continuing  to  make  progress  towards  our  dual 
mandate objectives. However, I have become somewhat more uncertain about the growth 
outlook  given  the  lack  of  a  sharp  rebound  in  economic  activity  in  recent  months  from  the 
weak first quarter. With respect to inflation, as long as  we see further improvement in the 
labor market and anchored longer-term inflation expectations, I am somewhat less worried 
that inflation will stay too low. Thus, I continue to expect that monetary policy normalization is 
likely to begin later this year. 
                                                
4   Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics 
and  Statistics  85(4),  1063–70.  The  FRBNY  DSGE  model  also  estimates  that  the  natural  rate  of  interest  is 
currently close to zero. See Marco Del Negro, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi and Micah 
Smith, Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Liberty Street Economics blog, May 20, 2015. 
5   With the benefit of hindsight, one could argue that the Federal Reserve should have raised short-term interest 
rates more aggressively over this period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Longer-term, I expect that the trajectory of short-term interest rates after lift-off will likely be 
relatively  shallow.  This  is  due,  in  part,  to  my  reading  that  monetary  policy  today  is  not  as 
accommodative as one might think judging just from the level of short-term rates. But, the 
path will ultimately be determined by how the economic outlook evolves and how financial 
market  conditions respond  to  monetary  policy.  I  expect  that there  will  be  many  twists  and 
turns  in  the  road  ahead.  As  we  make this journey,  I  will  do  my  best to explain  what  I  am 
seeing and how I think I might react as conditions change in the future. 
Thank you so much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
