  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining the economy’s growth saga through 
the 3Ps of policymaking – proactive, pre-emptive, and prudent 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Euromoney  Philippines  Investment  Forum,  Manila, 
24 March 2015. 
 I see from the conference agenda that you have already covered critical topics this morning. 
Our place in the ASEAN Economic Community, our prospects in the mass market and our 
infrastructure are certainly key  issues for the Philippines today. Before you take on capital 
market issues and the rest of the forum topics, I thought it would help in the discussion of 
these  sectoral  issues,  if  I  would  spend  the  time  allotted  to  me  to  speak  on  the  broader 
economy  that  we  operate  in.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  speak  briefly  on  the  risks  to  the 
macroeconomy that the BSP sees in the horizon, and how we, from a monetary and banking 
policy framework, intend to address these. 
First, the risks: 
The risks we face come mainly from the external side. Here I mean the interplay of three key 
factors: (1) the uneven global economic growth; (2) the uncertainty of the oil price path and 
the  ambiguity  of  the  underlying  drivers  of  the  oil  price  decline;  and  (3)  the  resulting 
divergence in monetary policy stance among major advanced economies. 
In  the  last  year  and  a  half, these factors  have manifested  themselves  in  the movement of 
global  capital  into  US  assets  (away  from  core  Europe  and  emerging  markets),  an 
appreciating  trend  in  the  US  dollar  and  a  decline  in  global  long-term  interest  rates.  The 
rebalancing  in  global  portfolios,  as  funds  search  for  better  yields,  has  surfaced  in  our 
domestic  financial  markets  as  volatility  in  the  peso/dollar  exchange  rate,  and  in  the  local 
bond and equity markets. 
Going forward, should the uneven global growth scenario persist, we may see this translate 
into more pronounced changes in trade patterns. 
Monetary policy thrusts: 
In  response,  the  BSP  has  opted  to  use  a  mix  of  monetary  policy  tools  over  the  last  year. 
These  actions  included  increases  in  reserve  requirements  on  bank  deposits,  upward 
adjustments in policy interest rates, a strategic presence in the FX market, alongside a clear 
communication plan, and other macroprudential measures. The BSP did these to allow it to: 
1) better manage credit and liquidity growth, 2) anchor inflation expectations, and 3) ward off 
any potential build up of excesses in some segments of the market that may be overly-reliant 
on the historically low interest rates for their growth and exuberance. 
The  BSP  will  continue  this  strategy  of  using  what  it  deems  as  appropriate from  the  whole 
range of tools available in its enhanced tool kit. I believe the domestic markets have come to 
understand this. They now appreciate that the BSP’s approach to responding to challenges 
is really to be Pro-active, Pre-emptive and Prudent. Three P’s. 
Banking reforms: 
Given  the  central  role  of  banks  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  the  BSP  is  also 
strategic in ensuring the resiliency of the banking system. 
We have repeatedly said that our handling of the banking system is premised on striking a 
balance  between  the  needed  prudential  limits  and  the  ability  of  banks  to  make  sound 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  business decisions based on the idiosyncrasies of their operations and the realities of their 
market.  In  practice,  this  translates  into  specific  actions  under  two  facets.  1)  Regulatory 
framework, and 2) Access to financial products. 
The  first  facet  is  crafting  a  regulatory  environment  that  encourages  innovation  while 
adequately mitigating unwarranted financial risks. I want to be clear though that it is not just 
about Basel 3, although we consider Basel 3 as a primary safety net. 
There was much apprehension surrounding our adoption of the capital requirements under 
Basel 3. In fact, I note that one of the topics for discussion in the session following my talk is 
whether the capital regulatory reforms are affecting banks’ ability to lend. Not to preempt the 
later discussion, let me just share that, the initial fear over the implementation of the Basel 3 
framework  is  unfounded.  Today,  our  universal  and  commercial  banks  continue  to  have 
capital levels that can withstand credit stress tests of 20 to 50 percent write-offs. In addition, 
credit continues to grow at healthy levels. Equally worth noting is that the quality of loans has 
been improving, with NPLs continuing to fall. It will be interesting to find out the perspectives 
of the Conference on this issue. 
I won’t attempt to list all the regulatory reforms, but just to illustrate, let me cite a couple. We 
have amended the credit risk framework for banks to align this with the global best practice 
of  highlighting  the  factors  that  go  into  a  sound  credit  decision,  without  relying  only  on  the 
collaterals  pledged  against  the  credit.  We  have  also  streamlined  the  minimum  capital 
requirement for banks so that it is tiered with the extent of their branch network. At the same 
time,  liberalization  of  bank  branching  was  undertaken  so  that  banks  can  better  make  the 
business decision of how and where they wish to serve their target constituents. 
To  round  this  out,  we  have  likewise  pursued  the  longstanding  objective  of  developing  our 
capital markets. Recent amendments to our regulations address gaps, particularly in arriving 
at  market  rates  for  purposes  of  marking-to-market.  These  new  interest  rate  benchmarking 
regulations should make pricing of bonds for capital build-up more transparent. 
All of these are done with the objective of making the regulatory environment more open to 
the  business  decisions  of  service  and  product  providers.  They  broaden  what  can  be 
achieved  within the banking industry  without unduly compromising the regulatory oversight 
for risks and conflicts of interest. 
This dovetails with the second facet of how we strike the balance between prudential limits 
and banks’ decision-making ability. This is – liberalized access to the banking market. It is 
critical  that  our  market  is  “financially  inclusive”  given  the  structure  of  the  Philippine 
archipelago.  This  means  that  access,  products  and  policy  have  to  generate  the  desired 
synergies so that we can equally respond to the needs of those traditionally underserved or 
underbanked. This is a key advocacy of the BSP, for which we could easily devote another 
forum. 
Even if I limit myself today to the traditional banking market, so much has already happened 
of late. 
With  the  enactment  of  Republic  Act  10641,  we  have  increased  the  ownership  ceiling  of 
foreign  banks  to  100  percent  from  60  percent,  liberalized  branching  requirements  and 
allowed foreign banks to participate in foreclosure proceedings of real estate properties. With 
capital infusion and market presence, the expectation is that the Law would bolster the local 
banking industry through greater competition, and the benefits from the transfer of skills and 
technology. 
This liberalization of the entry of foreign financial institutions positions us well for the ASEAN 
Banking Integration Framework. But more than just ABIF, we have pursued and supported 
these  legislative  initiatives  because  a  competitive  globally-oriented  banking  industry  is  an 
essential portal for foreign investments. This, in turn, feeds off the investment grade rating 
we have obtained from international credit rating agencies. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  While liberalization has its advantages, we recognize that there may be potential issues such 
as  the  relaxation  of  credit  standards  in  the  pursuit  of  larger  market  share,  the  risk  of 
contagion and volatile capital flows. 
Financial stability lens: 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  when  the  BSP  considers  the  effects  of  potential  risks,  we  do  not 
merely look at the impact on individual firms. Rather, through the lens of financial stability, 
our  concern  becomes  the  bigger  picture,  examining  the  interaction  among  institutions, 
transactions, products and markets. It is through this new prudential norm that we address 
the  contagion  of  risks,  including  those  that  may  potentially  arise  from  any  liberalization 
initiative. 
Outlook: 
Against  this  monetary  and  banking  sector  policy  backdrop  and  in  light  of  the  risks  we 
anticipate, how do we see the operating environment going forward? 
Very broadly, we see the country continuing to grow in a stable inflationary environment. We 
believe liquidity is sufficiently calibrated and that it would support broad-based growth without 
fuelling inflation which we monitor particularly in view of policy normalization in the US. More 
specifically,  the  government’s  target  of  7–8  percent  is  attainable  as  domestic  demand 
conditions  remain  firm  and  supported  by  improving  production  efficiency  and  robust  labor 
market dynamics. Meantime, inflation expectations will remain well-anchored. Latest inflation 
forecasts, based on surveys by the BSP and the Consensus Economics, remain close to the 
mid-point of the target band of 2–4 percent for 2015–2016. 
On the banking side, we see that this will remain a reliable intermediator of funds. Given the 
reform agenda, the system will continue to be characterized by solid asset growth, improved 
quality of loans and assets, strong capitalization, and better risk management practices. 
We see the external current account remaining in surplus as exchange inflows from overseas 
Filipinos  (OFs)  remittances,  business  process  outsourcing  (BPO)  revenues,  as  well  as 
tourism receipts are seen to continue to grow. 
Finally, ladies and gentlemen, given the positive alignment between inflation and growth, and 
augmented government resources as a result of fiscal consolidation, both the monetary and 
financial sectors have sufficient room to make policy adjustments, as may be warranted. 
Conclusion: 
You may ask, will the Philippine economy be able to sustain its successive years of strong 
growth  performance  over  the  medium  term?  I  believe  so.  Apart  from  the  country’s  strong 
fundamentals, the government’s commitment toward sustaining its structural reform agenda 
would lend critical support to achieving our growth potential. 
The BSP shares the same commitment. After all, we follow the framework of the Three P’s. I 
am confident that we will be able to attain our goal of an upward economic growth trajectory, 
in an environment of price and financial stability because we will remain Proactive in policy 
dialogue  with  stakeholders  such  as  yourselves.  Pre-emptive  in  putting  in  place  forward 
looking policies, and Prudent in adopting reforms. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  even  as  the  outlook  remains  favorable,  now  is  not  the  time  for 
complacency.  As  the  genius  behind  Intel,  Andy  Grove,  once  said,  “Only  the  paranoid 
survive.” I wish therefore that your conference would be peppered with just the right amount 
of  paranoia  and  balanced  with  enough  openness  for  finding  suitable  solutions.  Good 
afternoon and thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
