  Sabine Lautenschläger: Reintegrating the banking sector into society – 
earning and re-establishing trust 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at the 7th International Banking Conference “Tomorrow’s bank business model – How far are 
we from the new equilibrium”, organised by Bocconi University, Milan, 28 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, esteemed audience, 
First of all let me thank the organisers of this conference, and especially Andrea Sironi, for 
their kind invitation. I very much welcome this opportunity to elaborate on what I think are 
currently some of the most important questions in banking: 
How can bankers regain the trust that was lost during the crisis? 
How can the banking sector be reintegrated into society? 
There is no doubt that banks, bankers and the whole industry are experiencing one of the 
worst crises of confidence ever. The turmoil of 2008 and 2009 played a major role in this loss 
of  public  trust,  but the  problem  did  not  end  after  the most  acute  phase of  the  crisis.  Even 
seven years later, confidence in the banking sector is still very low. 
Numerous  scandals,  like  the  manipulation  of  LIBOR  rates,  large-scale  tax  evasion,  the 
fraudulent  behaviour  of  rogue  traders,  misconduct  in  the  selling  of  mortgages,  and  large 
taxpayer bailouts of banks, have reinforced the perception that wrongdoing is widespread in 
the banking sector. 
But mistrust is not only confined to banks themselves. Investors and clients also have less 
confidence in the correct functioning of the banking sector and in the ability of supervisors 
and regulators to prevent excessive risk-taking. 
We should worry about this loss of trust in the banking sector: 
• 
• 
• 
In  a  recent  paper,  Gennaioli  et  al.1  illustrated  the  role  that  trust  plays  in  banking  by 
comparing finance to medicine. Banking, is a service like healthcare, in which “transactions” 
take place between two parties that differ in terms of information, knowledge and technical 
competence.  Patients  put  themselves  in  the  hands  of  their  doctor,  and  investors,  like 
patients, would like to be in good hands and not be taken advantage of. 
But  how  can  trust  in  the  banking  sector  be  restored?  Who  are  the  key  players  in  this 
process? Is it enough to reform the regulatory and supervisory framework, as we have done 
in recent years? 
It impairs the proper functioning of banks to reallocate resources. 
It hampers growth. 
It leads to instability and costly crises. 
                                                
1  See Gennaioli, N., Schleifer, A., and Vishny, R.W. (2015), “Money Doctors”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 70(1), 
pp. 91–114. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Banks, intermediation and trust 
Let me start by using a simplification of the activities of banks to explain why it is worthwhile 
investing  in  regaining  trust.  Traditionally,  the  core  activity  of  a  commercial  bank  is  to  take 
deposits from individuals who have a surplus of resources and to allocate those resources to 
productive  activities.  Banks  thereby  perform  three  main  functions.  First,  they  provide 
payment  and  settlement  services  to  households,  entrepreneurs,  companies  and  other 
financial  institutions.  Second,  they  enable  savers  to  reap  the  full  benefits  of  long-term 
investments, while still being able to access liquidity when needed. Third, they assess and 
monitor  the  creditworthiness  and  payment  behaviour  of  borrowers  more  efficiently  than  an 
individual investor could. 
Through these activities, banks reduce the inefficiencies caused by asymmetric information 
and incentive problems between those who save and those who borrow. It is mainly via this 
channel, that banks create value and contribute to economic growth. 
However, even though banks assess and monitor borrowers’ creditworthiness, savers may 
still be concerned about whether banks – and their managements – have the necessary skills 
and  will  make  the  required  effort  to  protect  their  savings.  Asymmetric  information  and 
incentive  problems  are  still  present,  but  arise  at  new,  different  levels:  no  longer  between 
savers and borrowers, but between savers, bankers and supervisors. 
In the relationship between banks and their creditors, incentive conflicts may arise between 
managers on one side (who set the bank’s strategy, make investment decisions and monitor 
the  performance  of  investment  projects  and  the  payment  behaviour  of  debtors)  and 
shareholders and debt holders on the other side (who provide the bank’s funding and who 
bear the ultimate risks and receive the benefits of the bank’s activities). 
Information  problems  may  also  occur  among  banks  that  are  linked  by  mutual  business 
relationships or collective vulnerabilities to systemic events. 
Asymmetric  information  and  incentive  problems  can  be  addressed  through  contracts, 
institutions  and  appropriate  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks.  But  this  is  a  rather 
abstract and idealised view. In reality, more is needed: trust is needed. 
The medical analogy is a handy  way to illustrate this. Patients can always sue doctors for 
malpractice. They could always enforce the “contract” with their doctor. However, no patient 
will ever consult a doctor whom he does not trust, even though he can sue him. 
The same applies to banking. In general, creditors will not deposit money in a bank whose 
integrity and soundness they do not trust. 
Shareholders  can  set  up  remuneration  schemes  to  incentivise  managers  whose  activities 
they cannot monitor full time. But shareholders also need to trust their managers, because 
not all of their activities are perfectly contractible and, even if they were, it could be difficult 
and time-consuming to enforce the incentive contract in court. 
At this point, one could interject that, while trust may have been essential for banking in the 
past, this is no longer the case today. Our economy and society have undergone dramatic 
changes in recent decades, which have also affected banks. 
Innovation  and  technological  progress  have  reduced  the  need for trust in  some  situations. 
Computerisation has allowed banks to use data-driven applications rather than rely on expert 
judgement  for  the  evaluation  of  creditworthiness  of  borrowers  or  the  pricing  of  financial 
products. 
However, banks and their business have become much more complex than they used to be, 
which increases the asymmetry of information and, hence, the need for trust. For example, it 
is not now uncommon for banks now to have multiple parent-subsidiary structures operating 
in  different  jurisdictions  across  the  globe.  Some  banking  products  have  become  so 
sophisticated that most people, even some bankers, no longer fully understand them. By the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  way,  I  expect  every  CEO  or  Board  member  to  do  without  products  which  they  do  not 
understand. Today, banks are more complex to manage harder to monitor and their activities 
are  more  difficult  to  understand  than  was  previously  the  case,  and  the  asymmetric 
information and incentive problems I mentioned earlier are more prominent than ever. 
In short, trust is and has always been essential for banks to carry out their activities, foster 
economic growth and add value to society. Banking is and always has been trusting. 
What can be done to restore trust? 
Given the currently low level of confidence in, and within, banks, what needs to be done to 
rebuild trust? 
The role of regulatory reform 
First, whose job is it to regain trust? 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  significant  changes  have  been  made  in  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework.  Reforms  of  capital  and  liquidity  regulation,  risk  management, 
governance  and  resolution  regimes  have  been  introduced.  Moreover,  consumer  protection 
has been enhanced. The regulatory framework now has a better and broader base, and is 
less vulnerable to arbitrage. 
While much has been achieved, I would like to highlight one piece of work in particular. Last 
year,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  published  a  set  of  guidelines  on  supervisory  interaction 
with  banks  on  risk  culture.  The  guidelines  are  aimed  at  assisting  supervisors  in  their 
assessment of risk culture by listing a number of indicators or practices that can be indicative 
of  an  overall  sound  and  well-balanced  approach.  These  include  an  appropriate  “tone from 
the  top”  within  a  bank  and  other  key  factors,  such  as  accountability,  effective  internal 
communication, the existence of challenge mechanisms within the decision-making process, 
and incentives for employees. 
Supervisors themselves have also changed since the crisis. They are now stricter, more pro-
active  and  assess  banks  in  a  much  more  holistic  way.  Topics  such  as  governance, 
remuneration  and  risk  appetite  are  among  the  key  priorities  on  every  supervisor’s  agenda 
this year. 
In  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  for  example,  we  are  in  the  final  stages  of  a 
thematic review of governance and risk appetite in the 123 institutions directly supervised by 
us which will feed into this year’s assessments of the capital and liquidity adequacy of banks. 
Our initial findings indicate that a number of banks, while meeting national requirements, do 
not comply with international best practices with regard to governance. Our key observations 
include examples of power concentration in individual board members (e.g. holding multiple 
offices or chairmanships within the same group), a lack of separation between a bank’s risk 
and audit functions, information asymmetries among board members, and instances where 
the board simply does not take enough time to discuss and reflect on individual issues. It is 
also apparent that some banks are still in the early stages of implementing their risk appetite 
framework  and  therefore  still  have  a  lot  of  work  to  do  to  ensure  its  consistent  application 
throughout the entire organisation. 
All of these issues reduce the quality of decision-making and risk awareness within a bank 
and can obscure or even encourage malpractice. Therefore, we will require banks to follow 
up on these findings. 
But  are  the  efforts  of  regulators  and  supervisors  enough?  Can  trust  be  rebuilt  simply  by 
having better and more credible rules? 
Our  finance-medicine  analogy  suggests  that  the  answer  to  these  questions  is  no.  It  is  the 
doctor who holds the key to earning the trust of his patients. Likewise, rebuilding trust in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  banking  sector  requires  the  active  engagement  of  bankers  and  their  stakeholders. 
Regulatory and supervisory reforms are necessary, but not sufficient to restore people’s trust 
in banks. 
My view is that, while regulatory reform and supervisory action were certainly necessary to 
lay the foundations on which banks can restore trust, regulators and supervisors are not the 
key  players  in  this  process.  The  main  effort  to  regain  trust  must  come  from  bankers,  in 
particular from banks’ management and their boards as the tone from the top as well as the 
accountability  of  banks’  top  management  are  key  for  risk  culture  and  staff’s  behaviour. 
Without their active effort, society will not start to trust again. 
The necessary process will be laborious and time-consuming; and it will not be one measure 
or action that does the job, but rather a complex mixture of governance, risk appetite, risk 
culture and behaviour from the top. 
The role of banks and their stakeholders in restoring trust 
So what must bankers do to rebuild trust? 
First,  bank’s  management  should  develop  viable  business  models  with  a  clear  long-term 
perspective. Many of the recent crises have been the consequence of banks targeting high, 
but  risky,  short-term  gains  rather  than  pursuing  lower,  but  more  stable,  long-term  returns. 
Banks should refocus on their core functions: 
• 
providing  valuable  investment  opportunities  to  savers,  while  shielding  them  from 
liquidity risk, and 
providing  funds  to  those  who  need  them,  while  assessing  and  monitoring  their 
creditworthiness. 
 Financial intermediation is not simply a way to garner revenues; it also supports economic 
growth and thus, ultimately, provides an important service to society. 
Significant  changes  in  the  economic  environment  in  recent  decades  have  diverted  banks 
from these core functions. It seems that the combination of an increased range of investment 
opportunities  and  funding  sources,  a  trend  towards  more  liberal  regulation,  and  an 
increasingly  competitive  environment  caused  banks  to  reshuffle  their  priorities  towards 
maximising  short-term  corporate  and  often  also  personal  gain.  The  change  in  banks’ 
business models from “originate to hold” to “originate to repackage and sell”, which was the 
proverbial  spark  in  the  tinder  box  that  set  off  the  financial  crisis,  can  be  seen  as  a  prime 
example of losing sight of the goal of maximising long-term value. 
Second, a bank’s management and board must have a sense of responsibility for developing 
the bank’s individual risk culture, thus enabling it to deal with risk in a way that supports this 
long-term business perspective and fosters transparency and accountability. 
Every  bank  needs  a  strong  cultural  base,  which  should  embody  the  bank’s  essence  and 
aspirations  and  embrace  its  role  as  a  profit-oriented  organisation  without  neglecting  its 
relevance for the well-being of national economies and for the finances of both individuals 
and corporations. 
• 
This strong cultural base should serve as a shared value framework throughout the 
organisation. 
On top of these foundations, every bank needs clear risk-taking policies, allowing it 
to reach its business objectives, while ensuring that risk-taking activities beyond the 
institution’s risk appetite can be identified and addressed in a timely manner. 
To  complement  this,  there  must  be  clear  governance  arrangements  defining 
processes  and  responsibilities  for  decision-making,  risk  management,  control  and 
audit. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
   Lastly, a bank requires well-functioning communication mechanisms and IT systems 
to link the bank’s decision-making, risk management and control organs together, to 
convey  information  to  where  it  is  needed,  and  to  help  create  awareness  and 
transparency  about  the  bank’s  objectives,  policies  and  values  throughout  the 
organisation. 
 Changing an existing culture and the way an organisation thinks about its business is clearly 
a major challenge. In particular, at a time when the banking sector as a whole is having to 
comprehensively  rethink  the  values  it  embodies  and  the  culture  it  lives.2  Although  some 
progress has been achieved recently, much more is still needed. In this context, I welcome 
the  continued  initiative  of  policy-makers  to  stimulate  further  progress  in  this  area.  For 
example, in May this year, the G-7 finance ministers and central bank governors urged the 
Financial Stability Board to begin developing a bankers’ “code of conduct” to complement the 
existing guidance. 
Third, banks’ senior management and boards have to create adequate incentive schemes, 
including remuneration policies, to promote long-term perspectives within their organisation. 
We  have  witnessed  too  many  scandals  over  recent  years,  too  many  cases  of  misconduct 
where responsible parties were not sufficiently held accountable. We have witnessed banks 
cooperating  only  reluctantly  in  criminal  investigations,  and  we  have  seen  interest  groups 
rejecting outright any attempt to reform remuneration in the banking sector. 
Regaining  trust  will  not  be  easy.  Bank  managers  must  convince  the  public  that  they  will 
reward  socially  beneficial  behaviour,  while  unacceptable  behaviour  will  be  credibly 
sanctioned, up to the top.3 Most importantly, people need to believe that managers will be 
truly responsible for the conduct of those who report to them. 
To  achieve  a  turnaround  in  public  sentiment,  those  working  in  banks  must  believe  in  the 
value of sustainable business models and ethical behaviour. The tone from the top is key in 
this endeavour – the message must be that not everything that is legal is also legitimate and 
that the bank is only interested in legitimate business. 
This may require a considerable revision of human resources policies, too. 
• 
For a start, senior management could think about introducing new recruitment and 
training guidelines that indicate what sort of talent and personalities should be hired 
and how the bank’s values should be taught to employees. 
A well-balanced combination of monetary and non-monetary incentives should be in 
place. Staff should have reasonable compensation and development options aligned 
with  the  behaviour  they  exhibit  in  implementing  the  bank’s  desired  values  and 
culture.  Remuneration,  performance  evaluation  and  promotion  systems  should  be 
calibrated in such a way that they reward client orientation, long-term value creation 
and  sound  risk  management  practices  rather  than  short-term  revenues.  One 
possibility could be to extend even further the existing claw-back times for bonuses 
to discourage unacceptable behaviour, possibly up to seven years. 
Staff should face clear rules on responsibility, liability and integrity and be subject to 
proportionate follow-up or disciplinary measures in the case of infringements. 
                                                  
2  For a discussion on the role of culture in the financial industry and its interaction with monetary incentives in 
shaping  behaviours,  see  Lo, A.W.  (2015),  “The  Gordon  Gekko  Effect:  The  Role  of  Culture  in  the  Financial 
Industry”, NBER Working Paper, No 21267. 
3  On  the  importance  of  “cleansing”  the  sector  of  adverse  practices  and  behaviours  in  order  to  “reintegrate” 
banks into society, see Hartmann, P. (2015), “Financial Reforms in Transition”, in Evanoff, D., Haldane, A. and 
Kaufman, G. (eds.), The New International Financial System: Analyzing the Cumulative Impact of Regulatory 
Reform, Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific Publishing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Last,  but  not  least,  the  expectations  of  bank  shareholders  are  critical  and  key  to  
re-establishing trust. Their demand for higher returns puts pressure on banks and induces 
them  to  embark  on  risky  business  activities.  Hence,  efforts  to  restore  trust  cannot  be 
successful  without  a  corresponding  change  in  attitude  among  shareholders.  They  must 
understand  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  “free  lunch”.  Properly  adjusting  for  risk, 
shareholders  may  actually  be  better  off  when  banks  behave  cooperatively  and  achieve  a 
high level of trust. 
The role of bankers’ self-interest 
Having  identified  possible  actions  bankers  can take to  restore trust,  an important question 
remains. Why should bankers ever take such actions? Is it in their own interest? 
As I stressed before, trust is essential for the functioning of the banking sector. Without trust, 
banks cannot function properly. This not only has negative consequences for the rest of the 
economy, but also negatively affects banks themselves. 
There are several channels through which a lack of trust negatively affects banks. First, it is a 
potential  root  cause  of  crises.  Crises  usually  lead  to  a  significant  and  often  long-lasting 
contraction in bank profits, as can be seen, for instance, from the large drop in the S&P 500 
index  for  the  banking  sector.  Moreover,  they  are  usually  followed  by  an  “aggressive” 
regulatory response to constrain banking activities. 
Second, a lack of trust negatively impacts on the relationship between regulators and banks. 
The interaction tends to become more adversarial. Regulators become less willing to listen to 
bankers and to take their views on how to do business into account. 
Third, a lack of trust in some banks and bankers usually translates into a negative sentiment 
towards the entire industry. This, in turn, has negative implications for business. Customers 
may leave, and it is more difficult to recruit talent. But this negative sentiment not only has 
repercussions for banks’ business prospects, it also affects the social standing of bankers, 
whose image is often tarnished in society. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude. 
The recent crisis is a stark reminder that banking is trusting. 
The dramatic changes in the banking environment brought about by financial innovation and 
technological  progress  have  not  diminished  the  role  of  trust  in  banking.  Any  lack  of  trust 
significantly  impairs  the  functioning  of  the  banking  sector  and  prevents  banks  from 
contributing to economic growth. A lack of trust also negatively affects banks’ business and 
profitability. It is in the banks’ collective interest to restore and preserve a high level of trust 
in, and within, the banking sector. 
Rebuilding  trust  is  a  long  and  complex  process.  It  certainly  requires  effort  on  the  part  of 
regulators and supervisors, and a lot has been achieved there. 
But, ultimately, as the analogy with the trust between doctors and patients makes clear, most 
of the heavy lifting will have to be done by the banks – their senior managements, boards 
and shareholders – themselves. There is plenty that they can do and should be doing. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
