  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: The money services business industry in 
Malaysia 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Malaysian Association of Money Services Business 
(MSB) Annual Dinner 2015, Kuala Lumpur, 25 April 2015. 
 that 
industry 
inspires  confidence, 
Terima kasih kerana menjemput saya pada malam ini untuk bersama meraikan majlis makan 
malam  Persatuan  Perniagaan  Perkhidmatan  Wang  Malaysia  yang  diadakan  buat  julung 
kalinya. Saya amat berbesar hati dengan kehadiran tuan-tuan dan puan-puan sekalian yang 
mewakili  hampir  keseluruhan  penggiat  industri  pada  malam  yang  bermakna  ini.  Ia  jelas 
menunjukkan  sokongan  padu  dan  komitmen  daripada  saudara  dan  saudari  untuk  terus 
merealisasikan aspirasi untuk membina sebuah industri yang moden, progresif dan berdaya 
saing. 
I feel only a short time ago that I had officiated the official launch of the Association. Since 
then the industry has made significant progress on many fronts. Standards have been raised, 
business conduct modernised and the structure of the industry has changed significantly. In 
many ways the achievements by the industry had exceeded our expectations. 
I would like to believe that the regulatory reform instituted over the last few years was the 
catalyst  that  had  transformed  the  money  services  business  industry.  We  have  seen  very 
encouraging results. But these transformations would not be possible without the vision and 
shared commitments provided by the Association and the industry players. 
As  a  collective  effort,  the  regulator  and  the  industry  had  instituted  various  measures  to 
establish  new  norms  and  values  that  were  designed  to  enhance  the  integrity  and 
professionalism  of  the  industry.  The  measures  that  were  prescribed  made  good  business 
sense.  An 
trusts  and  exudes  high  degree  of 
professionalism would instil credence among the general public, a prized virtue that would 
expand  business  opportunities.  From  the  regulator  perspectives,  a  highly  organised  and 
disciplined money services business industry will easily withstand the higher level of scrutiny 
of regulatory requirements by both domestic and international bodies. 
I  would  like  to  commend  the  Association  in  the  strong  leadership  it  has  demonstrated  in 
leading  a  number  of  key  initiatives  to  further  elevate  the  status  of  the  industry.  The 
Association has adopted a Code of Conduct for its members which set high professional and 
ethical standards of business. We are very encouraged by the careful thoughts and active 
engagement by the Association. Indeed, the Code of Conduct is a centrepiece that reflects 
the ambitions and aspirations of what this industry stands for. 
The  Association  has  also  collaborated  closely  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  conduct  a 
series  of  practical  training  programs  to  expand  capacity  and  knowhow  to  instil  greater 
professionalism  and  strengthening  safeguards  to  protect  the  industry  from  being  used  for 
illicit and illegal purposes. 
The  positive  changes  in  the  industry  have  not  gone  unnoticed.  The  Bank  continues  to 
observe  sustained  improvements  in  the  operations  of  licensees.  And  customers  are  now 
more  appreciative  of  the  improved  quality  of  product  and  services  offered  by  the  industry 
players.  Customers  can  now  conduct  their  transactions  with  proper  documentation  and  in 
more secure premises. The public image of the industry has certainly improved. 
What  we  have  achieved  so  far  proved  that  with  collaborative  effort,  we  can  achieve 
significant  milestones.  Our  transformation  journey  is  not  over.  It  is  long.  It  is  fraught  with 
challenges and we will encounter much passive resistance along the way. But it is a journey 
that is abound with opportunities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Expectations  and  scrutiny  of  the  industry  will  continue  to  increase,  particularly  with  the 
growing concerns over risks posed by money laundering and terrorism financing activities. 
But  we  shall  practise  proportionate  regulation. The  Bank  will  assess  risks  and  compliance 
based on the individual company’s business profile. We are confident that all licensees will 
be able to comply with the minimum standards set by the Bank. Where necessary, additional 
investment in resources should be made including, recruiting suitable talent and acquisition 
of new systems. 
Immediate priorities for the industry 
Vision for the Future 
The world we are living today has changed significantly. The old rules do not work anymore. 
New rules are continuously being formed and constantly evolving. The advent of information 
technology  has  changed  the  way  we  live  and  the  way  we  do  business.  We  are  more 
integrated with the outside world. The world is increasingly more interdependent. In ASEAN, 
we  are  expected  to  be  more  integrated  as  a  region  arising  from  economic  and  financial 
integration process. It is from this perspective that I would like to expound some ideas on 
what ought to be the immediate priorities for the industry and the Association. 
Creation of domestically strong businesses 
With the foundation laid solidly for the conduct of professional and efficient money services 
business in the industry, the aspiration is for the creation of a pool of domestically strong and 
vibrant businesses that are able to compete with the best and expand beyond the Malaysian 
shores.  Such  businesses  would  be  characterised  by  the  ability  to  deliver  a  strong  value 
proposition; and are committed to offer excellent service to their customers. 
To achieve this goal, I would like to focus on 3 immediate priorities for the industry: 
• 
Firstly, continuing to nurture a mindset change within individual companies to spur 
and sustain the progress of the industry; 
Secondly,  putting  in  place  a  comprehensive  human  capital  development  plan  to 
support strategies for the further advancement; and 
Thirdly, creating the right incentives and a strong reputation for the constant delivery 
of high quality and innovative money services. 
  Mindset change 
We  are  seeing  many  positive  changes  now  taking  place  in  the  industry.  Sustaining  this 
transformation will call for businesses to have a long-term strategic view, the perseverance, 
willingness  and  be  agile  enough  to  adjust  to  changes  in  the  operating  environment. 
Companies should think carefully where they  wish to position themselves in the long term 
and have a clear plan on how to get there. 
There might be companies that may aspire to grow and be major providers in their own lines 
of business. There might also be companies that want to position themselves as a complete 
solution  providers  or  becoming  principals  with  large  agent  networks.  And  then,  there  are 
companies that have been very successful as agents, building strong partnerships with their 
principals  while  keeping  operating  costs  low.  In  fact,  our  engagements  with  the  industry 
reveal that many agents are doing better than before in terms of business flows and profits. 
The  regulatory  framework  in  Malaysia  is  specifically  tailored  to  accommodate  all  these 
options,  supported  by  operating  guidelines  that  is  efficient  and  proportionate  to  risk.  A 
company that takes on more risk and business responsibility must be prepared to meet the 
higher requirements that reflect the scope and levels of complexity of the business, including 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the  kind  of  management  team  that  needs  to  be  in  place,  the  board’s  profile  and  level  of 
engagement and their ability to provide strategic leadership to the company. 
Companies also need to consider changes to processes as well, as investments in critical 
systems is important to support operations over the long term. Most importantly, there must 
be  a  clear  strategy  of  execution  and  an  honest  assessment  of  the  company’s  ability  to 
implement such a plan. It would be a strategic error to defer these deliberations and plans 
because  the  costs  to  be  paid  would  be  higher  if  companies  fail  to  comply  with  regulatory 
requirements. 
With time, competition within the industry will also increase. For companies that invest the 
time and energy to thinking about shaping their future, the rewards can be substantial. One 
needs to explore new frontiers in doing money services business, including forming strategic 
partnerships  with  new  and  bigger  investors  with  the  expertise  and  network  to  take  the 
company to the next level, being listed, and expanding abroad, regionally or internationally. 
Human capital development 
Human capital is a key enabler in the transformation process. Operating in an environment of 
heightened  expectations  and  competition,  calls  for  companies  to  have  the  foresight  to 
develop  strong  teams  that  have  the  knowledge,  skills  sets  and  competencies.  Companies 
ought to consider a long term human capital development. 
Based on our data, business performance in terms of growth and profitability of the industry 
has expanded and has created new employment opportunities for Malaysians. The industry 
should be able to attract young local talent and assume key roles in the company as it grows 
and expands. They should be offered attractive remuneration packages commensurate with 
their  responsibility.  They  should  also  be  provided  with  opportunities  for  training  and 
development and encouraged to contribute new ideas and offer fresh perspectives. 
I urge the industry to look at this matter seriously, and formulate strategies to attract, develop 
and retain local talent. The industry needs to reduce the level of foreign employment which 
remains relatively high at present at more than 10% of the industry total workforce. We will 
therefore be engaging with companies to reduce the level of foreign employment to no more 
than 5% by the end of this year and to less than 3% by the end of 2016. 
Accreditation for compliance officers 
In  the  area  of  talent  development,  the  industry  should  take  the  next  step  of  introducing 
professional  certification  and  accreditation  programmes  for  relevant  key  personnel.  This 
initiative will signal the strong commitment by the industry players to uphold their professional 
standards consistent with the Code of Conduct, and sends a clear message that this industry 
takes, professionalism seriously. 
The  global  scrutiny  on  measures  aimed  at  countering  money  laundering  and  terrorism 
financing  risks  has  heightened.  The  importance  of  having  in  place  strong  AML/CFT  (anti-
money laundering and counter terrorism financing), to safeguards against such risks is given. 
Immediate  attention  to  developing  and  providing  an  accreditation  programme  for  the 
compliance  officers  becomes  critical.  I  am  optimistic  that  an  accreditation  programme  for 
compliance officers can be introduced by the industry by the end of the year. 
An  accreditation  program  will  also  tie  in  well  with  plans  being  considered  by  the  Bank  to 
introduce  an  approval  framework  for  compliance  officers  for  the  industry.  This  program 
should enable companies to appoint compliance officers who have the necessary skills and 
knowledge of regulatory requirements to perform their role effectively. 
Expectation on the Association 
I have attempted to describe the industry’s operating landscape sometime in the near future. 
This  is  the future full  of  opportunities  and  can  be  realised  through  collective  efforts  of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
industry players, with the effective leadership of the Association. The industry, together with 
the Association, should set its sights beyond the domestic agenda. The Association should 
continue  to  drive  efforts  to  further  elevate  the  reputation  of  the  industry  as  a  regional 
benchmark for best practices in money services business. The successful organisation of the 
regional  conference  on  money  services  business  by  the  Association  last  year  effectively 
showcased the remarkable progress that has been achieved in the industry and generated a 
lot of interest in Malaysia’s experience. 
Building on this interest, the Association can take a lead in the establishment of a regional 
network  of  money  services  business  Associations  among  ASEAN  countries  to  forge 
cooperation  among  industry  players  in  the  region.  This  would  contribute  towards  raising 
standards more broadly across the region and unlocking the business potential in the money 
services sector within the region. The Bank stands solidly behind the Association to achieve 
this operation. 
Conclusion 
In closing, let me congratulate the Council of the Association on the significant achievements 
over the past year which would not have been possible without your commitment in time and 
resources,  and  the  strength  of  your  conviction  to  overcome  obstacles  along  the  way.  The 
Association has built a strong foundation for its important role in bringing the industry to new 
heights  with  the  full  support  of  the  industry  players  to  realise  the  shared  vision  under  the 
industry’s five-year Strategic Blueprint. We have made tremendous strides in setting a clear 
path for the future. I am confident that the best for this industry is yet to come. 
Well done to the Association on a great first year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
