  Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Building financial systems for sustainable development 
Speech  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia), at the Global Ethical Finance Forum “Building Financial Systems for Sustainable 
Development”, Edinburgh, 1 September 2015. 
 It is my distinct pleasure to speak at the Global Ethical Finance Forum here in Edinburgh. I 
would like to warmly thank the Scottish Government and the Middle East Global Advisors for 
the kind invitation for me to speak at this forum. It is a privilege to be here in the company of 
this  distinguished  and  diverse  gathering  of  professionals  from  the  various  fields  that  are 
prioritising ethical finance for sustainable development. 
The  discussion  on  ethical  finance  that  supports  sustainable  development  is  timely.  In  this 
recent  decade,  we  have  had  to  deal  with  a  financial  crisis  of  unprecedented  global 
proportions that has stemmed in part from the prevalent ethics and culture in the financial 
services  industry.  In  this  period,  we  have  also  witnessed  significant  occurrences  of 
misbehaviour  and  ethical  lapses  surface  in  the  financial  services  profession,  including  the 
manipulation of reference rates and deliberate compliance failures. Since the global financial 
crisis, we have now had several years to reflect on these weaknesses and to institute the 
much-needed  reforms  that  have  prioritised  resilience  and  stability.  Having  made  important 
progress on this front, it is timely to direct our attention to developing more enduring solutions 
that will place the financial sector firmly back in the service of society. This calls for a closer 
examination of the fundamental character of modern finance – where ethical and responsible 
finance that is strongly anchored to the real economy has a more significant role. 
My  remarks  today  will  begin  with  some  observations  on  the  evolution  of  financial  systems 
and the trends that have increased the vulnerability to financial crises, highlighting some of 
the key issues that have contributed to the breakdown of financial systems. Finally, I would 
like to take this opportunity to discuss some possibilities for the future of finance. 
Financial systems, then and now 
The development of finance has  historically been a positive and inseparable part of 
world economic growth and prosperity. There is a large body of research that points to 
the significant benefits of financial development, recognising the economic value in financial 
intermediation that mobilises savings, catalyses investment, enables an efficient allocation of 
resources,  reduces  information  asymmetries,  and  facilitates  the  management  of  risks.  The 
transformative  role  of  finance  in  economic  progress  is  evident  throughout  history.  The 
intrinsic  power  of  finance  essentially  lies  in  its  linkage  to  the  real  economy  –  that  finance 
exists to serve the real economy. As has been described, “where enterprise leads, finance 
follows”. This can be seen in the early financial innovation and growth of financial systems 
around  the  world.  In  the  17th  century  in  the  Netherlands,  the  establishment  of  the 
Amsterdam  Exchange  Bank  and  the  availability  of  instruments  such  as  bills  of  exchange 
contributed towards financing their extensive domestic and international trade. This became 
the  bedrock  upon  which  the  Netherlands  evolved  to  become  the  foremost  maritime  and 
economic power in the world during the Dutch golden age. It was also the financial revolution 
of pre-modern Britain that provided the foundation for the industrial revolution to take effect in 
the 18th to 19th centuries. 
A  more  recent  observation  unfolding  is  the  experience  of  China,  where  the  process  of 
financial intermediation has been key for the infrastructure development that has propelled 
China’s economic growth story that began in the 1980s. In the process, it has lifted millions 
from  extreme  poverty.  Though  these  are  distinct  experiences  separated  by  chasms  of 
geography and history, finance was a common and powerful component of the overall rise of 
these economies. More recently, this transformative role of finance can also be observed in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
the  many  emerging  economies  in  different  parts  of  the  world  in  the  20th  century  as  they 
transitioned  to  becoming  a  significant  and  important  component  of  the  global  economy. 
Further, as the regional and international dimension of finance increased, this globalisation of 
finance facilitated greater cross border trade and investment activities. 
In this recent two decades however, finance has progressively evolved from being a 
means to an end, to being an end itself. The role of finance shifted from being an enabler 
of  growth  to  an  engine  of  growth  in  its  own  right.  In  the  more  globalised  world  economy, 
financial  centres  also  flourished  to  become  an  important  source  of  national  income  and 
wealth. These trends however saw the start of the erosion of the linkage between finance 
and the real economy, sowing the seeds of financial activity that would become inherently 
unsustainable. In several parts of the world, finance progressively deviated from long-term 
value creation towards the pursuit of short-term returns. Banks’ trading and fee-generating 
activities became much more lucrative than traditional lending activities. This in turn spurred 
innovation  in  financial  services  that  became  more  and  more  removed  from  the  service  to 
society and the economy. During the period just prior to the global financial crisis, domestic 
credit provided by the financial sectors such as in Iceland and the US, which had previously 
averaged 48% and 149% of GDP respectively, had become decisively decoupled from, and 
had far outstripped real economic activity. Domestic credit by the financial sectors in Iceland 
and the US had by 2007, risen sharply to 299% and 236% of GDP respectively. 
The experience of the global financial crisis highlights the potential for the benefits of 
finance to be dramatically reversed, resulting in destructive rather than constructive 
effects  of  finance.  Several  studies  have  shown  that  the  marginal  returns  to  growth  from 
finance  diminish  at  high  levels  of  financial development.  In  other  words,  there can  be  “too 
much  finance”  where  the  costs  to  growth  and  stability  outweigh  the  benefits  of  financial 
development.  Similar  to  other  booming  industries,  the  financial  sector  at  the  height  of  its 
exuberance  showed  an  overinvestment  of  resources  in  terms  of  capital  including  human 
capital  which  only  became  apparent  after  the  bust.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  has 
become clear that in the lead up to the global financial crisis, many financial systems were 
close to, or had long surpassed, the point where bigger was better. 
The breakdown of financial systems 
The  gradual  severance  of  the  link  between  finance  and  the  real  economy,  in  my  view, 
represents the foremost factor that has weakened the positive role of finance and increased 
the potential for financial instability. As witnessed during the recent crisis, the degradation of 
finance  eventually  rendered  its  noble  economic  function  of  intermediation  as  ineffective, 
causing  greater  harm  than  good  to  the  economic  growth  process.  The  various  factors 
contributing  to  the  recent  crisis  have  already  been  extensively  researched  and  discussed, 
highlighting that in most cases finance had become highly disconnected from real, productive 
economic activity. Additionally, is the role that it had in altering the relationship between the 
growth  and  distribution  of  risks  created  distortions  in  which  the  gains  from  excessive  risk-
taking were privatised among the few while the losses were socialised among the many. 
The abuse of securitisation and the “originate and distribute” model was a particularly telling 
display of this malaise, severing the link between risk-taking agents and those who ultimately 
bore the risk. While intended to facilitate better risk management by transferring risk from the 
banks to a diversified set of investors, this distancing gave rise to problems in the incentive 
structure  and  in  the  availability  of  information.  There  was  a  clear  breakdown  in  the 
relationship between creditor and borrower. Banks were essentially incentivised to focus on 
aggressively  originating  loans  which  were  of  compromised  quality  due  to  lowered 
underwriting standards. Investors of such bundled risks had then become far removed from 
their  origins.  Information  was  no  longer  transparent  and  risks  could  no  longer  be  fully 
understood.  Economic  agents  seeking  larger  returns  were  in  turn  encouraged  to  achieve 
them through greater leverage, thereby amplifying the vulnerabilities of the financial system 
and wider economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
Much  attention  has  also  focused  on  the  misaligned  incentives  of  financial  services 
professionals  as  reflected  by  the  compensation  structures  that  rewarded  short-term 
performance and inadequate reprimand for overzealous risk-taking. This, I believe, was also 
symptomatic  of  the  growing  disembodiment  of  finance  from  its  consumers  and  the  wider 
economy.  When  social  bonds  are  reduced  to  just  profit  measures,  it  provides  a  weak 
foundation for sustainable finance. Outcomes for finance need to be measured based on end 
services to the real economy, reflected for example, by an entrepreneur’s successes or the 
financial well-being of retail clients. The detachment of finance from its function in serving the 
economy,  results  in  clients  being  viewed  as  opportunities  for  extracting  value  and 
transactions  as  bets  on  financial  outcomes.  The  prevalence  of  mis-selling  of  complex 
financial products exemplifies this shift in trend. 
financier-client 
that  strengthens 
transparency,  and 
Future finance: re-anchoring finance to the real economy 
Allow me now turn to some of the imperatives for re-anchoring finance to the real economy. 
Firstly  and  most  critically,  future  finance  needs  to  have  stronger  links  to  the  real 
economy by effectively having an intermediation role that is in the service to society. 
Financial systems have to be both value-adding and value-based – value-adding, in that 
they  contribute  meaningfully  by  intermediating  and  facilitating  real  economic  activity,  and 
value-based in that they aim to benefit society. Such finance that is value-adding and value-
based  is  deeply  needed  in  the  global  economy.  Many  parts  of  the  world,  notably  the 
developing  world,  require  large  amounts  of  funding  to  address  infrastructure  development. 
Financial  inclusion  also  remains  an  important  agenda  to  uplift  the  living  standards  of  the 
marginalised segments of society in our global community. 
Secondly,  a  functioning  regime  practising  value-adding  and  value-based  finance 
needs to be built on a set of universal principles that will create a sustainable model 
for mainstreaming such positive finance in the global financial system. A regime that is 
deep-rooted  in  genuine  productive  activity  that  discourages  excessive  leverage  that 
emphasises 
relationships  would 
cumulatively be a positive force for the global financial system. Indeed, these are some of the 
core underpinnings of Islamic finance which has already garnered significance in many parts 
of  the  world.  The  central  tenet  in  Islamic  finance  requires  that  financial  transactions  be 
supported  by  genuine  economic  activity,  reinforcing  the  link  between  finance  and  value 
creation  and  aligning  financial  innovation  to  productive  economic  activity.  Additionally,  the 
emphasis  on  risk-sharing  in  Islamic  finance  strengthens  the  incentives  for  participants  to 
screen  and  monitor  transactions  for  economic  viability  and  risks,  and  to  institute  the 
governance process. In Malaysia, our efforts to widen the reach of such value-adding and 
value-based finance include the development of a multi-bank platform to match funds from 
potential investors with entrepreneurial ventures in the real sector. 
Thirdly, the efforts to strengthen the supply and demand of value-adding and value-
based finance would contribute significantly towards re-anchoring the global financial 
system to the real economy. On the supply side, the focus on professionalism, ethics and 
the  quality  of  talent  would  contribute  to  drive  for  positive  changes  in the  financial  services 
industry. In Malaysia, we have initiated the Financial Services Professional Board, launched 
in  2014,  comprising  of  an  independent  group  of  eminent  experts  from  around  the  world  is 
currently refining a voluntary code of ethics that may be internationally applicable across the 
financial services industry. 
A meaningful change in the culture of financial institutions requires a true commitment from 
the  industry.  A  display  of  such  commitment  through  the  measurement  and  disclosure  of  a 
financial institution’s non-financial performance, such as its impact in social, environmental 
and governance metrics, can be a powerful tool for change. In Malaysia, such a proposal is 
being developed for Islamic financial institutions to disclose their Corporate Value-Intent, a 
performance  measure  their  commitment  to  value  creation.  Greater  consumer  activism  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
demands  for  more  consumer-focused  corporate  information  reflects  the  increased demand 
by consumers for institutions to account for their behaviour and values. 
In  terms  of  the  demand  for  ethical  and  responsible  finance,  greater  awareness  among 
consumers  and  investors  on  the  availability  and  viability  of  such  positive  finance  is  also 
needed,  including  among  governments,  corporates  and  the  retail  market.  Education, 
engagement,  incentives  and  the  alignment  of  legal  and  regulatory  frameworks  on  the 
utilisation of such finance will be important to achieve this. 
Finally,  is  the  need  to  foster  strong  leadership  at  the  global  level  that  can  have  an 
advocacy  and  facilitative  role  in  resolving  barriers  and  bringing  together  different 
stakeholders to work together in a coordinated and cohesive manner. The Responsible 
Finance Institute, initiated as a think tank based in the United Kingdom, that brings together 
responsible finance experts from around the world and has a unique role for this endeavour. 
The  focus  on  collaboration  and  convergence  between  the  diverse  fields  of  ethical  and 
responsible finance has great potential to harness the best practices of positive finance in its 
various forms to collectively wield a powerful force in shaping future finance. 
Moving  forward,  stable and  sustainable  development  can  be  best  served  by  re-connecting 
the current gulf between finance and value creation that is reinforced by bringing benefit to 
society.  With  the  financial  reforms  by  the  international  community  now  much  in  place,  the 
imperative for future finance is not only by becoming stable and resilient but also becoming a 
deep anchor to its bedrock, the real economy and generating a positive benefit to the greater 
society. 
With that, allow me to wish you an engaging and productive forum. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
