 Glenn Stevens: The long run 
  Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Business Economists (ABE) Annual Dinner, Sydney, 24 November 2015. 
I thank Emily Perry for assistance in compiling these remarks.  
 Thank you for the opportunity to address you this evening.  
You've spent all afternoon talking about the near-term outlook. No doubt there was a lively 
discussion and some points of debate. I would hazard a guess that most forecasts have the 
Australian economy continuing to expand at a moderate pace, with inflation low and the rate 
of unemployment around 6 per cent. The points of debate might be around whether, and when, 
growth might speed up a bit or slow down; whether inflation would be broadly consistent with 
the 2–3 per cent target or a bit on the low side; and whether unemployment could start to drift 
down, or instead, might resume its drift up.  
The Reserve Bank released its own views about the outlook a few weeks ago. These left the 
forecast for growth about where it was before. Over the next couple of years, as the drag from 
the  decline  in  mining  investment  starts  to  lessen  (mainly  in  2016/17),  and  the  effects  of 
assumed  low  levels  of  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  continue  to  accrue,  growth  is 
thought likely to pick up a bit.  
A number of data points over recent months suggest that prospects for firmer conditions in the 
non-mining economy are improving. Business surveys indicate that firms report conditions to 
be,  if  anything,  above  their  long-term  average  in  some  key  sectors.  Firms  seem  to  have 
stepped  up  their  hiring.  Job  vacancies  have  been  increasing,  hours  worked  have  been 
increasing  and  employment  growth,  even  before  the  most  recent  month's  data,  had 
strengthened  noticeably  over  the  past  year.  Labour  force  participation  has  risen,  and  the 
unemployment rate has been stable. This is supporting income growth as the terms of trade 
decline works its way through the economy.  
The Bank did lower its forecast for inflation a little. This was based on an assessment that the 
latest reading contained some signal, not just noise. As in the case of many other countries, 
the effects of a decline in the exchange rate are proving a bit slow to come through. And slow 
wage growth makes for a low underlying rate of increase in domestic costs. On this basis, the 
Board  concluded  that  inflation  would  not  be  a  barrier  to  further  easing  of  monetary  policy, 
should that be useful to support demand.  
But there is little numerical precision that can be attached to these rather qualitative views. For 
a few years now the Bank has sought to emphasise the idea of the outlook being probabilistic. 
The “central forecast” is simply the modal point of a distribution of possible outcomes. It is 
more likely, in our judgement, than any other single outcome, but the likelihood of that particular 
outcome is in fact not that high at all.1 We have tried to convey this sense of imprecision by 
publishing  “fan  charts”  and  by  putting ranges  in tables for forecast  variables  over  horizons 
longer than a couple of quarters. The point of this is to try to get people to focus less on the 
central number and more on the set of issues that accompany the forecasts.  
It seems that we have not been very successful on that score. There still seems to be inordinate 
attention paid to changes in the central forecast that are often no more than a couple of tenths 
of a percentage point. I've debated at times with our staff whether we should leave the central 
                                                
1  
If, for example, the ‘central’ forecast for underlying inflation two quarters ahead is 2 per cent, the statistical 
likelihood of an outcome of 2 per cent +/– 0.125 per cent, is about 25 per cent, if forecast errors are assumed 
to be drawn from the same distribution as in the past. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   line off the fan charts altogether. The response is that people would simply back it out of the 
charts. Likewise, the desire I often feel to put wider ranges in the forecasts would probably still 
result in people just computing the mid-point of the range, ascertaining whether that had moved 
slightly and offering interpretation of that change.  
It's a natural human tendency to focus overly on small changes, perhaps because it allows us 
to maintain the comfortable illusion that things are predictable and controllable. But this fervent 
desire for precision is not supported by any demonstrated accuracy of economic forecasts. Its 
cousin, a hankering for policy fine-tuning, is barely, if at all, better supported by the historical 
outcomes of economic policymaking.  
While small forecast changes get a lot of attention, the far more important question is whether 
we  have  recognised  and  understood  the  big forces  at  work.  Even  if  we  cannot  predict  the 
outcomes with great accuracy, an understanding of these forces ought to help us get policy 
responses roughly right. And that, in the real world, is probably about as much as we dare 
hope.  
Right now the big forces include:  
• 
for  Australia, the  closing  chapters  of  a  very  large  and  long-running terms  of trade 
event, with all that means in terms of economic adjustment. This coincides with a 
household sector no longer being in a position to play a major role in leading growth 
by significantly increasing its leverage, because it had already done that in the past;  
a global economy growing but only moderately, affected by considerable structural 
change  and  facing  legacy  effects  of  debt,  arising  from  a  previous  period  of  over-
confidence and under-appreciation of risk;  
a  disinflationary  or  deflationary  environment  for  the  production  of  goods  and 
commodities, and even some services, accompanied by unusually low rates of wages 
growth;  
extremely low returns on safe financial assets, as central bank actions have removed 
a  significant  proportion  of  these  assets  from  the  market,  and  have  encouraged 
investors to accept interest rate risk on the remainder by providing “guidance”, leading 
to:  
high and rising valuations on existing fixed assets, including dwellings, around the 
world, but not so much, thus far, in the way of new capital formation by most existing 
businesses in the “real” economy.  
    To this list of “conventional” forces we might add:  
• 
the “disruption” of the increasing application of digital technology, which may mean, 
among other things, that growth in sales, capital formation and returns to capital are 
happening in entities and activities we don't measure very well – or at all.  
Many of these sorts of forces are low-frequency in their nature. Most of the ups and downs in 
the time series from month to month, or even year to year, on which we all expend so much 
energy are just temporary fluctuations around these longer-run trends.  
If numerical forecasts can't be very dependable, are we – the economics community – much 
good at predicting these long-run forces? If we look back a decade, to the sorts of things that 
occupied much attention, the evidence is mixed.  
By the middle of last decade, we had certainly noticed the change in household borrowing and 
spending  behaviour,  understood  that  it  was  important  and  wondered  how  long  it  could 
continue, and what might cause it to alter course again. In that respect, we were at least looking 
in one of the right places.  
People  had  also  sensed  that  the  emergence  of  China  was  starting  to  have  important 
implications for Australia and the global economy. That said, the strength and duration of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   “China boom” tended to be under-estimated. In forecasts made over a succession of years, 
people routinely tended to expect that the strong growth then being observed in China would 
slow.  Likewise,  through  most  of  the  period  in  which  Australia's  terms  of  trade  were  rising, 
forecasters routinely tended to call a near-term peak followed by a decline - and were wrong 
in  most  years.2  Even  those  resource  companies  that  would  eventually  make  massive 
investments on the back of the rise in commodity prices were initially sceptical. Now, as this 
period  of  exceptional,  and  not  well  forecast,  Chinese  growth  has  ended  and  we  face  less 
spectacular outcomes, a few have been surprised on the downside.  
A  decade  ago,  everyone  was  celebrating  the  “great  moderation”  –  that  period  of  reduced 
macroeconomic  volatility,  good  average  growth  and  low  inflation.  This  was  regarded  as  a 
success of macroeconomic policy. It was also thought that the development of modern financial 
tools,  with  fairly  light  regulation,  had  helped  us  to  understand,  unbundle  and  disperse  risk 
around the system. To be fair, there were some voices questioning compressed risk spreads, 
leverage and so on. Some worried about the complex interactions between the various players 
and how the system would cope in a stressed environment. Some wondered whether apparent 
stability would lead people to take on leverage to the point where it would threaten that very 
stability.3 A few presciently placed financial bets against the prevailing trend. But, overall, very 
few foresaw either the severity of the crisis that would unfold or the longevity of its adverse 
economic effects.  
If we look at what featured in most discussions about risks to global growth at the time, we find 
that the so-called “global imbalances” were prominent. It was not uncommon to hear people 
worry that markets would at some point decline to “fund” the US current account deficit, leading 
to a crash in the US dollar.  
Yet  it  wasn't  the  global  imbalances  that  caused  a  crisis.  It  was  the  implosion  of  complex 
financial products, against the backdrop of excessive leverage, that ushered in the crisis. It 
was the drying up of dollar funding liquidity in the financial systems of several major countries 
that propagated it. The onset of the crisis saw a shortage of dollars in the market, not a glut. 
And the “global imbalances” continue today, though they have diminished in size.  
A decade ago, Japan was experiencing deflation, “ZIRP” – zero interest rate policy – and “QE” 
– quantitative easing. People offered various analyses of this; many opined that it should not 
be  that  hard  for  the  central  bank  to  return  to  inflation,  by  sufficiently  aggressive  action. 
Thoughtful  people  pondered  the  difficulties  Japanese  policymakers  confronted  and  hoped 
never to find themselves in that situation.  
Ten years on, policy interest rates have been effectively zero in the United States, the United 
Kingdom and Europe for quite a long time. They are still zero in Japan. “Quantitative Easing” 
by one name or another has become more widespread. Central bank balance sheets in these 
cases are a multiple of their sizes in the mid 2000s. I recall few, if any, who a decade ago saw 
that outcome as having a significant probability.  
While  outright  deflation  is  still  comparatively  rare,  inflation  being  a  bit  too  low  relative  to 
announced objectives seems to be not uncommon. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion that, in 
practice, it is more difficult than the textbook says it should be for a central bank (by itself) to 
create inflation, when other powerful forces are at work. For economists and policymakers 
                                                
2   See Health, A (2015) ‘The Terms of Trade: Outlook and Implications’, Address to the Resources and Energy 
Workshop hosted by the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science, Canberra, 20 November. 
3   On these points, see for example Geithner, T (2006), ‘Hedge Funds and Derivatives and Their Implications for 
the Financial System’, Remarks at the Distinguished Lecture 2006, Hong Kong, 15 September (available at 
<https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2006/gei060914.html>) and Stevens, G (2006), ‘Risks and 
the Financial System’, Remarks in response to Distinguished Lecture by Mr Timothy Geithner, Hong Kong, 15 
September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   trained from the 1960s to the 1990s, when the task was always to stop inflation rising and/or 
to get it down, this is a remarkable outcome.  
One  area  in  which  good  long-term thinking  was  being  done  a decade  ago  was  population 
ageing. Australian work in this field foreshadowed adverse long-run trends in the fiscal balance. 
And we can find GDP growth projections from Intergenerational Reports from a decade ago 
that put average growth between 2010/11 and 2015/16 at 2¾ per cent, noticeably below the 
growth  rates  being  observed  at  the  time  this  projection  was  made.  That  was  not  a  bad 
“forecast”, actually: the outcome is likely to be about 2½ per cent. This is despite the fact that 
the people who made this estimate obviously could not have had any knowledge of many of 
the non-demographic forces that would be at work over the relevant years.  
One can't help but observe that, in common discussion about the economic outlook, we too 
often ignore the influence of demography. But it may be that demographic forces are a common 
factor behind some of the most important “big force” developments.  
It seems likely that the characteristics of the “baby boom” cohort – its relative size and different 
propensities from those of other generations – have affected saving and investment choices, 
housing markets, asset values, leverage and so on through time. Further effects no doubt will 
occur (not necessarily in the same direction).4  
What then might be some of the “big forces” at work over the next decade?  
Perhaps unwisely, I shall chance my arm at some ideas. In so doing, I am comforted by the 
very low likelihood that I shall have to return to a future ABE forecasting conference to explain 
why these prognostications were wrong!  
It is not very controversial to suggest that China will grow more slowly on average than in the 
past  decade,  but  it  will  still  be  a  big  deal given  its  overall  size  and  the  extent  of transition 
required in its growth strategy. China's financial weight will be increasingly apparent in markets. 
Those days, like in late August this year, when US and global markets are roiled by some 
event in China, will probably become more common. The growth transition towards services 
will have implications not just for the value of resource shipments from Australia, but for the 
Asian regional manufacturing chain.  
But  China's  demographics  are  not  favourable.  To  be  sure,  the  continuing  process  of 
urbanisation means that the labour available for manufacturing or services production may 
grow for a while. But, overall, China's total working-age population will be shrinking over the 
years  ahead.  Contrast  this  with  India,  another  large  country,  but  with  vastly  different 
demographics.  India's  population  of  working  age  will  exceed  China's  within  a  decade  and 
continue to grow.5 So India should become much more prominent in our conversation about 
the global economy and our own. Are we intellectually prepared for that?  
The United States will still be a very large economy and, perhaps more important, still a leading 
source  of  innovation  and  dynamism.  It  will  probably  retain  its  current  position  of  global 
leadership in international economic governance, though much depends on how two political 
establishments – the US's and China's - behave, including towards each other.  
There are no prizes for guessing that the share of services in most economies will continue to 
increase.  Health  and  aged  care  are  obvious  areas  for  expansion  –  another  effect  of 
demographics. It may be that jobs will be “robotised”. But on the other hand, in the long run we 
                                                
4   See,  for  example,  Kulish,  M,  K  Smith  and  C  Kent  (2006),  ‘Ageing,  Retirement  and  Savings:  A  General 
Equilibrium Analysis’, RBA Research Discussion Paper 2006-06. 
5   The UN projects India's total population to surpass China's in seven years and the working-age population to 
surpass China's in 2025. The UN projects India's working-age population to increase by 250 million by 2040, to 
1.11 billion (compared with 866 million in China). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   may  need  that to  some extent.  Demographic factors  suggest  strongly  that,  all  other  things 
equal, the problem isn't going to be a shortage of jobs, but instead a shortage of workers.  
‘Digital disruption’ will continue. Some of this will be faddish and no great aid to productivity. 
But other elements will mean fundamental changes to business models. It's already obvious 
that models that rely on having an information advantage over a customer are struggling as 
information becomes ubiquitous. Models that can profit by using more information about the 
customer will be advantaged – up to the point at which customers decline to reveal any more 
about themselves. The issue of trust will be key.  
On that note, I suspect the already-considerable resources devoted to IT security will grow 
further as awareness increases of cyber risk and its consequences. Maybe IT security will 
need to get as inconvenient as airport security and more costly – a whole new meaning of the 
term “digital disruption”. It remains to be seen whether, at some point, the potential risks of 
further connectedness might be judged to outweigh the benefits. There are, for example, some 
organisations  sufficiently  concerned  about  cyber  risk  that  they  construct  a  duplicated  IT 
architecture – one connected to the world, the other sealed off. The issue of trust in cyber 
space may turn out to be every bit as problematic as that of trust in the financial system.  
My guess is that global interest rates are still going to be very low for a good part of the decade 
ahead. Clearly there is a likelihood that the Federal Reserve will raise the fed funds rate next 
month or, if not then, pretty soon. Once it does, intense speculation will begin about a question 
much more important than the timing of the first increase, namely the timing of the second 
(and,  by  extension,  the  future  path  of  the  funds  rate).  But  it  seems  likely  that  the  pace  of 
increase  will  be  very  gradual. The  ECB  and the  Bank  of Japan  are  a  long  way  from  even 
thinking about higher interest rates; the ECB is openly contemplating further easing. So the 
average policy rate in major money centres may be very low for quite a while.  
In a low interest rate world, the problems of providing retirement incomes will become ever 
more  prominent. The  very  low  level  of  yields  on fixed  income  assets  means  that  it  is  very 
expensive today to purchase a secure stream of future income, which is what someone who 
is retiring is usually seeking. And there are more of such people, living longer.  
The retiree can of course respond to this by holding more of her portfolio in dividend-paying 
stocks – accepting more risk. She may hope for a dividend stream that is fairly stable from 
year to year but that tends to grow over time. It certainly seems that many Australian listed 
corporates feel the pressure from shareholders to deliver that, even some whose earnings are 
inherently volatile.  
Can  the  corporate  sector  realistically  promise  growing  dividends  over  a  long  period?  Not 
without being prepared to take the risk on investment in new products, processes and markets. 
How much of that risk an older shareholder base will allow boards and managements of listed 
entities to take is an important question.  
Overall, in a world where a higher proportion of the population wants to be retired and living 
(even if only in part) off the return on their savings, those returns are likely, all other things 
equal, to be lower. Part and parcel of the same adjustment may be higher real wages for the 
smaller proportion of the population that is working. These changes, driven by demographics, 
may require some adjustment to our collective thinking about what is “normal”, not just for rates 
of return on assets but also for returns to labour.  
My final, fairly uncontroversial predictions:  
• 
The business cycle will continue. There will be economic downturns from time to time. 
If one of those turns out to be a big one, it will be very new experience for quite a lot 
of  Australians.  Close  to half the  workforce  has  never  seen  really  high,  nationwide 
unemployment.  A  lot  of  people  in  business  have,  I  suspect,  not  seen  how  tough 
conditions can become when virtually every industry and region is contracting. That 
they have not seen this is a good thing – in the sense that it results from the fact that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     we have not a really serious downturn for a long time now. But if one comes, it will be 
a shock.  
A decade from now, I suspect the art of economic forecasting won't have changed 
much. In my 35 years as a maker, observer and user of forecasts, I think forecasts 
have improved. Part of that has come from learning more about how economies work. 
But a lot of it, I suspect, has come from what could be described as improved “now-
casting”: finding ways of assimilating a host of disparate pieces of information to judge 
more accurately what the economy has been doing in the very recent past. (That's 
probably where “big data” potentially has some use.) That provides a better “jumping 
off”  point  for  the  forecast  profile,  which  is  important  because  most  revisions  to 
numerical forecasts for annual growth or inflation still seem to come from surprise 
about  the  current  and  most  recent  previous  quarter.  When  all  is  said  and  done, 
however, it remains the case that “forecasting is hard, especially about the future”.6  
But, finally, human nature won't change. That means that we, as human beings, will 
be irresistibly drawn to those who claim to be able to forecast the future, beat the 
market, and give us the illusion of certainty and control.  
So there will continue to be interest in forecasts, and the ABE forecasting conference will, I'm 
sure, go from strength to strength.  
Thank you.  
                                                
6   The UN projects India's total population to surpass China's in seven years and the working-age population to 
surpass China's in 2025. The UN projects India's working-age population to increase by 250 million by 2040, to 
1.11 billion (compared with 866 million in China). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
