   Stefan Gerlach: The Central Bank of Ireland’s macro prudential policy 
Address by Mr Stefan Gerlach, Deputy Governor (Central Banking) of the Central Bank of 
Ireland, to the Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland, Dublin, 15 October 2015. 
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Ireland’s website: Slides (PDF). 
 Introduction1 
It is a great honour to be here this afternoon and to participate in your Annual Conference. I 
am particularly pleased to have the opportunity to talk about macro prudential policy, which 
promotes something that we all desire – financial stability. 
The macro prudential policy measures that the Central Bank introduced some nine months 
ago – that is, the loan-to-value (LTV) and loan-to-income (LTI) ratios for residential property 
lending – have been widely commented on. I think it is fair to say that, overall, the comments 
have been fairly balanced – they have been criticised by some observers but supported by 
others, although admittedly the critics may have gotten more play in the public debate. 
I think it is desirable that policy measures that the Central Bank takes are subject to public 
debate. It is also fully proper that we in the Central Bank are asked to explain the background 
and rationale for the decisions that we take, so invitations such as today’s should be accepted 
eagerly. 
Background 
It is perhaps useful for me to start by recalling the background to the policy measures, which 
were introduced to increase the resilience of the banking and household sectors to the property 
market and to reduce the risk of bank credit and house price spirals from developing in the 
future. 
Ireland experienced in the last decade a property boom-bust cycle of the most severe type. 
The aftermath has been protracted and painful. While the economy is now recovering strongly, 
public  and  private  indebtedness  remains  very  high  and  the  return  to  growth  is  very  much 
helped by the exceptionally low level of interest rates which help to reduce the burden of debt. 
One can’t help but worry about what would happen if interest rates rose sharply. 
During the boom, property prices rose extremely fast, increasing collateral values and reducing 
the perceived riskiness of mortgage loans. Massive construction activity and heavy investment 
in  housing  and  commercial  property  led  to  rapid  economic  growth,  which  reduced 
unemployment rates and in turn further reduced the perceived riskiness of mortgage lending. 
But we now know that lending standards slipped in a dangerous way during the boom. 
The subsequent downturn was extremely costly in social terms as unemployment rates soared. 
Net emigration resumed and reached over 155,000 during the period 2010–2015.2 It was also 
very  costly  in  economic  terms  although  precisely  how  costly  is  difficult  to  calculate  with 
certainty. Nevertheless, it is clear that this was one of the most expensive financial crises in 
history when measured relative to GDP. 
The collapse of Government tax collections and the development of a massive public sector 
deficit led to concerns in capital markets about the sovereign’s ability to service the debt. In 
                                                
1  
2   Central Bank of Ireland calculations based on data from the Central Statistics Office. 
I would like to thank Amelia Dennigan and Rebecca Stuart for their help in preparing this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
turn,  that  made  it  necessary  to  stabilise  Government  finances  through  sharp  cutbacks  in 
spending and increases in taxes. Overall, the property bubble led to huge losses of income 
and public services, in many cases hitting those most vulnerable in society. It is essential that 
we never permit another credit-fuelled property bubble to develop. 
Why did banks engage in lending that we now know was exceptionally risky? One part of the 
answer is that property loans appear to be of little risk in a situation of rising housing prices – 
if the borrower becomes unable to service the loan, the property can always be sold off at a 
price  above  the  purchase  price  and  the  lender  repaid,  leaving  some  capital  gain  for  the 
borrower. This reduces prudence on the part of both borrowers and lenders. 
However, in an environment in which property prices are falling and borrowers fall into negative 
equity, loans that previously appeared of little risk can quickly turn problematic. We now know 
that  lending  standards  were  far  too  lax  in  the  upswing  –  many  borrowers  experienced 
difficulties servicing their loans, in particular those loans made at higher LTV and LTI ratios, 
when the housing boom turned to bust. For example, loans originated at the peak of the boom 
with LTVs between 80–90 per cent and LTI multiples of 5–5.5 experienced default rates of 
around 23 per cent and 20 per cent respectively.3 This contrasts to loans issued originated 
prior to the peak with lower LTV and LTI ratios, which suffered default rates of around 12 per 
cent or less, that is, they were half as risky. 
The risk of bubbles 
But that was then and this is now – surely we have learned our lessons and there is little risk 
of a repetition of the years of imprudent lending? Two factors suggest to me that we must 
always be on the lookout for risky lending. 
First, there are good reasons to worry that borrowers and lenders systematically underestimate 
the riskiness of housing. In preparing these remarks, I looked at data4 on new house prices, 
including apartments, between 1970 and 2014. Since Ireland experienced very high inflation 
in the 1970s, I looked at these prices relative to the consumer price index.5  
What did I expect to find? I expected to see that the attraction to housing here in Ireland is 
partially because of the rapid capital gains that can be reaped in that way. That does not seem 
to be the case at all – on average real house prices rose about 2 per cent per annum in this 
45 year period. 
So if buying your own housing was seen as so desirable, it must have been either because 
there were large tax advantages to owning your own property or because the rental market in 
Ireland was seen as being unable to provide satisfactory housing. This suggests that the macro 
prudential  policies  might  highlight  problems  that  other  policies,  such  as  improving  the 
functioning of the rental market, are better placed to address. 
I also expected to find that buying a house is low risk. But also here I was surprised by what I 
found –in 17 of 44 years (or in 38 per cent of the sample), real house prices fell. 
Of course, no one owns a house for a year. If we instead look at ten-year holding periods, 
property prices fell in 9 of 35 holding periods or in 26 per cent of the sample. Indeed, the last 
half century of data suggests that a good rule of thumb is that buyers run a 30 per cent risk 
that a property will lose value in real terms over the next five years. 
The second reason why I believe that there is always a potential for housing bubbles to develop 
is that banks are concerned with maintaining market share. That makes them hesitant to cut 
                                                
3   Hallissey et al. (2014). 
4   Department of the Environment, Community and Local Government. 
5   Central Statistics Office. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
lending even if they grow worried about credit risk. Talking about a somewhat different issue, 
the CEO of major international financial firm said famously just before the financial crisis broke 
out:6 “When the music stops, in terms of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the 
music is playing, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing.” Withdrawing early from 
an inflating bubble can lead a financial institution to lose market share and profitability. By 
contrast, suffering the consequences of a deep downturn in the company of others is, perhaps, 
less worrisome. After all, collective mistakes may be forgiven and forgotten quickly. 
Macro prudential policy 
Given  the  catastrophic costs  of  credit-fuelled  housing  bubbles,  central  banks  and financial 
regulators across the world have introduced what is known as “macro prudential policy.” I think 
of that as policies  – other than interest rates – that restrict the financial system’s ability to 
extend credit. One benefit of these tools is that they can be used in a focussed way, targeting 
only those types of lending that are considered particularly risky. 
Macro-prudential policies for property lending fall into two broad categories. The first comprises 
measures that enhance bank resilience by using capital and liquidity regulations. The second 
comprises tools that affect the credit terms offered to borrowers. The latter measures are the 
focus of my speech today. 
As you know, the Central Bank introduced LTV and LTI ratios in February this year. The LTV 
limit restricts the amount one can borrow as a proportion of the value of the property and the 
LTI limit restricts the amount one can borrow as a multiple of one’s income. 
Such limits have been common in Asia, and more recently gained prominence in Europe. For 
example, Norway and Sweden introduced limits on LTV ratios of 85 per cent for new residential 
mortgage lending, while in 2014 the UK introduced an LTI cap of 4.5 times new lending. Since 
the  beginning  of  this  year  the  Czech  Republic  introduced  recommendations  on  mortgage 
lending while Estonia introduced an LTV limit of 85 per cent for new housing loans. Looking 
beyond Europe, both Canada and New Zealand have LTV caps in place. 
Although  this  list  is  by  no  means  exhaustive,  it  will  give  you  an  idea  of  the  increasing 
importance being placed on macro prudential measures. 
You may ask why these rules are suddenly introduced. Of course, the recent global financial 
crisis  is  one reason.  But,  historically,  such  rules  were  not  needed  because  banks’  lending 
practices were conservative. For instance, here in Ireland, prior to the 1990s, finance for private 
house purchases was provided more or less exclusively by building societies, which required 
borrowers to save a deposit, typically around 20 per cent of the value of the property. Mortgage 
LTI  ratios  prior  to  the  mid-1990s  were  roughly  2,  with  LTI  ratios  above  2.5  effectively  not 
permitted by building societies. While these were internal rules, they were not dissimilar in 
intent  to  the  current  macro-prudential  regulations.  Indeed,  when  I  speak  to  people  who 
purchased their first home 30 years ago or so, I get the sense that our new rules appear merely 
to bring back some aspects of the banking practices of old. 
The measures 
So what measures have we introduced? As already mentioned, we have introduced limits on 
LTV and LTI ratios. 
The precise LTV limit depends on whether you are buying a principal dwelling home or a buy-
to-let property. If it is the latter, you can borrow up to 70 per cent of the property’s value. 
                                                
6   See Nakamoto (2007) for the full interview with Citigroup’s then chief executive Chuck Prince. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
However, if you are buying a principal dwelling home, the limit depends on whether or not you 
are a first time buyer. If you are a first time buyer, a 90 per cent LTV ratio applies on the first 
€220,000 of the value of the property and an 80 per cent LTV ratio applies thereafter. For non-
first time buyers, an 80 per cent LTV applies. Turning to LTIs, a limit of 3.5 times gross annual 
income applies to all new lending for principal dwelling homes while mortgages for buy-to-lets 
are exempt. Borrowers in negative equity are exempt from all regulations. 
Furthermore, banks are provided with some discretion to exceed these limits. In the case of 
principal dwelling homes, banks are permitted to lend above the LTV limits but by no more 
than 15 per cent of the total amount lent. This limit is 10 per cent for buy-to-let properties. As 
for the LTI limit, this should be exceeded by no more than 20 per cent of the total amount lent. 
This leeway is important because it means that banks can’t simply apply the macro prudential 
rules in lieu of proper credit analysis. Furthermore, it provides a way for banks to go beyond 
the limits for borrowers that they consider credit worthy, including first-time buyers. 
While  public  opinion  on  these  measures  seems  broadly  balanced,  it  is  important  that  we 
consider critical views particularly carefully. As a starting point, it is useful to recall that the 
measures are intended to reduce the amount of high LTV/LTI lending, which the crisis has 
shown to be particularly risky as I just discussed. Few commentators have argued that we 
have  overestimated  the  risks  associated  with  such  lending,  or  that  reducing  risks  is  not  a 
worthwhile endeavour. 
Instead, most of those that criticise the measures appear to feel that they are disproportionate, 
that is, given their benefits in terms of risk reduction, they have too detrimental effects on the 
property market. In principle, that is a reasonable argument to which I will now turn. 
Direct effects 
Unfortunately, it is still too early for a careful review of the direct effect of the rules – which 
works through banks’ lending practices – on the property market. That is so for three reasons. 
First, the measures were introduced only nine months ago, in February 2015. Therefore, any 
data concerning new lending in H1 2015 will mostly contain mortgages that were approved 
prior to the introduction of the regulations, given that banks allow approvals to last up to nine 
months. Indeed, it may well be that these measures have only started to affect lending recently. 
Consequently, it will take some time before new lending consists entirely of loans falling under 
the scope of the regulations. 
Second, banks’ compliance with the measures will only be assessed after lending data for the 
period to  end-December  2015  has  been  submitted.  Before that  date  we  will  have  no  hard 
evidence on how the measures have impacted on bank lending. However, if anything, my 
suspicion  is  that  banks,  not  unexpectedly,  might  have  needed  some  time  to  become  fully 
acquainted with the rules and to introduce them in their lending practices. We will know more 
in a few months’ time. 
Third,  it  is  important  to  note  that  in  2013,  LTI  ratios  at  or  below  3.5  were  the  norm  and 
comprised around 83 per cent of new lending. 
Similarly, lending at LTVs greater than 90 per cent was circa 15 per cent of all new lending in 
2013. 
Thus,  the  measures  were  broadly  compatible  with  actual  lending  practices  and  therefore 
unlikely to have large immediate effects on credit availability. However, as the percentage of 
loans with an LTV ratio between 80–90 per cent was increasing and rapid house price growth 
was emerging, the introduction of the measures was timely. 
Overall, it is clear that any review of the measures themselves can only be carried out once 
sufficient time has passed for us to have the necessary data to analyse their effects. It is also 
worth recalling that while there is flexibility to recalibrate the measures if necessary, they are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   designed to be permanent features of the regulatory landscape. Indeed, they are part of a well-
functioning credit market. 
My suspicion – which remains to be confirmed or disproven – is that the macro prudential 
policy tools that we introduced have not had much direct effect on bank lending yet. 
Indirect effects 
However,  there  are  good  reasons  to  believe  that  the  new  rules  have  had  positive  indirect 
effects on the market by reducing speculative demand. 
Episodes of rapid house price increases have typically a speculative element. For instance, 
buyers may enter the market simply because they believe that prices will rise rapidly for some 
time so that capital gains can be reaped by entering the market. But speculation can also take 
the form of younger buyers naturally getting worried about the risk of delaying getting on the 
property ladder, and therefore entering the market early before prices rise too much. 
As  these  examples  suggest,  the  demand  for  property  today  depends  not  only  on  current 
supply-demand  conditions,  in  particular  on  the  availability  of  credit,  but  also  on  buyers’ 
expectations of future prices. Of course, these in turn depend on, among other things, the 
availability of mortgage credit in the future. Thus, if investors believe that credit will be abundant 
in the future, this will drive up prices today. 
The introduction of the macro prudential measures seems to have led buyers to realise that a 
repetition of the seemingly uncontrolled expansion of credit, including to borrowers that were 
not creditworthy, that played a central role in the last boom, will not be permitted to reoccur. 
With expectations of future prices being scaled back, the demand for housing is reduced now 
and prices grow more slowly. 
Overall, the measures may have thus removed the speculative element. This is most evident 
in the moderation of future house price expectations which has occurred since the introduction 
of the measures, as reported in survey evidence. A 2015Q2 survey carried out by Daft.ie of 
1,000  property  market  participants  shows  that  expected  national  and  Dublin  house  price 
growth (for the year ahead) has fallen significantly since the introduction of the new mortgage 
rules was first mooted. Moreover, asked to identify factors underlying downward revisions to 
their house price forecasts, a large number cited the recent macro prudential measures. 
According to the findings of the CBI/SCSI’s (2015Q2) survey of individuals employed in the 
property market, while a majority of respondents expect residential property prices to increase 
over the next year and next three years, the percentage doing so has fallen in recent quarters, 
particularly so in Dublin. 
For example, the percentage of respondents expecting national house prices to increase over 
the next three years has declined by 14 percentage points. The share expecting prices to rise 
in Dublin over the next three years is down over 17 percentage points. 
Furthermore the extent to which prices, nationally and in Dublin, are expected to increase is 
notably lower than in similar surveys carried out in the second half of 2014, with national prices 
for one year and three years ahead expected to increase by 5 and 10 per cent respectively. 
The corresponding figures for 2014Q4 were 8 and 15 per cent. Nonetheless, it is important to 
note that at 5 per cent, house prices are expected to grow faster than inflation generally in the 
next year, implying that there is still plenty of demand for housing. 
The suggestion that macro prudential measures can mitigate speculative forces in the housing 
market  is  not  new. The IMF  has  presented  an  analysis  on  survey-evidence from  Korea,  a 
country  which  has  employed  several  forms  of  macro-prudential  tools  for  some  years.7  Its 
                                                
7  
Igan and Kang (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
analysis  indicates  that  tightening  LTV  caps  reduces  households’  expectations  of  price 
increases. 
Despite these shifts of house price expectations, current credit availability in Ireland appears 
to be largely unaffected in the first half of the year. While it is too early to assess precisely the 
short-term impact of the measures, data on the volume and value of mortgage drawdowns 
from the Banking and Payments Federation Ireland (BPFI) indicate an increase in mortgage 
lending in 2015Q2, as do data on loan approvals, despite a slowdown in August. 
Finally,  Property  Services  Regulatory  Authority  data  indicates  that  the  level  of  property 
transactions has continued to grow in the first half of 2015. 
Furthermore, any problems with the functioning of the property market highlighted by these 
measures are better addressed by policies in other areas. For instance, do building regulations 
impose unnecessary additional costs and thus constrain supply?8 And to what extent is the 
demand for  owner-occupied  housing  reflecting a  poorly functioning  rental  market?  Clearly, 
permitting risky lending is not a good solution for problems originating elsewhere in the housing 
market. 
Conclusion 
Earlier  this  year,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  brought  in  macro  prudential  measures  for 
residential mortgage lending. The motivation for doing so was to limit lending of the type that 
was shown to be particularly risky in the financial crisis, and thereby enhance the resilience of 
both  households  and  banks.  The  measures  were  not  very  different  from  standards  in  the 
market at the time, so one would not expect any large short-term effects. However, as lending 
increases with the recovery of the financial sector in the aftermath of the crisis, the measures 
will come into play and contribute to financial stability. 
It is too soon to assess what the impact of these measures on the economy has been, as only 
a small number of loans drawn down have been subject to these rules and as banks may have 
had  some  initial  difficulties  implementing  the  rules.  In  fact,  the  banks  have  not  yet  been 
required to report their compliance with the rules. However, we have seen some evidence that 
house  price  expectations  have  declined,  suggesting  that  the  speculative  element  of  the 
property market has become less important, as buyers recognise that risky mortgage lending 
will not be allowed to fuel another devastating housing bubble. 
                                                
8   As argued by Ronan Lyons in this quarter’s Daft.ie House Price Report. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
