  Stefan Ingves: The housing market and household indebtedness from a 
central bank perspective 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  SNS  (Centre  for  Business  and  Policy  Studies), 
Stockholm, 19 November 2015. 
 Why are the housing market and household indebtedness important to the Riksbank? 
As  you  have  no  doubt  noticed,  the  Swedish  housing  market  and  Swedish  household 
indebtedness are being widely discussed. In my speech today, I intend to discuss this matter 
from a central bank perspective. Why is it so important for us at the Riksbank? 
In this context, it is important to remind ourselves of our role in the Swedish economy. Under 
the law, the Riksbank has two main tasks: price stability and financial stability.1 My opinion is 
that  the  housing  market  and  household  indebtedness  may  have  great  significance  for  our 
chances of performing both of these tasks. And consequently, as I see it, it is self-evident 
that the Riksbank should be interested in these issues. 
In my speech today, I would particularly like to point out two important conditions for Sweden 
regarding monetary policy, price stability and financial stability. 
As regards monetary policy, we need to take account of monetary policy abroad. If monetary 
policy  abroad  becomes  more  expansionary  and  Swedish  monetary  policy  is  passive,  the 
exchange  rate  will  strengthen  and  inflation  in  Sweden  will  fall.  As  international  monetary 
policy is presently very expansionary, we also need to conduct an expansionary monetary in 
Sweden so that inflation does not become too low. However, a more expansionary monetary 
policy contributes towards households’ debts increasing, and this increases the risks for the 
Swedish economy as a whole and the risks for financial stability. 
Financial stability in Sweden is affected by the banks, to a large extent, obtaining funding for 
households’  mortgages  on  the  market,  largely  in  the  form  of  what  are  known  as  covered 
bonds.  These  bonds  have  come  to  form  the  linchpin  of  the  Swedish  financial  system:  the 
value of the bonds corresponds to over half of Sweden’s GDP. Foreign investors own a large 
proportion  of  these  bonds.  Swedish  banks’  funding  is  therefore  dependent  upon  both 
Swedish and foreign investors having confidence in the Swedish housing market. 
Let me now go on to talk first about our monetary policy and the significance of the housing 
market and household indebtedness for interest rate decisions, then describe the risks and 
finally discuss the tools for managing these risks. 
Why is monetary policy so expansionary? 
Sweden is a small, open economy that is affected to a large extent by events abroad. The 
euro area, which represents about half of our foreign trade, is particularly significant.2 As you 
                                                
1  According to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the Riksbank must maintain price stability. The Riksbank has defined 
a target for inflation: the annual change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) should be 2 per cent. According to 
the preparatory materials for the Act, the Riksbank’s monetary policy is also aimed at attaining the inflation 
target, and at the same time it is to support the objectives of general economic policy with a view to achieving 
sustainable growth and high employment. The Riksbank also has a mandate from the Riksdag (the Swedish 
parliament) to promote a safe and efficient payment system. The Riksbank has interpreted this as meaning 
that it shall act to promote stability in the Swedish financial system as a whole. 
In  the  so-called  KIX  index,  which  measures  the  importance  of  various  regions  and  countries  for  Sweden’s 
foreign trade, the euro area has a weight of about 50 per cent. 
2 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  know, the global financial crisis of 2008 was followed by a sovereign debt crisis in the euro 
area  a  few  years  later.  Developments  in  recent  years  have  therefore  entailed  an 
unexpectedly  weak  level  of  economic  activity  abroad,  and  this  has  had  consequences  for 
Swedish  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  In  conjunction  with  this,  inflation  also  became 
surprisingly  low  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  Long-term  inflation  expectations  in  Sweden 
started  to  fall  –  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  thereby  risked  being  undermined  (see 
Figure 1). 
Figure 1 
Inflation expectations among money market participants 
Per cent 
Source: TNS Sifo Prospera. 
 Monetary policy abroad affects the conditions for Sweden 
Sweden  is  a  small,  open  economy,  which  is  reflected,  not  least,  by  its  monetary  policy. 
Interest  rates  abroad  are  an  important  condition  for  Swedish  monetary  policy.  As  I  have 
pointed out on previous occasions, there is a very high correlation between Sweden and the 
rest of the world regarding inflation, GDP and interest rates.3 When the euro area conducts a 
highly expansionary monetary policy, this affects us. I am thinking not just of the level of the 
policy rate but also of the ECB’s comprehensive asset purchases, which are also intended to 
push  down  the  interest  rate  level  in  the  euro  area  (see  Figures  2  and  3).  Everything  else 
being  equal,  lower  interest  rates  abroad  lead  to  a  stronger  krona  and  lower  inflation  in 
Sweden via lower import prices. 
                                                
3  See my speech to the Swedish Economics Association, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 2  
Policy rates in Sweden and the euro area 
Per cent 
Sources: ECB and the Riksbank. 
Figure 3 
Central banks’ balance sheet totals 
Per cent of GDP 
Sources: ECB, Eurostat, Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
 
  Several  other  small,  open  economies,  such  as  Switzerland,  the  Czech  Republic  and 
Denmark, have also been affected by the ECB’s expansionary monetary policy, even though 
their  conditions  are  slightly  different  from  those  in  Sweden,  not  least  as  regards  their 
monetary policy regimes. However, the problem is fundamentally the same, namely that the 
expansionary monetary policy in the euro area is creating pressure on these countries’ own 
currencies to appreciate. 
Monetary policy is a matter of trade-offs 
Last year, we cut the repo rate to zero in Sweden, and we have continued to lower it below 
zero at the same time as we have purchased government bonds (see Figure 4). We did this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  to safeguard confidence in the inflation target. If we can get inflation to rise, this will reduce 
the risk of the inflation target’s role as nominal anchor being undermined. 
Figure 4  
The Riksbank’s purchases of government bonds and the repo rate 
SEK billion and per cent 
Source: The Riksbank. 
 According to our analysis, the purchases of government bonds have contributed to interest 
rates in Sweden being lower and the krona being weaker than would otherwise have been 
the case without the purchases.4 We are now also seeing that inflation is moving in the right 
direction (see Figure 5). 
Figure 5 
Inflation in Sweden 
Annual percentage change 
Note. The CPIF is the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate. 
Source: Statistics Sweden. 
                                                 
4  See  De  Rezende,  R.B.,  Kjellberg,  D  and  Tysklind,  O.,  ”Effects  of  the  Riksbank’s  purchases  of government 
bonds on financial prices”, Economic Commentary no. 13, 2015, Sveriges Riksbank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, we are very much aware that the low interest rate level is also increasing the risks 
linked  to  households’  already-high  indebtedness.  We  are  now  seeing  annual  rates  of 
increase in housing prices of between 15 and 20 per cent, at the same time as household 
indebtedness has started to accelerate upwards again (see Figure 6).5 There is a connection 
between the development of housing prices and household indebtedness because housing 
purchases are largely funded by loans and large parts of households’ debts are made up of 
mortgages. 
Monetary  policy  faces  a  choice  between,  on  one  hand,  the  development  of  the  exchange 
rate,  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  and,  on  the  other,  the  development  of  household 
indebtedness. 
My  assessment  is  that,  at  present,  it  would  be  difficult  to  maintain  a  higher  repo  rate  to 
manage  the  risks  linked  with  household  indebtedness.  The  krona  would  then  risk 
appreciating  and  demand  in  Sweden  could  become  too  low  –  inflation  may  not  reach  the 
target as planned and inflation expectations may not become anchored around the target. 
Housing prices and household indebtedness in Sweden 
Figure 6 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and Valueguard. 
 The expansionary monetary policy is contributing to stable inflation... 
Our assessment is that the monetary policy being conducted will allow us to safeguard the 
credibility  of  the  inflation  target,  which  is  vital  for  achieving  price  stability.  However, 
household indebtedness risks threatening both price stability and financial stability. 
You could put it like this: Monetary policy is the policy area that has the best conditions for 
influencing  the  exchange  rate  and  inflation.  But  to  restrain  household  indebtedness,  we 
would actually need an “extra policy rate”, aimed at households and able to be set at a higher 
level than the usual policy rate. However, as the Riksbank can only steer the general level of 
interest rates and a part of the transmission is that households borrow more when interest 
rates are low, we now have to turn to other policy areas to manage household indebtedness. 
                                                
5  For a more in-depth description of the development of housing prices in Sweden, see, for example, Financial 
Stability Report 2015:1, pp. 11–12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  ... but assumes measures will be taken on the housing market for success in the 
longer term 
One  condition  for  our  monetary  policy  trade-offs  to  be  successful  is  for  measures  against 
indebtedness  to  be  taken  elsewhere.  If  this  does  not  happen,  we  may  encounter  major 
problems later on, both for the economy in general and for monetary policy. 
Let us assume that no measures are taken. The housing rally could then potentially continue. 
In  the  worst  case,  international  confidence  in  the  Swedish  housing  market  would  start  to 
collapse. As covered bonds are largely held by foreign investors, we would risk having these 
investors  remove  a  large  part  of  the  banks’  funding,  which  could  have  effects  not  only  on 
financial stability but also on inflation. 
In  that  case  we  could  describe  a  very  bad  scenario:  The  banks  would  encounter  funding 
problems,  which  in  turn  would  lead  to  higher  lending  rates  and  lower  demand.  Foreign 
investors’ reduced confidence in the Swedish housing market would lead to a weakening of 
the  krona,  which  could  then  drive  up  inflation.  Bond  yields  would  rise,  and  the  Riksbank 
would likely be forced to raise the policy rate to get inflation down, which would have even 
more consequences on household demand, and so on. 
We can therefore see that merely the fact that no measures have been adopted could affect 
the Riksbank’s chances of achieving price stability and financial stability. And this is without 
me even mentioning what could happen if households find it difficult to pay their mortgages 
and housing prices go into a steep decline.6 
A fall in housing prices could snowball, with a number of interacting effects... 
A  fall  in  prices  on  the  housing  market  could  threaten  both  real  economic  and  financial 
stability via both direct and indirect effects. 
The direct effects on the macroeconomy are linked to reduced consumer demand 
High  indebtedness  makes  households  sensitive  to  shocks  (such  as  falls  in  housing  prices 
and interest rate increases). Several empirical studies indicate that households with higher 
levels  of  indebtedness  reduced  their  consumption  significantly  more  than  less  indebted 
households  during  the  financial  crisis,  when  housing  prices  fell  substantially  in  several 
countries (see Figure 7).7 Let me explain why this could be the case. 
                                                
6  This is an issue that the Riksbank has analysed on several occasions in the past. Also see “The Riksbank’s 
inquiry  into  risks  on  the  Swedish  housing  market,”  2011, and  “Financial  imbalances  in the  monetary  policy 
assessment”, article in the Monetary Policy Report, July 2013. 
7  See Andersen, A.L, Duus C. and Lærkholm Jensen T., “Household debt and consumption during the financial 
crisis: Evidence from Danish micro data”, Working Papers 89, 2014, Danmarks Nationalbank, Dynan, K.,” Is 
Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption?”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2012, and 
Mian, A. Rao, K. and Sufi, A., ”Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 128(4), pp. 1687–1726, 2013. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Figure 7 
The relationship between indebtedness and the development of  
consumption among Danish households during the financial crisis 
Per cent 
Change in 
consumption 
between 2007 and 
2009, in relation 
to income in 2007
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
0
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700
Debt-to-income ratio in 2007
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
 Source:  Andersen,  A.L,  Duus  C.  and  Lærkholm  Jensen  T.,  “Household  debt  and 
consumption  during  the  financial  crisis:  Evidence  from  Danish  micro  data”,  Working 
Paper, Danmarks Nationalbank. 
One  hypothesis  argues  that  highly  indebted  households  particularly  increased  their 
indebtedness  before  the  crisis  with  the  aim  of  increasing  consumption,  based  on,  for 
example,  optimistic  expectations.  When  the  crisis  hit  and  the  mood  changed,  these 
households radically reduced their consumption back to a more normal level. This has been 
highlighted as an explanation for the negative link between indebtedness and consumption 
developments among Danish households (see Figure 7).8 
Substantial falls in housing prices impact households’ balance sheets, in that the relationship 
between assets and debts rapidly deteriorates. There were clear signs of this in the countries 
in which housing prices fell heavily in conjunction with the financial crisis. For example, over 
a  short  time,  the  average  loan-to-value  ratio  among  US  households  with  mortgages 
increased from under 60 per cent to over 90 per cent, while the average loan-to-value ratio 
among  households  in  Denmark  increased  from  under  45  per  cent  to  over  60  per  cent  
(see Figure 8). 
                                                
8  See Andersen, A.L, Duus C. and Lærkholm Jensen T., “Household debt and consumption during the financial 
crisis: Evidence from Danish micro data”, Working Paper, Copenhagen University, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Figure 8 
Households’ loan-to-value ratios in the United States and Denmark 
Per cent 
 
Sources: Gelain, P, Lansing, K.J., and Mendicino, C., “House Prices, Credit Growth, and Excess 
Volatility: Implications for Monetary and Macroprudential Policy”, International Journal of Central 
Banking,  2013,  and  Andersen,  A.L,  Duus  C.  and  Lærkholm  Jensen  T.,  “Household  debt  and 
consumption  during  the  financial  crisis:  Evidence  from  Danish  micro  data”,  Working  Paper, 
Danmarks Nationalbank. 
When debts take up a larger share of the value of housing, consumer demand decreases. 
The most obvious channel is that it will be more difficult to borrow for consumption when the 
value  of  collateral  (housing)  declines.9  Other  channels  can  also  be  considered,  however, 
such  as  increased  saving  to  restore  balance  sheets,  so  that  debts  decrease  in  relation  to 
assets and return to the same proportion as before the fall in prices. 
Another channel can be added to this, namely in the form of a fall in housing prices reducing 
confidence among households and companies across the board, with a negative impact on 
demand in general. 
Apart from the  consequences for the  economy  as  a  whole,  we  risk  seeing  many  personal 
tragedies in connection with individual households running into problems. 
The direct effects on financial stability are connected with banks’ funding 
Perhaps the first aspect to consider regarding the link between financial stability and falling 
housing  prices  is  that  the  banks  make  loan  losses  on  households’  mortgages  if  housing 
prices fall. However, in light both of our experiences from the crisis of the 1990s and the fact 
that Swedish mortgage holders have comprehensive obligations to make payments on their 
loans (full recourse), this must be considered less likely.10 
It is in fact more likely that financial stability risks will arise as a result of the banks’ funding 
being impaired. Swedish banks have a large share of wholesale funding, with one important 
element  being  covered  bonds  with  mortgages  as  collateral.  These  bonds  fund  lending  for 
housing  purposes  and  are  also  reported  on  the  banks’  asset  side,  as  the  Swedish  banks 
largely  own  one  another’s  covered  bonds.  The  banks  utilise  the  bonds  in  their  liquidity 
portfolios, in their role as market makers, as collateral in repos, and so on. 
In Sweden, the market for covered bonds with mortgages as collateral is currently larger than 
the market for Swedish government bonds. The outstanding stock corresponds to over half 
                                                
9  See Iacoviello, M., ”Housing Wealth and Consumption”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
International Finance Discussion Papers 1027, 2011. 
10  See, for example, “The Riksbank’s inquiry into risks on the Swedish housing market”, 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  of  Sweden’s  GDP.  In  other  words,  covered  bonds  are  one  of  the  central  linchpins  of  the 
Swedish financial sector. 
A  large  proportion  of  the  covered  bonds  are  held  by  foreign  investors  (see  Figure  9). The 
Swedish  banks  are  therefore  dependent  on  foreign  investors’  confidence  in  the  Swedish 
mortgage  market.  A  fall  in  housing  prices  makes  it  more  difficult  for  the  banks  to  obtain 
funding – foreign investors have turned out to be volatile, for example in conjunction with the 
last financial crisis (see Figure 9). Sweden has a large banking system, in which the banks’ 
assets  correspond to  almost  4 times GDP. The  potential  effects  on  the  economy  are  thus 
also magnified. 
Figure 9 
Ownership of Swedish covered bonds by type of investor 
Shares in per cent 
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
Swedish banks
Swedish funds
Svenska insurance companies
Public sector including national pension funds
Foreign investors
Source: Statistics Sweden. 
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
 Indirect risks for financial stability and the macro economy 
An indirect risk, going from the macro economy to financial stability, is that reduced demand 
from over-indebted households will push the general level of demand in the economy down. 
This will weaken economic activity, in turn increasing the risks that the banks will incur loan 
losses in the corporate sector.11 
Earlier, I mentioned that the banks may have problems obtaining funding in the event of a fall 
in prices on the housing market in Sweden. In such a scenario, it is also conceivable that the 
banks’  funding  problems  will  lead  to  higher  lending  rates  to  households  –  and  thereby  to 
lower consumer demand. 
In  practice,  it  is  likely  that  all  of  these  direct  and  indirect  factors  will  interact  so  that  the 
consequences of a decline on the housing market may be serious and also difficult to gain an 
overview of in advance. 
                                                
11  See Financial Stability Report 2015:1, pp. 13. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  ... making it difficult to maintain price stability and financial stability 
It is very clear that it will be more difficult for the Riksbank to carry out its main tasks of price 
stability  and  financial  stability  in  the  event  of  a  substantial  fall  in  prices  on  the  housing 
market. 
I shall begin with price stability. If demand grows weakly as a result of a fall in housing prices, 
we  would  normally  end  up  with  lower  inflation.  However,  if  decreasing  confidence  in  the 
Swedish  housing  market  among  foreign  investors  leads  to  a  general  fall  in  interest  in 
investing  in  Sweden,  we  would  presumably  see  a  substantial  depreciation  of  the  krona, 
which could strongly push up inflation. It is very likely that uncertainty over the development 
of inflation would increase. 
If we go over to financial stability, I can repeat what I have said many times before, which is 
that financial stability and price stability are interconnected. One reason for this is that if it 
becomes more difficult for the banks to obtain funding, it will also become more difficult to 
‘reach out’ with repo rate changes. We usually describe this as a weakening of the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism.  And  this,  naturally,  makes  it  more  difficult  to  stabilise 
inflation around the target. The Riksbank would also have to use its various tools to manage 
liquidity  problems  in  the  banks.  We  saw  this  clearly  during  the  acute  financial  crisis  of  
2008–2009. 
I shall now summarise my comments so far. Our monetary policy strategy is based on using 
a highly expansionary monetary policy to safeguard confidence in the inflation target, which 
has provided a nominal anchor for the Swedish economy for over 20 years. However, we are 
well  aware  that  the  low  interest  rate  level  increases  the  risk  of  problems  arising  on  the 
housing market later on and that measures need to be taken elsewhere to make our strategy 
successful in the longer term. 
Consequently, when we discuss possible measures for the housing market and household 
indebtedness, this is a matter of risk management: of adopting measures today to prevent 
the risk of unfavourable events later on. When it comes to the exact design of measures, to 
some extent it is, therefore, a matter of subjective opinions and not an exact science. 
The mandate for macroprudential policy in Sweden must be clarified 
Macroprudential  policy  is  the  policy  area  which  has  come  to  dominate  the  international 
discussion about reducing risks linked to household indebtedness.12 Several targeted tools 
are offered within macroprudential policy which could be used for this purpose. For example, 
requirements could be placed on banks’ equity by introducing countercyclical capital buffers 
and  risk-weight floors  on  mortgages,  and  limits could  be  placed  on  how  much  households 
can  borrow  by  way  of  loan-to-value  limits  and  an  amortisation  requirement.  It  is  therefore 
obviously very concerning that the previously adopted macroprudential policy framework in 
Sweden has encountered legal problems. 
We  now  have  a  situation  whereby  a  proposal  for  an  amortisation  requirement  from  the 
Government  has  been  sent  out  for  consultation  after  some  unclear  legal  points  arose 
concerning  Finansinspektionen’s  previous  proposal.13  Naturally,  it  is  thus  even  more 
regrettable that uncertainties have arisen surrounding the legal aspects of the Government’s 
proposal.  The  current  proposal  also  only  deals  with  the  amortisation  requirement  – 
                                                
12  A more detailed discussion about the growth and development of macroprudential policy in Sweden can be 
found in my speeches held at the Swedish Economics Association in 2014 and 2015. 
13  See ”Remissyttrande om Promemorian kring amorteringskrav” (Consultation response to the memo regarding 
the amortisation requirement), Sveriges Riksbank, published 29 October 2015. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  uncertainties  remain  regarding  other  loan  limitation  tools  which  I  consider  to  be  entirely 
necessary. More on this in a moment. 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  issued  a  recommendation  in  January  2012 
concerning  the  national  mandate  for  macroprudential  policy.  In  this,  the  importance  is 
highlighted of the responsible authority having access to appropriate tools to meet its targets. 
I can only observe that this recommendation has not been implemented in Sweden. 
We propose measures 
We  at  the  Riksbank  must  obviously  make  a  contribution,  given  our  task,  and  analyse  the 
risks before issuing a proposal for how they should be managed, not least because financial 
stability  is  a  precondition  for  price  stability.  Let  me  begin  by  discussing  different  types  of 
measure  more  generally,  and  then  I  will  say  a  few  words  on  the  quantitative  effects  of 
household indebtedness. 
Put  simply,  we  can  say  that  there  are  two  different  ways  to  manage  the  problems  on  the 
housing market: either attempt to increase the housing supply in order to dampen housing 
prices,  or  dampen  demand  for  housing  and  mortgages  by  making  it  more  expensive  to 
borrow,  or  simply  limit  how  much  households  can  borrow.  In  terms  of  measures  which 
subdue demand, it is important to differentiate between measures which affect all loans, or 
the whole stock of credit, and measures which only affect new loans, or the flow of credit. But 
let us begin with measures which affect the supply of housing. 
An increased supply of housing could dampen price increases – but it would take 
time! 
Structural  problems  on  the  Swedish  housing  market  are  the  main  reason  why  housing 
construction has been unable to meet rising demand. An increased supply of housing is a 
central piece of the puzzle, as it can subdue the increase in housing prices, which would also 
help to limit household indebtedness. 
However,  the  quantity  of  housing  is  not  the  only  significant  factor  in  terms  of  household 
indebtedness. It is also necessary to review how  we can exploit the current housing stock 
more  effectively.  The  distribution  between  purchased  and  rented  housing  is  significant. 
Changes  in  the  regulation  of  the  rental  market  or  increased  subsidies  for  rented  housing 
would  increase  the  share  of  accommodation  to  rent,  thereby  dampening  demand  for 
cooperative housing and thus housing prices. 
However,  increasing  the  number  of  cooperative  houses  and  changing  the  structure  of  the 
Swedish housing market can take a long time to implement. Over that time we will be obliged 
to look at different measures which could dampen demand for housing and mortgages. 
Measures which can dampen household demand for mortgages 
Raising capital requirements important to reinforce the resilience of banks, although 
the effects on household indebtedness are limited 
One option is to focus on the banks and raise capital requirements, which I think we should 
do. If the banks were forced to change the funding mix on their balance sheets towards a 
higher share of equity, lending rates could then increase which would mean lending volumes 
would decrease. However, our own analysis suggests that the effects on banks’ lending rates 
and lending to households would be limited.14 The main effect is in fact that the resilience of 
                                                
14  See  the  article  “Stricter  capital  requirements  for  banks  –  effects  on  the  macro  economy”,  Monetary  Policy 
Report, July 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  banks is strengthened. But this is a central point seen against the background of financial 
stability risks I described earlier. 
A large part of the improvement of banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios over the last few years 
has taken place as a result of banks using internal models to a greater degree to calculate 
lending  risks,  and  not  by  building  up  more  capital.  The  use  of  these  internal  models  has 
meant that the risk weights on banks’ lending have fallen, which has contributed to a rise in 
equity in relation to risk-weighted assets. Our analysis shows that without this transition to 
internal models, the major banks’ core tier one capital ratios would only have increased by a 
few percentage points over the period 2006 to 2013. The banks’ equity as a proportion of 
total assets, or the leverage ratio, has been largely unchanged over the last few years (see 
Figure 10).15 
Figure 10 
The major Swedish banks’ core tier one capital ratio and leverage ratio 
Per cent 
 
Note.  The  blue  line  indicates  CET  1  in  relation  to  total  assets  and 
thus differs from the Basel Committee’s definition of leverage ratio. 
Sources: Banks’ annual reports and the Riksbank. 
Even though measures have been taken to reinforce banks’ capital levels, more is needed. 
One important measure for which the Riksbank has argued for a long time is the introduction 
of  a  leverage  ratio  requirement.  But  we  have  also  argued  in  favour  of  raising  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  to  2.5  per  cent  along  with  raising  the  risk-weight  floor  for 
mortgages  to  35  per  cent.  Although  the  effects  are  minor,  a  raised  risk-weight  floor  for 
mortgages has the advantage that it can contribute to higher mortgage rates for households, 
and that banks are forced to retain more capital in order to cover their mortgage lending. 
Direct loan limitations for households reduce the risks – but only affect new borrowers 
One  alternative  is  to  focus  on  households  and  limit  the  amount  they  are  able  to  borrow. 
Examples  of  such  measures 
limits,  an 
amortisation  requirement  and  minimum  levels  for  banks’  discretionary  income  calculations. 
include  debt-to-income 
loan-to-value 
limits, 
                                                
15  See Financial Stability Report 2015:1, pp. 5–6. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This affects the flow of credit, or new loans in other words. The effect on the stock of debt 
therefore takes time. 
It is possible to understand the effects of different types of loan-limiting measures by using a 
simple equation which describes the development of the stock of debt over time: 
𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡=(1−𝛼𝛼)∗𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡−1+𝐿𝐿𝑡𝑡, 
where 𝐷𝐷𝑡𝑡 is the level of debt stock on date t, 𝛼𝛼 is the rate of amortisation in the loan stock 
and 𝐿𝐿𝑡𝑡 are new loans on date t. The development of the debt stock is therefore determined 
by the rate of amortisation on existing loans and by how many new loans are taken out. 
All  types  of  loan  limitation  discussed  so  far  concern  new  loans.  As  loans  in  the  stock  are 
typically amortised very slowly – by a few per cent each year – the development of the debt 
stock will principally be determined by the previous debt stock in the short term. Limiting the 
amount of new loans therefore has a relatively slow impact on the debt stock. 
A reduction in tax relief on mortgage interest can affect all borrowers – and could have 
potentially major effects on indebtedness 
To  influence  the  development  of  household  debt  we  should  also  consider  fiscal  policy 
measures,  which  in  this  context  means  changes  to  various  housing-related  taxes.  One 
example  is  changes  to  tax  relief  on  mortgage  interest.  The  advantage  of  this  kind  of 
measures is that it has the potential to influence the entire debt stock. The incentive to take 
out new loans decreases, and the costs linked to existing loans are also affected. In terms of 
the simple debt equation above, the amortisation rate could therefore rise on existing loans 
(the incentive to amortise increases if future borrowing costs rise) while new borrowing would 
be subdued. 
The debt-to-income limit is an effective complement to the loan-to-value limit 
There are many indications that the distribution of debt is also significant in terms of risks. As 
I  mentioned  earlier,  several  international  studies  show  that  highly-indebted  households 
reduce  their  consumption  more  than  households  with  lower  debts  when  there  is  a  fall  in 
housing  prices,  for  example.  Measures  which  set  an  upper  limit  for  individual  household 
indebtedness can therefore be effective in terms of reducing the risk of weak macroeconomic 
growth, even though the effects of the total debt-to-income ratio would be limited. 
The Riksbank’s previous analysis has also shown that a debt-to-income limit (that is to say a 
limit  for  how  large  debt  can  be  in  relation  to  disposable  income)  could  be  an  effective 
complement to the current loan-to-value limit.16 This is due to the fact that incomes grow in a 
more stable way than housing prices. Whenever housing prices increase sharply, there is a 
risk that debts will continue to increase in relation to incomes if the only limitation is a loan-to-
value  limit.  A  debt-to-income  limit  is  also  more  effective  in  terms  of  preventing  interest 
payments taking up too large a share of incomes in the future. 
So  those  are  the  measures  we  could  take.  But  what  would  happen  to  household 
indebtedness if no further measures were taken? 
A few different scenarios for household indebtedness 
Normally,  the  Riksbank  creates  forecasts  regarding  household  indebtedness  three  years 
ahead.  Making  an  assessment  any  further  ahead  than  this  would  involve  considerable 
                                                
16  See the article “Debt-to-income limit as a policy measure” in the Financial Stability Report 2015:1, and Alfelt, 
G., Lagerwall, B. and Ölcer, D. (2015) “An analysis of the debt ratio ceiling as a policy measure”, Economic 
Commentary no. 8, 2015. Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  uncertainty.  However,  in  order  to  give  us  an  idea  about  what  could  happen  to  household 
indebtedness  beyond  the  forecast  horizon  three  years  ahead,  we  have  made  a  rough 
estimate of developments over the coming 10 years, which uses our forecast for the coming 
three years as a starting point. We assess that the rate of increase of indebtedness will slow 
somewhat when the repo rate gradually begins to be raised (according to our forecast for the 
first six months of 2017) and slowly rises to a normal level.17 
In  the  Financial  Stability  Report  from  the  spring,  we  published  an  extensive  analysis  of 
Swedish  household  indebtedness.  One  conclusion  drawn  from  this  was  that  international 
studies  and  experiences  from  the  Swedish  1990s  crisis  indicate  that  if  indebtedness 
approaches 180–210 per cent, measured as a proportion of disposable income, risks in the 
Swedish economy are heightened. This is due to households’ interest expenditure – at a high 
rate of interest than today’s – becoming so high that it could lead to a major fall in demand 
and  ultimately  a  crisis.18  It  is  clear  that  we  are  approaching  a  critical  level  with  leaps  and 
bounds (see Figure 11). 
Household debt as a percentage of disposable income 
Figure 11 
Per cent 
Scenario without measures
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
130
15
10
05
 
Note.  Broken  red  line  shows  an  estimate of  developments over  the 
next  10  years  without  further  measures.  Shaded  area  indicates  a 
feasible lower limit for when the risks are elevated in the economy. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
20
25
We have also developed examples to broadly assess how different measures influence the 
development of household indebtedness, which can then illustrate what is required to help 
this indebtedness level out. 
Finansinspektionen’s proposal in the spring of an amortisation requirement means that new 
mortgage borrowers with loan-to-value ratios above 50 per cent must amortise 2 per cent of 
the loan per year down to 70 per cent, and then 1 per cent per year down to 50 per cent. 
                                                
17  It  is  assumed  in  the  debt  forecast  that  rising  interest  rates  between  2018–2025  will  contribute  to  housing 
prices rising at a slower pace than the period 2005–2015. The development of housing prices is determined 
by  a  model  in  which  price  developments  are  determined  in  the  long  term  by  developments  in  households’ 
financial assets, disposable income and mortgage rates after tax. Debts are assumed to follow housing prices. 
18  See Emanuelsson, R., Melander, O. and Molin, J. (2015), “Financial risks in the household sector”, Economic 
Commentaries no. 6, 2015, Sveriges Riksbank. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, we should be clear that this requirement looks mild by international standards. In 
most countries, the loan has a clear maturity date, which specifies when the debt is to be 
repaid,  often  between  20  and  40  years,  and  the  proportion  of  interest-only  loans  is  often 
low.19  If  the  home  is  not  revalued,  the  Finansinspektionen  proposal  for  an  amortisation 
requirement means that households with a loan-to-value ratio of 85 per cent would need to 
amortise down to a loan-to-value ratio of 50 per cent within 32 years. 
We see in Figure 12 that the amortisation requirement, in its present draft form, will have little 
impact  when  it  comes  to  slowing  down  total  indebtedness  in  the  coming  years.  As  I 
mentioned, it is the case for all loan-limiting macroprudential policy measures (for example 
loan-to-value  limits,  amortisation  requirements  and  debt-to-income  limits)  which  only  affect 
new  borrowers  that  they  are  relatively  slow  to  have  an  effect  on  the  debt  stock.  For  this 
reason,  such  measures  have  a  minor  effect  in  many  cases  on  total  indebtedness  over  a 
10-year period, although the scope of the measure itself (that is to say how many fewer new 
loans can be taken out) obviously also plays a part. 
Figure 12 
The effect of an amortisation requirement on household  
indebtedness according to current proposals 
Per cent 
Scenario without measures
Amortisation requirements
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
130
10
05
20
15
 
Note.  Broken  red  line  shows  an  estimate  of  developments  over  the 
next  10  years  without  further  measures.  Shaded  area  indicates  a 
feasible  lower  limit  for  when  the  risks  are  elevated  in  the  economy. 
Broken yellow line shows an estimate of the effect of an amortisation 
requirement according to current proposals. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
25
A change to tax relief on mortgage interest could lead to a faster and more direct effect on 
household  indebtedness,  as  it  affects  all  borrowers.  However,  as  a  reduction  in  tax  relief 
initially raises mortgage costs, it is likely that existing mortgage borrowers do not pay down 
their  loans  immediately.  The  effect  on  the  total  debt-to-income  ratio  therefore  occurs 
gradually, even in the case of changes to tax relief. According to these calculations, it is only 
                                                
19  A borrower  with medium indebtedness in Sweden taking out a new mortgage, or increasing existing loans, 
only amortises at a rate which leads to the new loan being repaid in 56 years. The rate of amortisation varies 
considerably between different households, however; 25 per cent of the new mortgage borrowers amortise the 
new  loans  at  a  rate  of  85  years  or  longer.  See  “Amortisation  requirements  –  a  step  towards  a  more 
sustainable debt situation”, Financial Stability Council memorandum, November 2014, Sveriges Riksbank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  when tax relief is halved that we will see a clear slowdown of household indebtedness over 
the coming 10 years (see Figure 13). 
Halving tax relief on mortgage interest may sound dramatic, but at the current low mortgage 
rates of approximately 2 per cent, this represents an upturn in the mortgage rate of around 
0.30 percentage points (0.15*2=0.30), so about the same as a “normal” repo rate increase of 
0.25  percentage  points. When  interest  rates  are  higher,  the  effect  of  lowered  tax  relief  on 
households’ mortgage rates is naturally greater. 
Figure 13 
Effects on household indebtedness: a comparison of  
the effects of an amortisation requirement, halved tax relief  
and different debt-to-income limits 
Per cent 
Scenario without measures
Amortisation requirements
Reduced tax relief (15%)
Debt-to-income limit (600%)
Debt-to-inome limit (400%)
Debt-to-income limit (400%, exemption 15% )
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
130
25
20
15
10
05
 
Note.  Broken  red  line  shows  an  estimate  of  developments  over  the 
next  10  years  without  further  measures.  Shaded  area  indicates  a 
feasible lower  limit  for  when  the  risks  are  elevated  in  the  economy. 
Broken  lines  show  an  estimate  of  the  effects  of  different  measures. 
“Debt-to-income  limit  (400%,  exemption  15%)”  means  that  15  per 
cent  of  the  volume  of  new  loans  may  have  a  loan-to-income  ratio 
exceeding 400 per cent. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
I  mentioned  the  debt-to-income  limit  earlier.  A  limit  of  600  per  cent  in  relation  to  disposable 
income would affect around 12 per cent of new mortgage borrowers. In Figure 13 we can see 
that the effect is considerably greater than it would be with the amortisation requirement, but 
also considerably smaller than with halved tax relief. If a debt-to-income limit of 400 per cent of 
income  were  introduced,  for  example,  this  would  currently  affect  nearly  40  per  cent  of  new 
mortgage borrowers. Indebtedness would thereby be dampened considerably in the long term, 
and  we  would  also  see  a  large  amount  of  the  effect  within  10  years  (see  Figure  13).  Our 
calculations indicate that the extent of the effect would be as great as if tax relief were halved.20 
Debt-to-income  limits  have  already  been  introduced  in  the  United  Kingdom  and Ireland.  In 
the UK, it has been stated that a maximum of 15 per cent of the banks’ new mortgages may 
have a loan-to-income ratio exceeding 450 per cent, while in Ireland it has been stated that a 
maximum  of  20  per  cent  of  the  banks’  new  mortgages  may  have  a  loan-to-income  ratio 
                                                
20  Our updated calculations indicate that the effect of debt-to-income limits would be slightly greater than those 
presented previously in the Financial Stability Report 2015:1, for example. 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exceeding  350  per  cent.21  In  the  UK,  the  exempted  share  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
number  of  new  mortgages,  while  in  Ireland  it  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  volume  of  new 
mortgages. It is not easy to calculate the effects of exempting, for instance, 15 per cent from 
a rule, but in Figure 13 we have tried to make such an estimate. We can see that the effect is 
somewhat smaller than if there is no exemption, but the difference is not major. 
There is already a loan-to-value limit in Sweden. One alternative could be to lower this from the 
current level of 85 per cent. But as I mentioned, there is a clear point to complementing the 
loan-to-value limit with a debt-to-income limit. Our calculations also indicate that a reduction in 
the loan-to-value limit would lead to relatively minor effects on total household indebtedness. 
Lowering the limit to 80 per cent would lead, over a 10-year period, to about the same effect as 
the proposed amortisation requirement, and even lowering it to 75 per cent would result in a 
smaller effect looking 10 years ahead than a debt-to-income limit of 600 per cent. 
It is clear from what I have said so far that it is hard to find an individual measure which could 
prevent  indebtedness  from  increasing  from  a  10-year  perspective.  A  combination  of 
measures may therefore be needed. One example of a “package of measures”, which I have 
discussed on previous occasions, includes an amortisation requirement, halved tax relief and 
a debt-to-income limit of 400 per cent. A summary of the effects of these measures offers a 
very  rough  estimate  of  the  total  effect,  and  indicates  in  this  case  that  indebtedness  would 
level out to around the level seen today (see Figure 14). 
Figure 14 
Households’ debt as proportion of disposable income:  
the overall effect of an amortisation requirement,  
halved tax relief and debt-to-income limit of 400 per cent 
Per cent 
Scenario without measures
Amortisation requirements,  reduced tax relief (15%) and
debt-to-income limit (400%)
Amortisation requirements,  reduced tax relief (15%) and
debt-to-income limit (400%, exemption 15% )
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
220
210
200
190
180
170
160
150
140
130
130
10
05
20
15
 
Note. Broken red line shows an estimate of developments over the next 
10  years  without  further  measures.  Shaded  area  indicates  a  feasible 
lower limit for when the risks are elevated in the economy. Broken lines 
show  an  estimated  total  effect  of  several  measures.  “Debt-to-income 
limit (400%, exemption 15%)” means that 15 per cent of the volume of 
new loans may have a loan-to-income ratio exceeding 400 per cent. 
Sources: Statistics Sweden and the Riksbank. 
25
                                                
21  In  both  cases,  mortgages  have  been  related  to  gross  income  instead  of  relating  total  loans  to  disposable 
income. In practice, this leads to the requirement being less binding (the mortgages are lower than total loans, 
and  gross  income  is  higher  than  disposable  income).  We  have  however,  based  the  calculation  on 
requirements for total loans in relation to disposable income. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  The revenue and costs of different measures should be weighed against each other 
I mentioned previously that the exact implementation of different measures must largely be 
based on value judgements. The purpose of the measures, that is to say the outcome, is to 
reduce the risk of unfavourable developments further ahead. However, costs also occur in 
the short term when opportunities to borrow are limited, as this subdues consumption and 
thereby  also  GDP  growth.  When  deciding  whether  to  introduce  a  measure,  it  is  thus 
necessary  to  weigh  the  gains,  in  the  form  of  reduced  risks  in  the  longer  run,  against  the 
costs, in the form of lower demand and GDP in the short run.22 
In this context another aspect of tax relief on mortgage interest can be mentioned, namely 
that it currently represents a cost for the state. According to an analysis carried out in June 
this year by the National Institute of Economic Research, the costs to the state of tax relief 
will increase considerably when interest rates rise: from around SEK 23 billion to 60 billion (1 
per cent of GDP) in 10 years. Reduced tax relief could therefore improve the state’s finances 
quite substantially in the future, which would create space for reform to compensate for many 
of the short-term macroeconomic costs which would otherwise occur. 
Conclusion 
It is important for the Riksbank to analyse the housing market and household indebtedness, 
not least because they can have an impact on our ability to perform our tasks relating to price 
stability and financial stability. 
Our expansionary monetary policy aims to maintain confidence in the inflation target. Today I 
have  pointed  out  that  international  monetary  policy  establishes  a  framework  for  Swedish 
monetary policy. Inflation is now moving in the right direction. 
However,  one  precondition  for  the  success  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  from  a  longer-
term perspective is that we take measures elsewhere to reduce risks linked to the housing 
market  and  household  indebtedness.  Developments  are  definitely  moving  in  the  wrong 
direction! There are several potential risks for the real economy, financial stability and price 
stability,  which  are  connected  to  household  indebtedness  and  the  housing  market.  I  have 
attempted to shed some light on several of them today. 
The Swedish housing market could be likened to a “blind spot” in terms of economic policy. 
In its latest statement on Sweden’s economy, the IMF described the situation on the Swedish 
housing  market  as  self-inflicted.23  It  is  essentially  each  individual  bank’s  responsibility  to 
ensure sound long-term credit lending. This is a central principle in a market-based system, 
and  something  which  we  should  not  forget  in  the  debate  about  the  housing  market  and 
household  indebtedness.  However,  the  authorities  are  responsible  for  taking  action  if 
developments threaten macroeconomic and financial stability. Sweden is lagging behind in 
this regard. 
There  are  several  potential  measures  which  could  dampen  overall  indebtedness  in  the 
economy, and prevent certain household groups from getting further into debt, for example in 
the  form  of  changes  to  mortgage  tax  relief  and  loan-limiting  measures.  I  have  described 
several of them today. But also allow me to point out once again that it is vitally important 
that the mandate for macroprudential policy be clarified. This is a precondition for being able 
to introduce to the loan-limiting measures. 
                                                
22  See  Guibourg,  G.  and  Lagerwall,  B.,  “How  is  the  economy  affected  by macroprudential  policy  measures?”, 
Economic Commentary no. 9, 2015, Sveriges Riksbank. 
23  See http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press-and-published/Notices/2015/The-Riksbank-publishes-the-IMFs-
statement-on-Swedens-economy/. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It is essential for the Riksbank to reduce these risks in order to fulfil its main tasks in terms of 
price stability and financial stability. However, avoiding problems on the housing market and 
a future economic crisis is something which concerns us all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
