   Malcolm Edey: The transition to central clearing of OTC derivatives in 
Australia 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  International  Swaps  and  Derivatives  Association’s  (ISDA)  2015  Annual 
Australia Conference, Sydney, 22 October 2015. 
 I thank Mark Manning for his invaluable assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Good morning and thanks to ISDA for the opportunity to speak here today. 
When I last addressed this forum three years ago, it was a time of quite significant stress in 
world financial markets. A particular focus of concern was the unfolding crisis in Greece and 
the associated risk of spillovers to other parts of Europe. 
A lot has happened since then. As a general observation, financial conditions around the world 
have been gradually recovering, though not without some periodic bouts of nervousness. The 
concerns about Greece came to a head around the middle of this year, and spillovers from that 
have turned out so far to be quite limited. 
More generally, the world economy has been expanding at a reasonable pace over these three 
years,  and  the  process  of  balance  sheet  repair  has  continued.  These  are  positive 
developments. 
Nonetheless,  in  some  important  respects  the  situation  is  still  some  way  from  returning  to 
normal. The after-effects of the global financial crisis are still weighing on activity in some of 
the major economies. And interest rate settings around the world are still at exceptionally low 
levels to support growth, seven years after the crisis reached its height. 
All of this underscores the point that financial crises are costly events. They are costly in terms 
of lost income and output, lost jobs and damage to institutions. And we’ve seen again that it 
takes a lot longer to recover from a financial crisis than it does from other types of economic 
downturn. 
These are good reasons for the global efforts that have been made over the past few years to 
build resilience in our financial systems. A great deal of work is underway on that front, at both 
national and international levels. In Australia, we have had a major inquiry into the financial 
system  which,  as  one  of  its  priorities,  made  a  number  of  recommendations  to  strengthen 
financial resilience. Key recommendations in that area have been endorsed by the government 
this week. Internationally, there has been an extensive program of regulatory reform initiated 
by the G20 and coordinated through the international standard setting bodies. 
Today I want to focus on just one aspect of that work, namely the move to central clearing of 
over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. As you know, this was initiated by the G20 commitments 
made at the Pittsburgh Summit in 20091. While progress on those commitments has been 
slower than many would have liked, a lot has been achieved. In my talk this morning, I would 
like  to  review  what  has  been  achieved  so  far,  highlight  some  of  the  key  considerations  in 
implementation, and look ahead to some of the work that remains to be done. 
                                                
1  Specifically,  G20  leaders  agreed  that  “all  standardised  OTC  derivatives  contracts  should  be  traded  on 
exchanges or electronic trading platforms, where appropriate, and cleared through central counterparties by 
end-2012 at the latest. OTC derivatives contracts should be reported to trade repositories. Non-centrally cleared 
contracts should be subject to higher capital requirements”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   What has been achieved? 
When  I  spoke  at  this  conference  in  October  2012,  the  Australian  Council  of  Financial 
Regulators (the Council) had provided its advice to the government following on from the G20 
commitments, and the legislative response to that advice was well underway. The resulting 
amendments to the Corporations Act came into force at the beginning of 2013. These gave 
the responsible minister the power, on the advice of the regulators, to determine particular 
products for mandatory trade reporting, central clearing or platform trading. They also gave 
ASIC  the  power  to  elaborate  on  the  details  of  any  such  obligations  by  setting  derivative 
transaction rules. 
As I foreshadowed then, the immediate priority once the legislation came into effect was the 
introduction of a broad-based trade reporting requirement. That regime is now fully in force for 
all but the smallest derivatives market participants. 
Given its mandate for financial stability, the Reserve Bank’s primary interest has been in central 
clearing, and it has worked closely on this with the other council agencies. Initially the agencies 
favoured an incentives-led transition to central clearing. But for a number of reasons, including 
considerations  of  international  consistency,  the  council  ultimately  turned  its  attention  to  a 
mandated approach. An important initial step was to establish a framework for assessing the 
case for any mandatory clearing obligations. That framework was applied in the regulators’ 
published  reports  on  the  Australian  OTC  Derivatives  Market  in  July  2013  and  April  2014. 
Together, these reports made recommendations to the government to proceed with clearing 
obligations for interest rate derivatives in Australian dollars and four major global currencies.2 
As  most  here  would  know,  just  a  few  weeks  ago,  the  government  issued  a  determination 
consistent with those recommendations. The government also released amendments to the 
Corporations Regulations 2001 restricting the institutional scope of the regime to internationally 
active  dealers.  ASIC  is  now  in  the  process  of  finalising  its  derivative  transaction  rules  in 
response to feedback from the recent consultation. These rules will set out further details of 
the  mandatory  clearing  requirement  including  how  the  mandate  will  apply  to  cross-border 
transactions,  the  use  of  overseas  CCPs  to  meet  the  mandate,  and  the  effective 
commencement date in 2016. 
Key considerations in implementation 
The implementation of a mandatory clearing obligation in Australia has involved a number of 
important considerations. The aim throughout has been to ensure that the financial stability 
benefits of central clearing are achieved,  while  supporting effective market functioning  and 
keeping the Australian market globally connected. I would like to discuss in more detail how 
the regulators have sought to achieve this. 
Ensuring that the stability benefits are achieved 
Central clearing potentially offers a range of well-known benefits. They include: centralised and 
standardised  risk  management;  reduced  counterparty  risk  exposures  due  to  multilateral 
netting;  a  less  complex  and  more  transparent  ‘hub  and  spokes’  network  of  exposures; 
coordinated default management; and operational improvements and efficiencies. CCPs also 
provide a focal point for regulation and oversight. 
These benefits are likely to be greatest for products that are traded widely and which give rise 
to  sizeable  counterparty  exposures  when  they  are  not  centrally  cleared.  In  the  Australian 
context, the regulators have identified Australian dollar-denominated interest rate swaps, and 
                                                
2  The US dollar, euro, British pound and Japanese yen. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   swaps denominated in the major currencies, as having these characteristics. These products 
were therefore prioritised in the regulators’ recommendations. 
The  trade-off,  of  course,  is  that  CCP  clearing  concentrates  risk  in  just  one  (or  a  few) 
systemically important entities that might be critical to the functioning of the financial system 
as a whole. This has always been recognised in the debate. But, as the share of activity that 
is centrally cleared has risen, this dependence has attracted increasing attention. It is critical 
that these entities are highly resilient to shocks, operate on a continuous basis, and maintain 
the confidence of market participants. 
Recognising  this,  in  2012,  the  relevant  international  standard-setting  bodies3  published  an 
enhanced  set  of  standards  for  CCPs  and  other  critical  facilities  called  the  Principles  for 
Financial  Market  Infrastructures  (PFMI).  As  the  title  indicates,  the  standards  are  principles 
based, and they have broad coverage. They establish requirements in all areas of CCP design 
and  operation:  legal  and  governance  arrangements;  credit  and  liquidity  risk  management; 
settlement; default management; general business risk and operational risk management; and 
access, efficiency and transparency. 
The PFMI have been adopted internationally and an extensive peer review process, co-chaired 
by the Reserve Bank, is underway monitoring the implementation measures that have been 
taken. In Australia, the Bank has included the stability-related principles in its Financial Stability 
Standards and has found them to be a sound basis for supervisory dialogue on risk matters. 
Application  of  the  principles  has  been  a  catalyst  for  a  range  of  enhancements  in  the  risk 
management practices of the CCPs under the Bank’s supervision. ASIC has addressed other 
aspects of the principles in its supervision and policy setting activities, including by setting out 
ASIC’s expectations of how licensed CCPs should comply with their licence obligations. 
Given the particular importance of continuity of service, a key focus of the debate has been on 
what might be called ‘Plan B’; that is, how to ensure that, if a severe stress event threatened 
the viability of a CCP, it could continue to operate uninterrupted. There are two strands to the 
work in this area: recovery, which refers to actions taken by the CCP itself in a stress event; 
and resolution, which refers to actions taken by a resolution authority within the framework of 
a special regime to restore viability. 
The principles require that the tools and powers available to a CCP in recovery allow for any 
residual losses and liquidity shortfalls to be allocated comprehensively. So in principle, if a CCP 
in stress was able to implement its recovery plan in full, resolution should never be necessary. 
A special resolution regime is nevertheless an important back-stop. Resolution actions might be 
called  into  play  if  a  CCP  faced  challenges  in  executing  its  recovery  plan  without  public 
intervention,  or  if  there  were  stability  grounds  for  the  resolution  authority  to  intervene.  It  is 
expected that the starting point for a resolution authority would be the CCP’s own recovery plan. 
A number of jurisdictions, including Australia, are now developing special resolution regimes 
for CCPs and other FMIs in accordance with an agreed international framework developed by 
the  Financial  Stability  Board (FSB).4 In  Australia  the government  consulted  on  a  proposed 
regime  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Under  the  proposal,  the  Reserve  Bank  would  be  the 
resolution  authority  for  domestically  incorporated  and  domestically  licensed  CCPs  and 
securities settlement facilities. Its mandate would be to pursue the overarching objective of 
financial  stability  and  an  additional  key  objective  of  continuity  in  the  provision  of  critical 
services. In this week’s response to the Financial System Inquiry, the government agreed to 
progress additional measures in this area. 
                                                
3  The Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO). 
4  This framework is set out in the FSB’s Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes (ref). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Supporting market functioning 
In implementing all these reforms, the Australian authorities have been careful to intervene 
only  where  necessary,  so  as  to  preserve  appropriate  incentives  and  avoid  imposing 
unnecessary  costs  on  industry  participants.  This  was  reflected  in  the  initial  preference  for 
industry-led  solutions  that  relied  on  private  incentives.  The  Bank  and  the  other  regulatory 
agencies took the view that an industry-led approach would allow the transition to occur in a 
measured way, and would avoid unnecessarily interfering with commercial outcomes. 
The  decision,  ultimately,  to  recommend  a  mandated  approach,  and  the  government’s 
acceptance  of  that  advice,  were  driven  importantly  by  considerations  of  international 
consistency. In a number of cases, products had already been mandated for clearing in other 
jurisdictions,  notably  interest  rate  derivatives  denominated  in  the  major  currencies.  The 
regulators  took  into  account  the  benefits  that  could  arise  in  such  cases  from  favourable 
comparability  assessments  of  the  Australian  regime,  and  from  avoiding  opportunities  for 
regulatory arbitrage. These, of course, needed to be balanced against any possible adverse 
implications that regulatory intervention might have for market functioning. 
By the time they issued their recommendation in respect of interest rate derivatives in the major 
currencies,  the  regulators  were  confident  that  the  industry  had  already  made  considerable 
progress in the transition to central clearing for these products. The incremental cost of regulatory 
intervention  was  therefore  expected  to  be  low.  By  April  2014,  when  the  regulators  also 
recommended that Australian dollar-denominated interest rate derivatives be centrally cleared, 
the  Australian  banks  were  already  well  advanced  in  becoming  direct  participants  of  the  two 
licensed clearing services, LCH.Clearnet Limited (LCH.C Ltd) and ASX Clear (Futures). 
During the period since those recommendations were made, the transition to clearing among 
Australian  banks  has  continued  to  accelerate,  even  though  the  clearing  mandate  has  only 
recently been confirmed and has yet to take effect. Our liaison with Australian banks reveals 
that they are now centrally clearing almost all new trades that are eligible for clearing, and have 
also  made  considerable  progress  in  backloading  legacy  trades  into  CCPs.  All  four  major 
Australian banks are now active participants of both LCH.C Ltd and ASX Clear (Futures) and 
more than 40 per cent of Australian banks’ outstanding OTC interest rate derivatives across 
currencies has been centrally cleared via LCH.C Ltd (Graph 1). 
Graph 1 
Click to view larger 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Both pricing and regulatory factors have contributed to this. Of course, the anticipation of a 
mandate  being  introduced  has  been  an  important  factor.  But  more  generally  over  time,  a 
material pricing differential has emerged between cleared and non-cleared transactions, which 
has reinforced this trend. In the case of Australian dollar-denominated interest rate derivatives, 
the acceleration of Australian banks’ transition to clearing has contributed to an increase in 
total notional cleared to more than $5 trillion (Graph 2).5 
Since  the regulators  issued  their  recommendation,  CME  Clearing  (CME)  has  also  become 
licensed in Australia, although it currently has no direct Australian participants. It is not yet 
clear how the competitive dynamics in this area will evolve. 
Graph 2 
Click to view larger 
 Another important consideration for the regulators was the institutional scope of any clearing 
mandate.  The  government  ultimately  followed  the  regulators’  advice  that  the  clearing 
mandates should apply only to internationally active dealers. This followed a survey, completed 
in  early  2014,  of  non-dealers’  use  of  OTC  derivatives.  Overall,  the  regulators  were  not 
convinced of the public policy case to extend clearing mandates to non-dealers. They took the 
view that the contribution to systemic risk reduction might be limited, given the relatively small 
scale of non-dealers’ activity and their typical hedging motivation. There remained questions 
over  access  to  appropriate  clearing  arrangements.  And  the  international  consistency 
motivation was also weaker. Reinforcing this conclusion, subsequent evidence suggests that 
non-dealers’ access to clearing agency services may be becoming more limited, with a number 
of instances of clearing agents stepping back from this business. 
Dealing with cross-border issues 
The third area I’d like to touch on is the cross-border dimension. Given the global nature of the 
OTC derivatives market, this has been a prominent part of the international policy debate. A 
                                                
5  The recent decline in cleared notional observed in Graph 2 represents compression activity. Compression is the 
practice of terminating offsetting trades in participants’ portfolios. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   particular  focus  has  been  the  cross-border  application  of  some  jurisdictions’  rules,  and 
arrangements  for  deference  and  cooperation  among  regulators.  For  a  jurisdiction  such  as 
Australia, with a relatively small but highly globally connected financial sector, these things are 
particularly important. A key consideration has been to ensure that regulatory settings allow 
Australian  institutions  to  remain  globally  connected.  Another  is  to  ensure  that  the  desired 
outcomes are achieved without duplicating regulatory costs for market participants. ASIC has 
given considerable thought to these questions as part of its rulemaking on mandatory clearing. 
The  Australian  agencies  have  also  worked  closely  with  overseas  regulators  on  the  cross-
border dimension. 
Let me give you a concrete example. 
In  recent  years,  equivalence  assessments  of  the  Australian  regimes  in  this  area  were 
undertaken by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA). These assessments 
were used to determine whether the European authorities would allow Australian rules to apply, 
or would impose their own requirements on Australian institutions. In the case of CCPs, the 
Australian regime was given an unconditional positive assessment of equivalence by ESMA in 
late 2013. This ultimately led to recognition for the two CCPs in the ASX Group under the 
European Market Infrastructure Regulation. 
Similarly, in the United States, ASX Clear (Futures) recently became the first foreign CCP to 
obtain  an  exemption  from  registration  as  a  Derivatives  Clearing  Organisation  by  the  US 
Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC).  This  was,  effectively,  recognition  of  the 
equivalence of the Australian regulatory regime, and it avoided a potentially costly duplication 
of requirements for that business. 
Of course, the mutual recognition process needs to work in both directions, and the Australian 
regulators  have  conducted  similar  equivalence  assessments  in  cases  where  foreign  CCPs 
have sought to offer their services here. In recent years, both LCH.C Ltd and CME have been 
licensed to offer services in Australia. In both cases, this occurred under provisions requiring 
the overseas regulatory regime to be deemed ‘sufficiently equivalent’ to that in Australia and 
supervisory cooperation arrangements to be concluded with the relevant overseas regulators. 
The resulting oversight regime maintains a broad equivalence of standards, avoids regulatory 
overlap and provides for deference to the home regulator. 
One  other  important  aspect  to  be  considered  was  the  framework  for  domestic  location 
requirements for systemically important facilities. Early in the policy process, a key question 
was the extent to which we should allow our domestic market to be cleared by an overseas-
based CCP. After careful consideration, it was decided not to insist on domestic incorporation. 
Although a financial stability argument might be made for such a requirement, the regulators 
took the view that it could risk market fragmentation and might not be sustainable in a rapidly 
changing global market. 
Instead, the council has developed a graduated framework for imposing additional regulatory 
requirements depending on the importance of a cross-border CCP to the domestic economy 
and financial system. In 2013, LCH.C Ltd became the first CCP to be granted an overseas 
licence  and  to  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  framework.  LCH.C  Ltd  has  since  established 
operational  and  governance  arrangements  commensurate  with  the  scale  of  its  services  to 
Australian  participants.  It  has  also  established  Australian  dollar  liquidity  arrangements 
consistent  with  the  requirements  for  a  systemically  important  CCP,  including  opening  an 
Exchange  Settlement  Account  with  the  Reserve  Bank.  As  part  of  the  supervisory 
arrangements, the Bank is also represented on a global college for LCH.C Ltd, led by the Bank 
of England, as well as a newly established crisis management group. 
Since CME’s operations in Australia are currently limited, additional requirements under the 
regulatory  influence framework  have  not  been triggered. The  Bank  and  ASIC  nevertheless 
have  a  joint  memorandum  of  understanding  with  the  CFTC  to  support  deference 
arrangements, both in respect of CME and in respect of the CFTC’s interest in ASX Clear 
(Futures). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What remains to be done? 
Of  course,  the  work  is  not  yet  done.  While  the  reporting  regime  has  been  almost  fully 
implemented and the transition to clearing is well advanced, some elements of the agreed 
international  package  of  derivatives  reform  have  yet  to  be  completed.  For  instance,  the 
international margining regime for non-centrally cleared derivatives is not due to come into 
force until next September; APRA is leading domestic work on the local implementation of that 
regime. At the same time, ASIC has been working on a framework for assessing the case for 
mandatory platform trading. This is one of the topics that will be considered in the regulators’ 
latest OTC derivatives market assessment report, due to published early next month. 
Internationally,  work  is  continuing  on  CCP  resilience,  recovery  and  resolution.  Regulatory 
arrangements supporting cross-border provision of CCP services will continue to be refined 
over time, with a particularly important area of focus being cross-border crisis management 
and  resolution  arrangements.  The  Australian  regulators  will  continue  to  engage  in  these 
debates. 
Conclusion 
Let me draw all this together with a few concluding remarks. 
As I said at the outset, the work on derivatives reform is just one part of a wider effort to build 
resilience in our financial systems. Given the global nature of these markets, the regulatory 
work has necessarily had a strong international dimension. 
In engaging with this, the Australian regulators have sought to keep several objectives in mind. 
Of course, there is the overarching objective of financial stability. But there are a number of 
other important aims to be taken into account: supporting market functioning; the need for our 
institutions to maintain connectedness with the rest of the world; avoiding costly duplication or 
inconsistency of requirements with other jurisdictions; and ensuring that regulatory settings are 
proportionate to the risks that need to be managed. 
In balancing these aims, we recognise that it is important to consult thoroughly with market 
participants at each stage of the process. We take that very seriously. So I take the opportunity 
today to thank market participants, and to thank ISDA, for the constructive way that you’ve 
engaged with us on all these reforms. 
Thanks for your attention today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
