   Vítor Constâncio: Divergent monetary policies and the world economy 
Keynote address by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 
conference  on  “Diverging  Monetary  Policies,  Global  Capital  Flows  and  Financial  Stability”, 
jointly organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York/European Central Bank/Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas/Hong Kong Monetary Authority, hosted by the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority, Hong Kong, 15 October 2015. 
 I wish to thank M. Ca’ Zorzi, G. Georgiadis, G. Strasser and L. Dedola, from the ECB staff for contributions in the 
preparation of this speech. 
Summary 
We  live  in  an  increasingly  globalised  world.  The  responsiveness  of  financial  markets  to 
monetary policy announcements is prima facie evidence that the exit from the zero lower bound 
may have potent spillovers on other countries in the short run. The medium-term impact of 
monetary policy spillovers is however much less clear-cut than frequently assumed in policy 
debates. Looking forward, central banks play an important role in preserving price and financial 
stability in their own constituencies, but also in stabilising the global financial system. However, 
it would be a misconception to believe that central bank actions alone are enough. Central 
banks have to respond to their own economies’ fundamentals but “putting their house in order” 
is not enough to ensure a suitable global economic environment. Global challenges require 
domestic and global responses to make the financial system more resilient. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to speak at this joint conference on “Diverging Monetary Policies, Global 
Capital Flows and Financial Stability” hosted by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
The  current  international  environment  poses  a  number  of  important  challenges  to  policy 
makers,  such  as  the  decline  in  commodity  prices,  remaining  global  imbalances  and  a 
synchronized growth slowdown in emerging economies with worldwide consequences. I could 
continue  this  list  even  further.  From  a  central  banking  perspective,  however,  an  obvious 
challenge in the coming months will be the divergence between the monetary policy stance in 
the US and other major advanced economies. 
When divergences reflect differences in fundamentals, as it is the case between the US and 
the  Euro  Area,  the  traditional  view  was  that  no  problems  would  be  created  to  the  global 
economy. However, this time the divergences could have greater global repercussions than in 
the past. This might be the case due to four momentous developments that the global economy 
has witnessed over recent years. First, several emerging economies – China in particular – 
have integrated in the global economy to an unprecedented degree. Second, the increasing 
international fragmentation of production has given rise to tight links between countries along 
the global value chain. Third, the liberalisation of capital flows and the rise of global banks have 
brought  about  strong  cross-border  financial  linkages.  Fourth,  the  zero  lower  bound  has 
rendered  central  bank  balance  sheets  and  forward  guidance  crucial  monetary  policy 
instruments. 
There is compelling “prima-facie” evidence that monetary policy in major advanced economies 
has significant spillovers to the global economy, at least in the short term. I refer here to the 
high  sensitivity  of  global  bond  yields  and  exchange  rates  to  recent  monetary  policy 
announcements in the US and the euro area. Likewise, the changes in market expectations 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   about the timing of US monetary policy tightening have given rise to bouts of financial market 
volatility.1 However, over the medium term, considering the multiplicity of channels of monetary 
policy transmission, the impact on other countries’ macroeconomic outlook is much less clear-
cut. It also critically depends on the economic fundamentals of the receiving countries, as I will 
explain in more detail later. 
The truth of the matter is that given the lack of historical precedents on what the impact of a 
major economy departing from a zero lower bound environment is, market analysts and policy 
makers do not have much of a choice other than “learning in real time”. While recent work in 
academia  and  policy  institutions  has  improved  our  understanding  of  the  transmission 
mechanisms  that  give  rise  to  global  spillovers,  we  still  live  with  more  open  questions  than 
answers. 
In the remainder of my remarks, I would like to discuss the spillovers generated by monetary 
policy  in  the  US  and  in  the  euro  area  in  more  detail.  I  shall  also  briefly  touch  upon  the 
implications of a growth slowdown in emerging economies. I will then share my views on how 
policymakers can deal with these spillovers. Finally, I will briefly touch upon policies that may 
help increase the resilience of the international monetary system. 
Monetary policy spillovers 
International  spillovers  from  the  monetary  policy  of  one  country  to  other  economies  are  a 
corollary of globalisation. This entails that we, as policymakers, have to rise to the challenge 
of conducting monetary policy in the presence of these unintended side-effects. 
The sign and magnitude of monetary policy spillovers is, a priori, less clear than assumed in 
some  economic  debates.  Consider,  for  example,  the  impact  of  a  US  dollar  appreciation 
resulting from  a  tightening  in  US  monetary  policy.  On the  one  hand,  to the  extent that the 
appreciation of the US dollar improves other economies’ price competitiveness, expenditure 
switching effects will shift US demand in favour of imported goods; at the same time, US goods 
become more expensive abroad, leading to substitution by domestic goods there. Through this 
expenditure switching channel, the spillovers from US monetary policy are expansionary for 
other countries. However, as the tightening in monetary policy leads to a dampening in US 
aggregate demand, contractionary spillovers will ensue through an overall import reduction in 
the US. As a result, the sign of the spillovers through trade is ambiguous. Recent research has 
emphasised that it depends on further complicating elements, such as the currency of trade 
invoicing.2 
While  a  traditional  textbook  would  focus  on  trade  as  the  main  channel  of  monetary  policy 
spillovers, the literature suggests that financial channels – through exchange rates and capital 
flows – are more important, especially when departing from a stylised world with frictionless 
financial  markets.  In  particular,  in  an  international  version  of  the  financial  accelerator  with 
foreign-currency  debt,  a  US  dollar  appreciation  would  increase  the  local-currency  value  of 
liabilities denominated in US dollar in the rest of the world. In turn, this would impair borrowers’ 
net-worth, at least in the absence of a matching cash-flow in US dollars.3 This is the root of the 
                                                
1  Several event studies in the literature evaluate the domestic and global impact of monetary policy changes and 
announcement by controlling for changes in economic fundamentals and news (Neely, 2010; Fratzscher, Lo 
Duca and Straub, 2013, 2014; Moore et al. 2013 and Georgiadis and Gräb, 2015). However, my take on this is 
that they are better suited to gauge the short-term rather than the long-term global impacts of monetary policy, 
in particular because they have a hard time in estimating the persistence of announcement effects. 
2  See Gopinath (2015) and ECBb (2015). 
3  This balance sheet effect has been pioneered as part of the “credit channel” of monetary policy transmission by 
Bernanke  and  Gertler  (1995).  See  Gertler,  Gilchrist  and  Natalucci  (2007)  for  an  open-economy  extension 
emphasizing private-sector foreign-currency debt. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   classic “original sin”4 in international macroeconomics, which can affect both public and private 
borrowers. The literature highlights a number of financial market imperfections that give rise to 
excessive volatility and contagion in asset prices and capital flows, magnifying the spillovers 
from monetary policy.5 It is this multitude of transmission channels, some of them going in 
opposite directions, which calls for a cautious judgement of the sign and magnitude of the 
spillovers from monetary policy. With this in mind, let me now discuss the empirical evidence 
of monetary policy spillovers between the US, the euro area and emerging economies. 
Spillovers from US monetary policy 
Let me start with the international impact of US monetary policy. There is a broad consensus 
that the spillovers emanating from the US are relatively large.6 This is rooted in the international 
role of the US dollars, both in global financial markets and in international trade. In particular, 
US  monetary  policy  greatly  affects  risk  premia,  volatility  of  asset  prices  and  global  credit 
growth.  It  has  even  been  argued  that  monetary  policy  in  the  US  is  the  driver  of  a  “global 
financial cycle”. According to this view, contractionary US monetary policy results in tighter 
financial conditions not only in the US but globally.7 
The  dominance  of  the  US  dollar  in  the  invoicing  of  US  trade  makes  spillovers  from  a  US 
monetary policy tightening, contractionary. On the one hand, because more than 90% of US 
imports are invoiced in US dollar, US demand for foreign goods hardly rises in response to US 
monetary policy through expenditure switching effects. On the other hand, as the share of US 
exports invoiced in US dollars is 97%, an appreciation of the US dollar exchange rate may 
trigger expenditure switching in the rest of the world away from US towards domestic goods. 
Overall,  the  spillovers  from  a  tightening  US  monetary  policy  to  output  growth  through 
expenditure switching are thus expansionary. In contrast, due to the stickiness of US dollar 
import prices, US demand for foreign goods closely co-moves with US aggregate demand, 
which contracts in response to the tightening in monetary policy. The dominance of the latter 
effect  renders  the  output  spillovers  from  a  tightening  US  monetary  policy  through  trade, 
contractionary. Furthermore, a high share of US exports invoiced in US dollar implies large 
spillovers to inflation abroad. 
These spillovers from US monetary policy differ across countries and regions. For example, 
changes in the euro-US dollar exchange rate have a substantial impact on euro area export 
competitiveness towards third countries whose exchange rate is linked to the US dollar, given 
the prevalence of producer-currency pricing with a share of 70% among euro area exports.8 
US monetary policy therefore affects the euro area through the relative export competitiveness 
in the world markets and the competitiveness of US exports in the euro area. Import prices in 
the euro area are partly shielded from the effects of fluctuations in exchange rates in what 
concerns imports from countries other than the US, given that about 50% of aggregate euro 
area imports are invoiced in euro. 
                                                
4  Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza (2005). 
5  See e.g. Forbes (2012). Other channels include the “risk taking channel”, which rests on the effect of monetary 
policy on the risk appetite of market participants, as described by Bruno and Shin (2015a), and Rajan (2005). 
6  See  Kim  (2001),  Canova  (2005),  Mackowiak  (2007),  Fratzscher,  Lo  Duca  and  Straub  (2013),  IMF  (2012), 
Rogers, Scotti and Wright (2014) as well as Georgiadis (2015). 
7  See Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012), Bekaert, Hoerova and Lo Duca (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2014), 
Rey (2013), as well as Bruno and Shin (2015b). 
8  The  competitiveness  of  euro area  exporters  vis-à-vis  US  domestic  producers changes  less,  because  these 
exports are mostly denominated in US dollar and are thus subject to incomplete exchange rate pass-through. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   However, the central channel of spillovers from US monetary policy appears to be via capital 
markets.9 In fact, US monetary policy has large financial spillovers, especially to European 
bond markets. German nominal bond yields, for example, follow the change of US bond yields 
in response to a US monetary policy tightening by more than one third.10 Owing to the role of 
the  US  dollar  in  emerging  economies’  integration  with  global  financial  markets,  spillovers 
through  valuation  effects,  “original  sin”  and  financial  accelerator  mechanisms,  are  much 
stronger than in the euro area. Overall, the evidence even suggests that spillovers from US 
monetary policy might be larger than the domestic effects in the US.11 
The spillovers from unconventional US monetary policy, such as the Federal Reserves’ asset 
purchases, are harder to quantify than those from conventional monetary policy. As there is 
not  a  single  monitored  policy  variable,  studies  have  to  rely  on  indirect  measures  of 
unconventional monetary policy surprises. Typically, a quantity that monetary policy appears 
to  target,  such  as  corporate  bond  spreads  or  term  premia,  has  been  used  to  do  so.  One 
difficulty in interpreting the results of this strand of the literature stems from the possibility that 
interest  rate  spreads  may  reflect  information  that  goes  beyond  what  is  captured  by  US 
monetary  policy.  As  a  second  caveat,  I  would  like  to  add  that  almost  all  unconventional 
monetary policy measures that were taken so far were expansionary. As available studies are 
necessarily  based  on  past  data,  they  might  not  be  informative  regarding  the  effects  policy 
actions have in the opposite direction. 
Spillovers from euro area monetary policy 
Turning to the euro area, the evidence suggests that spillovers from euro area monetary policy 
are smaller than those from the US, not least because of the dominance of the US dollar in 
global financial markets.12 
US inflation is shielded from exchange rate fluctuations in response to a euro area monetary 
policy loosening due to its “privileged insularity”, as almost all of US imports are invoiced in 
dollar.  By  the  same  token,  euro  area  exports  to  the  US  would  not  benefit  much  from  a 
depreciation of the euro vis-à-vis the dollar. At the same time, considering that a very large 
share of US exports to the euro area are invoiced in US dollar, there is a larger potential for 
real spillovers from euro area monetary policy to the US through expenditure switching away 
from US goods in the euro area. In this context, however, I would like to stress that if our 
monetary  policy  succeeds  in  stimulating  euro  area  aggregate  demand,  then  this  will  also 
increase euro area demand for US goods, counteracting the loss in competitiveness for US 
firms from the dollar appreciation. And as argued above, the income expenditure channel – in 
this  case  an  expenditure  increase  –  appear  to  be  quantitatively  more  important  than  the 
expenditure switching channel. 
As regards the spillovers from the euro area to emerging economies, given that about 70% of 
extra-euro area exports to these countries are invoiced in euro, there is a potential for a large 
impact through expenditure switching abroad. And due to the sheer size of the trade flows, 
such  expenditure  switching  could  have  noticeable  spillovers  in  neighbouring  economies  in 
                                                
9  For example, Kim (2001) estimates that between one-fourth and one-half of the stimulus of an expansionary US 
monetary policy for US output growth spills over to the output of Germany, France, Italy, Japan and UK. This 
spillover operates mainly through the capital market, whereas the trade channel plays only a minor role. See 
also Canova (2005); Nobili and Neri (2006); IMF 2013b; Georgiadis (2015). 
10  Ehrmann  and  Fratzscher  (2005)  estimate  that  after  1999,  about  1/3  of  US  Treasury  bill  rate  changes  feed 
through to euro area interbank rates. They find that US monetary policy has no significant impact on euro area 
beyond these indirect spillovers from US interest rates. Neely (2015) finds spillovers of a similar magnitude. 
11  See Canova (2005), Mackowiak (2007), Banerjee et al. (2015), Chen, Filardo, He and Zhu (2015), as well as 
Georgiadis (2015). 
12  See  Rogers,  Scotti,  and  Wright  (2014),  Ehrmann  and  Fratzscher  (2003,  2005),  Ehrmann,  Fratzscher  and 
Rigobon (2007), Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub (2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   likely 
through  expenditure-switching  are 
Europe. In response to a euro area monetary policy loosening, this effect would be largely 
contractionary to the extent that their currencies appreciate vis-à-vis the euro. But again, any 
contractionary  spillovers 
to  be  undone  by 
expansionary effects through the strengthening in euro area aggregate demand. And there is 
substantial  empirical  evidence  that  the  latter  dominate,  in  particular  for  neighbouring 
economies in Europe.13 
More recently, some studies have suggested that spillovers from the euro area might have 
become  larger,  in  particular  those  stemming  from  unconventional  monetary  policies  and 
operating through financial channels.14 Take the example of the ECB’s announcement of the 
Expanded Asset Purchase Program which triggered a concurrent decline in US bond yields, 
despite speculation about an imminent increase in the US Fed Funds rate.15 The large size of 
foreign assets and liabilities in the US and the euro area implies that the balance sheet effects 
of an exchange rate or interest rate change can trigger larger spillovers from the euro area to 
the US than we had been used to. 
A brief digression on emerging markets 
Allow  me  a  brief  digression  on  emerging  markets.  The  linkages  between  emerging  and 
advanced  economies  are  closely  monitored  at  the  present  time.  This  is  the  case  not  only 
because of concerns over the impact of monetary policy decisions in advanced countries but 
also given that an economic slowdown in emerging economies may potentially compromise a 
still  fragile  global  recovery.  The  lack  of  synchronisation  between  the  business  cycle  and 
monetary policies in the US and the euro area may reduce the current impact of monetary 
policy decisions in advanced countries on emerging countries as the effects tend to offset each 
other.16 The growth outlook in emerging economies may matter more than in the past. This is 
particularly evident if we consider that they account for more than 50% of world output, 40% 
of  world  trade  volumes  and  an  increasing,  albeit  still  small,  share  of  global  stock  market 
capitalisation or international bond issuance.17 China is increasingly becoming a global player, 
whose  decisions  have  increasingly  relevant  repercussions  at  the  global  level.  Its  share  on 
global  GDP  has  risen  substantially,  it  accounts  for  a  larger  share  of  global  trade,  and  is 
gradually liberalising its capital account and thereby integrating into global financial markets. 
Nevertheless, developments in China still have less direct impact on the euro area than those 
in the US. First, in 2014, the share of extra-euro area exports to the US in total exports was 
almost twice as large as the corresponding share accounted for by China.18 Second, China’s 
demand for euro area exports is largely driven by global rather than by domestic demand. In 
particular, a large share of euro area exports to China is made up of intermediate goods, which 
are, in turn, used in the production of Chinese exports to the rest of the world. Third, due to the 
remaining restrictions on China’s capital account, financial integration between the euro area 
and China remains limited. In 2013, the share of US foreign financial assets held by euro area 
residents was more than 40 times as large as the corresponding share of Chinese foreign 
                                                
13  See for example Jannsen and Klein (2011), Errit and Uusküla (2013), Falagiarda, McQuade and Tirpak (2015) 
as well as Kucharcukova, Claeys and Vasicek (2014). 
14  See Buitron and Vesperoni (2015) as well as IMF (2012, 2013, 2015). 
15  See Bank of International Settlements (2015). 
16  See He et al. (2015), Kim and Shin (2015) and Buitron and Vesperoni (2015). 
17  See Haldane (2015). 
18  12%  versus  6.9%  according  to  IMF  Direction  of  Trade  Statistics  data.  Notice  that  in  order  to  account  for 
competition faced by euro area companies in foreign markets from exporters based in third countries the weight 
of the renminbi in the euro effective exchange rate departs from the direct bilateral export linkages. In the case 
of China, the “double” export weight amounts to 16% compared to a direct export weight of 7%, over the period 
2010–12 (see ECB Economic Bulletin 6, 2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   financial assets held by euro area residents.19 And finally, a slowdown in China’s domestic 
demand lowers global commodity prices, which acts as a stimulus to commodity importers like 
the  euro  area.20  Having  said  that,  the  ECB  is  carefully  monitoring  events  in  emerging 
economies,  as  their  effect  on  the  rest  of  the  world  might  turn  out  to  be  larger  if  mutually-
reinforcing neighbourhood effects materialise.21 
Coping with monetary policy spillovers 
To cut a long story short, the global economy has become more vulnerable than ever before 
to very large real and financial spillovers. Global factors drive asset prices and cross-border 
flows. And in some cases, the ability of domestic monetary policy to achieve its mandate might 
be more limited than we used to think, in particular in emerging economies. What measures 
should be taken to manage the risks associated with the rise in global financial integration 
while not forsaking its benefits? 
One influential view in policy circles, close to being the conventional wisdom until some time 
ago, is that “putting your own house in order” is the main and best line of defence against 
external influences. Another view, that is rapidly gaining ground, surmises instead that global 
problems also require global solutions. 
The first view seems to find some support in the fact that while recent bouts of financial market 
volatility typically occurred in response to global shocks, not all economies were affected to 
the same extent. This is consistent with evidence suggesting that global push factors explain 
capital surges in general but domestic pull factors determine in which country they end up.22 
Unfortunately, 
fundamentals  mitigate  economies’ 
vulnerability to abrupt capital flows episodes is not settled. Some studies find that emerging 
economies  with  better  institutions  were  less  affected  by  unconventional  monetary  policy 
measures in advanced economies, for example. Other evidence suggests that countries that 
had  allowed  their  current  accounts  to  run  into  large  deficits  and  their  exchange  rates  to 
substantively appreciate displayed larger capital flow volatility during the taper talk in 2013. 
And one study that will be presented at the conference finds that emerging economies, that 
were  less  vulnerable  across  a  range  of  fundamentals,  displayed  a  less  pronounced 
deterioration of financial conditions during the taper tantrum.23 At the same time, a number of 
papers fail to confirm these findings concerning the relevance of fundamentals for mitigating 
spillovers.24 
Nevertheless, it is good news that many emerging economies have reduced their vulnerability 
along a number of dimensions, including having reduced current account deficits and adopted 
more flexible exchange rates. However, there remain worrisome pockets of vulnerability. The 
latter includes the level of corporate indebtedness and high stocks of foreign-currency debt in 
a number of emerging economies.25 A deterioration in the global growth outlook combined with 
the  debate  about  precisely  which 
                                                
19  13% versus 0.3% according to IMF Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey data. 
20  See IMF (2015). 
21  See IMF (2014). 
22  See Ghosh et al. (2014). 
23  Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub (2013), Eichengreen and Gupta (2014), Ahmed et al. (2015) as well as Chen 
et al. (2015). 
24  See Forbes and Warnock (2012), Forbes (2014), Cerutti et al. (2015), Aizenmann et al. (2014) and Eichengreen 
and Gupta (2014). Fratzscher, Lo Duca and Straub (2013) find no evidence consistent with the hypothesis that 
a flexible exchange rate regime or capital account restrictions helped economies to insulate from unconventional 
monetary policies abroad. 
25  See Pitterle et al. (2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   over-leveraged borrowers might pose significant challenges and non-trivial policy trade-offs for 
monetary policy. 
The second view, pointing to the need for global solutions, rests its case on a growing strand 
in the literature that argues that financial conditions around the world are driven by a global 
financial cycle in risk appetite, the leverage of global banks and capital flows. A particular role 
in the transmission of this financial cycle across the world is assumed by global banks and 
international  bond  issuance  more  recently,  as  also  highlighted  by  two  papers  that  will  be 
presented at the conference.26 As already mentioned, US monetary policy is argued to have a 
substantial influence on the global financial cycle.27 According to this increasingly popular view, 
a striking policy implication of the global financial cycle is that individual countries, especially 
emerging economies, face much starker trade-offs than those arising from the classic trilemma 
in international macroeconomics – the “impossible trinity” (a hypothesis that is also discussed 
by one of the papers that will be presented at the conference).28 The predicament of many 
economies would in fact be better described by a dilemma between imposing capital controls 
on the one hand and forsaking domestic stabilisation on the other. 
The debate about the dominance of the global financial cycle has re-ignited an old debate on 
the use of capital controls. In particular, a wave of theoretical work has emerged – one of these 
papers  will  be  presented  at  the conference29  –  that  rationalises  the  use of  capital  account 
restrictions as the welfare-optimising policy in a context in which large global shocks to capital 
flows lead to over-borrowing and financial vulnerability due to financial frictions.30 This work 
has also contributed to the IMF’s revision of its view on capital flow management.31 However, 
it is important to stress that the unilateral imposition of capital account restrictions can itself 
result in spillovers and externalities, in a suboptimal race to shift the burden of adjustment to 
global shocks from one country to others.32 
Global responses 
One might argue that the importance of common factors in global financial markets and the 
imperfect  ability  to  shield  the  domestic  economy  against  their  impact  implies  a  case  for 
international policy co-ordination.33 However, there are good reasons why binding forms of 
such co-ordination are difficult to implement in practice in the case of monetary policy. 
In particular, each central bank draws its legitimacy from a domestic political process. Each 
central bank operates within its own specific circumstances, which include its own institutional 
set-up,  mandate  and  economic/financial  market  environment.  Reaching  a  common 
understanding on what the issues are, the policy responses and the gains from engagement, 
in  view  of  the  great  uncertainties  on  how  the  global  economy  operates,  would  be  a  major 
challenge. Central banks clearly need to continue their dialogue and remain ready for swift co-
ordinated action in exceptional circumstances. Central banks play an important role in helping 
stabilise the global financial system. In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, central banks 
were swift in extending swap lines to countries in need, on a discretionary basis. Our efforts 
                                                
26  See He et al. (2015) as well as Kim and Shin (2014). 
27  See Cetorelli and Goldberg (2012), Bekaert, Hoerova and Lo Duca (2013), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey, (2014) 
and Bruno and Shin (2015b). 
28  See Georgiadis and Mehl (2015), Rey (2013) and Rey (2015). 
29  Davis and Presno (2015). 
30  See Jeanne and Korinek (2013), Mendoza and Bianchi (2011) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2015). 
31  See IMF (2012) as well as Ostry and Ghosh (2013). 
32  See Forbes et al. (2012). 
33  See Rajan (2013) and Ostry and Ghosh (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   contributing to the stabilisation have evolved into a standing swap facility among six major 
central banks. This contributes to stabilisation in a globalised world economy while respecting 
the mandates and independence of central banks. 
It would be a mistake, however, to believe that central banks can solve all problems. Central 
bank actions aim at providing liquidity, ensuring the proper transmission of monetary policy 
and  contributing  to  financial  stability.  They  are  not  aimed  at  providing  balance  of  payment 
support or at preserving the solvency of a state. This is a remit where I see much more scope 
for  international  co-ordination.  But  a  global  system  of  safety  nets  must  also  preserve  the 
incentives  to  pursue  responsible  domestic  policies  and  ensure  prudent  financial  market 
behaviour to avoid a crisis in the first place. Safety nets should be designed so that they do 
not encourage moral hazard and excessive risk taking. 
Clearly, we need to make the global financial system more resilient. At the global level, the 
biggest  innovation  over  the  past  few  years  has  perhaps  been  the  introduction  of  specific 
precautionary arrangements, the Flexible Credit Line and the Precautionary Liquidity Line by 
the IMF.34 There have been, however, other major improvements in the global financial safety 
net. In Europe, we now have a fully operational European Stability Mechanism to help countries 
in need. There is now also a Single Resolution Fund to support the resolution of banks that will 
be progressively fully financed by the banking industry. These are important steps ahead and 
Europe is not alone in improving its safety net. The Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation 
(CMIM)  in  East  Asia  has  doubled  in  size  to  USD  240bn.  And  in  July  this  year,  the  BRICs 
launched a Contingent Reserve Arrangement among themselves to the tune of USD 100bn. 
Furthermore, there has been progress in the inclusion of enhanced Collective Auction Clauses 
into newly issued international sovereign bonds to reduce the disruptiveness of sovereign debt 
restructuring. 
Nevertheless, with huge amounts of debt in US dollars being created around the world without 
liquidity backstops, we are still far from having a global lender of last resort adequate for our 
times. Without properly addressing this issue at the global level, we run the risk of a durable 
fragmentation of the international system. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Global challenges require both domestic and global responses to ensure that 
the global financial system becomes more resilient. Important steps in the right direction have 
recently been taken on both fronts, albeit admittedly, many of these innovations have not yet 
been fully tested. We should not be complacent. In many ways, the present challenges to the 
global economy place the monetary and financial system at a sort of crossroads. We should 
not  underestimate  the  challenges  of  living  in  the  ever  more  closely  interconnected  global 
economy. 
I thank you for your attention. 
References 
Ahmed Shaghil, Stephanie E. Curcuru, Francis Warnock and Andrei Zlate, 2015, presented at 
the  conference  “Divergent  Monetary  Policies,  Global  Capital  flows  and  Financial  Stability”, 
Hong Kong 15 October 2015. 
Aizenman,  Joshua,  Mahir  Binici  and  Michael  M.  Hutchison,  2014:  “The  Transmission  of 
Federal  Reserve  Tapering  News  to  Emerging  Financial  Markets”,  NBER  Working  Paper, 
no. 19980. 
                                                
34  See Haldane (2014) and Fischer (1999). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Bank for International Settlements, 2015: “BIS Quarterly Review – International banking and 
financial market developments”, March. 
Banerjee, Ryan, Michael Devereux and Giovanni Lombardo, 2015: “Self-Oriented Monetary 
Policy, Global Financial Markets and Excess Volatility of International Capital Flows”, mimeo. 
Bekaert, Geert, Marie Hoerova and Marco Lo Duca, 2013: “Risk, Uncertainty and Monetary 
policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 60(7), 771–788. 
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  and  Mark  Gertler,  1995:  “Inside  the  Black  Box:  The  Credit  Channel  of 
Monetary Policy Transmission.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(4), 27–48. 
Borio, Claudio and Haibin Zhu, 2012: “Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism?” Journal of Financial Stability 8(4), 236–251. 
Brunnermeier, Markus K. and Yuliy Sannikov, 2015: “International Credit Flows and Pecuniary 
Externalities,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1), 297–338. 
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, 2015a: “Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of 
Monetary Policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics 71, 119–132. 
Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, 2015b: “Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity”, 
Review of Economic Studies, Oxford University Press, 82(2), 535–564. 
Buitron, Carolina O. and Esteban Vesperoni, 2015: “Spillover Implications of Differences in 
Monetary Conditions in the United States and the Euro Area”, International Monetary Fund, 
2015. 
Canova, Fabio, 2005: “The Transmission of US shocks to Latin America," Journal of Applied 
Econometrics 20(2), 229–251. 
Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens and Damien Puy, 2015: Push Factors and Capital Flows to 
Emerging Markets: Why Knowing your Lender Matters, VOX CEPR. 
Cetorelli,  Nicola  and  Linda  S.  Goldberg,  2012:  “Banking  Globalization  and  Monetary 
Transmission”, Journal of Finance, American Finance Association, 67(5), 1811–1843. 
Chen,  Qianying,  Andrew  Filardo,  Dong  He  and  Feng  Zhu,  2015:  “Financial  Crisis,  US 
Unconventional Monetary Policy and International Spillovers”, BIS Working Paper 494. 
Davis, Scott and Ignacio Presno, 2015: “Capital Controls and Monetary Policy Autonomy in a 
Small  Open  Economy”  presented  at  the  conference  “Divergent  Monetary  Policies,  Global 
Capital flows and Financial Stability”, Hong Kong 15 October 2015. 
ECB, 2015a, Economic Bulletin Issue 6, Box 5. 
ECB, 2015b: “The International Role of the Euro”, European Central Bank, July. 
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher, 2003. “Interdependence between the Euro Area and 
the  U.S.:  what  Role  for  EMU?”,  Proceedings,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System. 
Ehrmann,  Michael  and  Marcel  Fratzscher,  2005:  “Equal  Size,  Equal  Role?  Interest  Rate 
Interdependence between the Euro Area and the United States”, Economic Journal 115 (506), 
928–948. 
Ehrmann, Michael and Marcel Fratzscher and Roberto Rigobon, 2011: “Stocks, Bonds, Money 
Markets  and  Exchange  Rates:  Measuring  International  Financial  Transmission”,  Journal  of 
Applied Econometrics 26(6), 948–974. 
Eichengreen, Barry and Poonam Gupta, 2014: “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectations of 
Reduced Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets," MPRA Paper 53040, 
University Library of Munich, Germany. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza, 2005: “The Pain of Original Sin” 
in:  Barry  Eichengreen  und  Ricardo  Hausmann  (eds):  Other  People’s  Money  –  Debt 
Denomination  and  Financial  Instability  in  Emerging  Market  Economies.  Chicago  University 
Press, 13–37. 
Errit, Gertrud and Lenno Uusküla, 2014: “Euro area monetary policy transmission in Estonia,” 
Baltic Journal of Economics 14(1-2), 55–77. 
Falagiarda, Matteo, Peter McQuade and Marcel Tirpák, 2015: “Spillovers From the ECB’s Non-
Standard Monetary Policies on Non-Euro area EU countries: Evidence from an Event-Study 
Analysis”, ECB Working Paper Series (forthcoming). 
Fischer, Stanley, 1999: “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort.” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 13(4), 85–104. 
Forbes,  Kristin,  2012:  “The  “Big  C”:  Identifying  and  Mitigating  Contagion”,  Proceedings  – 
Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 23–87. 
Forbes, Kristin, 2014: “Turmoil in Emerging Markets: What’s Missing from the Story?”, VOX 
CEPR. 
Forbes, Kristin and Francis Warnock, 2012: “Capital Flow Waves: Surges, Stops, Flight and 
Retrenchment”, Journal of International Economics 88(2), 235–51. 
Forbes,  Kristin,  Marcel Fratzscher, Thomas  Kostka  and  Roland  Straub, 2012:  “Bubble Thy 
Neighbor: Portfolio Effects and Externalities from Capital Controls”, NBER Working Paper, no. 
18052. 
Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca and Ronald Straub, 2013: “On the International Spillovers 
of US Quantitative Easing”, ECB Working Paper 1557. 
Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca and Roland Straub, 2014: “ECB Unconventional Monetary 
Policy  Actions:  Market  Impact, International  Spillovers  and  Transmission  Channels,”  Paper 
presented at the 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference. 
Georgiadis,  Georgios,  2015:  “Determinants  of Global  Spillovers  from  US  Monetary  Policy”, 
Journal of International Money and Finance, forthcoming. 
Georgiadis,  Georgios  and  Johannes  Gräb,  2015:  “Global  Financial  Market  Impact  of  the 
Announcement  of  the  ECB's  Extended  Asset  Purchase  Programme,”  Globalization  and 
Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 232, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
Georgiadis,  Georgios  and  Arnaud  Mehl,  2015:  “Trilemma,  not  Dilemma:  Financial 
Globalisation and Monetary Policy Effectiveness”, Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute 
Working Paper 222, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 
Gertler,  Mark,  Simon  Gilchrist  and  Fabio  M.  Natalucci,  2007:  “External  Constraints  on 
Monetary  Policy  and  the  Financial  Accelerator”,  Journal  of  Money,  Credit  and  Banking  39  
(2–3), 295–330. 
Gertler, Mark and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, 2015: “Banking, Liquidity, and Bank Runs in an Infinite 
Horizon Economy”, American Economic Review 105(7), 2011–2043. 
Giannone, Domenico, Michele Lenza and Lucrezia Reichlin, 2012: "Money, Credit, Monetary 
Policy and the Business Cycle in the Euro Area”, CEPR Discussion Paper 8944. 
Glick, Reuven and Sylvain Leduc, 2012: “Central Bank Announcements of Asset Purchases 
and the Impact on Global Financial and Commodity Markets”, Journal of International Money 
and Finance 31(8), December, 2078–2101. 
Gopinath, Gita, 2015: “The International Price System”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Economic Policy Symposium. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Ghosh, Atish R., Mahvash S. Qureshi, Jun Il Kim and Juan Zalduendo, 2014: “Surges”, Journal 
of International Economics, 92, 266–285. 
Haldane, Andrew G., 2014: “Managing Global Finance as a System”, speech delivered at the 
Maxwell Fry Annual Global Finance Lecture, Birmingham University, 29 October 2014. 
Haldane,  Andrew  G.,  2015:  “How  Low  can  You  Go?”,  speech  delivered  at  the  Portadown 
Chamber of Commerce, 18 September 2015. 
He, Dong, Eric Wong, Andrew Tsang and Kelvin Ho, 2015: “Asynchronous Monetary Policies 
and International Dollar Credit”, Working Papers 192015, Hong Kong Institute for Monetary 
Research. 
IMF, Spillover Reports, 2012, 2013 and 2014 issues. 
IMF, 2013b: Dancing Together? Spillovers, Common Shocks, and the Role of Financial and 
Trade Linkages, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3 
IMF,  2015:  Global  Financial  Stability  Report:  Navigating  Monetary  Policy  Challenges  and 
Managing Risks. Washington. 
Jannsen, Nils and Melanie Klein, 2011: “The International Transmission of Euro Area Monetary 
Policy Shocks,” Kiel Working Papers 1718, Kiel Institute for the World Economy. 
Jeanne, Olivier and Anton Korinek, 2013: “Macroprudential Regulation Versus Mopping Up 
After the Crash”, NBER Working Paper, no. 18675. 
Kim, Soyoung, 2001: “International Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence 
from VAR's”, Journal of Monetary Economics 48(2), 339–372. 
Kim, Soyoung and Shin Hyun Song Shin, 2015: “Transmission Channels of Global Liquidity” 
presented at the conference “Divergent Monetary Policies, Global Capital flows and Financial 
Stability”, Hong Kong 15 October 2015. 
Kucharcukova,  Oxana  B.,  Peter  Claeys  and  Borek  Vasicek,  2014:  “Spillover  of  the  ECB’s 
Monetary Policy Outside the Euro Area: How Different is Conventional From Unconventional 
Policy?,” Working Papers 2014/15, Czech National Bank, Research Department. 
Mackowiak,  Bartosz,  2007:  “External  Shocks,  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  and  Macroeconomic 
Fluctuations in Emerging Markets”, Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), 2512–2520. 
Mendoza, Enrique G. and Javier Bianchi, 2011: “Overborrowing, Financial Crises and Macro-
prudential”, IMF Working Papers 11/24, International Monetary Fund. 
Miranda-Agrippino,  Silvia  and  Hélene  Rey,  2014:  “World  Asset  Markets  and  the  Global 
Financial Cycle”, Technical Report, Working Paper, London Business School. 
Moore, Jeffrey, Sunwoo Nam, Myeongguk Suh and Alexander Tepper, 2013: “Estimating the 
Impacts of the U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies’ Local Currency Bond Markets”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 595. 
Neely,  Christopher  J.,  2010:  “The  Large  Scale  Asset  Purchases  Had  Large  International 
Effects”, Working Papers 2010–018, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Neely, Christopher J., 2015: “Unconventional Monetary Policy had Large International Effects”, 
Journal of Banking & Finance 52(C), 101–111. 
Nobili Andrea and Stefano Neri, 2006. The Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks from the 
US to the Euro Area”, Temi di Discussione, 606, Bank of Italy. 
Ostry, Jonathan and Atish Ghosh, 2013: “Obstacles to International Policy Coordination, and 
How to Overcome Them”, IMF Staff Discussion Note 11. 
Pitterle,  Ingo,  Fabio  Haufler  and  Pingfan  Hong,  2015:  “Assessing  Emerging  Markets’ 
Vulnerability to Financial Crisis”, Journal of Policy Modeling 37(3), 484–500. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Rajan,  Raghuram  G.,  2005:  “Has  Financial  Development  Made  the  World  Riskier?”, 
Proceedings – Economic Policy Symposium – Jackson Hole, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City, August, 313–369. 
Rajan, Raghuram G., 2013: “A Step in the Dark: Unconventional Monetary Policy after the 
Crisis”, Speech at The Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, BIS Basel. 
Rey, Hélène, 2013: “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy 
Independence”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium. 
Rey, Hélène, 2015: “International Credit Channel and Monetary Policy Autonomy”, Mundell 
Fleming Lecture (IMF), forthcoming IMF Economic Policy Review. 
Rogers,  John  H.,  Chiara  Scotti  and  Jonathan  H.  Wright,  2014:  “Evaluating  Asset-Market 
Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: a Multi-Country Review”, Economic Policy 29(80), 
749–799. 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
