   Benoît Cœuré: Interview in L’Orient-Le Jour 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank, in L’Orient-Le Jour, conducted by Ms Cyrille Nême and published on 6 October 2015. 
 Has the crisis that the euro area has experienced over the last five years damaged its 
international status? 
Paradoxically, while the euro area has been hit by two successive extremely serious crises – 
first the sub-prime crisis which brought to light serious flaws in the European banking system, 
and  then  the  so-called  “sovereign  debt  crisis”  which  revealed  weaknesses  in  economic 
governance within the euro area – these have not in any way reduced the attractiveness of the 
euro. On the contrary, the different dimensions of its international use – as a reserve currency, 
an  invoicing  currency  or  a  financing  currency  –  have  demonstrated  a  notable  stability.  At 
constant exchange rates, the share of the euro in global reserves has thus remained broadly 
stable since 2007–08. Its use as an invoicing currency or settlement currency for extra-euro 
area trade has not changed significantly either. Above all, also owing to extremely low interest 
rates  this  year,  international  borrowers  have  increasingly  used  the  euro  as  a  financing 
currency: for example, one-quarter of the debt securities issued in foreign currency this year 
in Lebanon has been in euro and, in April, Mexico became the first State to issue a bond in 
euro with a one-hundred-year maturity. 
In  fact,  and  this  is  another  paradox,  while  many  analysts  foresee  a  more  multi-polar 
international monetary system, the euro continues to be used in 20–25% of international trade, 
firmly in second place behind the dollar (50–60%). All the other currencies remain far behind, 
despite the marked progress of the renminbi in the invoicing of international trade, thanks to 
China’s leading role in the latter. 
Unlike  most  other  currencies,  the  euro  encompasses  nineteen  heterogeneous 
economies and national interests which are sometimes very divergent, as for example 
the  debates  surrounding  the  Greek  debt  crisis  reminded  us.  Does  this  remain  a 
disadvantage as far as international investors are concerned? 
The fact that the euro has maintained its international status over this period seems to signal 
confidence among investors about the ability of the euro area to overcome its crises. In forcing 
the euro area to strengthen its governance, this “trial by fire” might even have contributed to 
improving the prospects of the euro as an international currency. 
Furthermore,  with  regard  to  the  Greek  issue,  there  was  genuine  consensus  within  the 
Eurogroup that Greece had to respect the rules of the game of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU).  The  crux  of  the  debate  chiefly  concerned  the  tension  between  the  democratic 
legitimacy of an elected government and that of its European creditors, which also need to be 
accountable  to  their  citizens  regarding  the  fate  of  their  loans  or  in  granting  a  new  support 
package.  An  agreement  was  signed  in  August  and  it  is  important  for  the  new  Greek 
government to implement it in a forceful way with a view to quickly re-establishing confidence 
and enabling the Greek economy to recover. 
That said, the Greek crisis also highlighted the need to simplify the governance of the euro 
area.  This  experience  demonstrated,  for  example,  that  decision-making  by  simple  majority 
within  a  common 
is  more  efficient  and  faster  than 
intergovernmental decision-making and that it is necessary to strengthen the convergence of 
the euro area economies and facilitate the completion of Economic and Monetary Union in the 
spirit of the “Five Presidents’ Report” published in June this year – editor’s note: composed of 
Donald Tusk (European Council), Martin Schulz (European Parliament), Jean-Claude Juncker 
(European Commission), Jeroen Dijsselbloem (Eurogroup) and Mario Draghi (ECB). 
institution  such  as 
the  ECB 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
To what extent can the ECB contribute to strengthening the international status of the 
euro? 
While the prospect of seeing the euro play a substantial international role alongside the dollar 
may have been considered by some as a motivation for its creation, its promotion does not 
feature anywhere in the Treaty. Likewise, on monetary issues, the ECB’s primary mandate is 
to maintain price stability. We neither encourage nor discourage the international role for the 
euro, which continues to be essentially determined by the markets. 
That said, progress towards a genuine financial union, with better connected capital markets, 
could indirectly support their depth and liquidity and, in doing so, the international role of the 
euro. Even if this strengthening of the euro were not an aim in itself, it would attest to the 
continued confidence of the rest of the world in the single currency, but also to the success of 
the European Union in completing EMU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
