  Peter Praet: Monetary policy under uncertainty 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the FAROS Institutional Investors Forum during the 18th Euro Finance Week 2015, Frankfurt 
am Main, 19 November 2015. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the European Central Bank’s website. 
The  euro  area  economy  is  gradually  emerging  from  a  deep  and  protracted  downturn. 
However, despite improvements over the last year, real GDP is still below the level of the first 
quarter of 2008. The picture is more striking still if one looks at where nominal growth would 
be now if pre-crisis trends had been maintained. 
Amid such an environment, uncertainty about the economy naturally increases. There may 
be structural breaks in established macroeconomic relationships; firms and households may 
revise  their  expectations  about  the  economy.  Structural  reforms  introduced  in  response  to 
the crisis may also alter the way the economy responds to shocks. In the euro area we still in 
the process of understanding the impact of all these factors after seven long years of crisis. 
Uncertainty  does  not  prevent  the  central  bank  from  taking  informed  decisions.  But  it  does 
increase the importance of how we gather and assess information – broadening the set of 
inputs that we use for our policymaking, and evaluating those inputs in a more contextualised 
way. 
As such, policymaking inevitably becomes less easy to understand using mechanical policy 
rules,  and  the  importance  of  judgement  about  the  outlook  for  the  economy  –  and 
communicating clearly that judgement – increases. 
What  is  essential  is  that  uncertainty  does  not  give  rise  to  indecision.  Indeed,  even  under 
uncertainty the ECB has always proven in the past that it is willing and able to react to any 
event – and that remains the case today. In my remarks I would like to discuss some of the 
sources of uncertainty that the ECB currently faces, and how we are factoring them into our 
decision-making. 
I  will  frame  my  remarks  along  three  dimensions,  namely  (i)  uncertainty  about  the  current 
state of the economy, (ii) uncertainty about the structure of the economy; and (iii) uncertainty 
over the way economic agents form expectations about future economic developments and 
economic policy actions.1 
Uncertainty about the current state of the economy 
Deciphering  the  underlying  state  of  the  economy  is  challenging  for  policymakers  in  any 
environment, given the well-known issues surrounding the completeness of data and the lags 
in  their  release.  In  the  current  environment,  however,  a  special  form  of uncertainty  arises, 
which is linked not so much to the quality of data as to the context in which they appear. Let 
me explain what I mean with reference to the economic situation today. 
On the face of it, the incoming data points to an overall picture of normalisation in the euro 
area economy. Domestic demand is gradually strengthening. The Commission’s Economic 
Sentiment  Indicator  remains  at  levels  consistent  with  a  modest  pace  of  expansion.  The 
Purchasing Managers’ Index has also held up during the early part of the autumn – contrary, 
perhaps, to what one might have expected given the shocks that appeared since the spring, 
                                                
1  See  Ben  Bernanke’s  speech  at  the  32nd  Annual  Economic  Policy  Conference,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
St. Louis, 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  especially the slowdown in emerging economies. And while downside risks have increased, 
tail  risks  have  receded  –  not  least  thanks  to  the  policy  reactions  and  communication  of 
central banks in a number of major economies. 
Yet policymakers have to set this positive snapshot of the economy against a wider backdrop 
that is less compelling. The risks around the evolution of the global economy have shifted 
downward,  making  the  contribution  of  external  demand  to  the  recovery  less  assured. 
Domestic demand, though rising, also appears relatively weak if one considers that we are 
still in an early phase of the recovery and that there are important tailwinds supporting the 
economy – namely our monetary stimulus and lower oil prices. Investment has so far failed 
to perform its “accelerator” role for the recovery. 
This relates in part to the fact that the euro area is in the aftermath of a major financial crisis 
followed  by  a  “balance  sheet  recession”.  Financial  institutions,  firms  and  households  are 
going through a stock adjustment where the legacy of the crisis, in particular the high level of 
debt,  still  needs  to  be  fully  worked  through.  Indeed,  this  is  the  first  cycle  in  modern  times 
where real investment has not recovered its pre-crisis level after such a long period; it is in 
fact still 15% below. 
That  mixed  picture  for  activity  feeds  into  greater  uncertainty  over  the  outlook  for  inflation. 
While  we  expect  headline  inflation  to gradually  return  towards  2%,  price  pressures remain 
subdued. Measures of underlying inflation have been drifting downwards since mid-2012 and 
have remained at the lower end of our price stability range for nearly two years. And even if 
we  see  the  output  gap  steadily  closing,  there  is  quite  some  uncertainty  surrounding  its 
measurement.  Looking  forward,  financial  market  prices  suggest  that  inflation  will  remain 
below the ECB’s price stability aim for a protracted period of time. 
So how should the central bank react in this environment? 
Any potential action needs to be viewed in a context where the balance of risks to fulfilling 
our objective is on the downside. Certainly, the time horizon for central banks to normalise 
inflation  cannot  be  pre-set,  by  statute,  unconditionally.  Indeed,  in  a  vast  part  of  the  world 
where  central  banks  are  assigned  numerical  objectives  for  price  stability,  the  stabilisation 
horizon is not defined in rigid calendar-time form, but is left rather flexible for central banks to 
determine according to the nature of shocks that cause inflation to deviate from target. 
At the same time, a central bank cannot allow itself too much discretion over the time horizon 
when  inflation  should  return  to  its  target.  A  numerical  objective  which  is  rarely  realised  – 
looking forward and in retrospect – is no hard objective. Our independence rests on the fact 
that  we  are  accountable,  and  that  means  delivering  price  stability  over  a  horizon  that  is 
verifiable by the public. 
Moreover,  central  banks  know  that  if  they  lack  a  verifiable  commitment  to  control  inflation 
symmetrically  over  a  horizon  for  which  the  public  retains  some  visibility,  this  can  result  in 
inflation  expectations  becoming  “unanchored”.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  a  central  bank  may 
choose to proactively counter downside risks and thereby underpin the public’s faith in the 
effectiveness of monetary policy. 
That is why the Governing Council concluded at its last meeting to thoroughly analyse “the 
strength  and  persistence  of  the  factors  that  are  currently  slowing  the  return  of  inflation  to 
levels  below,  but  close  to,  2%  in  the medium term”,  and  would  re-examine  “the  degree of 
monetary policy accommodation.” We have to assess whether, taking the risks relating to our 
mandate into account, the overall picture in the euro area economy is one of sufficient speed 
and momentum in growth and inflation for the ECB to meet its medium-term mandate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Uncertainty about the structure of the economy 
To  deliver  our  mandate,  however,  we  also  need  to  address  the  second  dimension  of 
uncertainty – uncertainty related to the structure of the economy. More precisely, we need to 
understand and respond to evolutions in the structure of the economy caused by the crisis. 
There are two key structural conditions that matter for the central bank to meet its objective. 
First, the financial transmission channel must remain intact, so that monetary policy is able to 
maintain  sufficient  traction  over  the  economy  and  economic  slack  remains  controllable. 
Second, a structural connection between economic slack, inflation expectations and inflation 
needs to exist, with the Phillips curve providing the traditional framework to account for this 
relationship.  How  the  crisis  has  affected  both  conditions  has  been  a  persistent  source  of 
uncertainty for monetary policy – and remains so, to some extent, today. 
The process of monetary transmission has clearly become less regular during the crisis. In 
particular, the intermediation capacity of the banking sector has been affected by the legacy 
of  a  deep  financial  crisis,  followed  by  a  prolonged  balance  sheet  recession.  Such 
impairments do not impede the capacity of the central bank to control economic slack. But 
they require that we deploy monetary policy instruments that are effective in an environment 
of balance sheet adjustment – which is precisely what the ECB has done. 
Specifically, we have launched measures designed to ensure that, even as banks continue to 
deleverage, they still have incentives to price and originate credit to the real economy in a 
regular fashion. Those measures include, most notably, our credit easing package consisting 
of  the  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing  Operations  (TLTROs)  and  Asset  Purchase 
Programme (APP). Monetary transmission has also been supported by expanding the APP 
to include public sector securities. 
These instruments have had a strong impact and have contributed to the lowering of market-
based financing costs for both banks and non-financial corporations (NFCs). This has in turn, 
combined with greater competition among lenders triggered by the TLTROs, led to a sharp 
decline in banks’ lending rates across euro area Member States. 
Since  April  last  year,  lending  rates  to  NFCs  have  fallen  by  some  110–140bps  in  major 
vulnerable  countries,  suggesting  that  the  pass-through  of  the  ECB’s  policy  stance 
strengthened in those countries that were hit hardest by the crisis. Evidence from the bidding 
behaviour of banks located in those countries highlights that banks which have participated 
in at least one of the first five TLTROs have lowered their lending rates by more than non-
participants.  Progress  in  repairing  transmission  is  also  visible  in  our  SAFE  surveys,  where 
euro area SMEs signal an improvement in the availability of external sources of finance. 
Still,  even  though  the  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy  to  financial  conditions  has 
proceeded well, the transmission of financial conditions to inflation has taken longer than we 
anticipated due to new forces that have pulled in the other direction, in particular in the global 
economy. In addition, other factors in the economy continue to drag on the recovery. Those 
include the lingering debt overhang in the public and private sectors and the weakness of the 
institutions in the euro area to deal with that debt overhang. 
This  implies  two  things.  The  first  is  that  monetary  policy  needs  to  remain  sufficiently 
accommodative to offset any headwinds and produce a sustained adjustment in the path of 
inflation. Indeed, continued support for nominal growth is vital to accelerate the process of 
balance sheet repair so that banks can smoothly transmit our monetary policy and firms and 
households  can  capitalise  on  it.  The  second  is  that  other  policies  need  to  work  alongside 
monetary  policy  in  removing  those  disinflationary  forces  –  for  example,  by  governments 
improving the framework for resolution of non-performing loans. 
But even if we can be confident that our policy can influence slack, can we be confident that 
slack can influence inflation? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Regarding the Phillips curve, a precondition for central banks to exercise monetary control is 
that it remains negatively sloped – in the inflation/unemployment space. There has been a 
debate  stretching  over  decades  about  the  stability  of  the  Phillips  curve  and  its  power  to 
explain inflation developments. That has only intensified during the crisis. 
While there is no agreed upon functional form of the Phillips curve, my own assessment of 
the  body  of  evidence  is  that,  on the  whole  and  using  an  array  of  different  economic  slack 
measures,  the  inflation-unemployment  connection  remains  intact  and  in  fact  may  have 
strengthened during the crisis. This appears to be especially true in countries such as Spain 
and Italy where lawmakers have actively reformed local labour market institutions and weak 
demand has led to a protracted period of wage moderation. 
Another  reason  why  I  do  not  see  signs  of  a  disconnection  between  inflation  and 
unemployment in the euro area is that – echoing a point also raised by Robert Gordon – the 
inflation process is occasionally subject to short-term spells of inertial drift, when supply side 
shocks  hit  repeatedly  and  cause  serial  downward  inflation  surprises.  The  sequence  of 
negative commodity price surprises we have experienced may therefore have dampened the 
reflationary effect of the economic recovery, but only temporarily. 
The slope of the Phillips Curve, however, is of course only one relevant aspect. What also 
matters  for  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  deliver  price  stability  is  the  intercept,  which  is 
determined  principally  by  inflation  expectations.  This  brings  me  to  the  third  dimension  of 
uncertainty  that  is  relevant  for  our  decision-making  –  uncertainty  over  the  way  economic 
agents form expectations about future economic developments and economic policy actions. 
Uncertainty over the way economic agents form expectations about future economic 
developments and economic policy actions 
In  terms  of  inflation  expectations,  a  series  of  both  demand  and  supply  shocks  in  the  euro 
area have led, at times, to a possible loosening in the anchoring of agents expectations of 
inflation.  Today,  inflation  expectations  have  only  partially  regained  the  values  that  would 
indicate a rapid and sustained adjustment in the path of inflation to levels closer to 2%. In 
particular,  we  have  seen,  on  occasions,  longer-term  inflation  expectations  responding  to 
short-term  movements  in  oil  prices.  That  is  unacceptable  for  a  central  bank,  insofar  as  it 
implies that people’s expectations of its reaction function have become less certain. 
At the same time, the crisis has also left a mark on agents’ expectations of economic activity. 
Many countries are confronting a situation of disappointed growth expectations. For the euro 
area  as  a  whole,  5  years  ahead growth  expectations  among forecasters  have  been falling 
continuously since 2001, and during the crisis the distribution of those expectations has also 
widened,  reflecting  greater  uncertainty  about  the  lasting  impact  of  the  crisis  on  potential 
output. This matters for our policy insofar as lower expectations of future income feed back 
into the present and add to the forces weighing on against inflation. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  affect  expectations  about  long-term  growth:  that  is  the  task  of 
governments introducing structural reforms. Monetary policy can and must, however, anchor 
inflation  expectations. Indeed,  when  all  the  structural  preconditions  are  in  place for  central 
banks  to  influence  short-term  real  activity  and  limit  excessive  fluctuations  in  inflation  – 
namely  a  negative  Phillips  curve  coefficient  and  a  viable  transmission  mechanism  –  a 
responsible monetary policy has the capacity to deliver on its mandate of price stability. 
The ECB’s actions and communication internalise this responsibility. During the dark days of 
the  crisis,  many  observers  expected  that  the  EU  environment  of  diffuse  macroeconomic 
authority would lead to strategic paralysis. Instead, the ECB has risen to its responsibility of 
ensuring control over inflation in the medium-term, and has responded vigorously to any risks 
of  inflation  expectations  becoming  unanchored.  We  will  continue  to  do  so  for  as  long  as 
needed to bring inflation back to our objective. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  That  being  said,  it  is  clear  that  all  stakeholders  in  the  fiscal  and  structural  policy  domains 
must  play  their  part  in  ensuring  a  swift  and  sustained  recovery.  In  particular,  a  concerted 
effort is needed to boost growth via increased investment. More investment in education and 
training  as  well  as  on  R&D  would  put  more  of  the  labour  force  into  work  and  foster  new 
waves of innovation. In addition, measures to increase the profitability of investment would 
incentivise  firms  to  capitalise  on  low  interest  rates  and  replace  underutilised  and  obsolete 
capital as well as to invest in R&D and intangible capital. This is particularly acute in certain 
euro area countries where there has been a precipitous decline on the net return of capital. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, coming out of a prolonged and painful crisis a central bank inevitably confronts 
greater  uncertainty.  Achieving  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  becomes  more  complex, 
deploying the instruments of monetary policy becomes more complicated, and stabilising the 
public’s expectations of monetary policy becomes more challenging. 
Responding to that environment requires that central banks assess and process information 
cautiously – that they take a broader view of the economy and a more preventive orientation 
towards emerging risks. But most importantly, it requires that they are ready to take informed 
decisions; to act under uncertainty and deliver their mandates. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
