   Mark Carney: Breaking the tragedy of the horizon – climate change and 
financial stability 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at Lloyd’s of London, London, 29 September 2015. 
 I am grateful to Rhys Phillips and Iain de Weymarn for their assistance in preparing these remarks, and to Michael 
Sheren, Clare Ashton, Matthew Scott and Professor Myles Allen for their comments. 
I’m grateful to Lloyd’s for the invitation to speak tonight on the occasion of the first City Dinner 
held in this magnificent, eponymous “Room”. 
Lloyd’s is the bedrock of the UK insurance industry. 
An industry whose direct contribution to the UK economy is impressive: 300,000 high-paying 
jobs and £25bn in annual GDP.  
Its economic contribution goes much deeper. 
Insurance supports households, companies and investors, safeguarding them from perils they 
could not otherwise shoulder. 
It  matches  long-term  savings  and  investment,  financing  the  infrastructure  essential  to 
productivity.  
With  its  unique  perspective  and  skill  set,  insurance  diversifies  the  financial  system  and 
reinforces its resilience. 
Since 1688 Lloyd’s has, in the great tradition of the City, served both the UK and the world, 
providing protection against the perils of the age; helping enterprise and trade to thrive. 
From its origins in marine insurance, the Lloyd’s market has evolved constantly to meet the 
needs of a rapidly changing world.  
The first excess of loss reinsurance was created here. 
Modern catastrophe cover was born with your decision to stand by policyholders after the San 
Francisco earthquake.  
And Lloyd’s pioneered aviation insurance.1  
With eyes constantly on the horizon, Lloyd’s has remained at the forefront of global insurance. 
Today, you are insuring new classes of risk in new parts of the world – from cyber to climate, 
from space to specie, from Curitiba to Chengdu. 
And you are doing so in market conditions as challenging as any in the last 20 years. 
The need to manage emerging, mega risks is as important as ever. 
Alongside major technological, demographic and political shifts, our very world is changing. 
Shifts in our climate bring potentially profound implications for insurers, financial stability and 
the economy. 
I will focus on those risks from climate change this evening.  
                                                
1   The first aviation policy was written in 1911, followed in 1919 by the founding of the British Aviation Insurance 
Association. That venture closed in 1921, with underwriters concluding that “there seems to be no immediate 
future in aviation insurance…” www.lloyds.com/lloyds/about-us/history/innovation-and-unusual-risks/pioneers-
of-travel. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    The tragedy of the horizon 
There is a growing international consensus that climate change is unequivocal.2  
Many of the changes in our world since the 1950s are without precedent: not merely over 
decades but over millennia. 
Research tells us with a high degree of confidence that: 
• 
In the Northern Hemisphere the last 30 years have been the warmest since Anglo-
Saxon  times;  indeed,  eight  of  the  ten  warmest  years  on  record  in  the  UK  have 
occurred since 2002;3  
Atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases are at levels not seen in 800,000 
years; and  
• 
The rate of sea level rise is quicker now than at any time over the last 2 millennia.4  
Evidence is mounting of man’s role in climate change. Human drivers are judged extremely 
likely to have been the dominant cause of global warming since the mid-20th century.5 While 
natural fluctuations may mask it temporarily, the underlying human-induced warming trend of 
two-tenths of a degree per decade has continued unabated since the 1970s.6  
While there is always room for scientific disagreement about climate change (as there is with 
any scientific issue) I have found that insurers are amongst the most determined advocates 
for tackling it sooner rather than later. And little wonder. While others have been debating the 
theory, you have been dealing with the reality:  
• 
• 
Since the 1980s the number of registered weather-related loss events has tripled; and 
Inflation-adjusted insurance losses from these events have increased from an annual 
average of around $10bn in the 1980s to around $50bn over the past decade.7 
The challenges currently posed by climate change pale in significance compared with what 
might come. The far-sighted amongst you are anticipating broader global impacts on property, 
migration and political stability, as well as food and water security.8 
So why isn’t more being done to address it? 
A classic problem in environmental economics is the tragedy of the commons. The solution to 
it lies in property rights and supply management. 
                                                
2   For instance, the IPCC has stated “Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many 
of the observed changes are unprecedented over decades to millennia”. See IPCC - Climate Change 2014: 
Synthesis  Report.  Contribution  of  Working  Groups  I,  II  and  III  to  the  Fifth  Assessment  Report  of  the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014). 
3   See www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/releases/archive/2015/Record-UK-temps-2014. 
4   See IPCC (2014).  
5   See IPCC (2014) which notes that the effects of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, together with other 
anthropogenic drivers are “extremely likely to have been the dominant cause of observed [global] warming since 
the mid-20th Century”. 
6   See, for example, Otto et al (2015). 
7   See Munich Re, NatCatSERVICE (2015). 
8   The report “Risky Business – the economic risks of climate change in the United States” (2014) suggests that 
in  the  USA  $238-507bn  worth  of  coastal  property  could  be  below  sea  level  by  2100.  Research  by  
food  security.  See 
Lloyd’s 
www.lloyds.com/~/media/lloyds/reports/emerging%20risk%20reports/food%20report.pdf.  This 
is  consistent 
with the views expressed by Lloyd’s market participants surveyed by the PRA for its report to Defra. 
identifies  climate  change  as  an 
important  supply-side 
issue 
for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Climate change is the Tragedy of the Horizon.  
We don’t need an army of actuaries to tell us that the catastrophic impacts of climate change 
will  be  felt  beyond  the  traditional  horizons  of  most  actors  –  imposing  a  cost  on  future 
generations that the current generation has no direct incentive to fix. 
That means beyond:  
• 
• 
• 
the business cycle;9  
the political cycle; and 
the horizon of technocratic authorities, like central banks, who are bound by their 
mandates.  
The horizon for monetary policy extends out to 2-3 years. For financial stability it is a bit longer, 
but typically only to the outer boundaries of the credit cycle – about a decade.10 
In other words, once climate change becomes a defining issue for financial stability, it may 
already be too late. 
This paradox is deeper, as Lord Stern and others have amply demonstrated. As risks are a 
function of cumulative emissions, earlier action will mean less costly adjustment.11 
The desirability of restricting climate change to 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels12 leads 
to the notion of a carbon “budget”, an assessment of the amount of emissions the world can 
“afford”.  
Such a budget - like the one produced by the IPCC13 – highlights the consequences of inaction 
today for the scale of reaction required tomorrow. 
These actions will be influenced by policy choices that are rightly the responsibility of elected 
governments, advised by scientific experts. In ten weeks representatives of 196 countries will 
gather in Paris at the COP21 summit to consider the world’s response to climate change. It is 
governments who must choose whether, and how, to pursue that 2 degree world.  
And the role of finance? Earlier this year, G20 Finance Ministers asked the Financial Stability 
Board to consider how the financial sector could take account of the risks climate change poses 
to our financial system. 
As  Chair  of  the  FSB  I  hosted  a  meeting  last  week  where  the  private  and  public  sectors 
discussed the current and prospective financial stability risks from climate change and what 
might be done to mitigate them.  
I want to share some thoughts on the way forward after providing some context beginning with 
lessons from the insurance sector. 
                                                
9   Few business leaders list climate change as a near-term pressing risk. See, for instance, PWC’s annual survey 
of CEOs (www.pwc.com/gx/en/ceo-agenda/ceo-survey.html) and the Bank of England’s Systemic Risk Survey 
(www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/other/srs/srs2015h1.pdf). 
10   Even credit ratings typically only look out to 3-5 years. 
11   For instance, IPCC (2014) Conclusion SPM 2.1 notes that “cumulative emissions of CO2 largely determine 
global mean surface warming by the late 21st century and beyond”. The Stern review observes that “many 
greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide, stay in the atmosphere for more than a century” (See The Stern 
Review of the Economic Effects of Climate Change (2006)). 
12   The Cancun Agreement in 2010 committed governments to “hold the increase in global average temperature 
below two degrees”. Discussion of this level has been attributed to Nordhaus (1975). Others, including the UNEP 
Advisory Group on Greenhouse Gasses (1990) have suggested that two degrees could be a point beyond which 
the damage caused by climate change may become non-linear.  
13   See IPCC (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Climate change and financial stability  
There are three broad channels through which climate change can affect financial stability: 
– 
First,  physical  risks:  the  impacts  today  on  insurance  liabilities  and  the  value  of 
financial assets that arise from climate- and weather-related events, such as floods 
and storms that damage property or disrupt trade;  
Second, liability risks: the impacts that could arise tomorrow if parties who have 
suffered loss or damage from the effects of climate change seek compensation from 
those they hold responsible. Such claims could come decades in the future, but have 
the potential to hit carbon extractors and emitters – and, if they have liability cover, 
their insurers – the hardest; 
Finally, transition risks: the financial risks which could result from the process of 
adjustment  towards  a  lower-carbon  economy.  Changes  in  policy,  technology  and 
physical risks could prompt a reassessment of the value of a large range of assets as 
costs and opportunities become apparent.  
  The speed at which such  re-pricing occurs is uncertain and could be decisive for financial 
stability.  There  have  already  been  a  few  high  profile  examples  of  jump-to-distress  pricing 
because of shifts in environmental policy or performance. 
Risks  to  financial  stability  will  be  minimised  if  the  transition  begins  early  and  follows  a 
predictable path, thereby helping the market anticipate the transition to a 2 degree world. 
To  draw  out  these  crucial  points  consider  the  Bank  of  England’s  current  approach  to  the 
insurance sector.  
As  regulator  of  the  world’s  third  largest  insurance  industry,  the  PRA  is  responsible  for 
protecting policyholders and ensuring the safety and soundness of insurers.  
Our supervision is forward-looking and judgement-based. It is risk-based and proportionate 
– tailored to different business models around the sector – and considers both business-as-
usual and whether a firm can fail safely – recognising that “zero failure” is neither desirable nor 
realistic. 
Our supervisors take a view of your business plans, risk management, governance, and capital 
models. Where the PRA judges that it is necessary to intervene it does so sooner rather than 
later. 
While our mandate is to protect policyholders – many of whom are local – we are conscious 
that international competition needs robust and internationally-consistent regulatory standards.  
Solvency II is a good example. It is a prudent but proportionate Directive, that embodies the 
core principles of our domestic standards and embeds them more consistently across Europe 
while replacing a patchwork of local regimes.  
Another example of how best practice is converging globally is the FSB agreement last week 
on HLA for global systemic insurers, as well as its support for the IASB completing its new 
insurance  contracts  standard.  The  UK  insurance  industry  is  well-prepared  for  such 
developments. 
Forward-looking regulators consider not just the here and now, but emerging vulnerabilities 
and their impact on business models. 
That  is  why  the  PRA  has  worked  with  regulated  firms,  many  of  them  represented  here 
tonight, to produce for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs a review – 
published today – into the impact of climate change on British insurers.  
The Report concludes that insurers stand exposed to each of the three types of risk climate 
change poses to finance; and while the sector is well-placed to respond in the near-term you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
should not assume your ability to manage risks today means the future is secure. Longer term 
risks could have severe impacts on you and your policyholders. 
The insurance response to climate change 
It stands to reason that general insurers are the most directly exposed to such losses. 
Potential increases in the frequency or severity of extreme weather events driven by climate 
change could mean longer and stronger heat waves; the intensification of droughts; and a 
greater number of severe storms.  
Despite  winter  2014  being  England’s  wettest  since  the  time  of  King  George  III;  forecasts 
suggest we can expect at least a further 10% increase in rainfall during future winters.14 
A prospect guaranteed to dampen the spirits and shoes of those who equate climate change 
with global warming. 
While the attribution of increases in claims to specific factors is complex, the direct costs of 
climate change are already affecting insurers’ underwriting strategies and accounts. 
For example, work done here at Lloyd’s of London estimated that the 20cm rise in sea-level at 
the  tip  of  Manhattan  since  the  1950s,  when  all  other  factors  are  held  constant,  increased 
insured losses from Superstorm Sandy by 30% in New York alone.15 
Beyond  these  direct  costs,  there  is  an  upward  trend  in  losses that  arise  indirectly  through 
second-order events like the disruption of global supply chains. 
Insurers are therefore amongst those with the greatest incentives to understand and tackle 
climate  change  in  the  short  term.  Your  motives  are  sharpened  by  commercial  concern  as 
capitalists and by moral considerations as global citizens. And your response is at the cutting 
edge of the understanding and management of risks arising from climate change.  
Lloyd’s underwriters were the first to use storm records to mesh natural science with finance 
in order to analyse changing weather patterns. Events like Hurricanes Andrew, Katrina and Ike 
have  helped  advance  catastrophe  risk  modelling  and  provisioning.16  Today  Lloyd’s 
underwriters  are  required  to consider  climate change  explicitly  in  their  business  plans  and 
underwriting models.  
Your genius has been to recognise that past is not prologue and that the catastrophic norms 
of the future can be seen in the tail risks of today.  
For example, by holding capital at a one in 200 year risk appetite, UK insurers withstood the 
events of 2011, one of the worst years on record for insurance losses. Your models were 
validated, claims were paid, and solvency was maintained. 
The combination of your forecasting models, a forward-looking capital regime and business 
models built around short-term policies means general insurers are well-placed to manage 
physical risks in the near term.  
                                                
research 
14   See  Met  Office 
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/media/pdf/t/r/UK.pdf. 
into 
climate 
observations, 
projections 
and 
impacts 
 15  A  Lloyd’s 
report 
(“Catastrophe  Modelling  and  Climate  Change” 
that  
influence  the  impact  of  hurricanes.  It  notes  the  importance  of  sea-level  changes  –  in  addition  to  
wind 
See 
www.lloyds.com/~/media/Lloyds/Reports/Emerging%20Risk%20Reports/CC%20and%20modelling%20templa
te%20V6.pdf. 
looks  at 
-  2014) 
factors 
impact 
Sandy 
speed 
York. 
tides 
New 
and 
the 
on 
of 
in 
 16   As the PRA’s report to Defra notes, major catastrophe events have often driven innovations in risk management. 
For example, following Hurricane Andrew (1992, $15.5 billion uninflated insured losses) and the associated 
insolvency of eight insurance companies, the industry developed a more sophisticated approach to assessing 
catastrophe risk, and became more resilient to similar events.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
But  further  ahead,  increasing  levels  of  physical  risk  due  to  climate  change  could  present 
significant challenges to general insurance business models. 
Improvements in risk modelling must be unrelenting as loss frequency and severity shifts with: 
– 
– 
– 
Insurance extending into new markets not covered by existing models; 
Previously unanticipated risks coming to the fore; and 
Increasingly volatile weather trends and hydrological cycles making the future ever-
harder to predict.  
For example, the extent to which European windstorms occur in clusters17 could increase the 
frequency of catastrophes and reduce diversification benefits.  
Indeed, there are some estimates that currently modelled losses could be undervalued by as 
much as 50% if recent weather trends were to prove representative of the new normal.18 In 
addition,  climate  change  could  prompt  increased  morbidity  and  mortality  from  disease  or 
pandemics. 
Such  developments  have  the  potential  to  shift  the  balance  between  premiums  and  claims 
significantly, and render currently lucrative business non-viable. 
Absent actions to mitigate climate change, policyholders will also feel the impact as pricing 
adjusts and cover is withdrawn.19  
Insurers’ rational responses to physical risks can have very real consequences and pose acute 
public policy problems.  
In some extreme cases, householders in the Caribbean have found storm patterns render them 
unable to  get private cover, prompting mortgage lending to dry up, values to collapse and 
neighbourhoods to become abandoned.  
Thankfully these cases are rare. But the recognition of the potential impact of such risks has 
prompted a publicly-backed scheme in the UK – Flood Re – to ensure access to affordable 
flood insurance for half a million homes now considered to be at the highest risk of devastating 
flooding.  
This example underlines a wider point. While the insurance industry is well placed to adapt to 
a  changing  climate  in  the  short-term,  their  response  could  pose  wider  issues  for  society, 
including whether to nationalise risk. 
The passage of time may also reveal risks that even the most advanced models are not able 
to predict, such as third party liability risks. 
Participants in the Lloyd’s market know all too well that what appear to be low probability risks 
can evolve into large and unforeseen costs over a longer timescale.  
Claims  on  third-party  liability  insurance  –  in  classes  like  public  liability,  directors’  and 
officers’ and professional indemnity - could be brought if those who have suffered losses show 
that insured parties have failed to mitigate risks to the climate; failed to account for the damage 
they cause to the environment; or failed to comply with regulations. 
                                                
17   Discussions on correlation are not new. For example, a current issue is the extent to which European windstorms 
occur in clusters, such as windstorms Daria, Vivian, Wiebke and Herta in 1990 and Lothar, Martin, and Anatol 
in 1999.  
18   See Standard and Poor’s – “Climate Change Could Sting Reinsurers That Underestimate Its Impact” (2014).  
19   In 1992 after Hurricanes Andrew and Iniki hit the US, the price of reinsuring weather risks spiked and several 
carriers left the market, leading to a rise of up to 40% in premiums in some parts of Florida. A series of hurricanes 
affecting the Bahamas has prompted several insurers to withdraw flood cover for low-lying areas. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Asbestos alone is expected to cost insurers $85bn on a net ultimate claims basis in the United 
States – equivalent to almost three Superstorm Sandy-sized loss events.20  
It would be premature to draw too close an analogy with climate risks, and it is true that court 
cases have, so far, largely been unsuccessful.  
Cases like Arch Coal and Peabody Energy – where it is alleged that the directors of corporate 
pension schemes failed in their fiduciary duties by not considering financial risks driven at least 
in part by climate change21 – illustrate the potential for long-tail risks to be significant, uncertain 
and non-linear.  
And “Loss and Damage” from climate change – and what to do about it – is now formally on 
the  agenda  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  with  some 
talking openly about the case for compensation.22 
These risks will only increase as the science and evidence of climate change hardens.  
Physical risks from climate change will also become increasingly relevant to the asset side of 
insurer’s balance sheets.23 
While the ability to re-price or withdraw cover mitigates some risk to an insurer, as climate 
change progresses, insurers need to be wary of cognitive dissonance within their organisations 
whereby prudent decisions by underwriters lead to falls in the value of properties held by the 
firm’s asset managers. This highlights the transition risk from climate change. 
Transition risks  
The UK insurance sector manages almost £2tn in assets to match liabilities that often span 
decades.  
While a given physical manifestation of climate change – a flood or storm – may not directly 
affect a corporate bond’s value, policy action to promote the transition towards a low-carbon 
economy could spark a fundamental reassessment. 
Take,  for  example,  the  IPCC’s  estimate  of  a  carbon  budget  that  would  likely  limit  global 
temperature rises to 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels.  
That budget amounts to between 1/5th and 1/3rd world’s proven reserves of oil, gas and coal.24  
                                                
20   See  AM  Best  –  Special  Report:  Asbestos  Losses  Fueled  by  Rising  Number  of  Lung  Cancer  Cases  (2013) 
www.ambest.com/ambv/bestnews/presscontent.aspx?altsrc=0&refnum=20451. 
21   See  Roe  v  Arch  Coal  Inc  et  al,  Case:  4:15-cv-00910-NAB,  United  States  District  Court,  Eastern  
v  Peabody  Energy  Corporation  et  al,  
of  Missouri,  
District  of  Missouri,  9 
Case: 
11 June 2015. Note that as at 1 September 2015 the defences to these claims were yet to be filed.  
4:15-cv-00916-AGF,  United  States  District  Court,  Eastern  District 
June  2015  and  Lynn 
22   Loss and damage refers to impact of climate change not mitigated by reductions in emissions. The UNFCCC 
Warsaw  agreement  in  2013  discussed  support  for  measures  to  address  loss  and  damage.  See 
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2013/cop19/eng/10a01.pdf. 
23   The  largest  UK  insurers  hold  or  manage  in  excess  of  £40bn  of  CRE  and  infrastructure  assets,  and  have 
committed to further such investments in future. For instance, six major insurers pledged to invest £25bn into 
UK  domestic  infrastructure  in  2013  as  part  of  the  Government’s  national  infrastructure  plan  (see 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/1f74e176-5c41-11e3-b4f3-00144feabdc0.html). 
24   The IPCC gives a range of budgets for future emissions which depends on assumptions about other climate 
drivers and the level of risk of temperatures going >2 degrees that society is willing to accept. It sets these in 
the context of existing fossil fuel reserves. See table 2.2 in IPCC (2014).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   
If that estimate is even approximately correct it would render the vast majority of reserves 
“stranded” – oil, gas and coal that will be literally unburnable without expensive carbon capture 
technology, which itself alters fossil fuel economics.25  
The exposure of UK investors, including insurance companies, to these shifts is potentially 
huge. 
19% of FTSE 100 companies are in natural resource and extraction sectors; and a further 11% 
by value are in power utilities, chemicals, construction and industrial goods sectors. Globally, 
these two tiers of companies between them account for around one third of equity and fixed 
income assets. 
On the other hand, financing the de-carbonisation of our economy is a major opportunity for 
insurers  as  long-term  investors.  It  implies  a  sweeping  reallocation  of  resources  and  a 
technological  revolution,  with  investment  in  long-term  infrastructure  assets  at  roughly 
quadruple the present rate.26 
For  this  to  happen,  “green”  finance  cannot  conceivably  remain  a  niche  interest  over  the 
medium term.  
There are a number of factors which could influence the speed of transition to a low carbon 
economy including public policy, technology, investor preferences and physical events. 
From a regulator’s perspective the point is not that a reassessment of values is inherently 
unwelcome.  It  is  not.  Capital  should  be  allocated  to  reflect  fundamentals,  including 
externalities. 
But  a  wholesale  reassessment  of  prospects,  especially  if  it  were  to  occur  suddenly,  could 
potentially destabilise markets, spark a pro-cyclical crystallisation of losses and a persistent 
tightening of financial conditions. 
In other words, an abrupt resolution of the tragedy of horizons is in itself a financial stability 
risk.  
The more we invest with foresight; the less we will regret in hindsight. 
And there are ways to make that more likely. 
Financial policy implications 
Financial policymakers will not drive the transition to a low-carbon economy. It is not for a 
central banker to advocate for one policy response over another. That is for governments to 
decide.  
But  the  risks  that  I  have  outlined  mean  financial  policymakers  do,  however,  have  a  clear 
interest  in  ensuring  the  financial  system  is  resilient  to  any  transition  hastened  by  those 
decisions, and that it can finance the transition efficiently.  
Some  have  suggested  we  ought  to  accelerate  the  financing  of  a  low  carbon  economy  by 
adjusting the capital regime for banks and insurers. That is flawed. History shows the danger 
                                                
25   The IPCC makes clear that, without this critical technology, the cost of meeting the two degree goal more than 
doubles  –  if  it  can  be  achieved  at  all.  Canada  is  home  to  the  world’s  first  commercial-scale  CCS  plant  at 
Boundary  Dam.  Other  projects  rely  on  government  subsidies  which can  prove  unreliable.  If companies  are 
relying on CCS to achieve net zero carbon emissions, investors will want to assess how they plan to get there 
– and who they expect to pay for it.  
26   The IPCC estimates that additional investment of US$ 190-900bn is required annually in the energy sector alone 
if the rise in average global temperature is to be capped at 2C. www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/ Mercer estimates that 
additional  cumulative  investment  in  efficiency  improvements,  renewable  energy,  biofuels  and  nuclear,  and 
carbon 
2030. 
www.mercer.com/insights/point/2014/climate-change-scenarios-implications-for-strategic-asset-allocation.html 
of  US$3-5trn 
capture 
storage 
range 
could 
and 
the 
be 
by 
in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
of attempting to use such changes in prudential rules – designed to protect financial stability 
– for other ends. 
More properly our role can be in developing the frameworks that help the market itself to adjust 
efficiently. 
Any efficient market reaction to climate change risks as well as the technologies and policies 
to address them must be founded on transparency of information.  
A “market” in the transition to a 2 degree world can be built. It has the potential to pull forward 
adjustment  –  but  only  if  information  is  available  and  crucially  if  the  policy  responses  of 
governments and the technological breakthroughs of the private sector are credible. 
That is why, following our discussions at the FSB last week, we are considering recommending 
to the G20 summit that more be done to develop consistent, comparable, reliable and clear 
disclosure around the carbon intensity of different assets. 
Better information to allow investors to take a view 
An old adage is that which is measured can be managed. 
Information  about  the  carbon  intensity  of  investments  allows  investors  to  assess  risks  to 
companies’ business models and to express their views in the market.  
A well-known dictum of macroeconomics is Say’s Law: that supply creates demand.  
This means that the act of producing new products creates income and profits that ultimately 
finance the demand for them. 
By analogy, a framework for firms to publish information about their climate change footprint, 
and how they manage their risks and prepare (or not) for a 2 degree world, could encourage a 
virtuous circle of analyst demand and greater use by investors in their decision making. It would 
also improve policymaker understanding of the sources of CO2 and corporate preparedness.  
A carbon budget – like the one produced by the IPCC – is hugely valuable, but can only really 
be brought to life by disclosure, giving policymakers the context they need to make choices, 
and firms and investors the ability to anticipate and respond to those choices. 
Given  the  uncertainties  around  climate,  not  everyone  will  agree.  Some  might  dispute  the 
IPCC’s calculations. Others might despair that there will never be financial consequences of 
burning  fossil  fuels.  Still  others  could  take  a  view  that  the  stakes  make  political  action 
inevitable.  
The right information allows sceptics and evangelists alike to back their convictions with their 
capital.  
It will reveal how the valuations of companies that produce and use fossil fuels might change 
over time.  
It will expose the likely future cost of doing business, paying for emissions, changing processes 
to avoid those charges, and tighter regulation.  
It will help smooth price adjustments as opinions change, rather than concentrating them at a 
single climate “Minsky moment”. 
Crucially, it would also allow feedback between the market and policymaking, making climate 
policy a bit more like monetary policy.  
Policymakers  could  learn  from  markets’  reactions  and  refine  their  stance,  with  better 
information allowing more informed reactions, and supporting better policy decisions including 
on targets and instruments.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   Consistent – in scope and objective across the relevant industries and sectors; 
Comparable – to allow investors to assess peers and aggregate risks;  
Reliable – to ensure users can trust data;  
Clear – presented in a way that makes complex information understandable; and 
Efficient – minimising costs and burdens while maximising benefits. 
A climate disclosure task force 
That better information – about the costs, opportunities and risks created by climate change 
– can promote timely responses is not a new idea.  
Much the opposite: there are already nearly 400 initiatives to provide such information.  
Existing  schemes  vary  in  their  status  (from  laws  to  voluntary  guidance);  scope  (from 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  broader  environmental  risks);  and  ambition  (from  simple 
disclosure to full explanations of mitigation and divestment strategies).27  
In aggregate over 90% of FTSE 100 firms and 80% of Fortune Global 500 firms participate in 
these  various  initiatives.  For  instance,  the  Carbon  Disclosure  Project  makes  available 
disclosure from 5,000 companies to investment managers responsible for over $90 trillion of 
assets. 
The existing surfeit of existing schemes and fragmented disclosures means a risk of getting 
“lost in the right direction”. 
In any field, financial, scientific or other, the most effective disclosures are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Meeting  these  standards  requires  coordination,  something  the  G20  and  FSB  are  uniquely 
placed to provide.  
The logical starting point is a co-ordinated assessment of what constitutes effective disclosure, 
by those who understand what is valuable and feasible. 
One idea is to establish an industry-led group, a Climate Disclosure Task Force, to design 
and  deliver  a  voluntary  standard  for  disclosure  by  those  companies  that  produce  or  emit 
carbon.  
Companies  would  disclose  not  only  what  they  are  emitting  today,  but  how  they  plan  their 
transition to the net-zero world of the future. The G20 – whose member states account for 
around 85% of global emissions28 – has a unique ability to make this possible. 
This kind of proposal takes its lead from the FSB’s successful catalysing of improved disclosure 
by the world’s largest banks following the financial crisis, via the Enhanced Disclosure Task 
Force. 
The EDTF’s recommendations, published in October 2012, were the product of collaboration 
between banks, analysts and investors. This has given the providers of capital the disclosures 
they need – specifically how banks manage risks and make profits – in a format that the banks 
can readily supply.  
That shows that private industry can improve disclosure and build market discipline without the 
need for detailed or costly regulatory interventions.  
                                                
27   A non-exhaustive list of some of the more prominent initiatives in this space includes the Carbon Standards 
Disclosure Board, Integrated Reporting, the Carbon Disclosure Project, and the UN Principles for Responsible 
Investment.  
28   See www.pwc.co.uk/assets/pdf/low-carbon-economy-index-2014.pdf  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Like the  EDTF,  a  CDTF  could  be  comprised  of private  providers  of  capital, major  issuers, 
accounting firms and rating agencies.  
Complementing static disclosures 
Static disclosure is a necessary first step. There are two ways its impact could be amplified. 
First,  governments,  potentially  sparked  by  COP21,  could  complement  disclosure  by  giving 
guidance on possible carbon price paths.  
Such a carbon price corridor involves an indicative minimum and maximum price for carbon, 
calibrated to reflect both price and non-price policy actions, and increasing over time until the 
price converges towards the level required to offset fully the externality. 29 
Even if the initial indicative price is set far below the “true” cost of carbon, the price signal itself 
holds  great  power.  It  would  link  climate  exposures  to  a  monetary  value  and  provide  a 
perspective on the potential impacts of future policy changes on asset values and business 
models. 
Second, stress testing could be used to profile the size of the skews from climate change to 
the returns of various businesses.30  
This is another area where insurers are at the cutting edge.  
Your  capital  requirements  are  based  on  evaluating  the  impact  of  severe  but  plausible 
scenarios. You peer into the future, building your defences against a world where extreme 
events become the norm.  
This stress-testing technology is well-suited to analysing tail risks likely to grow fatter with time, 
casting light on the future implications of environmental exposures embedded in a wide range 
of firms and investments. 
Stress testing, built off better disclosure and a price corridor, could act as a time machine, 
shining a light not just on today’s risks, but on those that may otherwise lurk in the darkness 
for years to come. 
Conclusion 
Our societies face a series of profound environmental and social challenges.  
The combination of the weight of scientific evidence and the dynamics of the financial system 
suggest that, in the fullness of time, climate change will threaten financial resilience and longer-
term prosperity. 
While there is still time to act, the window of opportunity is finite and shrinking.31 
Others  will  need  to  learn  from  Lloyd’s  example  in  combining  data,  technology  and  expert 
judgment to measure and manage risks. 
The  December  meetings  in  Paris  will  work  towards  plans  to  curb  carbon  emissions  and 
encourage the funding of new technologies.  
                                                
29   For instance, the report of the Canfin-Grandjean Commission (2015) discusses the merits of an indicative price 
corridor with a maximum and minimum price that can be increased over time. See www.elysee.fr/assets/Report-
Commission-Canfin-Grandjean-ENG.pdf  
30   These skews could be upside or downside, depending on business model and the point in the transition path. 
31   Already our failure to act since 2010 has increased the task – since emissions persist – and the pace of de-
carbonisation required – for instance see http://site.thomsonreuters.com/corporate/pdf/global-500-greenhouse-
gases-performance-trends-2010-2013.pdf  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   We will need the market to work alongside in order to maximise their impact. 
With better information as a foundation, we can build a virtuous circle of better understanding 
of  tomorrow’s  risks,  better  pricing  for  investors,  better  decisions  by  policymakers,  and  a 
smoother transition to a lower-carbon economy.  
By managing what gets measured, we can break the Tragedy of the Horizon.  
 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
