   Ravi Menon: Basics for smart finance – common standards and 
seamless data 
Closing remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the SIBOS Conference, Singapore, 15 October 2015. 
 Mr Yawar Shah, Chairman, SWIFT 
Mr Gottfried Leibbrandt, CEO, SWIFT 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
Revolution in communications 
A. 
“What hath God wrought?” read the first telegraphic message sent by Samuel Morse on 24th 
May, 1844. 
The telegraph marked a revolution in communications at the time. 
• 
Transatlantic  telegraph  cables  cut  communications  between  America  and  Europe 
from about 10 days – the time it took for steam ships to sail across the Atlantic – to a 
matter of minutes. 
In  fact,  the  mid-19th  century  leaps  in  transport  and  communications  technologies 
ushered in the first phase of economic and financial globalisation. 
 Ground-breaking as the telegraph was, a text message that takes minutes to arrive will be 
considered glacial by today’s standards. It will certainly not be able to support the frenetic pace 
of communications in the global financial system. 
Thankfully, we have SWIFT. Last year, there were 5.6 billion messages carried globally on 
SWIFT’s network. 
• 
Close to half the messages related to international payments, which lies at the heart 
of global banking. 
Technology has transformed cross-border finance. 
 Smart Financial Centre 
It is MAS’s conviction that innovation and technology will be critical to the future growth and 
success of Singapore’s financial sector. Earlier this year, MAS shared its vision of a Smart 
Financial  Centre:  a  financial  centre  where  innovation  is  pervasive  and  technology  is  used 
widely. 
It is about pursuing innovation and technology to: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
We are walking the talk. 
• 
• 
We formed a new FinTech & Innovation Group (or FTIG) within MAS. 
FTIG’s  mission  is  to  formulate  policies  and  strategies  to  create  a  conducive 
ecosystem for innovation while fostering safety and security. 
increase efficiency; 
manage risks better; 
create new opportunities; and 
improve people’s lives. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  MAS has committed $225 million over the next five years under the Financial Sector 
Technology and Innovation scheme. 
  We have been working closely with the industry as well as reaching out to the broader “fintech” 
community. 
• 
We have been talking to start-ups, software providers, and experts and practitioners 
in  various  fields  of  financial  technology,  including  data  analytics,  cyber  security, 
blockchains, and digital payments. 
• 
We have learnt much from these interactions. 
The response from the industry has been encouraging. 
• 
Insurers such as Aon and Metlife as well as banks such as Citibank, Credit Suisse, 
DBS, HSBC, and UBS have already set up innovation labs in Singapore. 
Aviva has announced plans for a “Digital Garage” and AXA for a “Data Innovation 
Lab” here. 
MAS is working with several other banks and insurers on their plans to establish and 
expand their analytics and innovation teams in Singapore. 
  At  the  heart  of  a  Smart  Financial  Centre  must  be  a  progressive  information  technology 
architecture. Two key characteristics of such an architecture are: 
• 
• 
common standards; and 
seamless data sharing. 
Common standards 
Let me  begin  with  common standards. They  are key to making  systems  interoperable  and 
harnessing fully the benefits of new payments technologies. 
Lack of standardisation leads to fragmentation, inefficiency, and inconvenience. 
• 
• 
Take for example electronic funds transfer. 
Without a common standard, an application written to effect funds transfer for one 
group of financial service providers may need to be rewritten to work with another 
group of financial service providers that operate on different interface standards. 
Common standards allow systems and applications to operate efficiently and seamlessly when 
different financial service operators and solution providers come together. 
• 
The EMV chip is one of the most impactful examples of a common standard. It is all 
the  more  impressive  as  it  was  an  industry  initiative  without  any  government 
involvement. 
NFC,  or  near-field  communications,  represents  the  next  big  thing  in  common 
standards. It is enabling contactless payments on mobile devices like smart phones. 
Yet  another  good  example  of  a  common  standard  is  ISO  20022.  This  is  the  international 
standard for electronic data exchange among financial institutions. 
• 
Its  growing  adoption  has  helped  to  make  payments  platforms  interoperable  and 
reduce inefficiency. 
 Fast and Secure Transfers 
A successful example of ISO 20022 adoption in Singapore is “Fast And Secure Transfers” or 
“FAST”. This is a secure electronic funds transfer service that is available 24/7. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    We started with 14 participating banks in March 2014, we now have 19. 
FAST usage has risen steadily, clocking 18 million transactions since its launch. 
• 
• 
FAST offers several advantages for bank customers in Singapore. 
• 
You can pay someone almost instantaneously from your computer or mobile device 
at any time of the day. 
You can receive confirmation of payment within seconds. 
If you are a company, whether big or small, near-instant payment and confirmation 
round-the-clock  makes  a  huge  difference  if  you  rely  on  cashflow  to  pay  suppliers 
frequently. With the whole transaction going electronic, you can look forward to more 
efficient reconciliation of your payments with your financial accounts. 
In short, FAST is almost as convenient as cash, yet potentially safer and cheaper. 
• 
While the take-up of FAST has been encouraging for person-to-person payments, it has some 
ways more to go for merchant payments. 
On the payee side, a barrier to adoption by merchants is the challenge of integrating electronic 
payments with the existing work flow of confirming and reconciling receipt of payment, which 
is currently done at the cash register. Two of our banks have come up with solutions for this. 
Standard Chartered Bank has had some success with helping food courts, fast food 
• 
joints, convenience stores and taxi companies accept electronic payments by Dash. 
DBS has just announced a new product called FasTrack, which lets you order and 
pay for coffee before you even arrive at the counter. 
  It is good that there is a proliferation of innovative e-wallets, payment apps and mobile payment 
solutions in Singapore. 
• 
But  just  as  man  is  not  an  island,  neither  should  payment  solutions  be  limited  to 
themselves. 
For widespread take-up and usage of any digital payments solution, interoperability 
is critical. 
And this is where FAST comes in. 
• 
With  the  common  standard  provided  by  FAST,  banks  can  more  readily  collaborate  on 
innovative  payment  products  that  are  interoperable,  without  having  to  worry  about 
incompatibility. 
On the payer side, a barrier to adopting digital payments is the hassle involved in on-boarding 
payees. 
• 
People should be able to pay each other electronically as simply as writing a cheque 
or handing over some cash. 
It should not matter which bank that I bank with nor should a payee be identifiable 
only by his bank account number. 
Few of us can readily recall our own bank account numbers, let alone be familiar with 
those of our friends and family. 
  I am pleased to note that the participating banks are studying a mobile addressing system for 
FAST. 
• 
This means that you will be able to make payments through FAST as long as you 
know the payee’s mobile number. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   May  I  suggest  to  the  industry  to  go  one  step  further  and  explore  an  “all-in-one” 
addressing system? 
This means being able to pay someone through FAST using also the payee’s email 
address, social network account, or other proxies. 
  Unified Points-of-Sale 
Let me move on from card issuance to card acceptance. 
In Singapore’s retail payment scene, multiple Points-of-Sale (POS) terminals at the payment 
counters are a common sight. They are a source of clutter and inconvenience. And as more 
stores and restaurants introduce self-checkout facilities to improve productivity, these multiple 
terminals have become a source of confusion as well. 
Our vision is a unified POS – a single terminal, preferably mobile, that can read all kinds of 
cards. This will: 
• 
to  enhance  efficiency  by  simplifying 
front-to-back  process 
allow  merchants 
integration; and 
enhance the shopping or dining experience of customers. 
• 
A  unified  POS  requires  merchant  acquirer  systems  to  be  able  to  communicate  with  one 
another. This interoperability can be achieved through standardisation. The technology exists 
but it requires some effort and some cost. 
I am pleased that The Association of Banks in Singapore has formed a working group to look 
into standardising the POS applications to operate efficiently and seamlessly. I commend them 
for their resolve to address a long-standing bane in our retail payment scene. 
What have we learnt from all these experiences with common standards? 
• 
The technology behind common standards is not all that complicated and is becoming 
less of an impediment to systems integration. 
What is more important is for operators, subscribers, and consumers to recognise the 
larger collective benefits from investing in an infrastructure for interoperability and to 
work out a framework to ensure its commercial viability for all participants. 
 Seamless data sharing 
A second key characteristic of a progressive information technology architecture is seamless 
data sharing. 
By some estimates, the universe of digital information is growing at about 60% each year. It 
will grow even faster as embedded sensors become more common. How to make sense of all 
this data? 
We must get the basics right in data management. 
• 
First,  quality  data.  Data  must  be  rich  in  quality,  free  from  error,  and  commonly 
understood. 
Second,  aggregated  data.  To  extract  maximum  value,  data  must  be  efficiently 
aggregated. The value of each data point increases as it is connected to other data 
points. 
Third, intelligible data. Data must be formatted so that it is machine-readable as well 
as machine-usable. 
– 
For example, it is much easier for a system to process data provided in simple 
text formats such as CSV files rather than in a PDF report. 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Greater availability and deeper analysis of data helps us understand the world around us with 
a clarity and depth that was not possible before. In particular, mashing together diverse data 
sets offers the possibility of new types of insights. 
New software algorithms crunch the enlarged Big Data sets to make more reliable predictions 
on repayment and hence improve performance of loan portfolios. 
• 
For example, a lender to small businesses requires access to the company’s bank 
and credit card accounts, to constantly monitor the company’s cash flow and hence 
ability to repay the loan. 
Application programming interfaces 
Despite the greater availability of data and the possibilities for harnessing this data opened by 
technology, financial institutions continue to face challenges on the data front. 
• 
• 
More data means more cost. 
While  technology  has  significantly  reduced  the unit  costs  of  data gathering,  it  has 
ironically also raised the potential total cost of data by opening more possibilities for 
data mining and analysis. 
One way to improve access to data without raising costs significantly would be for the industry 
to pool relevant data together. 
• 
The benefits of aggregating data across the industry can be seen from our experience 
with the credit bureau, which has allowed banks to make better credit underwriting 
decisions. 
However, concerns over confidentiality and market sensitivity have held back data 
sharing among financial institutions and restricted public access to data. 
 One  effective  way  to  achieve  seamless  data  sharing  is  through  the  publication  of  open 
Application Programming Interfaces, or APIs, by financial institutions for data submission. 
• 
In essence, an API documents how a system operates, what inputs it will accept, and 
what outputs the system will provide. 
APIs allow different systems to interact with one another without the need for human 
intervention. 
In  effect,  APIs  allow  users  to  seamlessly  merge  multiple  data  sets  from  different 
sources into a single rich data set. 
  Using APIs, systems can be linked to create a system of systems, where the whole is greater 
than the sum of the parts. Smartphones are a good example. 
• 
Every notification you receive from Twitter or Facebook comes through an API and is 
displayed on your screen by another API. 
More efficient transactions 
Financial institutions are already making use of APIs to enhance efficiency in transactions. 
• 
SWIFT  itself  is  a  good  example.  Previously,  international  fund  transfers  were  a 
manual process. Banks sent telex messages to each other to debit funds from one 
account  and  credit  it  to  another.  The  speed  of  response  depended  on  whether 
someone was waiting by the telex machine! 
Now, transferring funds only requires banks to send a SWIFT message containing 
payment instructions to another bank for funds to be moved, at any time in the day. 
Some banks are selectively opening up their systems to customers, employees, and others. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Silicon Valley Bank plans to offer an API for payments by the end of the year. This 
will allow their tech-savvy customers’ systems to process payments without human 
intervention. 
BNY Mellon has built an internal online API catalogue for services such as pricing, 
calendars,  market  and  reference  data,  etc.  This  has  helped  its  developers  to 
significantly reduce steps to build new innovative apps. 
  More efficient data submission 
Another potential benefit from APIs will be a reduction in the cost of regulatory data submission. 
Currently, data submission to MAS is still partly manual. We will improve this process. Our 
vision  is  for  data  to  flow  seamlessly  in  both  directions  between  systems  in  the  financial 
institutions and MAS. This will reduce the ongoing cost of regulatory submissions. 
This is not a trivial exercise, given the volume and diversity of financial data. Well-crafted APIs 
are essential for this vision to work. MAS will closely engage the industry to ensure that these 
APIs are clear, simple to implement, and extensible. 
Conclusion 
I  spoke  earlier  about  the  telegraph.  Despite  the  breakthrough  in  world  travel  and 
communication enabled by the telegraph and other technologies, the globalisation of the late 
19th century soon faltered and reversed. 
There  is  a  lesson  here.  Technology  alone  does  not  make  connections  or  create  better 
understanding: it merely gives us the means to make those connections. 
• 
• 
• 
What is more important is the spirit of openness and collaboration. 
Common standards and seamless data sharing are in this spirit. 
They will enable us to maximise the benefits of digital and mobile technologies – reap 
enormous cost efficiencies and extend our reach and understanding. 
And it is this spirit of openness and collaboration in innovation that will help create a Smart 
Financial Centre. We have only just begun. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
