   Christopher Kent: Slowdown in China’s growth - implications for 
Australia 
Remarks  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, at the UBS Australasia Conference 2015, Sydney, 17 November 2015. 
I thank Ivan Roberts for help in preparing these remarks. 
 I would like to thank UBS for the opportunity to participate in this conference. 
Given its importance to the Australian economy, the Bank monitors developments in China 
closely with a team of economists in both Sydney and Beijing. 
The easing in the growth of the Chinese economy over the past year or so has two related 
parts. The economy is slowing as it matures, and this is to be expected. Overlaying that, there 
has been a substantial slowing in the industrial sector, linked in part to earlier excesses in 
construction.  How  all  of  this  will  play  out  and  the  effects  on  the  Australian  economy  are 
uncertain. I’ll briefly highlight some possibilities. Let me be clear though, many of these have 
positive implications for our economy. 
It is natural for the speed of China’s economic development to ease and for its nature to evolve: 
Part  of  this  reflects  slower  growth  of  the  working-age  population,  which  is  now  in 
• 
decline. Other than increasing the retirement age, there is little that can be done to 
alter that in the coming years, notwithstanding the ending of the one-child policy. 
However, growth continues to be supported by the process of urbanisation, which 
uses commodities intensively. This has further to run, albeit at a more gradual pace. 
Productivity growth appears to be slowing as windfall gains from earlier reforms have 
waned. But there remains a large gap between productivity in China and in advanced 
economies. That gap could be closed more quickly via additional reforms to allow a 
greater role for market forces in allocating productive resources. The authorities have 
expressed support for such reforms. 
The authorities would also like to see growth rebalancing from investment towards 
consumption. That is happening gradually. It is also being accompanied by a rise in 
the share of activity accounted for by the services sector as the economy develops 
and household incomes rise. 
   While these longer-run changes imply a decline in the growth rates of investment and industrial 
production, both have also experienced a noticeable cyclical slowing over the past year or 
more.  As  earlier  excesses  in  residential  construction  gave  rise  to  a  large  stock  of  unsold 
housing, house prices declined and so too did housing construction. Sales and prices have 
recovered  a  bit  since  the  start  of  this  year,  but  there  is  little  sign  to  date  of  a  sustained 
improvement in construction activity. 
Weakness  in  construction  has  been  accompanied  by  declines  in  output  of  a  range  of 
manufactured products over the past year.1 Steel is one obvious example. Mining activity in 
China has also been affected. Indeed, a further decline in the output of unprofitable Chinese 
mines would provide some support to commodity prices, and would benefit other producers, 
including in Australia. 
                                                
1   The substantial appreciation of the renminbi over the past year (12 per cent in trade weighted terms) may also 
have contributed somewhat to the weakness in the industrial sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Although the weakness in China’s property and manufacturing sectors is clearly of concern to 
commodity  exporters  like  Australia,  there  are  a number  of  countervailing forces supporting 
broader activity in China. 
• 
First,  growth  in  the  services  sector  has  been  resilient,  and  should  continue  to  be 
assisted by a shift in demand toward services as incomes rise. 
Second, growth in household consumption has also been stable in recent quarters 
aided  by  the  growth  of  new  jobs.2 Of  course,  such  outcomes  cannot  be  taken  for 
granted; if the industrial weakness is sustained, it might eventually affect household 
incomes and spending. 
Third, Chinese policymakers have responded to lower growth by easing monetary 
policy and approving additional infrastructure investment projects. They have scope 
to provide further support if needed, although they may be reticent to do too much if 
that compromises longer-term goals, such as placing the financial system on a more 
sustainable footing. 
  There are two key implications of the slowing in China’s growth for Australia. 
First, the  substantial  slowing  in  industrial  production  has  contributed to a further  decline  in 
commodity prices over the course of this year. (This is in addition to the contribution from the 
substantial increase in the supply of commodities, including from Australia.) We’ve detailed the 
effect of the decline in commodity prices on Australia’s economy elsewhere.3 I would just add 
that commodity prices remain relatively high. The Bank’s index of commodity prices has fallen 
by about 50 per cent from its peak, but is still almost 80 per cent above early 2000 levels. 
Clearly,  conditions  in  the  industrial  sector  in  China,  and  Asia  more  broadly,  will  have  an 
important  influence  on  the  path  of  commodity  prices  over  the  near  term.  Beyond  that,  the 
changing nature of China’s development implies that the potential for commodity prices to rise 
from here is somewhat limited. 
Second, the shift in demand towards services and agricultural products within China and the 
Asian  region  more  broadly  presents  new  opportunities  for  Australian  exporters.  While  our 
comparative  advantages  in  service  industries  are  perhaps  less  obvious  than  they  are  for 
mineral resources, the rise in the demand for services from a large and increasingly wealthier 
populace in our region will no doubt be to our benefit. 
                                                
2   The 2015 target of 10 million new urban employed workers was apparently exceeded in the first three quarters 
of the year. 
 3   See Gorajek A and D Rees (2015), ‘Lower Bulk Commodity Prices and Their Effect on Economic Activity’, RBA 
Bulletin, September Quarter. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
