   DeLisle Worrell: Keeping the economy stable and achieving growth 
Featured address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
BCCI Finance & investment Luncheon Seminar, Bridgetown, 28 October 2015. 
 By dint of economic policies suited to our circumstances the Barbados economy has been kept 
stable ever since the onset of the global economic recession, now seven years ago. Foreign 
exchange  reserves  have  been  protected  by  fiscal  contraction  to  reduce  spending  and 
importation,  to  ensure  the  balance  between  inflows  and  outflows  of  foreign  exchange  is 
maintained. As a result, foreign reserves remain adequate, and economic policy and the future 
development of the economy remain firmly in our own hands. As I have often said, the great 
value of adequate reserves is that Barbadians are our own economic bosses. 
The challenge before us remains, to use our mastery of our destiny to take actions that further 
the economic development of our country. I invite you to join me in assessing the advantages 
Barbados brings to the international markets in which we do business, our performances in 
those markets, the obstacles we face, and how we may overcome them and accelerate the 
pace of economic development over the coming years. 
Our advantages 
We are rich in the resources that matter for tourism, international business, culture and other 
services  that  can  attract  business  to  our  shores.  These  include  our  equitable  climate,  our 
geographical location, our abundant sunshine, the fact that English is our native language, and 
the physical beauty of our island. 
We have enhanced our appeal to visitors and investors – and bettered the quality of our own 
lives – by the investment we have made over the years in health, education, roads, our port 
and airport, public utilities and our system of law and order. As a result, Barbados has the 
reputation of being a safe, salubrious country, and it scores highly in indexes of freedom and 
transparency. 
Barbados  outshines  most  of  the  competition  in  the  majority  of  global  indexes  which  offer 
comparisons among countries. We are Number One in Latin America and the Caribbean in 
The Global Innovation Index, published by the UN World Intellectual Property Organisation 
(WIPO)  and  others;  first  in  the  Caribbean  in  The  Global  Tourism  Competitiveness  Report, 
published by the World Economic Forum; and second only to Panama in the Caribbean and 
Central America in The Global Competitiveness Report, published by the same body. 
Among factors which work to Barbados’ advantage are the quality of our institutions, our Social 
Partnership,  the  relative  development  of  our  business  and  financial  markets,  local  internet 
penetration and international connectivity. 
The  quality  of  life  in  Barbados  is  high,  attested  to  by  the  Human  Development  Report, 
published by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). In recent reports Barbados 
is credited with high human development, an indication that in terms of what our salaries will 
buy, as well as educational and health status, Barbadians live as well as people do in some 
advanced countries. We have all but eliminated dilapidation in housing, access to electricity, 
water and sanitation is universal, and homelessness has been reduced to a level that many 
rich countries would envy. We have our very wealthy, and our poor people, but on the whole 
we are a remarkably egalitarian society. 
Our economic performance 
The Barbados economy runs on foreign exchange, as I have often said. We live quite well, by 
international standards, by selling the goods and services we produce at competitive prices for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
foreign currency, and using that foreign currency to import everything we need for our modern 
lifestyles. Our main focus is therefore always on the activities that earn us foreign exchange: 
tourism and related activities, international business and financial services, and rum, chemicals 
and a few other manufactured goods. 
There is one sector where we have the potential to increase output without the use of foreign 
exchange, and it is in the energy sector. Every day in Barbados we produce far more energy 
than we could possibly use, but almost all of it is completely wasted, because it is in the form 
of heat generated on our roofs and other surfaces that absorb and reflect the sun’s rays. We 
currently harvest a small amount to heat water. However, affordable photovoltaic systems now 
provide  an  opportunity  to  businesses  and  middle  class  households  to  generate  all  their 
electricity needs. Of course, we would need a means of supplying electricity at night. It has 
been  shown  that  with  a  combination  of  solar  and  wind  energy,  plus  biofuels  and  storage, 
Barbados could become self-sufficient in electricity generation. It is an opportunity we cannot 
afford to pass up. 
Barbados’ tourism is rising to the challenges of the 21st century. The Barbados brand is highly 
regarded, and developments in the sector have largely enhanced the quality and appeal of the 
Barbadian tourism product. The visitor experience has been enhanced by top quality sports, 
dining,  shopping,  music,  culture  and  heritage.  Our  visitors  are  in  search  of  authentic 
experiences,  and  we  continue  to  enrich  our  offerings  in  ways  that  are  Barbadian  and 
Caribbean, which Barbadians can also enjoy. 
The strength of the Barbados International Business and Financial Centre is that it is focussed 
on  attracting  international  companies  to  set  up  businesses  of  substance  in  Barbados,  to 
employ Barbadian skills to perform tasks of various kinds for their international operations. We 
offer  a  strong  network  of  Double  Taxation  Agreements  (DTAs)  and  Bilateral  Investment 
Treaties (BITs), and a world-class regulatory framework. Why would companies want to do 
these activities in Barbados rather than in Toronto, New York or Luxembourg? The advantages 
mentioned above are the obvious answer, plus the fact that the skills these companies need 
cost less in Barbados than in their home countries. 
The  Barbadian  manufactured  products  which  command  significant  export  sales  are  those 
which have achieved a name for themselves. Chief among them are our branded rums. Our 
producers of chemical products for household use have also been successful in racking up 
sales in the Caribbean region. 
The obstacles we face 
If Barbados were fully to realise the plans and projects currently being implemented or under 
serious discussion in tourism, international business, sugar and its products, and in alternative 
energy, the country’s sustained growth rate rises to 5 percent or more. In contrast, Central 
Bank’s current projection for growth is no more than 2 percent in two years’ time. The difference 
could be transformative: at 5 percent per annum GDP doubles every 15 years; at 2 percent it 
takes 35 years. 
The measures that make the difference are within the purview of all of us, and do not depend 
critically on any external circumstance. 
It is important to persist with and complete the process of fiscal consolidation, to reduce the 
ratio of debt to GDP, eliminate Government arrears and restore Government’s international 
credit  worthiness.  In  this  way,  periodic  apprehensions  about  the  Central  Bank’s  ability  to 
defend the value of our currency on the interbank market become a thing of the past, and the 
investment community will have a resurgence of confidence. 
The quality and efficiency of our public services needs to be very significantly upgraded. The 
inefficiency of our bureaucracy is at the top of the list of factors that inhibit business activity in 
Barbados. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
A priority item for attention by the Social Partnership is the ever widening gap between unit 
labour costs and the average worker’s contribution to output. We live in a globally competitive 
world, and the engines of our growth will not perform at their best if worker productivity and 
engagement does not improve significantly. We must close the gap that has worsened over 
more than a decade, and achieve productivity gains that can be shared with workers. 
Ongoing reviews of the incentive regimes for private investment are necessary to ensure that 
the overall thrust of government policy continues to provide incentives for investment in foreign 
earning activities and in green energy solutions. Also, we should ensure that incentives that 
have served us well, such as duty free imports of computers, are maintained, and that any 
remaining inconsistencies in the incentive regime are removed. 
The bottom line 
Barbadians remain firmly in charge of our own destinies, and we have the resources and talent 
to  realise  a  path  to  a  future  of  greater  prosperity.  That  path  does  involve  some  tough 
challenges: in too many areas we are not up to speed with the finest services and products 
that are on offer in the industrialised world, and outmoded and inefficient processes will need 
to be discarded. Our own collective decisions on the timing of these inevitable changes will 
determine  the  extent  of  our  economic  success,  and  the  speed  with  which  we  are  able  to 
improve the livelihoods of all Barbadians. Faster growth increases the size of the pie to be 
shared among everyone; that must be our focus. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
