  Paul Fisher: The Financial Regulation Reform agenda – what has been 
achieved and how much is left to do? 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Supervisory  Risk  Specialists  and 
Regulatory Operations of the Bank of England and Deputy Head of the Prudential Regulation 
Authority (PRA), at Richmond, the American International University, London, 30 September 
2015. 
 It is now 8 years since the start of the great financial crisis, and 7 years since the collapse of 
Lehman Brothers and AIG in the United States, followed by the bailing out of HBoS and RBS 
in  the  UK.  The  consequences  were  not  limited  to  the  financial  sector  –  the  economic 
recession that followed in much of the developed world was both deep and prolonged. This 
naturally  created  an  imperative  for  changes  to  the  regulation  of  the  financial  system  to 
prevent  the  same  thing  happening  again  in  future.  Since  I  became  Deputy  Head  of  the 
Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (the  PRA)  in  June  2014,  I  have  been  asked  a  number  of 
times to comment on how far the regulatory reform agenda has advanced. How close are we 
to ending “too big to fail”? How much more regulatory change can one expect? 
In this lecture I will try to bring together in an accessible, structured way, summaries of the 
most  important  reform  initiatives  that  are  in  train  –  at  least  those  that  affect  prudential 
supervision – I will try to set out what they are aiming to achieve and how much further there 
is to go. I will then reflect on how the regulatory jigsaw fits together and the key questions 
that are being asked of it. 
Alongside the statutory Financial Policy Committee in the Bank of England (the FPC) and the 
Financial Conduct Authority (the FCA), the PRA was brought into life on 1 April 2013, as part 
of a reshaping of the UK’s financial regulation landscape. The PRA is the prudential regulator 
for  deposit  takers  (banks,  building  societies  and  credit  unions),  insurers  and  major 
investment firms. It started with two objectives: (i) promoting the safety and soundness of its 
authorised  firms  and  (ii)  specifically  for  insurers,  to  contribute  to  the  securing  of  an 
appropriate  degree  of  protection  for  those  who  are  or  may  become  policyholders.  A  year 
later, an additional secondary objective was added: to, so far as is reasonably possible, act 
in a way which facilitates effective competition in the markets for services provided by PRA-
authorised persons in carrying on regulated activities. 
The  PRA’s  strategy  is  to  deliver  a  resilient  financial  sector  by  seeking:  an  appropriate 
quantity and quality of capital; effective risk management; robust business models and sound 
governance, including clear accountability of a firm’s management. The PRA does not seek 
to  operate  a  zero-failure  regime.  But  when  failure  does  occur,  this  should  be  with  limited 
disruption  to  the  provision  of  core  financial  services  and  without  spillovers  to  the  wider 
financial sector. 
One of the main strategic challenges in building the PRA was to establish a new approach to 
supervision.  The  key  aspects  of  this  are  for  the  PRA  to  be  judgement-based  and  forward 
looking,  proportionate  in  its  actions,  and  efficient  in  its  allocation  of resources. The  PRA’s 
supervisory approaches for banking and insurance are summarised in published documents 
and updated regularly. 
In  the  first  2  ½  years  of  the  PRA’s  life,  much  of  the  effort  has  been  taken  up  with  the 
implementation of the regulatory reform agenda which is the main topic of this lecture. That is 
likely to continue to be the case until at least 2019. As I will illustrate, the main planks of the 
regulatory platform have been put in place and it is difficult to conceive of there being space 
to  add  many  additional  reforms  to  what  is  already  a  comprehensive  design  –  neither  the 
regulators nor the regulated are likely to have much spare resource to support substantially 
more regulatory change over the next few years than currently in train. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The FPC is increasingly focussed on implementation of the reforms for banks and insurers 
and on understanding the risk from market-based finance. In response to its Remit set by the 
Chancellor, the Governor replied on behalf of the FPC in August that: 
“The progress made in fixing the fault lines in the banking system means that the Committee 
is now more able to broaden its focus to potential risks emanating from and associated with 
non-bank  activities.  By  balance-sheet  size,  nearly  half  of  the  current  UK  financial  system 
consists  of  non-bank  financial  institutions.  Capital  markets  are  an  increasingly  important 
source  of  financing  for  the  UK  corporate  sector  and  beyond,  and  globally  almost  all  net 
finance  growth  since  the  crisis  has  been  in  market-based  finance.  A  broad  agenda 
encompassing  non-banks  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  any  potential  systemic  risks  from 
market-based finance are identified and also that risks do not migrate from one part of the 
financial system to another.” 
“The  Committee  will  (also)  review  a  number  of  activities  in  the  non-bank  financial  system 
over the next year, to consider potential systemic risks posed by: the investment activities of 
open-ended investment funds and hedge funds; securities financing transactions; the non-
traditional, non-insurance and investment activities of insurance companies; and  derivative 
transactions.  These  reviews  will  complement  the  Committee’s  annual  stocktake  of  risks 
outside the core banking system.” 
In  the  rest  of  this  lecture  I  am  going  to  focus  on  deposit  takers  and,  to  a  lesser  extent, 
insurance  firms,  which  are  the  sectors  most  subject  to  regulatory  reform  to  date.  I  should 
note that insurance represents a very large part of the PRA’s activities – at the end of the 
financial  year  2014/15  the  PRA  had  around  550  front-line  supervisors  and  risk  specialists 
working on various deposit taking firms compared with over 300 on insurance firms. 
Most of the regulatory reforms that the PRA are implementing have not actually originated in 
the PRA itself. Rather, they have arisen from a variety of external sources. Some are UK 
initiatives: for example, the new Senior Managers Regime and Senior Insurance Managers 
Regime  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  Parliamentary  Commission  on  Banking 
Standards (PCBS) and the structural reform of the major banks (ring-fencing) emerged from 
the Independent Commission on Banking (ICB, also known as the “Vickers Commission”). 
A number of key reforms are European initiatives such as the Solvency II regime for insurers. 
The banking capital regime, CRDIV, is a European implementation of agreements made in 
the  global  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS).  The  development  of 
international insurance standards is being driven by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) via 
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). 
The UK authorities, including the Bank of England and PRA, play a full part in negotiating 
these  reforms,  so  I  wouldn’t  claim  that  they  are  entirely  external,  even  though  there  are 
usually aspects of the final agreements which represent the middle ground in negotiations. 
The main point I want to make here is that, even though there are international agreements 
arising  out  of  the  alphabet  soup  of  committees,  most  of  these  initiatives  require  detailed 
interpretation, rule-making and implementation by the PRA, even after transposition into EU 
or UK law. Since the PRA was created in April 2013 (to 30 September 2015), I count that the 
PRA has issued 70 consultation papers, 82 supervisory statements or updates thereof and 
44 policy statements setting out final rules. 
The UK financial regulatory system is not solely about the PRA of course. Those firms that 
are authorised and supervised by the PRA are the banks, building societies, credit unions 
and major investment firms. Those firms are also regulated by the FCA for conduct matters. 
The remaining firms and persons within the regulatory perimeter of the financial system are 
then solo regulated by the FCA for prudential matters as well as conduct. The PRA and FCA 
arrangement  is  an  example  of  the  modern  “twin  peaks”  model  for  financial  regulation, 
pioneered in Australia in 1998, which separates out the prudential regulator – which covers 
the larger, more systemic firms – from the conduct regulator. That gives the latter a very long 
tail of small firms and financial advisors within its net. For comparison, the PRA authorises 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
some 1,700 firms and groups and has a budget for some 1,200 staff, plus support services 
from  the  wider  Bank  of  England.  The  FCA  regulates  over  73,000  firms  and  employs  over 
3,000 staff. 
The FCA has a strategic objective to ensure that the relevant markets for financial services 
function  well.  Its  formal  operational  objectives  are  to  secure  an  appropriate  degree  of 
protection for  consumers;  to  protect  and  enhance  the  integrity  of the  UK financial  system; 
and to promote effective competition in the interests of consumers in relevant markets. 
It is obviously important that the FCA and PRA work closely together even though they have 
separate,  differing  objectives.  Perhaps  the  most  crucial  aspects  joining  us  are  (i)  that  all 
PRA-authorised firms are dual regulated by the FCA as well for conduct purposes (ii) that the 
FCA has a primary objective to promote effective competition and the PRA has a secondary 
objective to facilitate it, and (iii) the FCA and PRA depend on shared data to carry out their 
roles. 
The close co-operation of the PRA and FCA is built into the system in part through cross 
membership of boards. The CEO of the FCA sits on the PRA Board (and is an FPC member 
ex officio). The CEO of the PRA sits on the FCA Board (and is also an FPC member). 
The PRA has a Board because it is currently constituted as a formal subsidiary of the Bank 
of England. It has been proposed that this arrangement changes so that the PRA becomes 
an authority within the Bank, and the PRA Board would become a new Prudential Regulation 
Committee.  These  proposals  are  subject  to  public  consultation  and  will  be  debated  in 
Parliament  before  being  finalised.  These  changes  should  have  no  impact  on  the  reform 
agenda and so I won’t pursue them further in this lecture. 
The PRA Board is independently responsible for delivering the PRA’s statutory objectives. It 
does  this  by  making  policies  and  rules,  supervising  authorised  firms,  giving  directions, 
issuing  guidance  and  carrying  out  other  legislative  functions.  In  practice  the  Board  is  the 
senior  supervisory  committee  in  the  PRA,  but delegates  some  of  its functions  to  the  PRA 
Chief Executive who in turn delegates to the management and staff. In 2014/15 the Board 
met physically 32 times and had one additional teleconference. 
That’s enough scene-setting. Let’s get on to the reforms themselves. 
Capital: banks 
Arguably the single most important objective of a prudential regulator is to make sure that 
firms  have  an  appropriate  level  of  capital.  The  objective  is  two-fold.  First,  there  must  be 
sufficient  capital  to  absorb  the  losses  that  a  firm  might  make,  even  under  relatively 
pronounced stress. Second, after the stress, there should be sufficient capital left such that 
the firm  can  either  (a)  carry  on  its  critical  economic functions,  with  customers  and  market 
counterparties believing it remains safe and sound, enabling market access to funding and 
capital or (b) be safely wound up. 
It was evident during the financial crisis that the point at which a financial firm is no longer 
trusted by customers or counterparties can come before it runs out of capital completely or 
even approaches that level. Also, once a firm has run into trouble, in part because it is in 
trouble and/or markets are dysfunctional, the marketable value of its assets are often found 
to be substantially less than valued in accounts – so losses are usually greater than originally 
expected, once a stress has occurred. 
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  firms  appeared  to  hold  substantial  capital  to  meet  their  then 
regulatory requirements, but in many cases this was illusory – the rules on what could count 
as  capital  had  been  weakened  over  time  and  much  of  it  was  not  properly  or  easily  loss-
absorbing in the event. So the quality of capital is also of interest. There is also a challenge 
of what the minimum level of acceptable capital is, and how to meet it, post-stress. Suppose 
X is the appropriate level of capital pre-stress, then substantial losses will always leave a firm 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
with significantly less than X. And raising extra capital in the market in those circumstances is 
not  always  feasible,  nor  can  a  balance  sheet  be  quickly  run  down  to  reduce  capital 
requirements.  So  how  can  a  firm  meet  the  ongoing  requirements  for  the  normal  level  of 
capital after a stress event? The answer is usually to start with a buffer above the minimum 
acceptable and/or to have some way of creating extra capital in a crisis. This latter solution 
could be implemented in part by restricting distributions such as dividend payments or staff 
bonuses, but it is also where the concept arises of having eligible debt that can be “bailed in”, 
whereby  some  debt  instruments  can  become  loss-absorbing  capital  under  stress,  to  re-
capitalise the firm. 
For banks, building societies and investment firms the main capital reforms come under the 
umbrella  of  CRDIV  which  is  the  EU  implementation  of  the  internationally  agreed  capital 
requirements, as determined by the Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (BCBS). The 
Basel  agreements  are  ultimately  agreed  and  signed  off  by  a  meeting  of  central  bank 
governors  and  heads  of  supervisory  authorities.  CRDIV  is  made  up  of  the  fourth  Capital 
Requirements  Directive  (2013)  which  must  be  implemented  through  national  law;  and  the 
Capital Requirements Regulation (2013), which is directly applicable to firms across the EU. 
Amongst other things, CRDIV enshrines enhanced requirements for the quality and quantity 
of  capital  and  gives  the  basis  for  new  liquidity  and  leverage  requirements;  new  rules  for 
counterparty  risk;  and  new  macroprudential  standards  including  a  countercyclical  capital 
buffer and capital buffers for systemically important institutions. In general, it is fair to say that 
the implication of CRDIV is that banks will substantially strengthen capital standards relative 
to pre-crisis. That will mean that the cost of required capital to support banking activity could 
be  higher  than  it  was  previously.  However,  this  is  not  certain.  By  making  firms  safer,  it  is 
possible that the required risk premia in bank capital and funding instruments will be lower, 
and hence the effect on the overall cost of funding is uncertain. 
In  addition  CRDIV  also  makes  changes  to  rules  on  corporate  governance,  including 
remuneration,  and  introduces  standardised  EU  regulatory  reporting.  These  reporting 
requirements will specify the information firms must report to supervisors in areas such as 
own funds, large exposures and financial information. CRDIV will take until 2019 to be fully 
implemented. 
In addition to CRDIV, there are a number of other reviews and developments affecting the 
banking  capital  framework.  The  PRA  has  been  undertaking  a  review  of  its  approach  and 
application of Pillar 2A requirements to ensure consistency of application across firms. That 
will be complete in 2016H1. The BCBS is also continuing its work including reviews of the 
capital held against the trading book, sovereign risk, and securitisation, and more generally 
reviewing the use of models and Pillar III disclosures. 
Leverage 
The capital requirements for a bank are generally calculated by first weighting together the 
assets of a firm, reflecting the underlying risks of each type of asset. Hence the key metric is 
the capital held relative to “risk weighted assets” or RWAs. Whilst the general approach of 
being  risk  sensitive  is  widely  accepted,  it  does  raise  issues  around  consistency.  Different 
firms can assess risk by different methods and models, using different data sets or applying 
different judgements: assessments undertaken by the BCBS1 have shown firms can generate 
quite different RWA calculations for an identical hypothetical portfolio. And firms may choose 
to optimise both their choice of assets and the weights attached to them to minimise capital 
requirements.  It  has  been  shown  that  differences  in  capital  ratios  calculated  on  an  RWA 
basis have historically had little or no correlation with whether firms were able to survive a 
                                                
1  Basel Committee on Banking Supervision July, 2013. “RCAP – Analysis of risk-weighted assets for credit risk 
in the banking book”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
stress2. A leverage ratio offers an alternative approach, which is not risk sensitive but simply 
calculates total capital in relation to total assets. The degree of leverage has historically been 
a much better indicator of likely firm failure (although we can’t be sure that correlation will 
survive if firms start to manage to a constraint!). 
As alternatives, the RWA and leverage approaches would generate different incentives for 
firms to be capital efficient. Under RWAs the incentive can be to expand the balance sheet 
with assets that carry low risk weights. Under a leverage ratio, the incentive can be to limit 
balance  sheet  size  but  choose  riskier  assets.  Ideally,  the  two  measures  would  work  in 
tandem to ensure sufficient capital to support both balance sheet size and risk taking. 
Even  a  simple  leverage  ratio  requires  some  agreement  as  to  what  to  include  in  each 
component  (e.g.  how  to  value  derivatives  for  this  purpose)  and  the  details  of  an 
internationally agreed measure are still being negotiated: they are due to be decided in 2017. 
A harmonised EU-wide measure will then be implemented. 
In advance of that, the FPC in the UK have already decided on a requirement for major UK 
banks, and on 6 April 2015, the Government gave the FPC the power to set a leverage ratio 
by direction to the PRA. The initial ratio of capital to unweighted assets was chosen by the 
FPC  to  complement  the  risk-weighted  capital  framework  and  to  be  in  line  with  the  level 
endorsed by the BCBS. The precise requirements were calculated to be consistent with a 
minimum average risk weight of 35%. This gives a minimum leverage ratio of 3%, with add-
ons for individual firms to reflect any systemic risk and counter-cyclical buffer requirements, 
at  35%  of  the  relevant  buffer  rates.  Details  on  what  capital  can  be  used  to  meet  these 
requirements have also been specified. The FPC plan to extend the leverage ratio to all the 
remaining  authorised  banks,  building  societies  and  investment firms from  2018,  subject  to 
the outcome of the anticipated 2017 international agreement. 
Stress testing 
It can be difficult to set capital requirements to meet possible losses, without specifying the 
likely extent of future stress. Stress testing addresses this by a process of modelling losses 
under a range of macroeconomic scenarios, to ensure that a firm holds sufficient capital ex 
ante to withstand shocks of a specified degree of severity. An example might be to assume a 
recession, with an attendant housing market fall which would stress a portfolio of mortgage 
loans.  In  2014  the  FPC,  supported  by  the  PRA,  undertook  and  published  simultaneous, 
standardised stress tests for the major UK banks for the first time, following a partial exercise 
in 2013.3 
Meeting  minimum  prudential  requirements  after  a  stress  may  not  be  sufficient  to  ensure 
financial stability. If a financial firm needs to rebuild its capital ratios then it can do so either 
by raising more capital or by reducing its assets. In the event of an economy wide stress, this 
latter  approach  could  amplify  the  cycle  if,  say,  all  banks  responded  to  lower  capital  by 
reducing their lending. The stress tests are therefore seeking to ensure that the banks have 
sufficient capital to at least maintain their levels of lending to the real economy and the stress 
tests  are  calibrated  assuming  that  lending  is  not  reduced  beyond  that  which  is  driven  by 
reductions in demand. 
The UK is not the only country with stress testing as part of its supervision tool kit: the US 
undertakes regular public stress tests of the major banks operating there and the European 
Banking Authority has also orchestrated stress tests across the major European banks. The 
UK supervisors had previously undertaken such tests, but not necessarily the same stress 
                                                
2  Bank of England October, 2014. “The Financial Policy Committee’s Review of the Leverage Ratio” and the 
references cited therein.  
3  See the Record of the March 2013 FPC meeting.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
for  each  firm,  and  not  at  the  same  time  and  not  as  publicly.  Further  details  on  the  2015 
concurrent stress test can be found on the Bank’s website.4 
Concurrent stress testing for the major banks is an established part of the UK supervisory 
process, and is also used by smaller banks to perform their own assessment of risks. The 
stress testing of the major banks is planned to be a regular annual exercise, as it is in the 
US, although the strategy and details will likely continue to evolve. 
Capital: Insurers 
Assessing the minimum level of capital for insurers can be an even trickier business than for 
banks. Any single regime is complicated in part by the three different basic types of insurer: 
general insurers, life insurers – who in fact often sell what are essentially savings products 
under an insurance wrapper – and re-insurers. The UK has had a successful capital regime 
in place for all its authorised firms for around 10 years known as ICAS (Individual Capital 
Adequacy  Standards).  Under  ICAS,  UK  insurance  firms  coped  reasonably  well  during  the 
financial crisis. 
The most uncertain risks for general insurers tend to be in the policies they have written and 
therefore on the liability side of the balance sheet, not the asset side. On the other hand, life 
insurers tend  to  be more  exposed  to  market (including  credit  spread)  risk  on  their  assets. 
And  although  they  are  less  likely  than  a  bank  to  have  a  liquidity  mismatch,  the  risk 
management  challenge  for  an  insurer  is  to  try  to  match  the  maturity  between  assets  and 
liabilities  (and  hence  manage  their  rate  of  return).  That  is  particularly  necessary  for  life 
insurers  whose  liabilities  tend  to  extend  well  into  the  future  i.e.  tens  of  years  for  many 
products. 
From 1 January 2016 a new European-wide capital standard will come into force under the 
Solvency  II  directive.  Solvency  II  is  largely  maximum  harmonising  and  should  establish  a 
more level playing field between European insurers. In part it embodies some of the basic 
principles  of  the  UK’s  ICAS  regime,  being  based  on  holding  sufficient  capital  to  meet  an 
event of such severity that might happen only once in every 200 years. In other aspects it is 
different, most noticeably in that the UK has a “gone concern” regime – i.e. under ICAS firms 
hold sufficient capital to run off their liabilities. Solvency II is to be a “going concern” regime – 
firms  have  to  hold  an  additional  risk  margin  to  allow  their  business  to  be  transferred  to  a 
surviving entity. Similar to banking, insurance firms can choose to use a standard formula or 
an internal model approach (or a partial model). But it seems to me personally, that both are 
more complex that their equivalent concepts in banking. 
Most insurance firms covered by Solvency II in the UK and elsewhere will be on the standard 
formula. But, relative to the rest of Europe, the UK has more insurers applying this autumn 
for approval of internal models for all or part of their capital assessment. Another wave will be 
applying in the following year or so, potentially giving the UK around 50 insurers using an 
internal model approach, compared with a handful in most other European countries, even 
the larger ones. The internal models are complicated, covering all aspects of a firm’s risks 
and setting capital to prescribed rules. The high number of applications to use models in the 
UK in part reflects the size and complexity of insurance businesses in the UK market, which 
includes Lloyd’s and the London market. The PRA considers the standardised approach is 
appropriate  for  the  large  majority  of  UK  firms.  However,  for  firms  with  more  complex  or 
unusual risk profiles, the standard formula will not be appropriate and an internal model will 
be needed. 
                                                
4  Bank of England, 30 March, 2015. “Stress testing the UK banking system: key elements of the 2015 stress 
test”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Although Solvency II is a European directive, with the vast majority of the technical rules in 
place,  a  review  is  planned  of  the  standard  elements  in  2018,  as  is  typical  with  many 
directives post-implementation. 
In  addition  to  establishing  a  European-wide  regime,  work  is  also  underway  to  try  and 
harmonise at least some elements of a global capital standard for insurers5. A simple Basic 
Capital Requirement (BCR) for Global Systemically Important Insurers (GSIIs) has already 
been agreed. The UK currently has two GSIIs – Prudential and Aviva – out of the 9 globally. 
Work  is  now  ongoing  on  a  Higher  Loss  Absorbency  (HLA)  Standard  which  will  reflect  the 
degree  of  systemic  importance  of  the  firm/group.  The  plan  is  that  all  GSIIs  should  meet 
capital requirements based on the BCR plus HLA by 2019. The third step in the international 
plan is to develop a risk-based global International Capital Standard which would apply to all 
Internationally  Active  Insurance  Groups  (IAIGs).  That  is  likely  to  be  challenging,  not  least 
because of the different accounting principles used in different jurisdictions, but that is the 
long-term  direction  of  travel.  Work  is  also  ongoing  in  the  IAIS  to  identify  the  assessment 
approach which most accurately identifies whether or not reinsurers pose systemic risk. 
The final element on insurers is that stress testing is also being applied to the sector. Last 
year  the  UK  participated  in  EU-wide  tests  carried  out  by  the  European  Insurance  and 
Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA), conducted for the first time on a Solvency II basis. 
This exercise focussed on the overall impact of an adverse market scenario and a low yield 
scenario. The tests covered 60 groups and 107 companies from across Europe, including the 
larger  UK  firms  and  from  some  non-EU  countries6.  In  2015/16  the  PRA  is  currently 
conducting a stress test on its own authorised General Insurers, covering a range of stresses 
such as natural catastrophes, terrorism and cyber-attack. 
Liquidity 
CRDIV  covers  liquidity  requirements  as  well  as  capital  requirements.  The  two  are  quite 
different  in  nature  and  liquidity  is,  in  my  personal  view,  more  controversial.  Most  firms  – 
including  banks  –  if  they  fail  will  actually  do  so  when  they  run  out  of  cash,  before  they 
become  insolvent.  And  banks  are  structurally  vulnerable  to  a  liquidity  run  because  their 
assets, such as mortgages or company loans, are longer maturity than their liabilities, such 
as  corporate  or  retail  deposits.  One  reason  why  liquidity  requirements  can  be  more 
controversial is because of the business impact. Capital, in whatever form – whether equity 
or bonds that could be converted into equity – is actually a source of funding and sits on the 
liabilities  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  Capital  may  be  more  expensive  than  debt  for  tax 
reasons, but both provide funding to be used. 
Liquidity requirements usually take the form of a specified minimum holding of liquid assets. 
They need to be funded by liabilities and may have capital requirements to hold against them 
– they therefore compete directly with other, less liquid assets on the balance sheet such as 
loans to the real economy. So holding more liquid assets will usually squeeze out less liquid 
lending. And assets which are liquid in normal times (i.e. can be easily sold or lent against 
cash), may become sharply less liquid in a financial crisis. These concerns give one reason 
why a central bank is usually willing to supply extra liquidity to the banking system in a crisis. 
The  particular  forms  of  liquidity  requirement  being  introduced  by  CRDIV  are  the  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). 
The LCR has been agreed and will be implemented on 1 October 2015 in the EU. It basically 
requires banks to hold liquid assets to cover one month of projected outflows, assuming that 
markets are closed to the raising of new funding. As you might expect, a lot of international 
                                                
5  See IAIS website for more details. 
6  See EIOPA website for more details. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
negotiating  time  was  taken  up  with  deciding  what  to  count  as  liquid  assets!  The  liquidity 
requirements  will  be  increased  over  time  until  the  full  requirement  is  in  operation  on  by 
January 2019 at the latest. 
The NSFR is a somewhat different calculation designed to incentivise banks to hold longer-
maturity  funding:  different  liabilities  are  weighted  together  according  to  estimated  maturity 
(reflecting,  among  other  things,  their  degree  of  stickiness)  and  a  minimum  standard  is 
applied. The NSFR was agreed internationally in the BCBS and announced in October 2014. 
All jurisdictions have committed to implement by January 2018. The EU is to make legislative 
proposals  based  on  a  report  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  due  in  December 
2015. 
Recovery and resolution, MREL, total loss absorbing capacity 
As described above, having sufficient capital to meet both anticipated and unexpected losses 
may still not be enough for a firm to continue trading. Part of the reform agenda is to put in 
place requirements for greater loss absorbing capacity such that, after a stress, a firm can be 
recapitalised sufficiently to continue to supply its critical economic functions. To deliver this, 
the  firm’s  management  team  needs  to  have  put  together  a  credible  plan  for  recovery,  to 
return the firm to a stable footing. And if even that is not enough, then we want firms to be 
easily wound down by the authorities i.e. for firms to be able to fail in an orderly fashion, with 
as close as possible a continuing provision of financial services, minimal spillovers to other 
firms and no public money involved. That process of managing the failure of a financial firm 
is what we call resolution. 
There  are  judgements  to  be  made  here  about  how  much  to  rely  on  these  different 
approaches.  If  a firm  is easily  resolvable  as  described, then the  authorities  may  care  less 
about the potential for recovery. That could be a matter left for the shareholders. The more 
difficult a resolution would be, the more interest the authorities have in removing any barriers 
to resolvability in advance. 
Failure is usually more problematic for banks than for other commercial firms. When a bank 
is known to be in trouble, its customers may withdraw funds quickly, creating a liquidity run 
that  might  spillover  to  similar  institutions.  That  places  an  emphasis  on  speed  of  action.  In 
2009 the UK government introduced permanent legislation that enables banks to be resolved 
by the authorities, and designated the Bank of England as the UK resolution authority. For 
the EU as a whole, the Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) took effect at the 
start of 2015, and brings European legislation on recovery and resolution into line with the 
FSB’s  international  standards.  It  requires  there  to  be  a  resolution  authority  in  every  EU 
country  and,  amongst  other  things,  specifies  how  decisions  are  made  to  put  banks  into 
resolution,  how  resolutions  may  be  conducted,  and  what  tools  should  be  available  to 
resolution  authorities.  But  there  is  not  yet  a  special  resolution  process  for  insurers.  That 
remains on the wish-list for now. 
Effective resolution can be greatly enhanced if the authorities have prepared for the event, 
with the assistance of the firms concerned. The larger and more complex a firm, the more 
complex and challenging such planning is likely to be. For large international groups, typically 
the  most  complex,  the  most  important  decision  is  whether  resolution  is  going  to  be 
addressed at the group level, by the home resolution authority (Single Point of Entry – SPE) 
or  whether  each  part  of  the  group  is  looked  at  separately,  usually  by  the  host  resolution 
authority  (Multiple  Point  of  Entry  –  MPE).  The  choice  between  SPE  and  MPE  will  have 
implications  for  resolution  planning,  including  steps  that  the  firm  may  need  to  take  to  be 
resolved under that strategy – for example in which entities the capital will be held. 
The BRRD requires that all banking firms should have recovery plans, and that resolution 
authorities  should  develop  resolution  plans  for  all  firms,  based  on  assessments  of  their 
resolvability. The resolution planning that the UK has already carried out has identified some 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
common barriers to resolvability, such as a lack of loss-absorbing capacity in the right legal 
entities, that need to be addressed. 
The  BRRD  also  establishes  that  resolution  authorities  should  determine  a  minimum 
requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL)  that  will  be  available  to  absorb 
losses  and  form  new  capital,  if  the  authorities  need  to  carry  out  a  bail-in.  The  BRRD 
demands that the MREL requirement will have to be met at all times. It is being introduced 
from January 2016, but will be phased in over four years (i.e. until 2020). The precise rules 
for setting MREL in the UK firm by firm are currently being formulated. 
Separately,  in  November  2014,  the  FSB  announced  an  international  agreement  on  the 
minimum  amount  of Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capital  (TLAC)  to  be  held,  covering  all  globally 
significant  banks.  The  motivation  and  concept  of  TLAC  are  very  similar  to  MREL.  As  the 
details of the TLAC proposals are finalised, the two should become consistent, with MREL 
being  the  mechanism  by  which  European  resolution  authorities  ensure  that  their  Global 
Systemically Important Banks (GSIBs) all meet the TLAC standards7. 
More  generally,  as  the  PRA  develops  its  detailed  rules  to  implement  regulatory  reforms, 
resolvability is a key consideration at each stage. In many cases the precise formulation of a 
rule will reflect the effects it has on the ease of resolvability. A particular example of this is 
the rules on ring-fencing which we will now come on to. 
Structural reform 
Structural  reform  is  the  general  term  for  the  changes  being  pursued  to  implement  ring-
fencing as originally proposed by the Independent Commission on Banking in (2011). What 
structural reform intends to achieve is basically to separate out and “ring-fence” into different 
legal  entities,  the  activities  of  retail  banking from  the  activities  of  investment  banking. The 
distinction is set with some flexibility to reflect different business models: retail deposits and 
payments  must  be  inside  the  ring  fence,  and  any  active  trading  units  must  be  outside, 
whereas corporate lending, for example, could be in either. The rules will only apply to banks 
with  core  deposits  over  £25bn  (broadly  those  from  individuals  and  small  businesses). 
Legislation to enable the IBC proposals was passed in 20138. 
The  benefits  from  separation  are  several.  Retail  deposits  tend  to  be  a  cheap  source  of 
funding.  In  part  that  is  because  retail  deposits  are  protected  up  to  a  limit  by  statutory 
guarantee  – so they tend be safe, and sticky. Banks that have a range of activities would 
have an interest in using cheap, protected retail funding to engage in its most risky activities 
–  for  which  direct  funding  is  likely  to  be  much  more  expensive.  Furthermore,  historically, 
banks with large retail activities have also been viewed by credit rating agencies to have a 
large degree of implicit government support thus making their public debt issuance cheaper 
as well. The funding advantage from being seen to be “too big to fail” has been estimated 
from a range of studies to be equivalent to a subsidy on the scale of hundreds of billions of 
dollars  globally,9  encouraging  and  enabling  greater  risk-taking  by  firms  than  true  costs  of 
funding  would  justify.  Separation  also  means  that  the  structure  of  firms  is  simplified  and 
hence they would be easier to resolve if necessary. 
The EU more generally is still deciding on its precise approach to structural reform, although 
the Liikanen report (2012) took a slightly different approach from the IBC. Liikanen made a 
range  of  recommendations,  but  these  did  not  go  in  quite  the  same  direction  as  the  IBC 
                                                
7  See  speech  by  Andrew  Gracie  “TLAC  and  MREL:  From  design  to implementation”,  17 July  2015,  Bank of 
England website. 
8  Financial Services (Banking Reform) Act, 2013.  
9  For example, see the range of estimates in the IMF Global Financial Stability Report, April 2014, Chapter 3.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  
 
proposals  in  that they  recommended  ring-fencing  of the  high  risk  activities  within  a  group, 
whereas  the  IBC  focussed  on  ring-fencing  the  retail  deposit  and  payments  activities.  The 
anticipated  outcome  is  that  whatever  is  finally  decided  for  the  EU  should  not  require  UK 
legislation to change. 
Work  on  implementing  structural  reform  is  underway:  initial  plans  were  submitted  by  the 
banks at the start of 2015, have been reviewed by the PRA, and are being further developed. 
Structural reform must be fully implemented by the affected banks by 1 January 2019. 
Other 
This lecture wouldn’t be complete without addressing issues around the behaviour of firms, 
boards and individuals. 
Along  with  capital  and  liquidity,  firm  governance  is  one  of  the  most  crucial  aspects  for  a 
regulator. In particular how boards are constituted and how they operate. It has long been 
recognised that most firm failures can be traced back to governance issues. The regulatory 
approach  to  governance  needs  to  be  sensitive  to  avoid  becoming  “shadow  management”: 
firms must be allowed to manage themselves, and indeed to make business judgements that 
mean taking calculated risk and hence might go wrong. The regulator’s interventions in board 
affairs  need  to  be  particularly  measured  and  proportionate.  The  PRA  recently  set  out  its 
general expectations in relation to firm governance in a recent consultation paper10. 
In  addition  to  structural  governance  issues,  the  conduct  of  individuals  has  also  raised 
considerable  concern  in  the  past  few  years.  These  matters  were  the  subject  of  the 
Parliamentary  Commission  on  Banking  Standards  (PCBS)  which  reported  in  June  201311. 
The recommendations of that report have been taken forward by the FCA and the PRA and 
new regimes will come into force in March 2016. For Banks there will be a Senior Managers 
Regime (SMR) and for insurers a Senior Insurance Managers Regime (SIMR). These new 
regimes  require  firms  to  allocate  certain  responsibilities  explicitly  across  the  senior 
management  and  senior  non-executives  in  a  firm.  They  are  targeted  at  the  most  senior 
decision makers only and for the SMR only, make it clear that there is an implicit assumption 
of responsibility for those to whom the firm has allocated it. The intent of the regimes is to 
make  accountability  much  clearer  in  advance,  so  that  individuals  take  more  personal 
responsibility. That in itself should improve the conduct of firms. Where it does not, it should 
be much easier to hold individuals to account than it has been hitherto. 
Alongside the SMR and SIMR, there are also new remuneration codes. CRDIV sets a cap on 
the proportion of variable pay for bankers. There is a risk that this will simply increase the 
fixed element of pay, making it harder to adjust pay in the light of performance. The UK’s 
approach nevertheless has to reflect those rules. In addition, the UK has provided for firms to 
defer elements of pay for up to 7 years – and a further 3 years if conduct investigations are 
still ongoing. Firms will be able to apply “malus” to variable pay which has been deferred and 
not  yet  vested.  So  if  misconduct  is  discovered  or  risk-taking  turns  out  to  have  negative 
medium-term consequences, the firm can subsequently withhold those deferred elements of 
remuneration. The UK code also provides for the possibility of clawback of pay that has been 
vested. 
There has also been misconduct discovered in markets that were not previously subject to 
regulation,  such  in  the  setting  of  LIBOR  or  behaviour  around  foreign  exchange  fixes.  The 
setting  of  major  financial  market  benchmarks  has  now  been  brought  within  the  regulatory 
perimeter.  And  the  Bank  of  England,  FCA  and  HMT  conducted  the  Fair  and  Effective 
                                                
10  PRA CP18/15, May 2015. Corporate Governance: Board Responsibilities’. 
11  Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards, June 2013. “Changing Banking for Good”. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Markets Review12 which has made a series of recommendations to improve conduct and the 
functioning of markets going forward. The next step will be an Open Forum to be held at the 
Guildhall in  November which  will bring together policymakers, financial market participants 
and users, academics, media representatives and wider society to map a positive future for 
financial markets. 
Conclusions 
I hope the above gives some idea of the comprehensive set of regulatory reforms that have 
either been applied or are in train. They cover policies to increase the quantity and quality of 
capital,  to  fix  appropriate  liquidity  requirements,  to  manage  systemic  risk,  move  closer  to 
ending too big to fail; and to establish clear management and personal accountability. The 
chart in Annex 2 shows these initiatives and gives a broad indication of the timelines out to 
the  start  of  2019.  This  is  a  massive  change  agenda,  absorbing  a  lot  of  resources  at 
regulators  around  the  globe,  especially  in  the  UK,  and  many  times  more  resources  in  the 
regulated firms themselves. What are the consequences? I frequently get asked questions 
on  this  so  let  me  try  and  give  my  –  strictly  personal  –  answers  to  the  most  common 
questions. 
Has the reform agenda been completed? I think most of the major planks are now in place, 
at  least  in  design,  but  many  have  yet  to  be  implemented  and  there  are  still  details  of 
components  being  debated;  not  least  the  ongoing  reviews  of  elements  of  the  capital 
framework by the BCBS. It will take at least until 2019 until most of the measures outlined in 
this lecture are broadly in force, with some taking longer. And no system should be static, 
since regulation will need to evolve alongside the business. 
Will these reforms prevent future financial crises? Almost certainly not. Financial crises have 
been around for thousands of years (we know that the Romans had them for example) and 
can  be  caused  by  all  sorts  of  unexpected,  unpredictable  events,  including  natural 
catastrophes. We have to assume there will be crises in future. But what the reforms should 
have done is made the financial system, and its component parts, much more resilient in the 
face of shocks. Fewer firms should fail, fewer still in a disorderly fashion. Financial instability 
is therefore less likely and hence there should be greater continuity of financial services. And 
in  consequence  of  a  more  resilient  financial  sector,  the  wider  economy  should  be  able  to 
better  withstand  shocks  with  less  detrimental  effects  on  unemployment,  output  or  price 
changes. 
Has  too  big  to  fail  been  ended?  Not yet. The policies being put in place should, however, 
take us a considerable way towards that objective. It will certainly be a lot easier to handle a 
major financial firm failure once they are in force. It should be much less likely that public 
money is required to underpin financial stability in future. 
Has  there  been  over regulation?  The honest answer is: quite possibly, but no one can be 
sure. This question has many aspects – have there been some reforms that are unnecessary 
given others? For example as we move closer to ending too big to fail, and with standardised 
compensation  schemes  for  retail  depositors,  one  could  reasonably  ask  why  we  need  the 
same  degree  of  regulation  at  all?  Has  the  cost  of  providing  credit  to  the  economy  been 
increased? Will the reforms restrict competition and innovation? Have capital markets been 
rendered  dysfunctional?  It  is  possible  that  there  are  degrees  to  which  all  these  questions 
might  have  positive  answers.  But  against  that,  the  consequences  of  the  Great  Financial 
Crisis  were  so  large,  so  negative  for  millions  of  people  around  the  globe  in  terms  of 
unemployment  and  reduced  incomes,  that  more  regulation,  in  every  direction  has  been  a 
necessary response. Over time one may learn where the reforms can be eased, where they 
                                                
12  Bank of England/FCA/HMT, June 2015. “Fair and Effective Markets Review”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  
 
need to be tightened, or whether other policies need to be introduced to offset any unwanted 
side effects. Let me re-state what has been said before – the authorities generally, including 
regulators,  do  not  want  the  stability  of  the  graveyard.  We  want  successful,  profitable, 
privately  owned  firms  operating  in  the  best  interests  of  the  global  economy  to  support 
sustainable growth. The regulation of the financial services sector has to be aligned with that. 
But  just  as  we  don’t  want  growth  generated  by  firms  causing  excess  pollution,  nor  do  we 
want it sustained by financial firms that take excessive risks with other people’s money. 
We probably won’t know for sure just how effective the new regime is until we reach another 
crisis. Meanwhile  we need to guard against the reforms being rolled back as a result of a 
period without crisis. Let’s complete the programme, give it time to work, be supportive of 
growth  wherever  we  can,  and  be  open  minded  about  change.  But  let’s  also  be  cautious 
about the siren voices of financial self-interest that were partly responsible for luring us on 
the rocks in the first place. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
 Annex 1 – Risk based minimum capital requirements and buffers under CRDIV 
 
    14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Annex 2 – Key policy initiatives, by intended implementation date 
 
   
This  diagram,  which  appeared  in  the  PRA  Annual  Report  2014/15,  highlights  some  of the 
major  policy  work  streams  that  will  support  delivery  of  the  PRA’s  strategy.  It  includes 
initiatives for which there is a publicly identified implementation date at UK or international 
level; however these may be subject to future revision. 
 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
