   Karnit Flug: Increasing competition in the financial system to benefit the 
Israeli economy 
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the presentation of the Strum 
Committee Report to the Minister of Finance and to the Governor, Tel Aviv, 14 December 
2015. 
 I would like to thank the Committee’s members and its chairperson for their comprehensive 
and professional work in recent months. The Bank of Israel sees extreme importance in 
increasing competition in the banking system in particular and in the financial system 
in  general,  and  toward  that  end  is  promoting  a  series  of  processes,  some  in 
collaboration with the other regulators, in addition to the recommendations discussed 
here today: 
• 
Establishing  a  credit  data  register,  which  will  reduce  information  asymmetries 
between  banks  and  nonbank  credit  providers  and  will  provide  the  customer  with 
negotiating power; 
Promoting a securitization market, which will allow an increase in the sources of credit 
and provide a bridge between the capital held by institutional investors and the credit 
needs of the economy; 
Extended  implementation  of  the  vast  majority  of  recommendations  by  the  Zaken 
Committee to promote competition. 
  The  Bank  of  Israel  supports  every  process  that  serves  the  public,  and  takes  this 
principle into account in every decision it reaches. Therefore, the issues must be examined 
from  a  long  term  perspective,  and  processes  whose  negative  impact  is  greater  than  their 
benefit and that are liable to pose a risk to the economy should be avoided. We will thus ensure 
that the reform will bring about the intended changes. 
There is broad agreement on the need to strengthen the competition in the credit market’s 
household  and  small  businesses  segment,  and  to  make  it  easier  for  new  participants  to 
compete  in  the  merchant  acquiring  and  payment  services  sector  as  well.  The  Committee 
proposes ways to increase the number of participants, to create conditions that will increase 
competition between participants, to increase the sources available to them, and to ease the 
connection to the payment and settlement systems. 
During  the  formulation  of  these  processes,  there  is  utmost  importance  to  ensuring  the 
protection of financial services consumers, and the stability of new entities, which of course 
impacts on the stability of the entire system. We must not forget the lessons of the most severe 
financial crisis in our generation, which was caused by irresponsible measures and inadequate 
supervision. It is important to remember that in the past three years the balance of consumer 
credit has increased cumulatively by about 20 percent, and credit to small businesses by about 
30 percent. 
As noted, the report contains very significant steps, which will change the state of financial 
system competition, and agreement has been reached regarding those steps. However, there 
are quite a few steps regarding which there is still disagreement, such that the discussions 
have not yet been exhausted and there remains much work ahead of the formulation of final 
recommendations. I emphasize that the issues which the Bank of Israel opposes reflect, from 
the Bank’s professional perspective, measures that are liable to negatively impact the public 
and to serve as a marked risk to the stability of the economy. 
The Committee’s recommendations reflect agreements that were reached on important 
and material issues: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Separating  the  two  credit  card  companies  from  the  large  banks,  while  providing 
proportionate protection to the nascent separated companies; 
A more lenient level of supervision over entities that do not take deposits, which will 
make it easier for new entities to compete with banks; 
Constructing  technological  tools  for  the  consumer  (information  services  and  activity 
initiation) that will allow simple price comparison; 
Deposit insurance is a measure that will help small banks compete for additional customers, 
and strengthen our ability to deal with the next crisis; 
Completing regulation that  will  apply  to  nonbank  financing  companies  (including  P2P’s). 
Supervised companies will be able to be connected to the payment systems. 
Payment services regulation, in accordance with generally accepted principles worldwide 
with  adjustment  for  the  domestic  market,  and  the  setting  of  conditions  for  access  to  the 
controlled payment systems. 
Setting  up  a  committee  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  recommendations,  and  to 
recommend, as necessary, additional steps. 
Advancing  the  steps  on  which  agreement  has  been  reached  will  lead  to  a  material 
change in the level of competition in the financial system, without risking its stability 
and  without  negatively  impacting  consumers.  It  is  important  that  financial  system 
reforms  are  made  with  agreement,  as  a  lack of  agreement  will  hamper  the  ability to 
implement  the  recommendations  in  practice.  We  must  implement  these  steps 
responsibly, with a long term view of the benefit to consumers and the economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
