   Daniel Mminele: The impact of diverging monetary policies on emerging 
markets 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
National Asset-Liability Management Africa Symposium, Johannesburg, 29 October 2015. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
It is a pleasure and privilege to have been invited to deliver the keynote address at this sixth 
Annual National Asset-Liability Management Africa symposium, which judging from the topics, 
promises to be an exciting event. Unfortunately, other commitments will not allow me to spend 
more time with you as I will have to leave immediately after this address. There is, however, 
strong representation from the South African Reserve Bank, and my colleagues will be able to 
share with me later some of the insights I am going to miss. 
As financial market participants, we all realise the challenges and risks stemming from a low 
growth and low interest rate economic environment amid a changing financial landscape and 
turbulence in financial markets. 
My  remarks  this  morning  will  focus  on  the  years  since  the  global  financial  crisis  (GFC), 
specifically in relation to monetary policy in advanced economies (AEs) and resulting spill-
overs and policy implications for emerging market economies (EMEs), with particular reference 
to South Africa. I will touch on how these monetary policy developments have impacted capital 
flows and investment positions in EMEs. 
Monetary policy developments after the global financial crisis 
Although the “taper tantrum” is behind us and the Fed’s QE programme came to an end in 
September 2014, vast uncertainties have re-emerged. 
Firstly, the timing and pace of Fed’s rate hikes became more uncertain as we moved deeper 
into 2015, following the soft patch in the US economy, and as inflation kept falling short of 
expectations. 
Secondly, the global environment and specifically financial markets began experiencing some 
renewed turbulences due to a possible Greek exit and country specific developments in EMEs. 
One  example  of  such  country  specific  events  were  the  mounting  concerns  regarding  the 
slowdown in the Chinese economy and its impact on commodity prices, commodity-exporting 
countries as well as global growth. The unease about the slowdown in China appears to have 
been further fuelled by various policy measures implemented by Chinese authorities to restore 
confidence  during  the  sharp  sell-off  in  their  equity  market,  as  well  as  the  unexpected 
devaluation of their currency, which at the time seemed to have created even more policy 
uncertainty. 
Thirdly, in contrast to the Fed’s expected monetary policy tightening path, some other major 
central banks have embarked on further policy easing, exacerbating the so-called monetary 
policy divergence. In the early part of this year, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced 
their long awaited QE programme of approximately EUR1,1 trillion, while the dovish stance at 
last  week’s  policy  meeting  reinforced  expectations  for  further  easing.  In  Japan,  the  recent 
economic contraction and renewed deflation fears fuelled speculation that the Bank of Japan 
(BoJ) could announce more QE. In addition, various central banks in AEs reduced their policy 
rates in 2015, for example Canada, Australia (both by 50 bps), New Zealand (75 bps) while 
Sweden and Switzerland moved further into the territory of negative interest rates. China also 
started easing monetary policy since November 2014, reducing their benchmark policy rates 
on six occasions and the reserve requirement ratio four times. The latest easing by China 
happened as recently as last week, reflecting the Chinese authorities’ concern about future 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
growth expectations and the overall health of the economy. Surprisingly, this resulted in broad 
EM weakness with losses being registered on both equity and currency markets. Perhaps this 
reaction is a reflection of increased risks to the Chinese economic outlook. 
The GFC set the tone for monetary policy implementation and liquidity provision to significantly 
influence  balance  sheet  dynamics  in  AEs  (and  in  order  to  restore  dysfunctional  interbank 
markets). In EMEs, however, this phenomenon was less apparent, with only the PBOC active 
in this regard. This was because, as EM central banks did not face the “zero lower bound” 
constraint,  they  could  still  use  traditional  policy  tools  (such  as  policy  rates)  to  respond  to 
external shocks. In addition, many EM countries recovered more quickly from the GFC than 
their AE counterparts, further reducing the need for exceptional policy measures. 
Nonetheless, the expansion of the balance sheets of major central banks has not been without 
effect on emerging markets, and has at times complicated the task of the latter’s central banks. 
Ample global liquidity triggered capital flows into EM countries, in many cases encouraging 
public and private leveraging and fuelling credit growth. Such developments would typically 
prompt  a  policy  response  in the form  of higher  interest  rates.  However, with  interest  rates 
differentials with AEs a key driver of portfolio flows and currency appreciation, some EM central 
banks found themselves facing increasingly complex challenges. 
Despite the current delay in the Fed’s expected monetary policy normalisation path, the Fed 
and the Bank of England (BoE) are expected to be the first AEs to increase their policy rates. 
Against this background, it still appears that monetary policy paths will differ amongst major 
central  banks,  in  terms  of  the  trend,  timing  and  pace,  adding  to  the  uncertainty  in  global 
financial markets. 
These  diverging  monetary  policy  paths  create  a  challenging  environment  in  which  central 
banks have to operate in order to attain a balance between macroeconomic challenges and 
policy choices. One of these possible choices could be a revision of monetary policy mandates 
due to changes in inflation trends. Over the past few decades, inflation targets in AEs have 
steadily fallen to an average of around 2 per cent. In EMEs, inflation fell at a faster pace to an 
average of around 4,0 per cent, however, with a fair degree of dispersion. This fall in average 
inflation targets has mirrored the fall in inflation itself. Yet, at present inflation is undershooting 
those targets, on average by around 1,5 percentage points, in an environment of the zero lower 
bound constraint. Some economists feel that a way of loosening this constraint would be to 
revise inflation targets upwards. For example, raising inflation targets to 4,0 per cent from 2,0 
per cent would provide 2 extra percentage points of “room to manoeuvre”. That is roughly the 
order of magnitude some researchers1 have suggested might be desirable. 
For EMEs, however, the picture is somewhat more challenging, as domestic developments, in 
particular currency depreciation, have been key to inflation developments and outlook. 
US monetary policy normalisation and treasury yields 
Despite the positive growth impact of monetary policy accommodation over the past seven 
years, considerable vulnerabilities have also emerged during this period, especially for those 
EMEs that did not introduce the appropriate policy adjustments. Those economies could be 
vulnerable in the wake of tighter financial conditions. 
Although  the  spill-overs  or  intensity  of  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy 
normalisation will, amongst others, depend on country-specific factors, the global environment 
has also become more integrated and complex. In addition, the last couple of months have 
brought  more  issues  to  the  fore,  for  example  the  impact  of  lower  commodity  prices  on 
commodity  exporting  countries  and  heightened  market  volatility,  which  could  make  the 
                                                
1   Ball, L (2014), “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent”, IMF Working Paper 14/92, and 
Blanchard, O, Dell’Ariccia, G, and Mauro, P (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
monetary  policy  adjustment  process  even  more  complicated  and  painful.  Against  this 
background, domestic imbalances or weak policies could aggravate risks and challenges in 
the adjustment process. 
Given that the Fed, as alluded to earlier, is expected to tighten policy first amongst the major 
central banks, let me spend some time on the impact of the imminent US monetary policy 
normalisation on EMEs. Monetary policy normalisation implies the removal of extraordinary 
policy measures that had been implemented to deal with a particular economic episode. In this 
sense, it refers to a path taken to return to a more “normal” monetary policy setting, although 
no qualification is made as to what exactly constitutes “normal” in the post-GFC world. 
During rate-hiking cycles, a key concern for global markets is the path of US bond yields, as 
these tend to have knock-on effects on other markets, and this is one of the three financial 
channels of spill-overs to EMEs. Before I discuss the possible effects of US monetary policy 
tightening on EMEs, I would like to mention some factors which could constrain and/or prevent 
abrupt and unexpected increases in US Treasury yields. These are important to note as they 
may influence expectations about the extent of the impact of US tightening on EME economies. 
Firstly, some central banks like the Fed initially adopted a form of forward guidance as part of 
their normal monetary policy toolkit. Although this could have at times contributed to volatility 
in markets because of the highly uncertain and changing environment in which communication 
takes place, the aim remained for central banks to be as transparent as possible in terms of 
the policy outlook. The FOMC is also clear on the gradual normalisation path, as also alluded 
to  by  the  previous  Fed  officials  like  Ben  Bernanke  ahead  of  the  2004  tightening  cycle2. 
Gradualism in monetary policy also reflects the Fed’s desire to keep bond-market volatility in 
check – in Greenspan’s words, to “not create discontinuous problems with respect to balance 
sheets and asset values”. 
The second important dynamic is that the longer end of the US yield curve is also interrelated 
with  the  Fed’s  balance-sheet  dynamics.  The  FOMC  has  indicated  that  it  will  consider  the 
cessation of reinvestments of maturing securities only after it commences hiking the policy 
rate. In the meantime, it will not sell any securities. Until such time as the Fed has signalled 
that it will cease to reinvest bond maturities, the Fed will have no direct impact on the stock of 
bonds in the market. 
Thirdly, there is debate on how much the “equilibrium” interest rate has declined structurally in 
the US, contributing to the downward pressure on the long end of the yield curve. 
Lastly,  monetary  policy  in  other  AEs  can  also  influence  the  demand  and  supply  for  core 
sovereign assets and therefore the global trend in long-term interest rates. For example, the 
declining trend in Eurozone bond yields has in the past also played a significant role in driving 
US Treasury yields lower. This could help explain the observation that US bond yields have 
not increased significantly along with expected future increases in US policy rates during 2014, 
a phenomenon reminiscent of the 2004–2006 US tightening cycle. This was also evident during 
the Eurozone crisis of 2011/12 and again in 2014, when the ECB stepped up liquidity-provision 
measures and ultimately implemented QE. As a result, the 10-year Bund traded below 1,0 per 
cent in late 2014 and even closer to 0 per cent earlier this year. This pulled US Treasury yields 
lower as investors switched out of low-yielding Eurozone bonds into more attractive yielding 
US Treasuries. 
Although some economists/analysts still believe that a Fed lift-off is possible before year-end, 
there remains considerable uncertainty in the broader market space regarding the timing and 
extent thereof. This was reinforced by the FOMC decision not to hike at the September meeting 
amid concerns about global developments and their impact on the US, as well as the likelihood 
                                                
2   Bernanke Ben, Gradualism, Remarks at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco and the University of Washington, 2004. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
that inflation could dip even lower in the near future. The Fed, however, reserved the option of 
raising rates by year end and some FOMC members have indicated a belief that such a hike 
will be necessary. Therefore, the debate continues as to when conditions will warrant a lift-off. 
The  statement  from  the  FOMC  after  the  conclusion  of  its  most  recent  meeting  yesterday 
suggested that the committee has downgraded its assessment of global risks and has left the 
door wide open for a possible move at its next meeting in December. 
Monetary spill-overs to emerging-market economies 
As financial markets and systems became more integrated in recent years, the monetary policy 
cycles of major economies also became increasingly important for EMEs. The impact from US 
monetary policy normalisation could transpire through two types of channels: firstly the real 
channel (trade), and secondly the financial channel. The real/trade channel occurs when US 
policy tightening is associated with an acceleration in US economic growth, with subsequent 
spill-overs for EMEs. However, the US economy is not expected to accelerate meaningfully; 
rather, US policy normalisation will consist of reducing an unusually large, and eventually no 
longer necessary, degree of stimulus. 
In contrast to the trade channel, the much more dynamic financial channel is very important 
for countries like South Africa, whereby spill-overs function through three sub-channels, i.e. 
changes  in  interest  rates  (or  yields),  exchange  rates  and  portfolio  flows,  which  could  also 
influence domestic credit conditions as well as other asset prices. 
In terms of the interest rate channel, it is well known that South African bonds – and those of 
countries such as Brazil, India, and Mexico – have a strong correlation with US Treasuries, 
albeit inconsistent at times. This correlation was clearly evident during the “taper tantrum” when 
the 10-year US Treasury yield increased from 1,63 to almost 3,0 per cent and the South African 
10-year benchmark bond increased from 6,58 to almost 8,0 per cent between May and August 
2013. In 2014, South African bond yields also adjusted (downwards) in line with US Treasuries 
despite various negative domestic developments, including credit rating downgrades and the 
depreciation of the rand, which under normal conditions would have driven yields higher. In 
2015, however, as the initial US policy rate hike was believed to be getting closer, 10-year US 
Treasury yields increased to around 2,50 per cent, which was mirrored by a 160 bps increase 
in  the  comparable  R186  domestic  bond  yield.  Earlier  this  month,  however,  following 
disappointing US payrolls data for September and other international data, the 10-year US 
Treasury dipped to below 2,0 per cent again, followed by a 40 bps decline in domestic bond 
yields. 
The  importance  of  the  US  interest-rate  cycle  for  South  Africa  is  also  apparent  in  terms  of 
funding costs for both the sovereign and domestic corporates. With reference to the former, 
the external funding costs – as reflected by JP Morgan’s Emerging Market Bond Index (or 
EMBI) – the spread for South African bonds over US Treasuries peaked around 460 bps by 
late September due to domestic factors but also in anticipation of US tightening and general 
risk aversion, from 350 bps a year ago. EMEs in general have experienced varying degrees of 
vulnerability  during  2015,  largely  owing  to  negative  country-specific  factors,  which  include 
political uncertainty in Turkey and increasing concerns about the economic outlook for Brazil. 
Standard  and  Poor’s  (S&P)  downgraded  Brazil’s  sovereign  credit  rating  to  sub-investment 
grade in September 2015. 
Domestic funding costs for banks in South Africa have, on the other hand, been negatively 
influenced by a further dynamic in the aftermath of the GFC, namely more stringent global 
financial regulations which are being implemented locally. With the upcoming introduction of 
the Net Stable Funding Ratio, the spread to Jibar of floating-rate NCDs issued by commercial 
banks increased significantly across all maturities, in some cases more than double the levels 
seen around mid-2013, as banks are forced to issue longer-term instruments. 
There is a general view that financial regulatory reform, while necessary, may have had certain 
unintended  consequences,  such  as  limitations  on  banks’  proprietary  trading,  reducing  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
willingness and ability of Primary Dealers to hold sizeable inventories of securities, which have 
contributed to less liquidity in the markets. This lower level of liquidity introduces new risks 
through an increase in market volatility that could amplify negative spill-over effects in stress 
situations. 
Another frequently discussed challenge is that of EMEs’ foreign-currency corporate borrowing 
in US dollars and the impact of the stronger dollar and higher yields on debt-servicing and 
refinancing risks. The total US dollar exposure from both bank loans and debt securities has 
been growing rapidly over recent years to approximately USD3,3 trillion, according to the BIS. 
For South Africa, this does not present a significant risk, given relatively low level of foreign 
liabilities of local companies and banks. However, excessive US dollar appreciation could have 
ramifications for highly indebted emerging markets, resulting in increased volatility and a sell-
off in EM assets. This might very well spill over to other EMEs, including South Africa. 
The second sub-channel, the foreign-exchange market, is probably the market that may suffer 
a more pronounced impact from global monetary policy normalisation. This risk was illustrated 
during the 2013 “taper tantrum” when the rand – together with the currencies of certain other 
EMEs  perceived  at  the  time  to  be  most  vulnerable  (such  as  Brazil,  India,  Indonesia,  and 
Turkey) – depreciated by more than 10 per cent against the US dollar3. The period that followed 
was  characterised  by  increased  differentiation  between  EMEs.  During  recent  months, 
however, correlations across markets in EMEs have increased, perhaps suggesting a lower 
degree  of  investor  differentiation.  Against  this  background,  currency-market  volatility  has 
increased  to  levels  that  prevailed  during  the  Eurozone  sovereign  debt  crisis,  while  EM 
currencies on average depreciated by 14 per cent4. 
The popular narrative tends to focus on the rand-dollar exchange rate. Given the outlook for 
the normalisation of monetary policy in the US, the US dollar has surprised with the magnitude 
and  speed  of  its  appreciation  since  mid-2014.  This  was  initially  triggered  by  the  ECB’s 
announcement  of  the  Targeted  Long-term  Refinancing  Operations  in  June  2014,  amid 
heightened speculation of full-scale QE, which implied increased monetary policy divergence. 
In the meantime, expectations of the Fed’s hiking cycle were also escalating, and by March 
2015, the US currency had appreciated by 26 per cent on a trade-weighted basis5 and reached 
US$1,05 against the euro, a level that was only expected amid actual US tightening6. This was 
the largest appreciation ever in the run-up to an interest-rate tightening cycle in the US. 
The outlook for the US dollar will, to a large extent, depend on two fundamental factors: the 
pace of widening interest-rate differentials and the performance of the US economy relative to 
its major trading partners, although other factors – such as portfolio reallocation – can at times 
temporarily dampen the importance of these two factors, as occurred in 2014. 
Therefore, actual US policy normalisation could result in further weakness in the rand against 
the dollar, and could also negatively impact portfolio flows by reducing the willingness of fund 
managers (a large share of them having US dollar liabilities) to hold unhedged positions in 
South African bonds and equities. This speaks to the third sub-channel, namely portfolio flows. 
Similar to other EMEs, portfolio inflows into South Africa declined in the aftermath of the “taper 
tantrum”. Reserve Bank statistics show that total portfolio inflows slowed from R85 billion in 
2012 to R50 billion in 2014, comprising mostly bond inflows of around R37 billion. More recent 
                                                
3   3 May to August 2013. 
4   According to the JP Morgan EM currency index, comprising Brazil, Chile, China, Singapore India, Hungary, 
Mexico, Russia, Turkey and South Africa. 
5   Mid-2014  to  mid-March  2015  (Since  then,  however,  the  US  dollar  has  depreciated  marginally,  but  traded 
generally sideways.). 
6   Market analysts’ models were showing that the US dollar performance was consistent with an actual 100 bps 
increase in the US policy rate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
data from the Central Securities Depository7 reveals that, in the year-to-date, non-residents 
bought R20,1  billion worth of equities and R861 million worth of bonds, amounting to total 
inflows of R21,0 billion. South Africa’s vulnerability to US policy tightening is augmented by our 
dependence  on  external  financing  to  deal  with  the  current-account  deficit.  South  Africa  is, 
however, not alone in this episode of asset reallocation away from EMEs, whereby portfolio 
inflows in 2015 are expected to fall below 2008 levels, according to the Institute of International 
Finance8. This, however, reflects a “lengthening drought” in capital flows, rather than a sudden 
stop. 
Has divergence in monetary policy impacted investment positions in EMEs? 
In the wake of the GFC, investors piled into EM equities and debt amid abundant liquidity, low 
interest rates and low growth in AEs. These inflows, however, did not always reflect domestic 
economic fundamentals, whilst the EM outlook also became increasingly uncertain over the 
past four years. As a result, a major concern with the Fed’s upcoming tightening cycle is that 
global investors will further reallocate portfolios away from EM assets and back towards the 
US given better growth prospects, rising yields and the perception of a more secure investment 
environment. 
A weaker exchange rate for South Africa would probably raise implied rand volatility, adding 
to overall risk aversion and weak sentiment towards rand-denominated assets. Although the 
nominal effective exchange rate of the rand was reasonably stable during 2014, relative to 
baskets of commodity-exporting or large EMEs, it depreciated by about 10 per cent on a trade-
weighted  basis  during  2015  to  date  due  to  the  combination  of  domestic  and  global 
developments already discussed. 
For South Africa, the favourable impact of a weaker currency on the trade account have not 
been  forthcoming  for  a  few  years  now  which  is  rather  problematic  in  an  international 
environment of volatile capital flows. While there has been some narrowing in the current-
account  deficit  since  the  third  quarter  of  2014,  it  remains  to  be  seen  to  what  extent  this 
represents the beginning of a sustained compression of the current account after a long period 
of  real  exchange-rate  depreciation.  Furthermore,  a  stronger  US  dollar  tends  to  dampen 
commodity prices, with adverse implications for commodity producers like South Africa. In the 
second quarter of this year, however, the current-account deficit narrowed to 3,1 per cent of 
GDP from 6,2 per cent in the same period last year. While this narrowing is attributed in part 
to temporary factors, there appears to be some evidence that both export and import volumes 
are responding to the depreciation of the rand and the weaker economy. I have to add though 
that larger service receipts contributed to a narrowing of the current account. However, the 
Bank expects this process of adjustment to remain slow, with the export response inhibited by 
a  number  of  factors  including,  inter  alia,  headwinds  from  the  slowing  global  economy  and 
electricity supply constraints. 
Although a number of EMEs have been able to reduce their policy rates in response to the 
favourable  impact  from  oil  prices  on  inflation,  this  could  be  thwarted  by  developments  in 
currency markets. This, in an environment where economic growth for emerging markets has 
slipped to its slowest pace since 2009 as countries battle to deal with the combined impact of 
a stronger dollar and weaker commodity prices. In this regard, the domestic economic outlook 
has also deteriorated even further as reflected by the surprise economic contraction in the 
second quarter of the year. Although domestic developments contributed, the downside risks 
to the global economic outlook have also increased on the back of a slowing Chinese economy. 
                                                
7   Strate data up to 20 October 2015. 
8   Capital flows to emerging markets, October 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
On  the  positive  side,  we  should  remember  that  the  beginning  of  the  US  monetary  policy 
tightening cycle will not necessarily be bad for the world, in particular for South Africa and other 
EMEs, as it would indicate that the US economy is in better shape and therefore supports the 
global recovery. In addition, both the consensus and FOMC projections suggest that the Fed 
will not move to a restrictive stance anytime soon, but rather that it will merely reduce the 
degree of policy looseness. Finally, while policy normalisation in the US may well reduce the 
flow of US-based capital to EM assets, prospects for additional stimulus in the Eurozone and 
Japan, as well as capital outflows from China, could result in greater investments into EM from 
these regions, counter-balancing to some extent the impact of US tightening. 
In summary, recent experience makes it quite clear that changes in AEs’ monetary policies 
have been a key driver of developments and sentiment towards EMEs and market volatility, 
as the years of low interest rates and unconventional monetary policy have seen increased 
international exposures to EMEs. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  it  would  appear  that  policy  challenges  and,  specifically,  the  “divergence” 
between the major central banks will continue to have major bearings on emerging economies 
in the foreseeable future. Market strains have eased over the past few weeks, in part because 
of growing indications that the Federal Reserve would take the risk of a further deterioration in 
financial conditions in consideration before any policy decision. Nonetheless, the consensus 
view remains that while lift-off has been delayed, it will still happen in the not-too-distant future; 
and its impact on global portfolio flows and EM assets remain highly uncertain. So does the 
impact on the world economy and global financial markets from current or potential stimulus in 
the Eurozone, Japan and China. 
Against, this background, it is clear that central banks cannot afford to be complacent, as the 
risks related to global monetary policy and macroeconomic developments remain high given 
the  globalised  nature  of  the  world  economy.  This  is  unchartered  territory,  and  the  risks  of 
further market turbulence are tilted to the upside. In light of possible implications for financial 
stability and resilience, and for domestic price developments, central banks – and the South 
African Reserve Bank among them – will have to exert continued and utmost vigilance. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
