  Sabine Lautenschläger: One year of SSM 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  an  international  conference  on  “One  year  of  SSM  effective  and  efficient 
supervision in a volatile world?”, organised by the Institute of Law and Finance, Frankfurt am 
Main, 2 November 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Let me thank the organisers of this conference, and especially Professor Schneider, for their 
kind  invitation.  I  very  much  welcome  this  opportunity  to  share  our  experience  of  one  year 
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  in  particular  as  our first  year  anniversary  is  only  two  days 
ahead of us. 
 
Back  in  November  2014,  in  a  speech  for  the  start  of  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism (SSM), I compared the new system, the SSM, to an athlete at the start 
of  his  career.  We  only  had  a  short  period  of  training  before  going  into  our  first 
competition.  Today,  almost  one  year  later,  we  have  gained  experience  and  won 
some contests. 
Let me mention some figures to give you some insight into the sport we practice: 
The SSM directly supervises 122 banking groups. From January 2016 onwards this 
number will increase to 130. The balance sheets of these banks count for 25 trillion 
euro in assets and 82% of the banking business done in the euro area. 
Overall,  the  ECB  issued  more  than  1.200  supervisory  decisions  last  year;  our 
planning cycle for the first year included more than 8.000 activities. 
Not only did we hire 1.000 new staff members at the ECB, but we also integrated 
5.000  staff  members  from  26  national  supervisory  authorities,  who  were  formerly 
responsible for supervision in their home country, into the SSM. 
Since  November  2014,  the  SSM  is  responsible  for  directly  supervising  1200 
individual banks, which until that point in time had been supervised according to 19 
national  interpretations  of  European  law  and  according  to  specific  national 
regulations,  following  a  national  supervisory  tradition  with  varying  degrees  of 
quantitative and qualitative elements, with a historically grown reporting universe. 
It was a busy first year. 
And it was a successful first year as we made progress on many fronts. 
 
We achieved a lot regarding our main objective: we improved the resilience of 122 
significant banking groups, of the 19 national banking systems, and of the European 
banking  system  as  whole.  The  comprehensive  assessment  was  the  most  publicly 
visible success, but many smaller and less visible steps followed and will still follow 
on our way to a safer and more sound banking system in the Euro Area. 
As the SSM changed the way supervision addresses problems and communicates 
what it expects to be done by banks, it also changed the timing and the way banks, 
their management and their owners acknowledge shortcomings and find solutions. 
One important step led to a common methodology for the supervisory review and 
evaluation  process,  the  core  of  supervisory  activities  and  the  basis  for  the  capital 
level the SSM expects a bank to hold according to its individual risk profile. 
Starting with 19 different supervisory practices and information levels, it was pivotal 
to set a basis of quantitative as well as qualitative information about individual banks 
and  the  differences  in  national  banking  systems.  We  can  now  reap  the  fruit  from 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
           2 
  having a single European supervisor by moving our capacity for benchmarking to a 
European level. 
But  it  was  not  only  a  busy  year,  it  was  a  very  special  year,  too.  Everything  we 
decided,  we  decided  for  first  time.  Everything  we  did  set  a  precedent.  Thus, 
everything had to be discussed in the Supervisory Board of the SSM, consisting of 
the representatives of the 26 national supervisory authorities as  well as  of 6 ECB 
representatives. We formulated supervisory policies in all major areas, for example 
large exposure limits, the fitness and properness of board members, conditions for 
changes  in  qualifying  holdings,  prerequisites  for  capital  reductions  and  issuances, 
model approvals, capital and liquidity waivers, IPS etc. 
We also discussed and agreed on concepts and processes for supervisory planning, 
onsite inspections, risk analysis, reporting of banks. 
Integrating  19  national  supervisory  cultures  and  traditions  with  a  wide  range  of 
administrative  practices  demanded  and  still  demands  organisational  and 
methodological  rigour.  This  rigour  is  sometimes  misinterpreted  as  being  not 
proportional  or  not  in  line  with  qualitative  supervision.  But  common  concepts  and 
methods have helped and are helping us to put in place the fundamental pillars of a 
truly European supervisory approach. Some stakeholders had grown fond of some 
habits and customs. Those customs had to be abandoned to make room for a new 
common  approach,  as  the  objective  of  the  SSM  is  not  to  preserve  19  national 
approaches but to foster convergence towards best standards of supervision. 
It is not my intention to only look back at our past achievements. We cannot lean 
back and hope for easy wins in the years to come. There are still a lot of challenges 
ahead of us, which we have to face and address. 
Firstly, there are issues for which  we still lack a common approach. For example, 
what are our supervisory expectations regarding banks’ liquidity risk management? 
What contingency planning do we expect from banks for outsourced services? 
To answer these questions, we  will establish common administrative practices via 
the  already  described  process  of  collecting  national  and  international  best 
administrative practices, of benchmarking concepts and by taking into account the 
lessons learnt from the crisis. 
Second,  we  need  to  further  refine  our  benchmarking  by  using  the  knowledge  we 
gained last year. Last year, we had to be tough on banks and on us to collect a lot of 
harmonised quantitative as well as qualitative information. This was necessary to lay 
the foundation for our work and to exploit that we are one of the biggest supervisors 
of the world. We are exceptionally well placed to look for the best practices and to 
identify emerging risks by using our unique database. 
Good  benchmarking  combines  strong  analysis  and  data-driven  assessment  with 
expert judgement. It allows taking into account the specificities of individual banks 
while still fostering consistency of assessments across banks and countries. Good 
benchmarking looks at risks from multiple perspectives and helps to develop a deep, 
holistic understanding of each institution’s overall risk profile and viability. 
Third, we need to further analyse in detail and for each topic individually where we 
are  able  to  create  a  harmonized  approach  within  the  SSM,  where  we  are  able  to 
remove  uneven  playing  fields.  We  already  did  so  for  the  options  and  national 
discretion. In November we will consult on the legal text we drafted for executing the 
discretion  given  to  us  regarding  the  122  OND  identified  and  decided  upon  by  the 
SB. 
Apart from the famous ONDs, the current legal environment in which we operate is 
characterised  by  many  different  interpretations  and  national  gold  plating.  In  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  context, we face a particular challenge. It goes without saying that the SSM applies 
national  law;  consequently,  the  SSM  is  not  always  able  to  ensure  a  level  playing 
field  when  national  laws  diverge.  Things  get  even  more  difficult  when  national 
supervisory  practices  are  transferred  into  national  law  limiting  the  usual  range  of 
discretion needed by a supervisor to correctly do his job. These new national rules 
risk  not  removing  but  creating  new  elements  of  fragmentation  and  supervisory 
arbitrage. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by recalling a key lesson from the recent financial crises. The crises did not 
solely result from weaknesses in the regulatory framework. It is important to remember that 
the  supervision  of  banks  did  not  function  optimally,  either.  We  can  all  agree  that  banks 
should be subject to consistent prudential requirements based on their business model, risk 
profile  and  governance  arrangements;  to  only  name  the  most  important  characteristics. 
Prudential  requirements  should  not  be  driven  by  the  location  of  a  bank’s  business  or 
headquarter.  Ultimately,  banks  which  face  comparable  economic  and  financial  conditions 
should receive the same regulatory and supervisory treatment. This is why a truly European 
Banking supervisor, the SSM, was created. The SSM’s first year of supervision was overall a 
successful  one.  But  we  continue  to  face  challenges  so  there  is  no  reason  at  all  to  stop 
training. We have to stay vigilant and keep on with the work we have started. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
