 Minouche Shafik: Treading carefully 
 Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England, at the Institute of Directors, London, 14 December 2015. 
 I  would  especially  like  to  thank  Grellan  McGrath  for  his  help  with  the  analysis  and  evidence  in  this  speech. 
Comments from Alex Haberis, Andrew Hauser, Gareth Ramsay, Jon Relleen, Matt Waldron, Martin Weale and 
James Talbot are also gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
In what is likely a first for a monetary policymaker, I would like to begin my speech today with 
a chart of the depth of tread on car tyres – as measured by the busiest tyre fitting station in 
the  UK  whom  I  recently  visited  in  the  South  East.  Generally  speaking,  the  deeper  the 
grooves are on a tyre, the better is its grip, performance and safety. When the recession hit 
in  2008,  people  began  to  delay  replacing  their  tyres,  implicitly  accepting  a  deterioration  in 
quality in the hope of saving on costs (Chart 1). What is surprising, however, is that although 
we are now into the seventh year of the recovery, the frequency with which drivers replace 
their tyres has not returned to pre-crisis levels. 
This illustrates quite nicely that although the economy is thankfully returning to normal, we 
cannot  blithely  assume  that  relationships  which  held  in  the  past  will  automatically  revert. 
Several  stylised  facts  in  macroeconomics  –  such  as  the  idea  that  deeper  recessions  are 
followed by stronger recoveries, and the idea that productivity can be relied upon to increase 
over time around a long-standing trend – have been long since disproven by the nature of 
the recovery in the UK. And questions remain about the how the economy operates in the 
wake of the Great Recession that make the setting of monetary policy more challenging. 
In  the  rest  of  this  speech  I  would  like  to  put  forward  some  thoughts  on  how  one  should 
approach  decision  taking  in  the  face  of  such  uncertainty.  I  will  highlight  three  themes: 
proceeding with caution, considering all of the outcomes and retaining flexibility. I do so as a 
member of the Monetary Policy Committee, though you should note that what follows are my 
own views and may not necessarily represent the views of the committee as a whole. I don’t 
think  other  members  place  quite  so  much  weight  on  tyre  tread  depth  as  an  indicator,  and 
they  probably  wouldn’t  thank  me  were  it  to  be  deemed  a  bellweather  for  interest  rate 
decisions in the future. 
Proceed with caution 
1.  
It is now 81 months since Bank Rate was cut to its current level of 0.5%. It has taken a lot of 
hard work since then to generate the recovery we are now experiencing. I mean that quite 
literally: the weakness in productivity that we have witnessed means that much of the growth 
so far has been generated by increased hours worked rather than an increase in output per 
hour worked. Participation in the labour force has increased in recent years, as has average 
hours worked per week. Having demonstrated such flexibility, it is fitting that people are now 
beginning to enjoy the benefits of an increase in real wage growth.  
For comparison, following the 1990s recession Bank Rate stayed at its trough for 7 months 
before being increased again, and the equivalent number following the 1980s recession was 
only 6 months. Indeed were one to look solely at measures of the real economy relative to 
their  value  when  previous  tightening  cycles  began,  you  would  have  expected  the  MPC  to 
have  already  begun  raising  rates  by  now  (Chart  2).  And  I  must  admit  to  getting  a  gentle 
ribbing at the dinner table when I come home after each monthly MPC meeting to say that I 
have voted for no change in Bank Rate once again. “All that work to decide to do nothing!” 
say my children. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  But there are good reasons for Bank Rate to have remained lower for longer this time. First 
among them is that it is not the absolute level of Bank Rate which matters, but where it is 
relative  to  some  “equilibrium”  rate  that  would  maintain  demand  in  line  with  supply  in  the 
economy  and  keep  inflation  close  to  target.  The  size  and  nature  of  the  shocks  that 
accompanied the financial crisis meant that this equilibrium level fell dramatically in 2008–09. 
So  far,  in  fact,  that  even  cutting  Bank  Rate  to  a  record  low  of  0.5%  was  not  enough  to 
prevent the unemployment rate rising. And in order to head off a further deterioration in the 
economy,  the  MPC  embarked  on  a  programme  of  Quantitative  Easing  (QE)  designed  to 
further  support  the  economy.  In  total,  the  MPC  has  purchased  £375  billion  of  government 
bonds through a scheme we call the Asset Purchase Facility (APF). 
The persistence of those shocks and their after effects – including the need for ongoing fiscal 
consolidation, high levels of household indebtedness, and the subsequent events in the euro 
area – mean that the equilibrium rate is probably recovering only gradually. And I note at this 
point that at least some of this recovery in the equilibrium rate is likely to be matched by a 
fading of the stimulus from QE.1 
The second reason why it is reasonable for Bank Rate not to have increased already is that 
the  relationship  between  the  real  economy  and  inflation  has  not  been  as  one  would  have 
expected: Chart 2 shows that while most real variables – such as unemployment – are at or 
beyond  levels  at  which  Bank  Rate  had  been  raised  in  the  past,  most  nominal  variables  – 
such  as  wage  growth  and  inflation  –  are  below.  For  example,  despite  unemployment 
declining by three percentage points from its peak in 2008, headline inflation has fallen by 
five percentage points over the same period to a record low of –0.1%. This is the inverse of 
what one would have expected based simply on the historical negative correlation between 
inflation and unemployment.2 
Of course much of this weakness in inflation is due to movements in commodity prices and 
the  exchange  rate.  Since  2008  we  have  learned  more  about  how  movements  in  the 
exchange  rate,  in  particular,  affect  inflation.  Contrary  to  the  body  of  literature  developed 
during  the  period  of  Great  Stability,  changes  in  the  exchange  rate  do  have  a  large  and 
persistent effect on inflation through their effect on import prices. That means that the 18% 
appreciation  of  sterling  which  began  in  early  2013  (as  the  prospects  for  the  UK  economy 
improved relative to those of our trading partners) is currently exerting significant downward 
pressure on inflation and is likely to continue to exert some downward pressure for several 
years to come as lower import costs pass through the supply chain.   
But not all of the weakness in inflation can be explained by the price of things we import – a 
portion3  of  the  current  deviation  from target  is  due  to  weakness  in  domestically  generated 
inflation.  The  biggest  domestic  driver  of  inflation  is  labour  costs  per  unit  of  output,  and  in 
order to generate inflation at target in the medium term, wages would ordinarily need to grow 
about 2 to 3 percentage points more quickly than productivity growth. The data are noisy, but 
over the period since the recovery began, that wedge – known as the unit wage cost – has 
averaged just 1% (Chart 3).  
Of  course  for  much  of  that  period  the  weakness  of  wages  relative  to  productivity  was 
consistent with the presence of slack in the labour market. But something of a puzzle started 
to  emerge  in  2014  when  –  despite  a  significant  narrowing  of  that  slack  –  wage  growth 
                                                
1   As time passes the effect of the early tranches of asset purchases on the level of output diminishes. The peak 
impact  on  GDP  of  asset  purchases  probably  occurred  during  2013.  Since  then,  the  support  to  the  level  of 
activity  from  asset  purchases  has  likely  been  waning.  At  the  same  time,  the  value  of  the  £375bn  stock  of 
purchased assets has declined relative to nominal GDP (from 22.5% to 20.1%) as the latter has increased.  
2   Over the period 1971 to 2008 the correlation between unemployment and inflation was –0.2. 
3   As best we can tell around ½ percentage point. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  seemed slow to pick up. The early signs were that 2015 would be more promising, but the 
rate of wage growth seems to have levelled off again in the most recent data.  
Wage  data  can  be  volatile  in  the  short  run,  and  this  recent  pause  may  prove  to  be  more 
noise than signal. But there are several plausible explanations for why  wage growth might 
have levelled off more recently.  
• 
The first is quite simply that the number of hours worked per person per week has 
levelled off in the most recent data, and even started to decline. This could have a 
temporary flattening effect on the growth rate of wages earned per week. 
The  second  is  the  nature  of  the growth  in  employment  that  we  have  seen.  It  has 
been  unusually  skewed  towards  employees  with  less  experience  and  educational 
attainment  and  in  occupations  that  tend  to  attract  lower  levels  of  pay.  These 
compositional effects tend to push down on starting salaries, though that shouldn’t 
affect future wage growth prospects.  
A third explanation, and one we hear from the Bank’s network of agents, is that the 
low level of headline inflation may be limiting upward pressure on pay in some cases 
as relatively small nominal pay awards are sufficient to increase real incomes. If this 
is an important factor, the lags between headline inflation and the determination of 
pay awards mean it could increase the persistence of weak wage growth for some 
time  to  come.  This  too  should  ultimately  fade  as  the  effects  of  energy  and  the 
exchange rate on inflation dissipate. 
A fourth potential explanation is that the severity of the recession and the increase in 
uncertainty  that  accompanied  it  has  had  a  lasting  impact  on  the  decisions  people 
take and the tradeoffs they make – just as it seems to have done in the market for 
tyres. It may be, for example, that with the recession still reasonably fresh in their 
memories,  workers  are  marginally  more  reluctant  to  push  for  the  kinds  of  pay 
settlements they would have been used to before 2008, or marginally less willing to 
take the step of switching employers in order to gain a higher salary. 
   In deciding how to vote in monetary policy meetings each month, I look across a wide range 
of indicators. There are many signs that the economy is normalising – the labour market is 
tightening,  consumption  growth  is  solid,  investment  is  recovering,  and  even  productivity 
growth  is  showing  tentative  signs  of  a  return.  And  although  the  downward  pressure  on 
inflation from movements in energy prices and the exchange rate are proving persistent, they 
will not have a permanent effect on inflation.  
But,  there  is  residual  uncertainty  about  the  relationship  between  the  real  economy  and 
inflation  –  something  economists  refer  to  as  “model  uncertainty”  –  which  in  this  instance 
augurs for caution in setting monetary policy.4 The most likely outcome is that wage growth 
will soon resume its recovery, but there are alternative states of the world in which it takes 
longer for that to happen. So I judge it prudent to tread carefully, and refrain from voting for 
an increase in Bank Rate until I am convinced that wage growth will be sustained at a level 
consistent with inflation returning to target.  
                                                
4   The effect of uncertainty in the setting of monetary policy is much discussed. Brainard (1967) shows that when policymakers are uncertain 
about the effects of their actions on the economy, it is appropriate to move more cautiously than if the impact of policy is certain – a strategy 
known as gradualism. Data uncertainty is another reason why policymakers may adopt a gradualist approach. One common finding is that 
when data are noisier, a less aggressive response is desirable (Rudebusch, 2001; Orphanides, 2003). In addition, more recently, Evans et al 
(2015) have argued for delaying lift-off in the face of uncertainty about the strength of the recovery, given a view that there are asymmetric 
costs associated with the zero lower bound. However, the finding that policy should respond more gradually in the face of uncertainty is not a 
general  one.   For  example,  Söderström  (2002)  suggests  that  there  is  uncertainty  about  monetary  policy’s  ability  to  return  inflation  in  the 
medium term, that may call for a pre-emptive response.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Consider all of the outcomes 
2.  
In the presence of uncertainty, it is wise not to put all of one’s eggs in one basket, but rather 
to hedge against undesirable states of the world. That is something that market participants 
know well, and it means that financial asset prices reflect not only what is thought to be the 
most likely outcome, but also the full range of other possible outcomes and the probabilities 
attached  to  them.  So  what  is  implied  by  a  literal  interpretation  of  markets  –  including 
government bond and interest rate swap markets – is not necessarily a true reflection of what 
participants expect is going to happen.5 
For example, at the time we were producing the November Inflation Report, the market yield 
curve implied the first increase in Bank Rate would come in March 2017, and that it would 
reach 1¼% by the end of 2018. A literal interpretation of this would suggest that in 33 of the 
coming  36  months  the  majority  of  MPC  members  would  have  to  return  home  to  their 
respective dinner tables reporting they voted for no change in Bank Rate.6  
An  alternative  interpretation  is  that  the  true  expectation  of  market  participants  is  for  Bank 
Rate to increase more quickly than that, but that they are particularly worried about downside 
risks and are happy to accept a lower expected return in exchange for insurance against bad 
outcomes.7 This would be consistent with the risks to the world economy that have come to 
the  fore  over  the  past  year  as  emerging  economies  grapple  with  the  twin  challenges  of 
transitioning  to  slower  potential  output  growth  and  lower  commodity  prices.  Although  the 
direct trade links between emerging economies and the UK are relatively small, the indirect 
effects  of  a  more  dramatic  emerging  market  slowdown  through  confidence  and  financial 
channels could be significant.  
I  suspect  this  latter  interpretation  is  closer  to  the  reality.  Personally  speaking,  should  the 
downside risks from the world economy fail to materialise, and absent further shocks, once 
wage  growth  has  returned  to  a  level  consistent  with  inflation  returning  to  target  I  would 
expect the economy to warrant a path for Bank Rate that increases more quickly than implied 
by  the  market  yield  curve  used  to  condition  the  November  Inflation  Report.  I  think  it  is 
interesting  to  note  that  surveys  of  economic  forecasters  –  a  more  direct  measure  of  the 
expected future path of interest rates – show expectations for a faster pace of increases in 
Bank  Rate.  Having  said  that,  I  think  all  agents,  and  all  members  of  the  MPC,  expect  the 
future path to be gradual and limited.  
Retain flexibility 
3.  
Of course one can never know exactly what the future holds. So when the time does come to 
raise  Bank  Rate,  it  will  be  important  to  retain  the  flexibility  to  change  course  if  needs  be, 
either  by  tightening  policy  more  quickly  than  originally  envisaged  or  by  being  prepared  to 
loosen again. Were it required to respond to unforeseen events, the MPC would have two 
tools at its immediate disposal: Bank Rate and QE.  
Past  experience  gives  us  a  good  dataset  from  which  to  gain  an  understanding  of  how 
changes in policy rates transmit to the economy. Based on a rich literature of international 
estimates  over  the  period  since  inflation  targeting  began,  the  peak  impact  on  inflation  is 
generally estimated to occur with a lag of between 18 and 24 months, although it begins to 
                                                
5   See Shafik (2015) and Broadbent (2015) for more on this issue. 
6   Though should proposed legislation pass, the number of MPC meetings per year will reduce from 12 to 8, in 
line with the recommendations of the Warsh Review (Warsh, 2014) 
7   The market curve represents the mean of the priced distribution of interest rates. Consideration of risks can 
cause  this  whole  distribution  to  move  relative  to  true  expectations.  Risks  can  also  affect  the  shape  of  the 
distribution, though Dison and Elliot (2015) found that the shape of the distribution is currently being heavily 
influenced by the proximity of Bank Rate to the effective lower bound. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  have some effect within the first year. Comparisons between the US and the UK indicate that 
the  transmission  mechanism  may  be  a  bit  quicker  in  the  UK  than  in  the  US,  perhaps 
reflecting  the  prevalence  of  longer  term  fixed  rate  mortgages  in  the  US.  However,  these 
estimates are generally based on the experience of changing policy when rates are positive 
– relatively little is known about the transmission of negative interest rates which have only 
begun to be used quite recently in parts of Europe.  
As for QE, we can be confident that it was effective in reducing the severity of the impact of 
the financial crisis. For example analysis by Bank staff suggests that QE had a peak impact 
on  the  level  of  real  GDP  of  around  2.5%,8  and  helped  limit  the  long  term  impact  of  the 
recession  on  the  economy.  However,  our  knowledge  of  how  QE  affects  the  economy  is 
based only on what we can learn from its use since 2009 – a much more limited sample than 
that  available  for  changes  in  Bank  Rate.  And  it  may  well  be  that  were  it  used  in  different 
circumstances its effect could be quite different.  
In  light  of  the  uncertainty  about  the  transmission  of  unconventional  monetary  policies,  the 
MPC has expressed a preference to use Bank Rate as the marginal instrument for monetary 
policy when the time comes to tighten. Specifically, we have said that we do not expect to 
reduce the stock of QE either through outright sales or by ceasing reinvestment of principal 
until Bank Rate has reached a level from which it can be materially cut. Choosing to focus 
this part of the tightening cycle solely on Bank Rate will at the margin imply a faster increase 
than would have been the case were we to combine it with a tightening via a reduction in the 
stock of QE as well. This will be more likely to give us the ability to respond to an adverse 
shock using Bank Rate rather than tools which are inherently less flexible and with which we 
are less familiar.  
Based on past experience, the MPC currently judges that the level of Bank Rate which would 
provide  room  for  a  material  reduction  is  around  2%.  As  Chart  4  shows,  67  of  the  106 
loosening cycles since the Bank was founded in 1694 were achieved by reducing Bank Rate 
by 2 percentage points or less.  
You could argue that there is a case for choosing a level higher than “around 2%”. To do so, 
however, would extend the horizon over which we would be expected to reach that level, and 
by implication extend the horizon over which the stock of QE would be held on behalf of the 
MPC. Given the gradual pace at which the equilibrium rate may rise, such an extension could 
be very long.  
It has never been the intention of the MPC to retain indefinitely the stock of assets purchased 
as  part  of  QE.9  Were  it  to  do  so,  there  is  a  risk  that  maintaining  such  a  large  stock  of 
government  debt  as  a  monetary  policy  tool  might  blur  some  external  perceptions  of  the 
distinction  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  That  could  lead  to  doubts  over  the 
independence  with  which  we  were  pursuing  our  objective  of  price  stability,  which  would 
represent a significant step backward. Decisions on the stock of gilts held in the APF have 
always  been  made  solely  by  the  MPC  in  the  sole  pursuit  of  its  monetary  policy  objectives 
mandated  by  Parliament  and 
the  case.  Central  bank 
independence has been shown to bring great economic benefit in the form of lower and more 
stable inflation – a result that has stood the test of the financial crisis and is something we 
should treasure. 10  
that  should  always  remain 
                                                
8   Joyce, M, Tong, M and Woods, R (2011), “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: design, operation 
and impact”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Vol. 51, No. 3, pages 200–12. 
9   For  example,  in  his  2009  letter  to  the  Chancellor  requesting  the  MPC  be  able  to  use  the  Asset  Purchase 
Facility  for  monetary  policy  purposes,  the  then  Governor,  Mervyn  King  said  “At  some  future  date,  I  would 
expect  that  the  MPC  would  wish  to  exit  from  the  strategy  of  buying  assets  and  would  wish  to  reduce  the 
amount of assets held under the Asset Purchase Facility.”  
10   See for example Alesina and Summers (1993), Klomp and De Haan (2009) and King (2013). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Conclusion 
Let  me  sum  up.  We  are  still  learning  how  the  post-crisis  economy  behaves,  and  some 
relationships in the data have proven slow to reassert themselves or may have changed. The 
recent plateau in wage growth despite the ongoing recovery is one example, and I will wait 
until  I  am  convinced  that  wage  growth  will  be  sustained  at  a  level  consistent  with  inflation 
returning to target before voting for an increase in Bank Rate. In this sense, I will proceed 
with caution.  
But  once  I  am  convinced,  absent further shocks,  I  can  see  Bank  Rate  rising  more quickly 
than the path implied by the market curve at the time of the last Inflation Report. That is not 
to say I don’t understand the shape of the yield curve – market participants must consider all 
of the possible outcomes when making their decisions, and the yield curve could be weighed 
down by worries about the world. 
Whatever the outcome, it will be important to maintain flexibility to respond to new data and 
events. The flexibility  the  MPC  has  had  to  pursue  its  target  independently  since  1997  has 
brought  great  benefits.  The  MPC  has  also  shown  flexibility  in  developing  new  instruments 
such as QE to achieve its goals. Similarly, as monetary policy begins to tighten, the MPC will 
be focussed on Bank Rate as the marginal tool of monetary policy, given it’s more flexible in 
nature than QE.  
And  occasionally,  we  might  also  consider  tyre  tread  depth,  just  to  see  if  the  post  crisis 
economy  reverts  to  pre-crisis  patterns  or  whether  we  need  to  think  about  the  future  a  bit 
differently. 
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Alesina,  A.  and  Summers,  L.  (1993)  “Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic 
Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 25, 
No. 2, pp. 151-162. 
Brainard,  W.  (1967),  “Uncertainty  and  the  effectiveness  of  policy”,  American  Economic 
Review 57, 411–425. 
Broadbent,  B.  (2015)  “The  MPC’s  forecasts  and  the  yield  curve:  predictions  vs  promises,” 
Speech given at Reuters. 
Dison,  W.  and  Elliot,  D  “Mean  and  modal  Bank  Rate  expectations,”  blog  available  on 
http://bankunderground.co.uk/  
Evans, C. Fisher, J. Gourio, F and Krane, S (2015) “Risk Management for Monetary Policy 
Near the Zero Lower Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 
Joyce, M, Tong, M and Woods, R (2011), “The United Kingdom’s quantitative easing policy: 
design,  operation  and  impact”,  Bank  of  England  Quarterly  Bulletin,  Vol.  51,  No.  3, 
pages 200–12. 
King,  M.  (2013), “Monetary  policy:  many  targets,  many  instruments. Where  do  we  stand?” 
Remarks given at the IMF Conference on “Rethinking Macro Policy II: First Steps and Early 
Lessons,” Washington DC. 
Klomp,  J.  and  De  Hann,  J.  (2009),  “Inflation  and  Central  Bank  Independence:  A  Meta-
Regression Analysis,” Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 24, 593–621. 
Orphanides,  A.  (2003)  “Monetary  Policy  Evaluation  with  Noisy  Information,”  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 50 (April), pp. 605–31. 
Rudebusch,  G.  (2001)  “Is  the  Fed  Too  Timid?  Monetary  Policy  in  an  Uncertain  World,” 
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, pp. 203–17. 
Shafik, M. (2015) “Interpreting the yield curve: warning or opportunity,” Speech given at the 
annual conference of the Association of Corporate Treasurers.  
Söderström,  U.  (2002)  “Monetary  Policy  with  Uncertain  Parameters”.  The  Scandinavian 
Journal of Economics, 104.1, pp. 125–145. 
Warsh,  K.  (2014)  “Transparency  and  the  Bank  of  England’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee,” 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/warsh.pdf  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
