  Martin Flodén: Sweden needs its inflation target 
Speech  by  Mr  Martin  Flodén,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Fores, 
Stockholm, 13 October 2015. 
I would like to thank Mikael Apel for contributions to the text. 
 “The Riksbank should reconsider its policy. Digitisation and globalisation have made it more 
or less impossible to reach the inflation target of 2 per cent. The Riksbank’s rigid fixation with 
the  target  is  in  fact  making  the  problems  of  rising  debt  and  housing  prices  worse.  The 
Riksbank  should  lower  the  inflation  target  or  at  least  accept  that  inflation  will  continue  to 
remain below the target for a long time to come. Then the repo rate could be raised and the 
rise in debt and housing prices would slow down.” 
These are the main features of the criticism directed at the monetary policy, which has been 
expressed  by  an  increasing  number  of  commentators  over  the  past  few  months.  It  is 
undoubtedly  good  that  monetary  policy  is  publically  debated,  as  this  forces  all  parties  to 
sharpen their arguments and think a little more deeply, which in turn increases everyone’s 
knowledge and insight. I would like to make my contribution to this discussion here. It may 
not come as a complete surprise that I believe the ongoing debate is often oversimplified, 
and that there are a number of points that are unclear in the arguments presented. 
As  a  starting  point  I  think  it  is  worth  taking  a  step  back  and  reminding  ourselves  why  the 
Riksbank and many other central banks in general have developed inflation targets.1 
The advantages of an inflation target 
Money as we know it in modern times has no natural, intrinsic value. Historically, coins were 
minted using valuable metals and central banks promised to redeem banknotes in exchange 
for a certain quantity of such metals. However, since the early 1970s every trace of this kind 
of  link  to  valuable  metals  has  disappeared.  The  reason  why  banknotes  and  coins 
nevertheless  have  a  stable  value  is  based  on  expectations  and  confidence  –  expectations 
that the money will continue to be valuable in the future and confidence that the central bank 
will pursue a monetary policy consistent with price stability. 
There are several ways to build expectations of price stability. It has often been attempted to 
develop some form of nominal anchor for the economy. The anchor could, for example, be a 
fixed exchange rate, a target for the development of money supply or an inflation target. 
When it is credible, an inflation target acts as a benchmark and guides expectations in the 
economy. When economic agents have a common picture of how prices will develop in the 
future,  it  becomes  easier  to  plan  for  the  long  term.  The  inflation  target  therefore  lays  the 
foundations  for  efficient  price  and  wage  formation.  In  Sweden  the  inflation  target  has 
contributed  to  stability  in  wage  formation  since  the  end  of  the  1990s,  which  could  be 
compared with the 1970s and 80s when inflation was high and volatile and wage formation 
created major imbalances. 
The monetary policy anchor thus helps coordinate expectations in the economy, and this is 
particularly  the  case  when  the  target  is  well-defined,  clearly  communicated  and  generally 
accessible.  For  this  reason,  most  central  banks  with  inflation  targets  have  formulated  the 
target in terms of a broad and well-known price index, and as a specific level of inflation. A 
tolerance band is also often specified to show that the central bank neither can nor wants to 
                                                
1 
I also discuss this in Flodén (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  meet the inflation target perfectly all the time. However, even when there is a tolerance band, 
the objective is for inflation to end up at the target level, or in other words in the middle of the 
tolerance band. 
If  the  target  succeeds  in  coordinating  inflation  expectations,  it  can  also  become  self-
reinforcing. If expectations are in line with the inflation target, and if price and wage formation 
adapt  to  these  expectations,  actual  prices  will  become  consistent  with  the  inflation  target. 
When confidence in the inflation target is strong, it consequently becomes easier to meet the 
target.  The  flipside  of  this  reasoning,  however,  is  that  the  central  bank  has  to  fight  even 
harder to succeed if expectations begin to deviate from the inflation target. 
A  weakness in the current criticism is that it takes the advantages I have just outlined too 
lightly, or in other words underestimates the benefit of maintaining confidence in an already 
formulated  inflation  target.  I  also  think  that  the  criticism  overestimates  the  possibility  of 
managing the debt and housing problem by using the repo rate. I will explain what I mean in 
more detail shortly. 
The criticism: Lower the target or accept long term low inflation 
It is easier to discuss the criticism if we divide it up based on the conclusions drawn from it. 
Different  commentators  have  put  forward  roughly  the  same  arguments  in  favour  of  the 
Riksbank  reconsidering  its  policy,  but  they  have  drawn  slightly  different  conclusions  about 
what  the  consequences  should  be  for  the  inflation  target.  Some  have  claimed  that  the 
inflation  target  is  outdated  or  that  it  should  be  lowered.2  Others  have  not  gone  as far,  but 
instead said that the Riksbank should keep the 2 per cent target but accept that inflation will 
continue to remain below the target for a long time to come.3, 4 
My perception is that the criticism has gradually aligned itself with the latter view, but I still 
want to say something about the argument that the inflation target should be lowered, as that 
discussion  is  important  in  principle. What  I  perceive  to  be  the  most  common  argument for 
lowering the target is that trends such as globalisation and digitisation are assumed to have 
such a highly dampening effect on inflation that it is impossible, or at least extremely difficult, 
to achieve the 2 per cent target. 
Do digitisation and globalisation lead to permanently lower inflation? 
There are several, and I think convincing, reasons why it is a bad idea to lower the inflation 
target. One is that it is far from obvious why digitisation and globalisation would give rise to 
permanently  lower  inflation.  The  arguments  presented  are  often  relatively  vague,  and  say 
that  stiff  competition  and  squeezed  margins  have  changed  the  economic  playing  field  for 
companies in various ways. However, because the margins cannot keep falling indefinitely, 
this kind of price pressure can only lead to a temporary effect on inflation. And regardless of 
                                                
2  See  for  example  Mitelman  (2013),  Fölster  (2015),  Hökmark  (2015),  Andersson  (2015),  Schück  (2015), 
Expressen (2015), Sydsvenskan (2015), Cervenka (2015), and Krister Andersson in Dagens Industri (2015). 
3  See for example Winsth and Isaksson (2015), Engzell-Larsson (2015), Lars Jonung and Robert Bergqvist in 
Dagens Nyheter (2015), Mitelman (2015), and Jakobsson (2015).  
4  Some even think that the inflation target is in conflict with the Sveriges Riksbank Act and the task delegated to 
the Riksbank by the Riksdag (Swedish parliament) (Mitelman, 2015b). This is obviously not correct. According 
to the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the Riksbank shall ”maintain price stability”, but the preliminary works to the Act 
state that the Riksbank should formulate a more precise inflation target, and also that ”price stability” should 
not  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  target  for  the  rate  of  inflation  is  zero  (Government  Bill  1997/98:40,  
pp. 52–53). Furthermore, the Riksdag has repeatedly endorsed the inflation target as it is currently formulated, 
and emphasised that it is important for the Riksbank to pursue a monetary policy which ensures that inflation 
rises towards the target (most recently in the Riksdag Committee on Finance's report 2014/15:FiU24). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the nature of this kind of price pressure, in the long term inflation is determined by monetary 
policy and its effects on inflation expectations.5 
It is worth noting that it is mainly in Sweden that we have seen this debate take place. In the 
US and UK for example, inflation has been considerably higher than in Sweden over the past 
few  years.  Inflation  has  seen  a  falling  trend  in  those  countries  too,  but  it  has  only  been 
recently  that  inflation  has  fallen  more  sharply,  in  connection  with  the  major  falls  in  energy 
prices  and  the  appreciation  of  the  countries’  exchange  rates.  In  both  countries  the  central 
banks  as  well  as  other  analysts  are  also  expecting  inflation  to  rise  soon  to  two  per  cent, 
despite the fact that digitisation and globalisation will likely affect them, too (see Figure 1).6 It 
is  therefore  difficult  to  understand  why  the  effects  should  be  so  much  bigger  and  more 
permanent in Sweden that the inflation target should be lowered here but not in any other 
countries, or why the rest of the world has not identified the problems.7 
It  is  possible  that  digitisation  and globalisation  have  played  some  role  in  how  inflation  has 
developed in recent years, but the Riksbank’s assessment is that the low inflation seen in 
Sweden since 2010 is mainly explained by a strong exchange rate, a weak global economy, 
falling  energy  prices,  and  that  companies  have  generally  not  been  inclined  to  raise  their 
prices.  That  prices  have  not  been  raised  could  be  due,  for  example,  to  the  fact  that 
uncertainty has increased following the crises and that inflation expectations have fallen as 
inflation has remained low for so long. 
                                                
5  Another way of expressing this is that inflation is fundamentally a monetary phenomenon. 
6  There is a lively debate about the low interest rate policy also in the US, but it has a slightly different focus 
than the Swedish debate. Those who criticise the Fed for pursuing an overly expansionary monetary policy 
are usually convinced that inflation will soon return to the target even if the central bank tightens monetary 
policy (see for example George, 2015, and Lacker, 2015). 
7  According to Hammond (2012), 27 countries were fully fledged inflation targeters a few years ago. Not one of 
these countries has a target lower than 2 per cent, but Israel has a target range which goes as low as 1 per 
cent. If we also include the euro area, Japan, Switzerland and the US among the inflation targeters, we can 
add  that  the  ECB's  target  is  for  inflation  to  be  close  to  but  lower  than  2  per  cent,  and  that  the  target  in 
Switzerland is for inflation to be between 0 and 2 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Figure 1 
Inflation has been higher in the UK and the USA, and the fall  
is expected to be temporary 
Annual percentage change 
 
Note: HICP is an EU-harmonised index for consumer prices. Quarterly data for Sweden 
and the UK, annual data for the US. 
Sources:  Bank  of  England,  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  Eurostat,  IMF,  SCB  and  the 
Riksbank. 
Risky to have a target that is too low 
Another  objection  to  lowering  the  target  is  that  it  would  risk  reducing  confidence  in  the 
inflation targeting regime. As I have noted, it is important for monetary policy to stand by a 
target once it has been formulated. If a target is changed because it seems too difficult to 
achieve,  then  there  is  always  a  risk  that  economic  agents  will  expect  the  same  thing  to 
happen in similar situations in the future – both when inflation is higher and when it is lower 
than the target in place. Confidence in the inflation target is then weakened and it will not be 
able to fulfil its role as a benchmark for expectations in the economy as well as it could. 
But there is one more reason why the inflation target should not be lowered – and this is in 
my opinion, probably the most important. It is that there needs to be enough scope to lower 
the  policy  rate  if  inflation  falls  substantially  or  the  economy  weakens.  When  the  inflation 
target is, say, 1 or 0 per cent, then inflation will vary around that level. The nominal interest 
rate will of course also be lower for a lower target on average. And the lower the interest rate 
is in normal conditions, the less scope there is to lower it before it hits its lower bound and 
can no longer be used to stimulate the economy. 
With an inflation target of 2 per cent and a real interest rate which on average is expected to 
be around 2 per cent, the policy rate will be around 4 per cent in normal conditions.8 Before 
the financial crisis, this was usually considered to be a sufficient distance to ensure that the 
                                                
8  The Riksbank’s assessment is that in the long term the repo rate will be in the range 3.5 to 4.5 per cent on 
average. However, international real interest rates are currently very low, and various factors indicate that they 
will remain unusually low, at least in the medium term (see Armelius et al, 2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  interest rate would not be restricted by its lower bound too often. During the financial crisis, 
however, several central banks lowered their policy rate over a short period to nearly zero, 
which they judged at that point to be the policy rate’s lower bound. And now, seven years 
later,  the  policy  rates  are  still  at  the  same  low  levels  in  many  countries.  Based  on  these 
experiences, many analysts think that it would be desirable to have an inflation target higher 
than 2 per cent.9 This question is perhaps mainly discussed within the research community, 
though it has also been highlighted by the IMF and some central banks, among others. In the 
review  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  which  the  Bank  of  Canada  conducts  every  five 
years, for example, an increase in the target is one of the areas to be examined.10 Unlike the 
debate  in  Sweden,  the  international  discussion  therefore  focuses  on  the  central  banks’ 
inflation targets needing to be raised rather than lowered. 
Some inflation is desirable for another reason, namely that wage formation can deteriorate 
when average inflation is too low. The reason is that in practice it has proved difficult to lower 
nominal wages. If inflation is low and nominal wages cannot be lowered, it becomes difficult 
to adjust real wages between individuals at a company and between different sectors. This 
can ultimately bring about both higher unemployment and poorer productivity growth in the 
economy.  These  problems  can  be  mitigated  if  there  is  a  certain  underlying  inflation  in  the 
economy. 
Important to maintain confidence in the inflation target 
Let  me  then  move  on  to  discussing  the  more  nuanced  argument  that  the  inflation  target 
should not be lowered but that the Riksbank – and all other economic agents – should accept 
that inflation will continue to fall below the target for a long time to come. This is assumed, in 
the same way as when the target is lowered, to create scope to raise the repo rate in order to 
counteract  continued  increases  in  household  debt  and  housing  prices.  One  proposal  put 
forward to facilitate this is to reintroduce the tolerance band around the inflation target which 
was in place until mid-2010. 
First, however, I would like to briefly describe why the Riksbank is pursuing the policy it is 
pursuing  today.  The  low  repo  rate  is  essentially  due  to  the  fact  that  inflation  has  been 
surprisingly low and has not risen as the Riksbank and other commentators expected. During 
the  first  half  of  2013  for  example,  the  average  of  Swedish  forecasters  expected  inflation, 
excluding interest-rate effects, to be a little less than 1.5 per cent in 2014. The outcome was 
almost one percentage point lower. 
The  period  where  inflation  has  been  below  the  target  has  gradually  become  longer  and 
longer. Even the more stable underlying inflation measure, where both interest-rate effects 
and volatile energy prices are excluded, has been below 2 per cent since January 2010 (see 
Figure  2).  According  to  the  Riksbank’s  forecast,  it  is  expected  to  reach  this  level  again  in 
autumn 2016, provided that monetary policy is very expansionary. This means nearly seven 
years below the target, at least five of which have been clearly below it. 
                                                
9  Se for example Williams (2009), Blanchard et al. (2010), Calmfors (2013), Ball (2014), Krugman (2014), and 
Rosengren (2015). 
10  See Côté (2014) and Kryvtsov and Mendes (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Figure 2 
Inflation has been low for a long time 
Annual percentage change 
Note: CPIF is CPI with fixed mortgage rate.  
Sources: SCB and the Riksbank. 
 Once  inflation  had  undershot  the  target  for  a  while,  inflation  expectations  began  to  fall. 
Economic agents did not expect inflation to meet the target even five years ahead. In other 
words, a risk began to build up that the role of the inflation target as a benchmark for price-
setting and wage formation would begin to weaken – that the nominal anchor that has been 
an important part of the favourable developments in Sweden since the 1990s crisis would no 
longer  hold.  As  the  basis  of  an  inflation-targeting  policy  is  that  the  long-run  inflation 
expectations are anchored around the target, this development has gradually made it more 
important to bring up inflation. The Riksbank has therefore needed to focus more and more 
on its main task, to maintain confidence in the inflation target, while the scope for taking other 
issues into consideration has become more and more limited. 
It is these considerations which form the basis for the policy being pursued by the Riksbank 
today. It is not a question of a rigid fixation with achieving exactly 2 per cent all the time. On 
the contrary, the Riksbank normally demonstrates a considerable degree of flexibility when it 
comes to how fast the target should be met. There is a limit to this patience, however. 
Difficult to maintain confidence simply through communication 
I believe the critics take the importance of maintaining confidence in the inflation target far 
too lightly. This argument is often not considered at all, with everything focusing instead on 
the Riksbank needing to stop the increase in household debt and housing prices by raising 
the interest rate. If confidence in the inflation target is even mentioned at all, the idea seems 
to  be  that  it  is  something  that  should  be  maintained  by  the  Riksbank  communicating  that 
even though it intends to continue to allow inflation to undershoot the target for some time to 
come, it will eventually bring inflation back up to the target at some point in the future. 
It  would  likely  be  difficult  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  inflation  target  by  using  such  a 
strategy. Inflation has already undershot the target for several years and would in that case 
continue to undershoot the target for some years to come. The fact that inflation has been 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  low  for  a  long  time  is  probably  a  major  reason  why  long  term  inflation  expectations  have 
fallen.  Conversely,  the  trend  we  have  witnessed  over  the  past  year  of  a  slowing  fall  in 
inflation  expectations  has  coincided  with  monetary  policy  becoming  very  clearly 
expansionary  and  underlying  inflation  beginning  to  rise.  Against  this  background  it  would 
likely  be  difficult  for  the  Riksbank  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  target  solely  by 
communicating that the inflation target is still valid, without in any way reinforcing that claim 
with policy measures. 
A higher repo rate would weaken economic development 
The idea behind the Riksbank needing to have more patience and accepting that inflation will 
continue to remain below the target for an even longer period seems to be that the policy rate 
could then be raised to slow the rise in debt and housing prices. But the Swedish repo rate 
does not exist in a vacuum. Interest rates are also low internationally. Higher interest rates in 
Sweden in relation to those abroad would strengthen the krona and lead to a weaker real 
economic development. This would dampen inflation. If inflation not only remains below the 
target but actually falls further, confidence in the inflation target risks being weakened even 
further.  A  monetary  policy  that  is  not  sufficiently  expansionary  can  contribute  to  inflation 
expectations  becoming  permanently  low,  which  in  turn  makes  the  target  even  harder  to 
achieve.  This  means  that  instead  of  the  positive  self-reinforcing  effect  through  the 
expectations  I  spoke  about  earlier,  we  end  up  with  a  negative  self-reinforcing  effect  which 
means we then need to fight much harder to meet the inflation target. This would mean that it 
would be even longer before the repo rate could rise to a more normal level. 
There is also reason to ask how much higher the critics think the repo rate should be. Should 
it be at 0, 1 or perhaps 2 per cent? The impression one gets is that the repo rate is assumed 
to be the main tool for relieving the problem of rising debt and housing prices. However, for 
this to be possible a repo rate considerably higher than the one we have today would likely 
be required. And the more the Swedish interest rate exceeds international rates, the more 
inflation and growth will be dampened, in part via the usual interest rate channel and in part 
via a stronger krona in the way I have just described. This in turn means a greater risk that 
inflation will remain below the target and that inflation expectations  will  become stuck at a 
level that is too low. A discussion of these kinds of central considerations is typically missing 
from the criticism put forward. 
In  the  international  discussion,  the  central  banks’  policy  rates  are  currently  seen  as  quite 
blunt  tools  when  it  comes  to  curbing  the  rise  in  household  debt  and  housing  prices.  The 
reason for this is that the interest rate cannot be targeted at the problem area in question, but 
has  a  much  broader  impact  on  the  economy,  such  as  companies’  investments  and,  via 
exchange rate effects, their export opportunities.11 It does not come as much of a surprise 
therefore that no central bank has so far used the interest rate weapon to any great extent for 
this  purpose.  There  is  currently  a  relatively  high  level  of  agreement  that  macroprudential 
policy and well-designed financial regulation should be the first line of defence in preventing 
financial imbalances from accumulating.12 
The tolerance band was not a target range 
As I mentioned, one proposal has been that the tolerance band for the inflation target should 
be reintroduced, as it is assumed this would make it easier for the Riksbank to raise the repo 
                                                
11  The  broad  impact  of  the  interest  rate  is  occasionally  highlighted  as  an  advantage,  however.  Unlike 
macroprudential policy  measures  which can  sometimes be circumvented,  “the interest  rate  gets  into all the 
cracks” (Stein, 2013). 
12  See IMF (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  rate.  It  could  be  helpful  to  remind  ourselves  here  why  there  was  previously  a  band 
surrounding the inflation target. The main purpose was to explain that the Riksbank is not 
able to control inflation precisely in the short term, but that it aims to limit deviations from the 
target. 
The band was abolished in 2010 because the Riksbank then assessed that it no longer had a 
role  to  fill.  In  the  memorandum  published  in  connection  with  the  decision,  it  was  noted: 
“There is considerable understanding for the fact that inflation commonly deviates from the 
target  and  that  the  deviations  are  sometimes  larger  than  1  percentage  point.  Inflation  can 
thus be outside of the tolerance band without threatening the credibility of the inflation target. 
Such deviations have proved to be a natural part of monetary policy.”13 
The  view  was  therefore  that  even  the  relatively  broad  band  of  1  to  3  per  cent  gave  the 
appearance of excessive precision. However, as economic agents did not find it noteworthy 
that  inflation  was  outside  this  band  at  times,  the  Riksbank  felt  it  was  not  a  problem.  The 
tolerance band was thus a pedagogical tool intended to illustrate the uncertainty surrounding 
the inflation development. It was never intended to be a target range, i.e. that the target was 
actually 2 percentage points wide, and that inflation of marginally over 1 or just under 3 was 
as consistent with the target as inflation of 2 per cent.14 This appears to be many people’s 
interpretation today, however. The idea then appears to be that a broader target range would 
mean the  Riksbank  did not feel  as forced  to  bring  inflation  up to  2  per cent,  which  in  turn 
would mean that monetary policy would not need to be as expansionary and that rising debt 
could be dampened. 
As I have just described, however, the policy the Riksbank is pursuing today is due to the 
fact  that  the  period  in  which  inflation  has  remained  below  target  has  gradually  become 
longer,  and  long  term  inflation  expectations  have fallen. The  Riksbank wants  to  avoid  that 
expectations  become  permanently  stuck  at  a  level  that  is  too  low.  A  relevant  question  is 
therefore  whether  a  tolerance  band  would  influence  expectations  in  the  economy  in  a 
desirable  way.  If  the  Riksbank  reintroduced  the  band  tomorrow,  would  long-term  inflation 
expectations suddenly increase and adjust to 2 per cent? It is hard to see why that would be 
the case. If the repo rate were to be raised as a result of the band being reintroduced, as the 
idea appears to be, then the result could instead very well be that both inflation and inflation 
expectations would fall further. 
After five years without a tolerance band, new arguments could arise in favour of having a 
tolerance band as a part of the normal monetary policy communication, or older arguments 
could once again become relevant. In that case it could be worth discussing a comeback for 
the  tolerance  band,  but  reintroducing  the  band  would  neither  contribute  to  higher  inflation 
expectations nor consequently to a rise in interest rates. 
Monetary policy cannot solve the problem of rising debt and housing prices 
What can be said then about the growth of household debt and housing prices? After all, one 
issue central to the criticism is that the low  interest rate contributes to further increases in 
debt and housing prices. 
                                                
13  The Riksbank (2010). 
14  For example, Heikensten and Vredin (1998, pp. 585-586) noted that "A tolerance band could be a reflection of 
the fact that the central bank does not consider it important to aim for an inflation target in the middle of the 
band.  Instead  it  may,  as  long  as  inflation  is  contained  within  this  band,  want  to  focus  on  achieving  other 
targets,  such  as  production  or  employment  for  example.  This  is  portrayed  at  times  [...]  as  "opportunistic" 
monetary policy. We do not feel, however, that this was the reason certain countries chose to put a tolerance 
band around their inflation target". 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  has  been  obvious  to  those  who  have  followed  the  monetary  policy  debate  that  the 
Riksbank shares many people’s concerns about this development. This is clear from reports, 
minutes, speeches and a number of debate articles. The Riksbank has therefore pointed out 
the  necessity  of  measures  in  other  policy  areas  for  several  years.  It  is  a  question  of 
dampening these debt and price increases using macroprudential or fiscal policy measures, 
but also fundamental reforms on the housing market to generate a sustainable and improved 
balance between supply and demand. 
But  if  the  Riksbank  is  so  concerned,  shouldn’t  it  then  reconsider  its  policy  and  raise  the 
interest rate? I hope that it has become clear during my discussion here that I think there are 
solid and convincing reasons to pursue the policy the Riksbank is currently pursuing, but I 
would like to repeat them briefly in any case. 
The inflation target has been a nominal anchor in the Swedish economy and a major reason 
behind  the  favourable  economic  development  over  the  past  two  decades.  For  some  time 
now, following the long period of inflation falling below the target, there have been signs that 
confidence in the inflation target has begun to falter. The Riksbank’s main task is to maintain 
confidence in the target – a task it does not share with any other authority. The repo rate is a 
blunt tool when trying to curb increases in household debt and housing prices as it influences 
so much else in the economy. A considerably higher rate would likely be needed in order to 
have a substantial effect, but then inflation and growth would be dampened, quite extensively 
in  the  worst  case  scenario.  Neither  low  inflation  nor  weaker  growth  would  contribute  to  a 
sustainable rise in the interest rate level. On the contrary, it is by ensuring that inflation and 
inflation expectations increase that the Riksbank is able to contribute to an increase in the 
interest rate level to more normal levels. 
Monetary policy is having an effect but hitting strong headwinds 
Allow me to conclude by saying a few words about the effects monetary policy has had, and 
how I see inflation developing in the future. Many point out that inflation is still low despite the 
very expansionary monetary policy, and at times it seems that some take this as proof that 
the  monetary  policy  is  now  ineffectual.  I  think  that  this  is  a  far  too  simple  interpretation, 
however. In reality we are seeing numerous signs that monetary policy is having the intended 
effect. 
One  important  observation  is  that  the  cuts  to  the  repo  rate  to  negative  levels  have  had  a 
broad impact on other market rates, including lending rates to households and companies. 
Households  and  companies  have  thereby  had  more  disposable  income  to  spend  on 
consumption and investment. 
Another  observation  is  that  the  negative  interest  rate  does  not  appear  to  have  led  to  any 
clear  disruptions  on  the  markets.15  A  negative  interest  rate  is  primarily  a  phenomenon  on 
certain  financial  markets,  the  participants  of  which  are  specialists  who  see  that  things  are 
mostly working the same as when the rate is positive. Households can read about negative 
rates in the newspaper but have, as before, zero interest on their bank accounts and positive 
interest  on  their  mortgages.  There  has  hence  been  no  reason  for  them  to  react  any 
differently in the wake of recent interest rate cuts. For example, the demand for cash has not 
increased. 
Another  indication  that  monetary  policy  is  having  the  intended  effect  is  that  inflation  in 
Sweden now appears to be on the rise. Underlying inflation, where interest rate effects and 
volatile energy prices are excluded, has shown a clear upward trend over the past year, from 
                                                
15  One  exception  is  the  FRN  market,  which  is  a  market  for  bonds  with  variable  coupons  (see  The  Riksbank, 
2015,  pp.  16-17).  The  problems  on  that  market  are  not  however  assessed  to  have  an  impact  on 
macroeconomic developments or the functioning of the financial markets more generally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  0.5 to 1.4 per cent. This is despite the fact that the inflation rise in Sweden continues to be 
held back by uncertainty and weak global economic activity. The Riksbank expects this trend 
to continue and underlying inflation to be near the target in about a year. 
An important assumption in our forecast is that the economic situation will strengthen in the 
euro  area  over  the  coming  year.  Forecasts  are  always  uncertain,  however.  For  example, 
concern  has  recently  grown  over  how  a  slowdown  in  and  rebalancing  of  the  Chinese 
economy will influence the global economy. If developments internationally are weaker than 
in our forecast, an even more expansionary monetary policy will be required to ensure that 
inflation rises. The repo rate could then be cut, and the bond purchases extended. But there 
is of course a floor for the repo rate and a ceiling for the purchase of bonds – our aim after all 
is  to  get  inflation  up  in  an  orderly  manner.  If  the  inflation  outlook  deteriorates  more 
substantially, we could therefore end up in a situation where monetary policy can no longer 
do anything meaningful to raise inflation. In such a situation we would be forced to accept 
that it would take longer to bring inflation up. 
I would like to emphasise that I see a major difference between that kind of development and 
the increased patience with low inflation that the critics call for and that I have discussed in 
this speech today. My view is that the Riksbank should use its monetary policy tools to the 
full in order to attain the inflation target as well as possible. This does not mean that we are 
pursuing an inflexible monetary policy which aims to keep inflation at exactly 2 per cent all of 
the time, but when inflation has been clearly below target for many years we must focus on 
raising inflation and ensuring that inflation expectations are anchored around 2 per cent. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  our  main  scenario  is  that  the  monetary  policy  we  are 
currently pursuing is sufficient to keep inflation rising and make it reach 2 per cent relatively 
soon.  Attempting  to  achieve  this  is  important  to  ensure  the  inflation  target  continues  to 
function as a benchmark for expectations in the economy, as it has done for twenty years 
now. 
However, this does not mean that the inflation targeting framework will be exactly the same 
as it is today forever. We are learning from previous experiences, and the global economy is 
constantly  changing.  We  therefore  welcome  a  discussion  of  ideas  about  the  content  and 
direction of the monetary policy. Naturally, we at the Riksbank listen to the arguments and 
analyses presented to us, and we try to contribute to this discussion with our own analysis.16 I 
hope that my speech today has conveyed that I am not convinced by the arguments recently 
put forward which say that the Riksbank should abandon or lower the inflation target, or show 
even greater patience with low inflation. 
 
                                                 
16  The Riksdag is also contributing to this process by carrying out both its own and external assessments of the 
monetary  policy.  An  external  assessment  is  currently  being  conducted  under  the  management  of  Marvin 
Goodfriend  and  Mervyn  King  (The  Riksdag,  2014).  Their  conclusions  will  be  presented  at  the  beginning  of 
next year. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Andersson, Rune (2015), Det är därför minusräntan är så farligt. [Why the negative rate is so 
dangerous.] (In Swedish), Debate article, Dagens Industri, 12 August. 
Armelius,  Hanna,  Paolo  Bonomolo,  Magnus  Lindskog,  Julia  Rådahl,  Ingvar  Strid  and  Karl 
Walentin, (2014), “Lower neutral interest in Sweden”, Economic Commentaries, no. 8, 2014, 
the Riksbank, Stockholm. 
Ball,  Laurence  M.  (2014),  The  Case  for  a  Long-Run  Inflation  Target  of  Four  Percent.  IMF 
Working Paper WP/14/92. 
Blanchard, Olivier, Dell’Ariccia, Giovanni and Mauro, Paolo (2010), Rethinking Macro Policy. 
IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/03, International Monetary Fund. 
Calmfors, Lars (2013), Våga ompröva Riksbankens mål. [Dare to reconsider the Riksbank’s 
target.] (In Swedish), Column, Dagens Nyheter, 3 April 2013. 
Cervenka, Andreas (2015), Stefan Ingves gör självmål. [Stefan Ingves scores an own goal.] 
(In Swedish), Column, Svenska Dagbladet, 3 September. 
Côté,  Agathe  (2014),  Inflation  Targeting  in  the  Post-Crisis  Era.  Remarks  at  Calgary  CFA 
Society, Calgary, Alberta, 18 November. 
Dagens Industri (2015), Inflationsmålets fader sågar Riksbankens agerande. [The father of 
the inflation target slates the Riksbank’s actions.] (In Swedish), 1 October. 
Dagens Nyheter (2015), Minusräntan bäddar för ny svensk finanskris. [Negative rate paving 
way for new Swedish financial crisis.] (In Swedish), 10 September. 
Engzell-Larsson,  Lotta  (2015),  Gör  din  plikt  Ingves,  [Do  your  duty,  Ingves]  (In  Swedish), 
Editorial, Dagens Industri, 19 August. 
Expressen  (2015),  Blås  av  den  galna  inflationsjakten.  [Stop  the  mad  inflation  hunt]  (In 
Swedish), Editorial, 4 September. 
Flodén, Martin (2015), Därför är inflationsmålet två procent. [Why the inflation target is two 
per cent.] (In Swedish), Ekonomisk Debatt no. 6. 
Fölster,  Stefan  (2015),  Riksbankens  lek  med  elden.  [The  Riksbank  is  playing  with  fire]  (In 
Swedish), Column, Östgöta Correspondenten, 19 March. 
George,  Esther  (2015),  Weighing  the  Costs  of  Waiting.  Speech,  9  July.  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City. 
Hammond,  Gill  (2012),  State  of  the  Art  of  Inflation  Targeting  –  2012.  Centre  for  Central 
Banking Studies, Handbook – No. 29, Bank of England. 
Heikensten,  Lars  and  Vredin,  Anders 
Inflationsmålet  och  den  svenska 
penningpolitiken  –  erfarenheter  och  problem.  [The  inflation  target  and  Swedish  monetary 
policy – experiences and problems.] (In Swedish), Ekonomisk Debatt no. 8. 
Hökmark, Gunnar (2015), Därför har vi hög arbetslöshet. [Why we have high unemployment] 
(In Swedish), Debate article, Svenska Dagbladet, 31 July. 
IMF (2015), Monetary Policy and Financial Stability. IMF Staff Report. 
Jakobsson, Ulf (2015), Normer i en onormal tid. [Norms in an abnormal time] (In Swedish), 
Column, Affärsvärlden, 16 September. 
Krugman,  Paul  (2014),  Inflation  Targets  Reconsidered.  Essay  presented  at  ECB  Sintra 
Conference, May 2014. 
Kryvtsov, Oleksiy and Mendes, Rhys R. (2015), The Optimal Level of the Inflation Target: A 
Selective Review of the Literature and Outstanding Issues. Discussion Paper 2015-8, Bank 
of Canada. 
(1998), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  target.  Memorandum,  Basis 
Lacker, Jeffrey M. (2015), The Case Against Further Delay. Speech, 4 September. Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond. 
Mitelman, Henrik (2013), Dags sänka inflationsmålet. [Time to lower the inflation target] (In 
Swedish), Commentary, Dagens Industri, 4 December. 
Mitelman, Henrik (2015a), Riksbanken gör farligt experiment. [The Riksbank is conducting a 
dangerous experiment] (In Swedish), Commentary, Dagens Industri, 15 September. 
Mitelman,  Henrik  (2015b),  Regeringen  måste  tygla  Ingves.  [The  government  must  rein 
Ingves in] (In Swedish), Commentary, Dagens Industri, 8 October. 
The  Riksbank  (2010),  The  Riksbank  removes  the  tolerance  interval  from  its  specified 
monetary  policy 
for  Decision,  31  May  2010. 
http://www.riksbank.se/Upload/Dokument_riksbank/Kat_publicerat/Pressmeddelanden/2010/
nr27e_beslutsunderlag.pdf. 
The Riksbank (2015), Financial Infrastructure 2015. 
The  Riksdag  (2014),  Finansutskottet  utser  toppnamn  för  att  utvärdera  Riksbankens 
penningpolitik.  [The  Committee  on  Finance  nominates  prominent  persons  to  evaluate  the 
Riksbank’s monetary policy] (In Swedish), Press Release, June 17. 
Rosengren,  Eric  S.  (2015),  Changing  Economic  Relationships:  Implications  for  Monetary 
Policy  and  Simple  Monetary  Policy  Rules.  Speech  on  16  April.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Boston. 
Schück, Johan (2015), 2 procents inflation är ett orealistiskt mål. [2 per cent inflation is an 
unrealistic target] (In Swedish), Column, Dagens Nyheter, 8 May. 
Stein,  Jeremy  C.  (2013),  Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement  and  Policy 
Responses. Speech on 7 February. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Sydsvenskan  (2015),  Sikta  lägre  Ingves.  [Aim  lower,  Ingves]  (In  Swedish),  Editorial,  4 
September. 
Williams,  John  (2009),  Heeding  Daedalus:  Optimal  Inflation  and  the  Zero  Lower  Bound. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.2, s. 1–37. 
Winsth,  Annika  and  Isaksson,  Torbjörn  (2015),  Låg  inflation  gynnar  Sverige.  [Low  inflation 
benefits Sweden] (In Swedish), Debate article, Dagens Industri, 2 February. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
