   
Klaas  Knot:  The  role  of  central  banks;  the  Netherlands  Bank  and 
sustainable finance 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Klaas  Knot,  President  of  the  Netherlands  Bank, at the  Sustainable 
Finance  Seminar,  organized  by  the  United  Nations  Environmental  Program  and  the 
Sustainable Finance Lab, and hosted by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 27 November 
2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to De Nederlandsche Bank at this seminar organised 
by the United Nations Environment Program and the Sustainable Finance Lab. 
I am glad to see so many leaders from the banking, insurance and pension sector. 
It tells me that sustainability is given the prominent attention it deserves. 
And today’s programme reflects that belief. 
It features respected colleagues from around the world, who will argue in their own way that 
sustainable finance is crucial to our industry and the stakeholders we serve. 
It has taken us a while. 
We have been occupied by the global financial crisis and its consequences for financial stability 
and economic growth. Now that the worst seems to be over, we have to carefully consider the 
future. 
It is evident to me that a stable financial industry and sustainable economic growth are only 
possible if we integrate sustainability into our operations and business models. 
This is a complex discussion full of dilemmas and unanswered questions, and we are still in 
the early stages of charting a course. 
My hope is that today’s speakers and discussions will contribute to more clarity and action. 
This morning Simon Zadek from the United Nations Environment Programme will summarise 
the UNEP’s inquiry into the role of the financial system in achieving sustainable development. 
Ma Jun, Chief Economist at the People’s Bank of China, will join us via video link and share 
China’s expertise in the area of sustainable finance. 
And eminent economist Herman Wijffels will facilitate two roundtable discussions. 
You are also invited to join this afternoon’s session, which will be open to a broader audience. 
This will feature: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
- Simon Zadek, Co-director of the UNEP Inquiry into the 
Design of a Sustainable Financial System; 
Professor Dirk Schoenmaker from the VU University; 
James  Orr,  Chief  Actuary  for  General  Insurance  at  the  Prudential  Regulation 
Authority, which is part of the Bank of England Group. 
In addition, my fellow Governing Board Member Frank Elderson will elaborate on De 
Nederlandsche Bank’s vision on achieving sustainable development. 
 The role of central banks 
De Nederlandsche Bank is hosting today’s event because it shares the sense of urgency that 
is felt across industries and territories. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Global population growth, climate change and dwindling natural resources are threatening the 
wellbeing and welfare of every person on this planet over a period of many decades. 
Furthermore, the financial crisis has awoken us to the fact that many existing approaches to 
business  and  finance  are  unsustainable.  Economic  development  cannot  be  considered 
durable when: 
– 
– 
– 
natural resources are being depleted; 
growth rates do not fully reflect potential long-run costs to society; 
- and short-term gains of a small group are achieved at the expense of the long-term 
health and stability of the system as a whole. 
Now,  originally,  sustainability  was  driven  by  the  climate  debate  and  its  many  passionate 
stakeholders. 
As a result of the recent crisis, however, the financial industry has become fully aware that 
sustainability is its responsibility, too. 
After  all,  climate  change,  economic  growth,  financial  stability  and  social  wellbeing  are 
inextricably and systemically linked. 
The UNEP’s inquiry comes to a similar conclusion. 
As  Simon  Zadek  will  discuss  later,  central  banks  and  regulators  are  considered  key  to 
achieving a financial system that contributes to sustainable development. 
This potential is unfulfilled, however, in spite of many encouraging efforts by peers from around 
the world. 
The Bank of England is one of them. 
In a recent address, Governor Mark Carney spoke about the profound and long-term effects 
of climate change on issues such as property, migration, political stability and food and water 
security. 
In spite of the threat this poses to our financial resilience and long-term prosperity, little is done 
to mitigate it. 
This  is  because  of  short  planning  horizons  related  to  short  business  cycles,  short  political 
cycles and the mandate of central banks. 
Carney called this the Tragedy of the Horizon and he argued it could be broken by combining 
data, technology and expert judgment. 
This, he said, can help us achieve: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
These and other concerns are being shared by the Financial Stability Board, of which I am 
member and which Carney chairs. 
In April, G20 Finance Ministers asked the Financial Stability Board to consider how the financial 
sector could take account of the risks climate change poses to our financial system. 
In  response,  the  FSB  initiated  the  plan  to  set  up  an  industry-led  disclosure  task  force  on 
climate-relate risks in 2016. This initiative was welcomed by the G20. 
a better understanding of risks; 
better pricing for investors; 
better decisions by policymakers, 
- and a smoother transition to a lower-carbon economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   De Nederlandsche Bank and sustainable finance 
Now, as Frank Elderson will elaborate on this afternoon, De Nederlandsche Bank believes it 
can – and must – contribute to sustainable development. It follows from our legal mandate. 
And  it  follows  from  our  mission,  which  is  to  contribute  to  the  sustainable  prosperity  of  the 
Netherlands by safeguarding the financial stability. 
To achieve this, we have begun to incorporate sustainability into our core business. 
We  are  conducting  research  into  the  carbon  bubble,  the  energy  transition  and  sustainable 
investments in the pensions industry. 
The  outcomes  will  be  used  to  advice  policy  makers  and  to  guide  financial  institutions  into 
incorporating sustainability more fully into their business. 
And  we  are  exploring  ways  to  integrate  sustainability  more  fully  across  our  own  range  of 
instruments. 
Over the coming period, we will define the exact scope and scale in close co-operation with all 
our stakeholders. 
What we do know, however, is that we will increasingly take a forward-looking approach and 
assume the role of catalyst. 
This way, we hope to ensure that: 
– 
– 
business models of financial institutions are sustainable over the long run; 
the interests of financial service clients are not subordinated to those of the industry’s 
shareholders; 
the organisation of social welfare does not lead to an unintended distribution of wealth 
and income among generations or groups; 
solid government finances contribute to solid economic development; 
no financial or economic disbalances occur; 
and finally, that the external effects of the economy – including the generation and 
usage of energy – are adequately priced and regulated. 
  Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We are at a crossroads. 
The challenges to our system will have serious, long-term consequences unless we act now. 
And sustainable development is key to securing the wellbeing and welfare of this generation 
and the many that will follow. 
De Nederlandse Bank is eager to play a catalysing role and use its instruments to promote 
sustainability. I challenge you to do the same. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
