   Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Victor Constancy, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Valletta, 22 October 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press 
conference. I would like to thank Governor Benicia for his kind hospitality and express our 
special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organization of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. We will now report on the outcome of our meeting. 
Based on our regular economic and monetary analyses, and in line with our forward guidance, 
the Governing Council decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged. As regards 
non-standard monetary policy measures,  the  asset  purchases  are  proceeding  smoothly 
and continue to have a favorable impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and 
households. 
The Governing Council has been closely monitoring incoming information since our meeting 
in early September. While euro area domestic demand remains resilient, concerns over growth 
prospects  in  emerging  markets  and  possible  repercussions  for  the  economy  from 
developments in financial and commodity markets continue to signal downside risks to the 
outlook for growth and inflation. Most notably, the strength and persistence of the factors that 
are currently slowing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term 
require thorough analysis. In this context, the degree of monetary policy accommodation will 
need to be re-examined at our December monetary policy meeting, when the new Euro system 
staff macroeconomic projections will be available. The Governing Council is willing and able 
to act by using all the instruments available within its mandate if warranted in order to maintain 
an  appropriate  degree  of  monetary  accommodation.  In  particular,  the  Governing  Council 
recalls that the asset purchase programmer provides sufficient flexibility in terms of adjusting 
its size, composition and duration. In the meantime, we will continue to fully implement the 
monthly asset purchases of €60 billion. These purchases are intended to run until the end of 
September  2016,  or  beyond,  if  necessary,  and,  in  any  case,  until  we  see  a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Let me now explain our assessment of the available information in greater detail, starting with 
the economic analysis. Euro area real GDP increased by 0.4%, quarter on quarter, in the 
second quarter of 2015, following a rise of 0.5% in the previous quarter. The outcome for the 
second quarter reflected positive contributions from both domestic demand and net exports. 
The most recent survey indicators point to a broadly similar pace of real GDP growth in the 
third  quarter  of  the  year.  Overall,  we  expect  the  economic  recovery  to  continue,  albeit 
dampened, in particular, by weaker than expected foreign demand. Domestic demand should 
be further supported by our monetary policy measures and their favorable impact on financial 
conditions, as well as by the progress made with fiscal consolidation and structural reforms. 
Moreover,  the  decline  in  oil  prices  should  provide  support  for  households’  real  disposable 
income  and  corporate  profitability  and,  therefore,  private  consumption  and  investment. 
However, the recovery in domestic demand in the euro area continues to be hampered by the 
necessary  balance  sheet  adjustments  in  a  number  of  sectors  and  the  sluggish  pace  of 
implementation of structural reforms. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain on the downside, reflecting in particular the 
heightened uncertainties regarding developments in emerging market economies, which have 
the  potential  to  further  weigh  on  global  growth  and  foreign  demand  for  euro  area  exports. 
Increased uncertainty has recently manifested itself in financial market developments, which 
may have negative repercussions for euro area domestic demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   According to Eurostat, euro area annual HICP inflation was –0.1% in September 2015, down 
from 0.1% in August. Compared with the previous month, this mainly reflects a further decline 
in energy price inflation. On the basis of the information available and current oil futures prices, 
annual  HICP  inflation  rates  will  remain  very  low  in  the  near  term.  Annual  HICP  inflation  is 
expected to rise at the turn of the year, also on account of base effects associated with the fall 
in oil prices in late 2014. Inflation rates are foreseen to pick up further during 2016 and 2017, 
supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past declines in the euro 
exchange  rate  and  the  assumption  of  somewhat  higher  oil  prices  in  the  years  ahead  as 
currently reflected in oil futures markets. However, there are risks stemming from the economic 
outlook and from financial and commodity market developments which could further slow down 
the gradual increase in inflation rates towards levels closer to 2%. These risks are being closely 
monitored by the Governing Council. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm solid growth in broad money (M3), 
notwithstanding a decline in the annual growth rate of M3 to 4.8% in August 2015 from 5.3% 
in July. Annual growth in M3 continues to be mainly supported by its most liquid components, 
with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 11.4% in August, after 
12.2% in July. 
Loan  dynamics  continued  to  improve.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  non-financial 
corporations (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) increased to 0.4% in August, up from 
0.3%  in  July,  pursuing  its  gradual  recovery  since  the  beginning  of  2014.  Despite  these 
improvements, developments in loans to enterprises continue to reflect the lagged relationship 
with  the  business  cycle,  credit  risk,  credit  supply  factors,  and  the  ongoing  adjustment  of 
financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to 
households  (adjusted for  loan  sales  and securitisation)  increased  to  1.0%  in  August  2015, 
compared with 0.9% in July. The euro area bank lending survey for the third quarter of 2015 
confirms the increase in demand for bank loans, supported by the general level of interest 
rates, financing needs for investment purposes and housing market prospects. In  addition, 
credit standards eased further on loans to enterprises, notably due to increasing competitive 
pressures  in  retail  banking,  while  tightening  somewhat  on  loans  to  households  for  house 
purchase.  Overall,  the  monetary  policy  measures  we  have  put  in  place  since  June  2014 
provide clear support for improvements both in borrowing conditions for firms and households 
and in credit flows across the euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from the monetary analysis indicates the need to firmly implement the Governing Council’s 
monetary policy decisions and to monitor closely all relevant incoming information as concerns 
their impact on the medium-term outlook for price stability. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance supports economic activity. However, in order to reap the full benefits 
from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute  decisively.  Given 
continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro area, the 
ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective structural policies. In particular, 
actions to improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public 
infrastructure,  are  vital  to  increase  productive  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity. The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment of 
accommodative monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth in 
the euro area but will also raise expectations of permanently higher incomes and accelerate 
the benefits of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to global shocks. Fiscal 
policies should support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the EU’s 
fiscal rules. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact is crucial for 
confidence in our fiscal framework. At the same time, all countries should strive for a growth-
friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
