   James McAndrews: Modern recipes for financial crises 
Remarks by Mr James McAndrews, Executive Vice President and Director of Research of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, 4 December 2015. 
 Original presentation is on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website: Slides (PDF). 
The author wishes to thank Tobias Adrian and Thomas Eisenbach for helpful discussions and comments on the 
text of the speech. The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York or of the Federal Reserve System. 
Introduction 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his first fireside chat on March 12, 1933, cogently explained the 
mechanisms  that  led  to the  complete  collapse  of the  banking system  in  the  United  States 
earlier that month: 
“First of all, let me state the simple fact that when you deposit money in a bank, the bank does 
not put the money into a safe deposit vault. It invests your money in many different forms of 
credit – in bonds, in commercial paper, in mortgages and in many other kinds of loans. In other 
words, the bank puts your money to work to keep the wheels of industry and of agriculture 
turning around. A comparatively small part of the money that you put into the bank is kept in 
currency – an amount which in normal times is wholly sufficient to cover the cash needs of the 
average citizen. In other words, the total amount of all the currency in the country is only a 
comparatively small proportion of the total deposits in all the banks of the country. 
“What, then, happened during the last few days of February and the first few days of March? 
Because of undermined confidence on the part of the public, there was a general rush by a 
large portion of our population to turn bank deposits into currency or gold – a rush so great 
that the soundest banks couldn’t get enough currency to meet the demand. The reason for this 
was that on the spur of the moment it was, of course, impossible to sell perfectly sound assets 
of a bank and convert them into cash, except at panic prices far below their real value. By the 
afternoon of March third, a week ago last Friday, scarcely a bank in the country was open to 
do  business.  Proclamations  closing  them,  in  whole  or  in  part,  had  been  issued  by  the 
Governors in almost all the states. It was then that I issued the proclamation providing for the 
national bank holiday, and this was the first step in the Government’s reconstruction of our 
financial and economic fabric.”1  
Roosevelt  understood  the  recipe  for  a  banking  crisis:  fractional  reserve  banking  and  an 
undermined confidence by the public in banks, which led to widespread runs on banks. In turn 
that led to panic prices on bank assets and bank closures. During the Depression, the basic 
elements for the prevention of banking panics were put in place or strengthened: an extensive 
and well-designed system of federal deposit insurance, broad access by banks to the discount 
window, and sound supervision of banks.2  
After  1933,  the  United  States  did  not  experience  another  major  broad  financial  crisis  for 
74 years, until 2007. Even through significant macroeconomic upheavals, and the savings and 
loan  crisis  of  the  1980s,  the  Continental  Illinois  failure  in  1984,  the  Long-Term  Capital 
Management crisis of 1998, and the dot-com crash in the early 2000s, a widespread financial 
crisis did not occur. Although the savings and loan crisis was very costly to taxpayers, for the 
                                                
1   Franklin Delano Roosevelt, “Fireside Chat on Banking,” March 12, 1933. Transcript available from University of 
California, Santa Barbara, American Presidency Project, http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=14540. 
2   Congress greatly broadened the lending powers of the Federal Reserve Banks in 1932 and again in 1933. The 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation was created in 1933. See Meltzer (2003) and Sastry (forthcoming). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
most  part  the  system  of  deposit  insurance,  discount  window  access,  and  supervision 
prevented runs and large spillovers into the real economy. 
The  bank  runs  during the  Great  Depression  have  been  the subject  of  extensive  research. 
Economic theory provided increasingly compelling explanations for the mechanisms that lead 
to bank runs. The widely cited work by Douglas Diamond and Philip Dybvig in 1983 explained 
the economic logic behind why banks exist and what makes them vulnerable to runs. In their 
model, banks fund illiquid assets with liabilities payable on demand and provide an important 
form of insurance for depositors. So long as the demand of depositors for currency withdrawals 
are relatively uncorrelated, the bank provides a safe place for housing one’s savings while 
earning  a  rate  of  return  higher  than  that  available  to  people  simply  by  storing  currency. 
However, coordination failure, such as an instance when everyone thinks that everyone else 
will withdraw their deposit today, can give rise to instability and lead to bank runs. That general 
theory  has  been  extended  in  many  ways.  One  of  the  lessons  of  that  work  is  that  deposit 
insurance (backed by the government’s money creation power) and discount window access 
can mitigate or even eliminate bank runs. 
So why did we experience a crisis in 2007, one in which we in the United States did not observe 
widespread  instances  of  depositors  lined  up  outside  of  their  banks  demanding  currency?3 
During the decades from 1933 to 2007, and especially since the rapid growth of the market 
intermediated financial  system  in the  1980s, the financial  system  in  the United  States  has 
grown  in  complexity  and  in  reliance  on  financial  institutions  that  aren’t  commercial  banks. 
Those institutions intermediate corporate bond markets, money markets for short-term credit, 
stock markets  in  which  firms  can  issue  equity  claims,  and  derivative  markets.  All  of  these 
markets  rely  on  non-banks  such  as  dealers, finance  companies,  insurers,  and many  other 
types of specialists. It is important to recognize that the financial crisis of 2007–09 in the United 
States did not include widespread runs on bank deposit accounts, the hallmark of the crisis in 
the early 1930s. However, there has been a growing recognition that the financial system as a 
whole  can  be  fragile  beyond  banks,  and  that  runs  can  occur  on  a  wide  range  of  financial 
intermediaries. So what is a modern recipe for a financial crisis? 
Menu 
What is a financial crisis? 
First, let’s define a financial crisis. There are many types of financial crises including currency 
crises in which the value of a country’s currency plummets, as happened in Iceland in 2008 
along with its major banking crisis; fiscal crises in which a country’s government defaults on its 
debt or has the debt restructured, as happened in Greece in 2010 and 2014; and general 
financial crises, often called banking crises, which occurred in several parts of the world in 
2008–09.4  What  is  a  banking  crisis,  specifically?  The  economists  Luc  Laeven  and  Fabián 
Valencia  (2012)  have  a  clear  definition,  but  similar  definitions  have  been  offered  by  other 
researchers: 
A banking crisis is defined as systemic if two conditions are met: 
                                                
3  
IndyMac did experience a run in which depositors were, in some instances, unable to withdraw their deposits 
as their branch closed for the day. See Kristoff and Chang, “Federal Regulators Seize Crippled IndyMac Bank,” 
Los Angeles Times, July 12, 2008, http://articles.latimes.com/2008/jul/12/business/fi-indymac12. 
4   Recently, a group of economists agreed to and published a “consensus narrative” of the causes of the eurozone 
financial crisis, focusing on the external imbalances across countries within the eurozone, which led to a sudden 
stop  in  lending,  and  the  flow  of  capital,  across  those  countries.  See  http://www.voxeu.org/article/ez-crisis-
consensus-narrative 
http://www.voxeu.org/content/eurozone-crisis-consensus-view-causes-and-few-
possible-solutions. 
and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1) 
2) 
 
Significant signs of financial distress in the banking system (as indicated by significant 
bank runs, losses in the banking system, and/or bank liquidations) 
Significant banking policy intervention measures in response to significant losses in 
the banking system. 
 To be clear, and to apply this definition to the U.S. crisis in 2007–09, I’ll expand it from the 
banking system to the financial system more broadly, as many financial firms that experienced 
distress during the most recent crisis weren’t licensed as banks. It may seem odd to include 
policy interventions to be counted as a sign of a financial crisis, but when deposit insurance 
and lender of last resort services are available, a crisis may not kick off a bank run. That means 
the government must intervene to keep the stress from worsening, and so extraordinary action 
by the government can itself be a gauge of the severity of a crisis. Laeven and Valencia review 
the frequency of financial crises around the world and count 147 crises since 1970. 
What problems are caused by a financial crisis? 
The clearest outcome of a financial crisis is a loss of output – in other words, a severe and 
long-lasting  recession.  Using  the  same  dataset  they  used  to  identify  crises,  Laeven  and 
Valencia found that in advanced-economy nations, the median cumulative decline in output 
accompanying a financial crisis was 33 percent of annual gross domestic product, or one-third 
of an economy’s output for a year. In addition, the median growth in government debt was 
21 percent of GDP, and the median fiscal cost of the crisis-related spending was 3.8 percent 
of GDP. 
Other  studies  confirm  these  grim  statistics.  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)  point  out  that 
recoveries from financial crises are weaker and slower than recoveries from recessions that 
don’t  accompany  a  financial  crisis.  Employment  growth  is  slower  during  recoveries  from 
financial crises, and the associated higher unemployment can have long-lasting effects on a 
whole generation of young workers who sustain long spells of joblessness. There are many 
other maladies that come along with financial crises. 
Ingredients 
Several economic researchers agree that one crucial ingredient in creating the vulnerabilities 
that can foster a financial crisis is a buildup of debt.5 In particular, a “credit boom,” that is, a 
high and fast-growing ratio of credit to GDP, is one of the precursors to a financial crisis. Other, 
somewhat  less  reliable  precursors  include  a  prior  financial  liberalization  or  deregulation, 
housing price booms, and external imbalances (in practice, large inflows of capital from outside 
the country). 
The complication is that while most financial crises have been preceded by a credit boom, not 
all  credit  booms  have  been  followed  by  a  financial  crisis.  In  fact,  a  credit  boom  has  been 
followed by a financial crisis in only about 30 percent of the cases.6 Consequently, there are 
good booms, which don’t end in a crisis, and bad booms, or “booms gone wrong” that do end 
in  a  crisis.  Given  that  credit  booms  often  accommodate  the  real  and  pressing  needs  of  a 
growing economy, simply preventing credit booms, if that were even possible, could have the 
effect of choking off desirable growth and thus be more costly for society over the longer run. 
Nevertheless, it is difficult a priori to distinguish good and bad booms, and, furthermore, to 
determine the mechanisms that generate crises when the economy has become vulnerable to 
one, that is, when the economy has high debt, a weakening macroeconomy, and other such 
elements.  Even  so,  as  previous  studies  have  indicated,  debt  growth  shifts  the  conditional 
distribution  of  economic  outcomes  to  put  more  weight  on  events  in  which  debtors  must 
                                                
5   See Borio, Drehmann, and Tstsaronis (2011), Schularick and Taylor (2012), and Reinhart and Rogoff (2011). 
6   See Dell’Ariccia, Igan, Laeven, and Tong (2015), and Gorton and Ordonez (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
unexpectedly cut back their spending plans to repay debt, a vulnerability that is not present in 
the absence of debt. Therefore, as I’ll explain later, forward-looking comprehensive supervision 
of the financial system is a key element in attempting to distinguish a healthy expansion of 
credit from a more dangerous and fragile buildup of debt. 
Recipes 
In  what  follows,  I’ll  outline  recent  findings  on  some  of  the  possible  mechanisms  that  can 
generate a modern financial crisis, one that is not characterized, like the U.S. banking crisis in 
1931–33 by depositors demanding currency from their banks. In particular, I’ll focus on two 
strands of research that identify mechanisms that can amplify small initial disturbances in the 
economy to produce significant financial distress. My review is selective, as I don’t aim to cover 
all the possible factors that researchers have suggested can contribute to financial crises, but 
instead to focus on two topics that reveal some of the main mechanisms at play. 
The first mechanism is the procyclicality of financial intermediary leverage; banks and other 
financial  intermediaries, notably  broker-dealers,  increased their  leverage during  the  growth 
years  of  the  2000s,  issuing  increasing  amounts  of  debt,  but  little  equity.  But  as  financial 
volatility increased in 2007, they began to deleverage, a process that produced stresses for 
many institutions and people throughout the economy, much like the distress caused by classic 
bank runs. 
The second mechanism I’ll review is the role played by the private sector in creating money-
like assets, such as repos, commercial paper, and other short-term and ostensibly safe assets. 
When able to issue such assets, private issuers pay a very low interest rate, as others in the 
economy  demand  the  apparent  safety  that  those  assets  provide.  That  situation  gives  the 
private financial sector strong incentives to issue money-like claims. However, the excessive 
issuance of such instruments can lead, at some point, to a loss of confidence in them. In turn, 
that can reduce demand for these instruments and lead again to a rapid deleveraging by the 
issuers of these instruments. Much like the case that F.D.R. discussed for banks in the 1930s, 
the runs on these short-term debt instruments can lead to fire sales of assets by the institutions 
that were relying on the issuance of money-like instruments to finance their portfolios – and 
those sales cause distress for many others throughout the economy. 
Procyclical leverage of financial intermediaries 
In a series of papers, Tobias Adrian and coauthors have made a number of findings about the 
behavior  of  financial  intermediaries,  that  is,  banks,  broker-dealers,  and  other  financial 
companies,  and  how  their  leverage  varies  over  time.  So  rather  than  focusing  on  the  debt 
burden  of  the  government,  or  households,  or  nonfinancial  corporations,  this  line  of  work 
focuses on the debt burden of the financial sector itself.7 It is important to mention that, in a 
series of studies, Atif Mian and Amir Sufi have proposed a complementary mechanism in which 
they focus on the increase in household debt as a strongly predictive factor in explaining the 
depth of the recession associated with the financial crisis.8 Across the United States, regions 
in which household leverage was fueled by more aggressive lending tended to have larger 
subsequent busts. Hence the procyclicality of household and financial sector leverage were 
tightly intertwined. 
The  first  and  central  finding  is  that  financial  intermediary  balance  sheet  growth  is  highly 
procyclical. This finding is broadly consistent with how we think banks operate and the role 
they perform in providing financing to households and firms: As the economy expands, banks 
                                                
7   See Adrian and Shin (2008, 2010, 2014), Adrian, Boyarchenko, and Shin (2015), Adrian, Moench, and Shin 
(2010, 2014), Adrian, Etula, and Muir (2014), and Adrian and Boyarchenko (2012, 2013, 2014). 
8   See Mian and Sufi (2010, 2014). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
find more potentially profitable projects to which to lend, and also find it relatively easy to attract 
more funding, as households and businesses have more savings to invest. A more cautionary 
finding is that the size of bank balance sheets tends to forecast aggregate economic volatility. 
Consequently bank lending booms may portend more mixed economic outcomes. 
Other studies in this vein suggest some of the mechanisms that might be behind the greater 
future volatility. First, banks have procyclical leverage: lending booms by banks are financed 
by debt, not equity. Consequently, the increased leverage of banks can result in a deterioration 
of the quality of bank lending through a type of moral hazard that can occur if debt becomes 
too easy for the banks to raise or if volatility in financial markets is suppressed. Another finding 
by  Adrian  and  his  coauthors  is  that  banks’  incentives  and  ability  to  lend  becomes  highly 
sensitive to financial market volatility. When the economy is in the upside of the cycle, volatility 
and other measures of risk may be low precisely because of the abundance of debt financing, 
masking  the  level  of  underlying  risk  in  the  economy,  which  may  lead  to  excessive,  and 
eventually unsustainable, growth in bank lending. 
The procyclical leverage of banks is associated with other features of the financial economy 
and its dynamics. For example, the leverage of financial intermediaries influences the pricing 
of  assets:  once  again,  this  feature  can  impart  procyclicality  to  asset  pricing.  When  risk 
measures  are  low  during  a  growth  and  boom  phase  of  the  cycle,  asset  prices  tend  to  be 
supported, but during the contractionary phase, asset prices can drop, with risk premia rising, 
which,  in turn, can  lead  to further  contractions  in  credit  by  lenders,  resulting  in  a  negative 
feedback loop that can amplify the initial shock to asset prices. 
Finally, the procyclical leverage of financial intermediaries is tied to systemic risk, suggesting 
that  the  leverage  of  financial  intermediaries  is  a  key  factor  behind  economy-wide  financial 
crises. Once again, a potential “macroprudential” regulator – one that is attempting to reduce 
the risk of a financial crisis but also attempting to stabilize the macroeconomy – would face a 
risk-return tradeoff: Allowing a buildup in financial intermediary leverage as the economy grows 
can assist in achieving macroeconomic objectives such as full employment, but risks a more 
severe  downturn  if  such  leverage  growth  becomes  excessive.  Making  those  judgments  is 
inherently difficult. 
The benefit of being a money issuer 
Society demands money for many purposes. Money provides a good way for people to store 
value safely, and it can be used as a means of exchange. These are classic and enduring 
features of money. For the purpose of this talk, by “money” I mean a broad definition of money 
– what some would call “money-like” assets that can provide the monetary functions of storing 
value and serving as a medium of exchange. Those include both short-term government debt 
and short-term borrowing by financial intermediaries, especially borrowing that is designed to 
be extremely safe, such as repurchase agreements, or repos. 
A repo is a fairly modern instrument that I’ll describe in a bit more detail, as repos played an 
important  role  in  the  buildup  of  intermediary  leverage  and  the  issuance  of  private-sector 
money-like instruments during the lead-up to the crisis of 2007–09. A repo is a sale of a security 
with an agreement to buy it back on a later date (the most common term for a repo is overnight, 
but the term can be for a longer period, such as one-month as well). The difference in the 
purchase and sale prices constitutes a rate of interest paid by the institution that is borrowing 
the money (or selling the security). The advantage of the sale and resale arrangement is that, 
in the event that the borrower does not return the money it owes, the party that purchased the 
security can keep it, avoiding the costs, delays, and uncertainty associated with making its 
claim in bankruptcy court; these advantages are confined to certain types of securities and has 
been allowed by supporting legislation. 
Repos are just one such way that a private intermediary can provide a high degree of safety 
to its lenders, and others include asset-backed commercial paper, money market mutual fund 
shares,  and  auction-rate  securities.  However  these  private  money-like  assets  are  created, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
those that succeed in providing that elusive money-likeness confer significant benefits on their 
creators. A now widely confirmed finding regarding the issuance of money-like assets is that 
they can be issued at lower interest rates than other types of debt, saving the issuer from 
greater interest expense. 
That result comes in two steps. First, a number of studies show that short-term Treasury bills 
(which are a publicly provided type of money-like asset) enjoy a “liquidity premium,” especially 
when  the  supply  of  Treasury  bills  is  relatively  low.9  Short-term  Treasury  bills  can  provide 
various money-like services for larger institutions because they are so safe. Deposit insurance 
is limited (currently it is limited to deposits of $250,000) so large institutions that want to hold 
funds safely for short periods cannot find that safety directly with bank deposits. Instead, short-
term Treasury bills can provide a convenient way for large institutions to hold wealth in a safe 
form. Because the Treasury bills are short-term, their prices don’t experience much variation, 
and they are easily transferred and used as collateral. Hence, they provide those features of 
money I mentioned earlier, namely a good store of value and a means of exchange. 
A second finding from these studies is that when the U.S. Treasury issues relatively smaller 
amounts of Treasury bills, the private-sector issuance of money-like assets increases, taking 
advantage of the liquidity premium that large institutions are willing to pay for their safety and 
convenience. So when the government funds itself with relatively more long-term debt, firms 
fill the resulting gap by issuing more short-term debt.10  
In related work, Jeremy Stein (2012) points out that, notwithstanding their private benefits, 
there are systemic risks involved when the private sector creates money-like assets. For many 
reasons, if private intermediaries run into difficulty issuing those assets or in rolling over their 
short-term  debt,  then  they  must  deleverage  abruptly.  In  fact,  the  crisis  of  2007–09  was 
characterized by runs on all four of the money-like instruments I mentioned earlier, namely 
repo, asset-backed commercial paper, money market mutual fund shares, and auction-rate 
securities. Those runs can lead to selling off the loans or securities that were financed by the 
issuance of those instruments and also may initiate fire sales. 
A fire sale is caused when assets are sold at a time when many of the likely buyers of those 
assets  do  not  have  the  capacity  to  purchase  them,  leading  to  severe  downward  price 
adjustments.  These  price  movements  create  additional  problems  for  other  financial  sector 
players, as the declining value of the securities that were sold often means that the value of 
the securities that they hold are also marked down, reducing their ability to obtain or retain 
financing to hold their portfolio of securities. This can lead to additional sales, worsening the 
fire sale conditions, in a negative feedback loop that amplifies the initial shock to the financial 
sector. 
The emphasis on fire sales when private intermediaries encounter difficulty rolling over their 
short-term debt is complemented by research that posits that the role of banks is to create and 
preserve liquidity of their money-like liabilities such as deposits, repos, and other short-term 
debt.11  In  normal  times,  these  instruments  are  very  safe  and  it  is  believed  by  people  and 
institutions  that  invest  in  them  that  no  special  monitoring  of  those  instruments  is  needed. 
Consequently, investors remain ignorant of the precise condition of the intermediary to whom 
they are lending, or of the securities that back their loan. However, once conditions worsen, 
suddenly the nature of the debt changes, in that the people and institutions that hold the debt 
                                                
9   See Greenwood, Hansen, and Stein (2010, 2015), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), and Carlson 
et al. (2014). 
10   This finding is further supported by the finding that the share of safe assets in the economy has been relatively 
steady since the 1950s. Others confirm those results and show that the substitution of privately-created short-
term debt for the Treasury’s supply of short-term debt has been a consistent feature of the U.S. financial system 
since 1875. See Gorton, Lewellen, and Metrick (2012), and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2015). 
11   See Dang, Gorton, and Holmstrom (2009, 2012). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
realize they must expend resources to monitor their borrower. But, at that point, they are not 
in a good position to monitor that firm, so they simply refuse to extend the loan to it when the 
loan comes due, greatly amplifying the initial cause of the need to monitor further. This has the 
effect of the old-style bank run: suddenly the financial intermediary is caught short of the ability 
to finance its portfolio, and must reduce its indebtedness quickly, again, possibly triggering fire 
sales and creating negative externalities to others. 
Setting the table 
Classic and modern crises 
In the financial crisis that initiated the Great Depression, we saw a classic banking panic. At 
the  peak  of  an  economic  expansion,  a  stock  market  crash  signaled  a  revision  to  growth 
expectations, or possibly a change in the willingness of people to assume risk. Around the 
country  many  banks  (whose  deposits  were  not  insured)  experienced  difficulty  in  meeting 
depositors’ withdrawal demands, and bank runs began to occur, at first sporadically. In these 
runs,  depositors  formed  lines  stretching  from  teller  windows  to  outside  the  bank,  clearly 
indicating to the public that the bank was in distress. Bank runs waxed and waned for a few 
years prior to the generalized runs that preceded F.D.R.’s declaration of a bank holiday. F.D.R. 
explained well the consequences of a bank run: the banks that were run could only close their 
doors,  or  sell  their  assets  at  panic  prices.  Either  of  those  actions  conferred  negative 
externalities on the economy more broadly. With the closure of a bank, the community lost 
access to credit and to a safe place into which it could deposit its paychecks and savings. The 
knowledge about borrowers and their creditworthiness was lost, and even if other banks would 
expand their business, that loss of information was costly to the efficiency of the economy, and 
in notable research Ben Bernanke (1983) measured the very negative effect that bank closures 
had on economic performance. 
In  the  U.S.  financial  crisis  of  2007–09,  there  were  no  widespread  bank  runs:  in  general 
depositors did not line up at their bank and request their deposits, even for banks that were 
widely  reported  to  be  in  poor  financial  condition.  This  is  likely  the  case  because  of  the 
widespread  understanding  of  U.S.  federally  insured  deposit  insurance,  which  protects 
depositors’ funds up to the current limit of $250,000, and the presence of the discount window, 
by which banks can increase their cash holdings to meet withdrawal demands without having 
to sell assets at panic prices.12  
However, the financial crisis of 2007–09 manifested another type of run on banks as well as 
non-banks, a run on the short-term, non-deposit debt issued by the intermediaries. This is a 
point made clearly by Gary Gorton (2012). These runs weren’t clearly and easily visible to the 
public,  and  this  fact  impeded  the  quick  understanding  of  the  severity  and  potential 
consequences of the run that was underway. 
I’ve outlined two strains of thought that provide models for us to understand the mechanisms 
that  amplify  what  might  initially  be  small  shocks  into  large  and  dangerous  events  for  the 
economy: the procyclical leverage of financial intermediaries and their sensitivity to measures 
of financial risk, such as volatility, and the potential for private intermediaries to issue money-
like instruments. When the economy is vulnerable to a financial crisis – that is when the levels 
of debt are high and the macroeconomy is at or past a peak, and in some cases, a housing 
boom is ending – then financial intermediary leverage and the issuance of money-like debt 
instruments can become excessive. Such excess can lead to a rapid scramble to deleverage 
– that is, to reduce levels of debt, causing fire sales and failures of financial intermediaries, 
which,  in  turn,  confers  further  distress  on  the  financial  economy  and  the  working  of  the 
                                                
12   Prior to October 3, 2009 the FDIC limit on deposit insurance was $100,000, but was raised on that day to 
$250,000, for a temporary period. The Dodd-Frank Act made the expansion in the insurance limit permanent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   
macroeconomy  generally,  as  important  sources  of  credit  are  blocked  from  reaching 
households and firms. 
In essence, I’ve argued that there are two views of the mechanisms that could lead to a crisis: 
one is about excessive leverage or the scarcity of loss-bearing capacity that builds up in an 
expanding economy and the other is about the excessive provision of liquidity in the private 
sector, or excess private money creation. Of course, liquidity and leverage go hand in hand: 
Private money creation enables firms that issue it to take on high leverage, both in the financial 
and the nonfinancial sectors. Part of the puzzle of the crisis of 2007–09 was that the excessive 
leverage and private money creation took place outside of commercial banks, and outside of 
firms that were subject to broad consolidated supervision – in the “shadows” as some have put 
it. It is important that we recognize that in the modern era the conditions for a financial crisis 
can be created by nonbanks. 
A lesson of the crisis of 2007–09 was that financial crises, modern ones, do not have to be 
characterized by lines from bank teller windows in which depositors are withdrawing cash, or 
even be centered in banks. Instead, in a more market-oriented, in contrast to bank-oriented 
financial  system,  different  sources  of  stress  come  to  the  fore. While  employing  a  different 
recipe,  the  flavors  of  the  crises  are  the  same:  financial  intermediaries,  through  having 
overextended credit or engaged in an over-reliance on the issuance of short-term debt, or in 
the midst of a general panic, have difficulty in raising funds and are forced to sell off positions 
abruptly, putting further downward pressure on prices, worsening the situation systematically. 
Preparing for (unwanted) guests 
In response to the 2007–09 crisis, the policies of the Federal Reserve were focused primarily 
on liquidity injections, which can be thought of as replacing the privately created money that 
was being withdrawn from circulation as intermediaries delevered. The U.S. Treasury and the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation extended guarantees for money market mutual fund 
shares, issuance of certain types of debt by bank holding companies and unlimited amounts 
of deposits in transactions accounts of commercial banks. Later, with the passage of the TARP 
legislation, the federal government addressed the excessive leverage and shortages of loss-
bearing  capacity  through  the  injections  of  capital  in  October  2008  and  in  April  2009  in 
conjunction with the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or stress test of the major U.S. 
bank holding companies. 
Ultimately, the 2007–09 crisis was about both leverage and liquidity in the financial system as 
a whole, and not only in the tightly supervised sector of banking firms. This suggests that official 
sector efforts should aim at forward-looking monitoring of financial vulnerability that take both 
leverage  and  maturity  transformation  into  account,  and  to  broaden  supervision  to  include 
broader coverage of the financial sector. In addition to many other efforts, the Federal Reserve 
is  conducting  tests  of  exactly  that  sort  through  its  capital  and  liquidity  assessments,  the 
Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review,  or  CCAR,  and  the  Comprehensive  Liquidity 
Analysis and Review, or CLAR. CCAR is the Federal Reserve’s annual process for evaluating 
capital adequacy of large and complex financial firms under normal and stressed conditions. 
CLAR is the Federal Reserve’s annual, horizontal exam to evaluate the liquidity position and 
liquidity  risk  management  practices  of  those  firms.  CCAR  and  CLAR  are  applied  to  bank 
holding  companies,  firms  that  now  include  many  of  the  broker-dealers  and  other  nonbank 
intermediaries involved in the market-based system of intermediation. Both of these forward-
looking assessments attempt to gauge the vulnerability to a crisis by examining the capital and 
liquidity resources the largest bank holding companies have to withstand the stresses that 
accompany a severe economic downturn. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   References 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2008. “Liquidity, Monetary Policy, and Financial Cycles.” 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Current  Issues  in  Economics  and  Finance  14,  no.  1 
(January). 
Adrian,  Tobias,  and  Hyun  Song  Shin.  2010.  “Liquidity  and  Leverage.”  Journal  of  Financial 
Intermediation 19, no. 3: 418–437. 
Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk.” Review 
of Financial Studies 27, no. 2 (February): 373–403. 
Adrian, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko. 2012. “Intermediary Leverage Cycles and Financial 
Stability.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 567, August. 
Adrian, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko. 2013. “Liquidity Policies and Systemic Risk.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no.661 (December). 
Adrian, Tobias, and Nina Boyarchenko. 2014. “Liquidity Policies and Systemic Risk.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics blog, April. 
Adrian, Tobias, Nina Boyarchenko, and Hyun Song Shin. 2015. “The Cyclicality of Leverage.” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no.743 (October). 
Adrian, Tobias, Emmanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin. 2010. “Macro Risk Premium and 
Intermediary Balance Sheet Quantities.” International Monetary Fund Economic Review 58 
(September): 179–207. 
Adrian, Tobias, Emmanuel Moench, and Hyun Song Shin. 2014. “Dynamic Leverage Asset 
Pricing.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 625 (December). 
Adrian, Tobias, Erkko Etula, and Tyler Muir. 2014. “Financial Intermediaries and the Cross-
Section of Asset Returns.” Journal of Finance 69, no. 6 (December): 2557–96. 
Baldwin, Richard, et al. 2015. “Rebooting the Eurozone: Step 1 – Agreeing a Crisis Narrative.” 
Vox, November 20, http://www.voxeu.org/article/ez-crisis-consensus-narrative. 
Baldwin, Richard, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2015. “The Eurozone Crisis: A Consensus View of 
the 
7, 
September 
http://www.voxeu.org/content/eurozone-crisis-consensus-view-causes-and-few-possible-
solutions. 
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the 
Great Depression.” American Economic Review 73, no. 3: 257–76. 
Borio, Claudio, Mathias Drehmann, and Kostas Tsatsaronis. 2011. “Anchoring Countercyclical 
Capital Buffers: The Role of Credit Aggregates.” International Journal of Central Banking 7, 
no. 4 (December): 189–240. 
Carlson, Mark, et al. 2014. “The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets and Financial Stability: 
Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policies.” Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, November. 
Dang, Tri  Vi,  Gary  Gorton,  and  Bengt  Holmström.  “Ignorance,  Debt  and  Financial  Crises.” 
Working paper, 2012. 
Dang,  Tri  Vi,  Gary  Gorton,  and  Bengt  Holmström.  “Opacity  and  the  Optimality  of  Debt  for 
Liquidity Provision.” Working paper, 2009. 
Diamond,  Douglas  W.,  and  Philip  H.  Dybvig.  1983.  “Bank  Runs,  Deposit  Insurance,  and 
Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 3 (June): 401–19. 
Dell’Ariccia,  Giovanni,  Deniz 
for 
Macrofinancial Stability: How to Deal with Credit Booms?” Paper prepared for the Economic 
Policy Meeting, Central Bank of Luxembourg, October. 
Igan,  Luc  Laeven,  and  Hui  Tong.2015.  “Policies 
Solutions.” 
Possible 
Causes 
Vox, 
Few 
and 
a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Corporate Debt Maturity Choice.” Journal of Finance 65, no. 3 (June): 993–1028. 
 
Gorton, Gary B. Misunderstanding Financial Crises. 2012. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Gorton,  Gary  B,  Stefan  Lewellen,  and  Andrew  Metrick.  2012.  “The  Safe-Asset  Share.” 
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 102 (May): 101–06. 
Gorton, Gary B., and Guillermo L. Ordoñez. “Good Booms, Bad Booms.” 2015. Society for 
Economic Dynamics working paper. 
Greenwood,  Robin,  Samuel  Hanson,  and Jeremy  C.  Stein.  2010.  “A Gap‐Filling Theory of 
Greenwood,  Robin,  Samuel  Hanson,  and  Jeremy  C.  Stein.  2010.  2015.  “A  Comparative‐
Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity.” The Journal of Finance 40, no. 4 (August). 
1683–772. 
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012.  “The Aggregate Demand for 
Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 120, no. 2: 233–67. 
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2015. “The Impact of Treasury Supply 
on  Financial  Sector  Lending  and  Stability.”  Journal  of  Financial  Economics  118,  no.  3 
(December). 
Kristoff, Kathy M., and Andrea Chang. “Federal Regulators Seize Crippled IndyMac Bank.” Los 
Angeles Times, July 12, 2008, http://articles.latimes.com/2008/jul/12/business/fi-indymac12. 
Laeven, Luc and Fabián Valencia. 2012. “Systemic Banking Crises Database: An Update,” 
IMF Working Paper no. 12/163. 
Meltzer, Allan H. A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1: 1913–1951. 2003. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Mian, Atif R., and Amir Sufi. 2010. “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007–09.” IMF 
Economic Review 58, no. 1: 74–117. 
Mian, Atif R., and Amir Sufi. House of Debt: How They (and You) Cause the Great Recession, 
and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again. 2014. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth Rogoff. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial 
Folly. 2009. Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart,  Carmen  M.,  and  Kenneth  Rogoff.  2011.  “From  Financial  Crash  to  Debt  Crisis.” 
American Economic Review 101 (August): 1676–706. 
Sastry,  Parinitha.  Forthcoming.  “The  Political  Origins  of  Section  13(3).”  Economic  Policy 
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Schularick,  Moritz,  and Alan  M.  Taylor.  2012.  “Credit  Booms Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008.” American Economic Review, 102, no. 2 
(April): 1029–61. 
Stein, Jeremy. 2012. “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation.” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 127 (February): 57–95. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
