   Pentti Hakkarainen: Welcome more common and integrated financial 
markets 
Opening remarks by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
Nordic Capital Markets Forum seminar on European Banking Union, Helsinki, 5 October 2015. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
Welcome to the Bank of Finland’s Money Museum. It is a great pleasure for me to open and 
participate in your seminar on the European Banking Union. 
Without going into detailed argumentation, it is quite an indisputable view that fully integrated 
financial system would bring invaluable benefits to the real economy in Europe. The banking 
union is an essential part of the financial system. However, there are also capital markets and 
payment services, clearing and settlement systems and other finance market functions, which 
are elements for further integration. In these fields a lot of progress has been made in Europe 
in recent years. 
I would like to share with you some experiences of the Banking Union and then some views 
on the new Action Plan of the Capital Markets Union. 
Banking Union 
The latest financial crisis made it very clear that interconnected banking and financial markets 
require a better and stronger institutional framework that we had in Europe. New institutional 
arrangements  for  bank  supervision  and  resolution  were  needed  to  match  the  integrated 
structures of banking business. 
As a part of the economic and monetary union and as a remedy for future financial crisis, the 
EU leaders agreed in June 2012 on creating the Banking Union. In the future, the Banking 
Union will help us resolve banking problems while avoiding using taxpayers’ money for bail-
outs. The Banking Union also means a more stable financial system in Europe as the likelihood 
of problems is reduced. 
The Single Rulebook provided the foundation for the Banking Union. It is based on the idea of 
harmonised  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  capital  adequacy  rules  for  banks  and 
supervisory practices. 
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
One of the main pillars of the Banking Union is the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). It 
ensures  consistent,  non-biased  supervision  in  all  Member  States.  The  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism started supervision nearly one year ago and its work is independent and separated 
from the ECB’s central banking activities. 
From the banks’ perspective, the introduction of the SSM means numerous changes. I will 
mention only a few of them. 
For cross-border banks, operating in multiple countries within the Banking Union, the SSM 
effectively simplifies their contacts with the authorities. A bank will work with a single supervisor 
and operate following a single rulebook. This implies also lower costs for the bank in complying 
with regulatory requirements. 
Common  rules  and  methods  of  supervision  have  a  broader  impact  on  competition  among 
banks.  Banks  are  treated  equally  in  supervision  and  regulatory  capture  can  be  avoided, 
thereby ensuring a level playing field. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) 
The second important pillar of the Banking Union is the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), 
which is a necessary complement to the Single Supervisory Mechanism. Single Resolution 
Mechanism creates a single authority, which is responsible for swift and orderly resolution of 
banks in the euro area and participating member states. 
The SRM is a game-changer in the European bank resolution, as it is designed to end bank 
bail-outs.  The  new  bank  recovery  and  resolution  framework  ensures  a  uniform  European 
approach where identical cases are treated identically. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  is  complemented  by  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  (SRF) 
which is financed via levies on the banking sector itself. The Fund (EUR 55 bn) starts from 
national compartments but it will gradually, in eight years, be mutualised to become a single 
European Fund. 
Underlying  the  new  regime  is  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  which 
changes  the  culture  in  the  banking  markets.  Bail-in  will  now  be  the  rule,  bail-out  a  rare 
exception. As of the beginning of 2016, the BRRD requires bail-in of shareholders and creditors 
equal to at least 8 % of the total liabilities of a failing bank. Only after the threshold of 8 % bail-
in can money from the resolution fund be used and only at the very end of the process can 
public money be used. It is notable that public money can only be used to facilitate resolution, 
not to save non-viable banks. 
Macroprudential policy 
Alongside the changes in microprudential supervision due to the establishment of the SSM 
also a macroprudential policy is becoming effective. 
While the macroprudential policy lies in the first place with the national authorities, the SSM 
Regulation assigns macroprudential tasks also to the ECB. In particular, the ECB may decide 
stricter  measures  than  national  authorities,  using  the  counter-cyclical  buffer  or  other 
macroprudential tools provided with the European legislation. The role of the ECB in making 
macroprudential decisions within the Banking Union can be seen as a useful complement to 
national frameworks so as to avoid the so called inaction bias in macroprudential policy. 
Deposit Guarantee System 
A common Deposit Guarantee Scheme can be seen as a completion of the Banking Union. 
The planning of such a scheme is still in a very early phase and would require harmonisation 
of the national schemes as a first step. The European Commission is mandated to revisit the 
issue in 2019. But I assume that the European wide deposit guarantee system will be promoted 
earlier than 2019 since it would fit naturally inwith the SSM and the SRM. 
A Capital Market Union for Europe 
Following  the  initiation  of  the  European  Banking  Union,  Commission  President  Juncker 
promised in July 2014 to create a European “Capital Markets Union”. As he explained it, “To 
improve the financing of our economy, we should further develop and integrate capital markets. 
This would cut the costs of raising capital, notable SMEs, and help reduce corporations’ high 
dependence on bank funding”. 
Last week, The European Commission launched the Action Plan on Building a Capital Markets 
Union (CMU). The Capital Markets Union is a good initiative. The ECB and the Bank of England 
have already been active in some capital markets issues, especially reviving the EU market 
for a high-quality securitization. The CMU should help mobilise more capital in Europe and 
especially  channel  it  to  financing  of  the  corporate  sector.  By  opening  up  a  wider  range  of 
funding  sources  for  investments  the  CMU  can  reduce  the  bank-dependency  of  European 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   finance and thus the vulnerability of the EU economies and corporations to banking shocks. 
The CMU can also deepen financial integration and increase competition in the EU financial 
markets. 
Conclusions: some enhancements 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
To conclude, I would like to express some additional views on the Banking Union and the 
Capital Markets Union, as I think that some enhancements would be needed. 
The Capital Markets Union needs robust banks. The Banking Union was a major step in the 
right direction. The BU is mandatory for the euro area countries, while the other member states 
can join the BU on a voluntary basis. It is important to strive for an as unified approach to bank 
supervision as possible in the whole EU and including also the EEA countries and others. This 
is so because banks are and will be of high importance for the SME financing, and the future 
playing field may not become quite level in the SME financing in the future Capital Markets 
Union without some extra efforts. 
Moreover, for ensuring financial stability and capital market integration, the bank-sovereign-
nexus has to be in the future. The bank-sovereign-nexus is a two-sided problem. The nexus 
from  banks to  sovereigns  is  dampened through the  introduction  of  the  SRM  and  the  Bank 
Restructuring and Resolution Directive. However, the dampening of sovereign risks to banks 
has not been resolved yet. Up to now there have been some discussions about potential risk-
sensitive capital requirements regulation for sovereign bonds. That is s one way forward, but I 
would also support the five Presidents’ initiative to review the treatment of bank exposures to 
sovereign debt, for example by setting large exposures limits1. 
As I said in the beginning, well functioning integrated financial markets are invaluable for the 
real  economy  and  there  is  a  lot  of  preparation  underway.  As  you  all  here  present  are  in 
important, key positions in financial markets, I call for your active participation in and providing 
your valuable contribution to these consultations. With your input we can improve our work in 
creating deeper, more liquid, better integrated and increasingly safe capital markets. 
Thank you for your attention! 
 
                                                 
1  Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union. Report by Jean-Claude Juncker in close cooperation with 
Donald Tusk, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, Mario Draghi and Martin Schulz. European Commission, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  4 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
