  
 
Jwala Rambarran: Shiva’s wrath – Divali, creative destruction and central 
banking 
Speech by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  annual  Divali  celebrations,  Port-of-Spain, 
25 October 2015. 
 Sita Ram, good evening and a warm welcome to every one of you who graciously accepted 
our invitation to attend Central Bank’s 2015 Divali celebrations. 
This is the fourth year Central Bank has opened its Divali celebrations to the public in this 
noteworthy manner...and it’s truly our honour to give this valuable gift of art and culture to our 
country during the festive Divali season. 
In  2012,  when  we  started  these  more  engaging  Divali  celebrations  we  began  with  the 
traditional story of Lakshmi who is  easily associated with Divali, as she is the Goddess of 
Light and Prosperity. 
In 2013, we took a different approach. We realized there were themes  and lessons in  the 
Ramayana  that  were  very  applicable  to  the  Central  Bank. So,  we  chose  Hanuman  for  our 
Divali program. We highlighted how Central Bank, like Hanuman, is a faithful servant to the 
people of our country and how we diligently ensure their financial protection, no matter the 
size and ferocity of the Ravans (demons) we take on. 
Last  year,  we  continued  our  exploration  of  the  Ramayana,  staging  a  dance  performance 
entitled Paanch Kahani. It is Hindi for five stories. We selected five unusual stories from the 
Ramayana, each with a powerful message for central banking. 
The first story was about Shravan Kumar, a lesser celebrated character in the Ramayana, 
but  incidentally  the  entire  reason  the  epic  Ramayana  was  written.  His  life  was  one  of 
devotion to his parents and this is what led to his death and triggered the chain of events that 
is  the  Ramayana.  The  second  story  was  about  King  Dashrath  who  accidentally  killed 
Shravan Kumar but as king of Ayodhya was duty bound to keep his promise. The third and 
fourth  stories  are  about  Ram’s  brothers,  Bharat  and  Lakshman  who  personified  servant 
leadership  and  loyalty,  respectively.  The  final  story  was  about  Ram’s  twin  sons,  Luv  and 
Kush…representing the future. 
In  2015,  we  have  again  taken  a  different  path. Tonight,  we  present  Lord Shiva: Creative 
Destruction, a dance drama by Rana and Susan Mohip. “Creative Destruction” seems to be 
a  paradoxical  term.  At  first  blush,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  associated  with  the  universal 
message of Divali, the triumph of good over evil. Nor does it seem to be relevant to central 
banking and the economy. 
However, generations of economists have associated the term “Creative Destruction” with 
the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter who writing in the 1940s described capitalism as 
“the perennial gale of creative destruction”. It has become a shorthand description on how 
economies  evolve,  incessantly  destroying  old  jobs,  companies  and  industries,  incessantly 
creating new ones. 
Transportation  provides  a  dramatic  example  of  creative  destruction  at  work.  For  the  older 
generation, I am sure you remember how the bison carts were replaced by the train (not the 
Rapid  Rail)  which,  in  turn,  was  replaced  by  the  car.  But  all  of  this  creation  did  not  come 
without  destruction.  Each  new  mode  of  transportation  took  a  toll  on  existing  jobs  and 
industries…and will continue to do so. 
For  the  younger  generation,  the  concept  of  creative  destruction  might  seem  intuitive.  This 
generation  has  seen  laptops,  smartphones,  and  social  media  replace  typewriters,  fax 
machines,  and  newspapers.  They  have  seen  the  birth  of  the  Internet  spawn  the  need  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
hundreds of webmasters, an occupation that did not exist when I joined the Central Bank in 
1990, some 25 years ago. 
Herein  lies  the  paradox  of  progress.  A  society  cannot  reap  the  rewards  of  creative 
destruction  without  accepting  some  individuals  might  be  worse  off.  Trinidad  and  Tobago 
would do well to heed this lesson, as we strive to diversify the economy away from oil and 
gas at a time of falling energy prices. Economic diversification is about creative destruction. 
Diversification  means  creating  new  sources  of  foreign  exchange,  while  destroying  the 
industries that consume foreign exchange. Attempts to soften the harsher aspects of creative 
destruction by trying to preserve unsustainable jobs or protect uncompetitive industries will 
not advance our economic diversification process. 
So while economists associate the concept of creative destruction with Schumpeter, the idea 
itself is a very old one, well before Schumpeter. Going back further in time, the process of 
creation  and  destruction  plays  a  central  role  in  Hinduism.  Here  we  find  one  of  the  most 
complex and certainly one of the richest cosmological illustrations of the dynamics of creation 
and destruction. 
At the heart of Hinduism are the three supreme godheads of the pantheon: Brahma the Creator, 
Vishnu the Preserver and Shiva the Destroyer. Brahma creates the universe; Vishnu protects 
what comes into being; Shiva, in turn, is the destroyer of the universe, fated to destroy it as it 
winds down in order to bring about its regeneration. After Shiva finishes his work of destruction, 
Brahma, in turn, begins the creation of the universe: thus the cycle is infinite. 
Shiva is responsible for change both in the form of death and destruction. What does that 
mean?  Simply  put,  it  means  that  destruction  is  for  a  purpose.  It  is  not  annihilation,  but 
transformation. 
Tonight, you will see story of the birth of Lord Ganesh, which depicts Shiva both as creator 
and  destroyer.  Long  time  ago  when  Lord  Shiva,  was  away  fighting  for  the  gods,  Goddess 
Parvathi was alone at home on Mt. Kailash. On one occasion, she needed someone to guard 
the house when she was going for a bath. Unable to think of an alternative, she used her 
powers  to  create  a  son.  She  instructed  her  son  to  keep  strict  vigil  on  the  entrance  to  the 
house and not to allow anyone into the house. In due course, Shiva came home, only to find 
this strange boy telling him he couldn’t enter his own house. Furious, Shiva ordered his army 
to destroy the boy, but they all failed. 
This surprised Shiva. Seeing that this was no ordinary boy, Shiva decided he would have to 
fight him, and in his divine fury severed the boy’s head, killing him instantly. When Parvati 
learned  of  this,  she  was  so  enraged  and  insulted  that  she  decided  to  destroy  the  entire 
Creation. Lord Shiva having cooled down by this time, and realizing his mistake, attempted to 
pacify Parvati by agreeing to meet her two conditions: one, that her son be brought back to 
life, and two, that he be forever worshipped before all the other gods. 
Lord Shiva sent his soldiers out with orders to bring back the head of the first creature that 
came  in  sight  sleeping  with  its  head  to  the  north,  the  auspicious  direction  associated  with 
wisdom. They soon returned with the head of a strong and powerful elephant, which Shiva 
placed onto the boy’s body. Breathing new life into him, he declared the boy to be his first 
son, and gave him the status of being foremost among the gods. He was called Ganesh. 
The message is when we are too egotistical; the root problem must be cut. By cutting the 
head  of  the  boy  who  was  egotistical,  Shiva  was  cutting  the  root  problem  of  the  mind  that 
thinks  too  highly  of  itself.  Why  replace  the  boy’s  head  with  the  head  of  an  elephant?  The 
elephant  represents  both  Gyan  Shakti  and  Karma  Shakti.  The  large  head  of  the  elephant 
signifies  wisdom,  understanding  and  discriminating  intellect.  Elephants  don’t  walk  around 
obstacles, neither are they stopped by obstacles. By replacing the boy’s head with the head 
of an elephant, Lord Shiva replaced it with something that was beneficial to the world and for 
the betterment of the people. Although the birth of Lord Ganesh appeared to be destructive, 
it was indeed creative and would benefit everyone involved. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  message  associated  with  the  birth  of  Lord  Ganesh  has  relevance  for  us  here  at  the 
Central  Bank.  Our  power  and  authority  to  manage  the  financial  system  comes  from  the 
people of Trinidad and Tobago. We must exercise this great power without being egotistical. 
We must exercise our power in a fair and just manner, with knowledge of what actions are 
best for the overall health of Trinidad and Tobago’s economy. 
Tonight, we will also see another aspect of Shiva as both the creator and the destroyer. In 
this  capacity,  he  is  often  represented  as  the  Shiva  Nataraja,  the  Lord  of  the  Dance.  His 
Tandava  dance  is  the  dance  of  the  universe,  as  it  endlessly  moves  from  creation  to 
destruction, destruction to creation. 
Until recently, scientists considered the atom to be the fundamental particle in physics. We 
now  know  there  are  sub-atomic  particles;  some  make  up  matter  and  some  carry  forces. 
Movement  of  sub-atomic  particles  involves  a  set  rhythm.  This  is  called  Laya  in  Indian 
thought. Laya is the attribute of Shiva in his Tandava dance. The movement of these sub-
atomic particles creates energy. Where does this energy go? 
Well some of you may be familiar with the term “Big Bang” (and I am not talking about the 
CBS hit comedy with Leonard, Penny, Sheldon and the rest of the gang). I am talking about 
CERN  or  the  European  Organization  for  Nuclear  Research,  an  international  organization 
based  in  Geneva,  Switzerland.  Scientists  at  CERN  are  using  the  Large  Hadron  Collider 
(LHC),  the  most  powerful  particle  accelerator  on  the  planet,  to  recreate  the  primordial 
conditions  of  the  universe,  and  create  a  small  version  of  the  so-called  ‘big  bang’,  by 
smashing atoms at near-light speed. 
In July 2012, scientists at the CERN laboratory discovered the latest subatomic particle – the 
Higgs boson – named after the Nobel Prize winner in Physics Peter Higgs, and known by its 
nickname  the  “God  particle”  in  popular  media  outside  the  scientific  community.  The  Higgs 
boson is thought to give everything else in the universe mass and to keep the universe from 
destruction. It is part of Shiva’s Tandava dance. 
Is  it  a  coincidence  that  the  statue  in  front  of  the  CERN  complex  is  none  other  than  Shiva 
Nataraja – the dancing Shiva? For many modern physicists, Shiva’s Tandava dance is seen 
as the dance of subatomic matter. The Tandava thus unifies ancient mythology, religious art 
and modern physics. 
Here at the Central Bank, some would say that our monetary policy is similar to the Tandava 
dance, as we move our policy interest rate to destroy inflation, create the conditions for growth 
in the non-energy sector, and protect the foreign exchange market. Or they might even say that 
the  CLICO  crisis  has  been  a  process  of  creative  destruction,  with  the  pain  of  thousands  of 
policyholders making way for new and stronger insurance regulation and supervision. 
Two weeks ago, Professor Angus Deaton won the 2015 Nobel Prize in Economics. Professor 
Deaton has changed our thinking about world progress. His popular book The Great Escape: 
Health, Wealth and the Origins of Inequality, traces the ways the world has gotten better over 
the  last  250  years,  as  billions  of  people  have  become  healthier  and  happier  as  GDP  has 
grown.  But  he  notes  crises  can  interrupt  progress,  and  he  worries  about  the  millions  of 
people who are being left behind by this progress, especially in developed countries where 
inequality is growing and economic growth is slowing. Professor Deaton’s works reminds us 
that pain and gain are inextricably linked to creative destruction. 
Hopefully, you will leave here tonight with a greater appreciation of the message of Divali. 
Remember the act of lighting a deya is creative destruction, destroying evil and darkness and 
creating  a  new  opportunity  for  the  Satyam,  Shivam,  Sundaram  (Truth,  Goodness  and 
Beauty) of the universe to unfold. 
I wish you and your family Shubh Divali 2015. 
May your paths always be lit; may your minds always be illuminated. 
I hope you enjoy Lord Shiva: Creative Destruction. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
