   Benoît Cœuré: The international role of the euro – concepts, empirics 
and prospects 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at Saint Joseph University, Beirut, 2 October 2015. 
 I would like to thank Johannes Gräb and Arnaud Mehl for their contribution to the speech. I remain solely responsible 
for the opinions expressed herein. 
Introduction 
M. Dean, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Thank you for the opportunity to address you today and to testify to the trust and friendship 
between European institutions and Lebanon. 
The international use of the euro and the evolution of the international monetary system have 
attracted  renewed  interest  from  academics  and  policy-makers  alike  since  the  onset  of  the 
financial crisis. 
The euro is used not only as legal tender by the 340 million residents of the 19 euro area 
countries.1 It is used in private and official transactions outside the euro area, too. 
The euro is used inter alia to settle international transactions, to issue debt in international 
financial  markets  and  to  store  value  in  the  form  of  official  reserve  holdings  or  private 
international bank deposits. For instance, about 25% of foreign currency debt securities issued 
this year in Lebanon were in euro. The euro is well established as the second most important 
currency in the global monetary and financial system. 
That the euro could play an important role internationally, alongside the US dollar was, in fact, 
considered  by  some  observers  as  one  motivation  underlying  the  creation  of  the  single 
currency.2 I would not, however, regard this reason as the most important one: completing the 
single market was arguably the most important motivation, and promoting the international role 
of the euro is nowhere to be seen in the Treaty. 
Sixteen years after the euro’s creation, and seven years after the start of the global financial 
crisis, developments in the global monetary and financial system in general, and in the euro’s 
international status in particular, give rise to two related paradoxes. 
The first paradox is that the global economy has just been hit by the most severe shock since 
the Great Depression. The Great Depression led to the collapse of the gold standard. But the 
sub-prime crisis did not deter investors from holding US dollars, nor did the euro area crisis 
deter them from holding euros. The roles of the US dollar and the euro in the global monetary 
and  financial  system  remain  broadly  unaltered  across  various  dimensions  of  international 
currency use. 
The second paradox is that prospects of the evolution of the system towards greater multi-
polarity,  i.e.  a  system  in  which  the  US  dollar,  the  euro,  and  the  renminbi  would  all  play 
                                                
1  The euro also has legal tender status in smaller non-EU jurisdictions such as Monaco and San Marino, which 
are tied to the euro area by an exchange rate agreement. Montenegro and Kosovo have unilateral euroisation 
regimes. 
2  See Bergsten (1997) and Feldstein (1997) for a review of the debate. For instance, Bergsten stressed that “The 
creation of a single European currency will be the most important development since the adoption of flexible 
exchange rates in the 1970s. The dollar will have its first real competitor since it surpassed sterling” (Bergsten, 
1997, p. 83). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   significant roles, have been increasingly discussed by both academics and policy-makers. But, 
so far, the US dollar has remained clearly the leading international currency, with the euro a 
distant second, and the renminbi still lagging far behind. 
Solving  these  paradoxes  and  peering  into  the  future  requires  us  to  review  some  of  the 
conceptual and empirical issues that underlie international currency status. This is what I will 
be doing in my speech today. 
Theoretical definition and determinants 
1. 
Consider first the definition of an international currency and the theoretical determinants of 
international currency status. 
We have learned from Benjamin Cohen and Paul Krugman – who studied the cases of 
the pound sterling and the US dollar, respectively – that an international currency fulfils 
the standard Aristotelian functions of money (medium of exchange, store of value and 
unit  of  account)  for  private  and  official  transactions  between  residents  and  non-
residents.3 
An international currency can thus be a medium of exchange, for instance a vehicle to transact 
two other currencies in the foreign exchange market. It can be a store of value, for instance as 
the currency of denomination of financial assets held by central banks, sovereign wealth funds 
or  international  private  investors.  And  it  can  be  a  unit  of  account,  for  instance  to  invoice 
international transactions in goods and services, which will be particularly unsurprising in this 
country. 
The  Phoenicians,  who  owed  much  of  their  prosperity  to  international  trade,  were  after  all 
among the first peoples in antiquity to mint coins, which gained international status across the 
Mediterranean  world  and  the  Middle  East.  The  parallel  use  in  the  Achemenid  period  of 
Phoenician shekels and Athenian tetradrachms is an example of what would now be called a 
“multipolar international monetary system”.4 The European citizens can remember this period 
when looking at the image of Europa, daughter of the king of Tyre, which is featured in the new 
series of euro banknotes.5 
Economies  of  scope  suggest  that  these  functions  tend  to  reinforce  each  other.  But  an 
international currency does not need to fulfil all of them necessarily. For instance, the use of 
the Chinese renminbi as a store of value, i.e. in official foreign reserves and private financial 
holdings, or as a funding currency in international debt markets, remains limited to date, but it 
is already significant in the invoicing of international trade transactions.6 
Several determinants buttress the international status of a currency. 
One such determinant is inertia. In international currency use, inertia effects may have a 
variety of causes, including habit formation, sunk costs, network increasing returns or a lack 
of  credible  alternatives.  The  idea  that  these  effects  may  be  important  rests,  in  turn,  on  an 
observation based on the work by Robert Triffin, according to which there was a lag of more 
                                                
3  See Cohen (1971) and Krugman (1984). 
4  See Elayi and Elayi (1993). 
5  A Phoenician coin depicting Europa riding a bull was unearthed in 2012 by a British Museum team in Saida, 
Lebanon. 
6  The renminbi’s role as an international invoicing and settlement currency for China’s international trade grew 
rapidly from essentially nought in 2009 to 25% at the end of 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   than 70 years between the United States overtaking Britain as the largest economy (in 1870) 
and the US dollar overtaking sterling as the leading international currency (in 1945).7 
A number of recent studies have challenged this conventional wisdom, however. They use 
new data to show that the US dollar had already overtaken sterling in the mid-1920s. This 
suggests, in other words, that inertia effects are less strong than previously supposed and that 
the advantages of incumbency are not insurmountable.8 
Another determinant is economic size. The currencies of the largest economies in global 
output  and  trade,  with  the  deepest  and  most  liquid  financial  markets,  tend  to  be  used 
internationally. 
This is also what the historical record suggests. Sterling was the leading international currency 
in the 19th century when the UK was the world’s largest economy and the City of London the 
dominant financial centre. The dollar was the leading international currency in the 20th century 
when the United States was the world’s largest economy and New York the dominant financial 
centre.  Some  observers  argue  that  the  international  use  of  the  renminbi  will  increase  still 
further, as China’s economy grows larger, along with the roles of Shanghai and Hong Kong as 
financial centres.9 
This is also what theoretical models of random matching games predict, insofar as they see 
the emergence of international currencies as the solution to a “double coincidence of wants” 
problem.  The  incentive  of  an  agent  to  accept  the  currency  issued  by  a  particular  country 
depends on how often he or she trades with a resident from that country.10 
A third determinant of international currencies is credibility. Stable currencies, from an 
internal  and  external  perspective,  are  attractive  to  non-residents  as  stores  of  value.11  The 
ECB’s independence and its commitment to maintaining price stability in the euro area over 
the  medium  term  is  therefore  a  supportive  factor,  albeit  an  indirect  one,  in  the  euro’s 
international status. I doubt that a currency can gain international status if investors do not trust 
its issuing central bank to be free from political interference. 
Other policies can have a bearing on a currency’s international role. The rule of law and the 
enforcement of financial contracts support a currency’s role as medium of exchange and store 
of value. Financial market infrastructures contribute significantly to a currency’s liquidity, which 
is  a  key  determinant  of  its  international  standing.  Various  challenges  may  also  exist  in 
processing cross-border transactions. For example, the absence of common or interoperable 
technical standards leads to higher failure rates and costs. The recent setting up of renminbi 
clearing  arrangements  in  several  euro  area  financial  centres  will  facilitate  cross-border 
payments in euro and renminbi, with benefits for corporates and financial actors, both in the 
euro area and in China.12 The October 2013 currency swap agreement between the European 
Central Bank and the People’s Bank of China is based on this prospect. 
Capital  account  openness  and  regulatory  policies  more  broadly  are  important,  too. 
Given the economies of scale and network externalities arising from the international status of 
                                                
7  See Triffin (1960). 
8  See Eichengreen and Flandreau (2009), Chiţu, Eichengreen and Mehl (2014), Eichengreen, Chiţu and Mehl 
(forthcoming (a)). 
9  See e.g. Subramanian (2011). 
10  See Matsuyama, Kiyotaki and Matsui (1993) and Rey (2001). 
11  See Devereux and Shi (2013). 
12  See Coeuré (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   a  currency,  regulatory  changes  can  be  the  “push  factor”  from  one  equilibrium,  involving  a 
dominant currency, to a different equilibrium.13 
Recent developments 
II. 
Consider now the developments since the start of the global financial crisis. The roles played 
by the US dollar and the euro in the global monetary and financial system have remained 
broadly  unaltered  since  2007–2008,  despite  signs  of  a  gradual  ascent  of  the  Chinese 
renminbi. This was also true, albeit to a somewhat lesser extent, during the acute phase of the 
European sovereign debt crisis in 2011–2012. This stability testifies to the importance of inertia 
effects,  to  the  size  of  the  US  and  euro  area  economies,  to  their  deep  and  liquid  financial 
markets, and – well, if I dare say – to the credibility of their central banks’ policies. 
The  US  dollar  remains  the  leading  international  currency,  accounting  for  50  to  60%  of 
international  transactions  across  various  metrics  of  international  currency  use.  The  euro 
remains  the  second  most  important  currency  internationally,  accounting  for  20  to  25%  of 
transactions. Its role is particularly significant in countries neighbouring the euro area. All other 
currencies, the renminbi included, remain well behind the US dollar and the euro, although the 
rise  of the renminbi  as an  international  payment currency  –  which  reflects  the  leading  role 
played by China in global merchandise trade – is notable. 
There is therefore evidence that, despite the euro area crisis, economic players all over 
the world have maintained their confidence in the euro. And this holds true for the euro’s 
use as a reserve, financing and invoicing currency. 
At  constant  exchange  rates,  the  euro’s  share  of  global  foreign  exchange  reserves  has 
remained broadly unchanged since 2007–08. The decline in 2014 in the share of the euro at 
market exchange rates was a reflection of the depreciation of the euro. There is therefore no 
evidence that global foreign exchange reserve managers actively rebalanced their portfolios 
away from the euro in 2014, or in 2011–2012 for that matter. This year the euro has been 
increasingly used as a funding currency by international borrowers, owing to the historically 
low interest rates in the euro area. Investment-grade corporations in advanced economies, 
mainly the United States, were particularly active issuers of international bonds denominated 
in euro, whose proceeds are swapped back into dollars. In April 2015 Mexico became the first 
sovereign state to issue a bond denominated in euro with a maturity of 100 years.14 Moreover, 
the share of the euro as an invoicing or settlement currency for extra-euro area trade remained 
broadly  stable  again  last  year.  Finally,  the  euro  is  used  as  a  reference  currency  for  the 
anchoring of exchange rates, mainly in countries neighbouring the euro area and countries 
that have established special institutional arrangements with the EU or its Member States.15 
Welfare implications 
III. 
Those  are  the  recent  developments.  But  to  what  extent  do  they  matter?  What  are  the 
implications of international currency status? In other words, what are the benefits and costs? 
One starting point here is the striking diversity of policy positions towards currency 
internationalisation across countries and over time. In the 1970s, Germany and Japan 
maintained  tight  controls  and  regulatory  restrictions  to  limit  foreign  holdings  of  their 
                                                
13  Still now, capital controls in place in some emerging markets are believed to help explain the development of 
offshore  markets  in  their  currencies,  as  well  as  of  certain  financial  derivative  instruments,  such  as  non-
deliverable forward exchange rates. 
14  Similar evidence is presented in BIS (2015). 
15  With the exception of the countries participating in ERM II, the decision to use the euro as an anchor currency 
is a unilateral one and does not involve any commitment on the part of the ECB. The US dollar, on the other 
hand, continues to be widely used as an exchange rate anchor both in Asia and in Central and South America. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   in 
international  currency  status  also  creates  efficiency  gains 
currencies.16 In contrast, the United States has always been open to the international use of 
the dollar. China is now promoting the global role of the renminbi, an objective which it also 
uses as an anchor for domestic reforms.17 And the ECB’s position is one of neutrality. We view 
the international role of the euro as being primarily determined by market forces and we neither 
hinder nor promote it. 
One reason for such diverse approaches is that the benefits and costs of international currency 
status differ from country to country and are difficult to measure.18  
Take the benefits first. One benefit is seigniorage, i.e. interest-free loans to the issuing 
central  bank  from  non-residents  who  hold  the  international  currency.  In  the  current 
environment of low interest rates, this benefit is arguably very limited. 
financial 
But 
intermediation and lowers transaction costs. For instance, size and liquidity effects lead to 
the emergence of new financial market segments denominated in the international currency. 
Bid-ask spreads in wholesale and retail foreign exchange markets are lower for international 
currencies than for other currencies, and this phenomenon is self-reinforcing, which gives rise 
to the vehicle role of such currencies.19 
The “exorbitant privilege” – an immensely popular phrase, albeit one with somewhat 
mysterious origins, since it has been alternately ascribed to Charles de Gaulle, Valéry 
Giscard  d’Estaing  and  Jacques  Rueff  –  is  yet  another  benefit.  International  currency 
issuers can issue debt to non-resident investors at lower interest rates than other issuers (to 
the extent that the currency is perceived as safe and liquid) and moreover they can invest the 
proceeds  in  higher-yielding  foreign  assets.20  The  magnitude  of  this  differential  remains  a 
subject of heated debate, however. 
But  what  we  have  also  learned  since  the  global  financial  crisis  is  that  international 
currency  status  provides  partial  insulation  from  external  disturbances,  in  particular 
those arising from exchange rate movements. Recent studies suggest that exchange rate 
pass-through  to  import  prices  and  domestic  prices  declines  significantly,  even  at  distant 
horizons, if a significant share of imports of goods and services is invoiced in the domestic 
currency.21 
For  instance,  one  study  by  ECB  staff  found  an  economically  large  link  between  choice  of 
invoicing currency and exchange rate pass-through. According to the study, an increase in the 
share of the euro as an invoicing currency for extra-euro area imports of 10 percentage points 
lowers  the  degree  of  exchange rate  pass-through  to  import  prices  by  almost  7  percentage 
                                                
16  Japan moved on eventually to encourage the international role of the yen for some time. 
17  As  re-emphasized by  Premier  Li  Keqiang  on  9  September 2015  “The  continued devaluation  of  the  yuan  is 
definitely not conducive to the currency becoming internationalized. This is not our policy preference.” 
18  To paraphrase the first ECB Monthly Bulletin article on the international of the euro: “The list of potential benefits 
and costs for euro area residents is for the time being of a rather speculative, forward-looking nature. Many 
benefits  are  difficult 
(Monthly  Bulletin,  August  1999,  p.  43; 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/p.31_53_mb199908en.pdf). 
to  measure  with  precision.” 
19  See Krugman (1980). 
20  Gourinchas et al. (2010) estimate that the United States earned a positive return differential on its external 
balance sheet of about 2% per year in real terms over the period 1952–2009; other studies find smaller effects. 
Moreover, it can be disputed as to whether this “privilege” also holds for countries with a currency with a status 
less important than the US dollar. 
21  For instance, Gopinath, Itskhoki and Rigobon (2010) find large differences in the extent of long-run exchange 
rate pass-through to US import prices between US dollar-priced goods (25%) and non-US dollar-priced goods 
(95%). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   internationalisation  may  generate  costs,  too. 
points.22 This might be particularly relevant in circumstances when importing deflation might 
create risks to price stability over the medium term. 
At the same time, low pass-through may exacerbate real exchange rate volatility as relative 
prices adjust less strongly, thereby failing to dampen movements in the nominal exchange 
rate. International currency status may therefore partly hamper the benefits of having a flexible 
exchange rate. 
Currency 
It  may  make  monetary 
developments more difficult to interpret, with shifts in non-resident demand for banknotes and 
deposits  having  a  direct  impact  on  money  aggregates.  It  may  complicate  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy if money demand and capital flows become unstable as a result of external 
shocks, as the experiences of the Deutsche Mark and the Swiss franc after the demise of the 
Bretton Woods system starkly illustrate. 
The outbreak of the global financial crisis has even added some new dimensions to the debate. 
One cost which has now become more apparent is the “exorbitant duty” of international 
currency  issuers,  the  flipside  of  “exorbitant  privilege”.  International  currency  issuers 
provide insurance to the rest of the world in times of global financial market stress, which gives 
rise to potentially large financial transfers between economies.23 
Moreover, we are now even more aware than in the past that with international currency 
status come greater responsibilities and challenges at the international and domestic 
level. 
At the international level, one challenge is about global liquidity risk. For instance, central banks 
in  major  advanced  economies  have  been  called  upon  by  emerging  markets  to  establish  a 
structured network of currency swap agreements to mitigate the risks of international currency 
liquidity shortages. Such agreements are however possible to the extent that they are in line 
with the domestic mandate of the central bank of issue, i.e. in case of concerns that liquidity 
stress in global markets could materially impair the pursuit of domestic policy goals. Further 
progress in global and regional financial safety nets would help overcome this limitation. 
At the domestic level, another challenge is about foreign exchange risk. In this respect, the 
marked rise in foreign currency-denominated borrowing since the financial crisis, in particular 
in US dollars and more recently also in euro, could lead to increased demand for currency 
swap agreements. Currency mismatches may create financial stability risks in some emerging 
market economies in the event of a significant appreciation of the international currency, and 
the  central  bank  of  issue  may  be  called  to the rescue  as  “hedger  of  last  resort”  of foreign 
currency risk, which falls clearly outside of its domestic mandate.24 
Prospects 
IV. 
Let us go back to where we started and refocus our attention on the future. That the roles of 
the US dollar and the euro have remained broadly stable since the global financial crisis is one 
                                                
22  See Gräb and Lafarguette (2015) and ECB (2015). 
23  As argued by Gourinchas et al. (2010), this is epitomised, for example, by the fact that the decline in the value 
of US external asset holdings was more sizeable than the decline in the value of foreigners’ holdings in the 
United States in the period 2007–09 (the net foreign position of the United States worsened by 19% of GDP). 
This arose because of strong valuation effects that occurred after the sharp appreciation of the dollar in the 
wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
24  Exiting from currency mismatches is not easy either. The statutory conversion of FX loans may result in a decline 
in international reserves, entail financial costs for the banking sector, and raise concerns for macroeconomic 
and  financial  stability.  See  the  ECB  Opinions  on  the  conversion  of  foreign  exchange  loans  in  Hungary 
(CON/2014/87), Poland (CON/2015/26), and Croatia (CON/2015/32). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   thing, but whether or not the global monetary and financial system will remain frozen in its 
current state is quite another. 
In  particular,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  global  monetary  and  financial  system  could 
become more multi-polar in the years ahead in the light of the growing global importance of 
the Chinese renminbi. 
As we have learned, historical evidence suggests that a multi-polar system is feasible. 
For instance, while half of identified foreign exchange reserve holdings in 1913 were in sterling, 
holdings of French francs and German marks were substantial.25 Even in cases as extreme as 
markets for homogeneous goods, such as the oil market, where network effects are believed 
to  be  so  strong  as  to  naturally  lead  to  the  dominance  of  one  settlement  currency, multiple 
currencies were used in the past. European oil import settlements around World War II, for 
instance, were split evenly between the dollar and non-dollar currencies, mainly sterling.26 
But,  from  a  normative  standpoint,  is  a  possible  evolution  towards  multi-polarity 
desirable? 
Some view it with concern.27 They fear that a multipolar currency system would increase 
global  financial  instability.  They  argue  that  the  likelihood  of  self-fulfilling  runs  on  reserve 
currencies would increase, insofar as investors could switch more easily from one currency to 
another, seeking to convert their holdings first for fear of suffering losses down the line.28 These 
concerns might be overblown, however. First, the extent of price adjustments would depend 
significantly on the degree of substitutability between reserve assets and on whether reserve 
currencies would be seen by investors as substitutes or complements. Second, official reserve 
managers have a longer time horizon than private market participants and are therefore more 
likely to act as stabilising rather than destabilising investors.29 Third, the sub-prime and euro 
area  crises  showed  that,  even  when  large  shocks  occur  in  reserve-issuing  countries, 
rebalancing in reserve portfolios may remain limited. 
Others argue, in contrast, that multi-polarity would create global benefits. They argue 
that it would help address potential shortages in global safe assets to the extent that their 
supply could respond more elastically to the growing needs of the global economy and to the 
demand  from  emerging  market  economies.  They  argue  that  it  would  have  a  stronger 
disciplinary effect on the policies of reserve currency issuers, which would need to address 
swiftly any worsening in their fundamentals in the face of competitive pressures created by the 
existence of other reserve currency issuers. 
In any case, from a positive standpoint, a possible evolution towards multi-polarity is a likely 
evolution,  given  the  increasing  importance  of  emerging  market  economies  in  the  global 
economy. 
Finally, the  question  remains  of  how the  euro’s international role will  develop. In  an 
evolving  global  monetary  and  financial  landscape,  the  euro’s  international  status  will  be 
determined primarily by market forces, although European authorities may indirectly contribute 
to it, too, as I will now explain. 
                                                
25  At 31% and 15%, respectively. See Lindert (1969) and the discussion in Eichengreen (2014). 
26  See Eichengreen, Chiţu and Mehl (forthcoming (b)). 
27  See Fahri, Gourinchas and Rey (2011) for a review of the debate as well as Eichengreen (2010) and Bénassy-
Quéré and Cœuré (2010). 
28  Bénassy-Quéré and Forouheshfar (2015) show that a transitory shock to the current account has less impact 
on exchange rates when more currencies are international in the sense that they are present in international 
portfolios. The reason is that the impact of wealth transfers arising from the current account shock is spread 
over a larger number of currencies. 
29  See Eichengreen (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   
The euro area crisis exposed weaknesses in economic governance and uncovered fault 
lines  in  European  capital  markets.  Paradoxically,  it  may  have  improved  the  euro’s 
prospects as an international currency. Completing our Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU) in the spirit of the Five Presidents’ Report may have indirect consequences for 
the euro’s international status.30 Deeper and better connected European capital markets, 
and moving towards genuine financial  union, may  buttress  the  depth  and  liquidity  of these 
markets and, as an indirect result, buttress the euro’s international role. 
In the light of this, a stronger international role for the euro, while not being an objective per 
se, would be an indicator not only of the continued confidence of the rest of the world in the 
single currency and in the euro area, but also of the success of the EU in completing EMU. 
And vis-à-vis the latter outcome the ECB is definitely not neutral. 
Mr. Dean, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2015), “Highlights of global financing flows”, BIS Quarterly 
Review, September, pp. 17–34. 
Bénassy-Quéré, A., and B. Cœuré (2010), “Le rôle international de l’euro : chronique d’une 
décennie”, Revue d’économie politique 120, pp. 357–377. 
Bénassy-Quéré, A., and Y. Forouheshfar (2015), “The impact of yuan internationalization on 
the stability of the international monetary system”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 
57, pp. 115–135. 
Bergsten, F. (1997), “The dollar and the euro,” Foreign Affairs 76, pp. 83–95. 
Chiţu, L., B. Eichengreen and A. Mehl (2014), “When did the dollar overtake sterling as the 
leading  international  currency?  Evidence  from  the  bond  markets”,  Journal  of  Development 
Economics 111, pp. 225–245. 
Cœuré,  B.  (2014),  “Taking  stock  of  the  global  role  of  the  renminbi”,  Speech  by  Mr  Benoît 
Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  European-
Chinese Banking Day, Frankfurt am Main, 17 November 2014. 
Cohen, B. (1971), The future of sterling as an international currency, London: Macmillan. 
Devereux,  M.  and  S.  Shi  (2013),  “Vehicle  currency”,  International  Economic  Review  54, 
pp. 97–133. 
Eichengreen,  B.  (2010),  “A  World  of  Multiple  Reserve  Currencies”,  Project  Syndicate, 
20 October 2010. 
Eichengreen, B. (2014), “International currencies past, present and future: Two views from 
economic history”, Bank of Korea WP 2014–31. 
Eichengreen, B., L. Chiţu and A. Mehl, “Stability or upheaval? The currency composition of 
international reserves in the long run”, IMF Economic Review, forthcoming (a). 
                                                
30  The ECB’s annual reports on the international role of the euro released in July 2013 and July 2014 showed that 
the euro area sovereign debt crisis had weighed on the international use of the euro, which declined in 2011–
2012 due to the fragmentation of the euro area financial system that affected euro area capital markets’ depth 
and liquidity. After policy measures were taken at both the European and the national level to reduce the degree 
of financial fragmentation, there were signs of a turnaround in the international use of the euro in 2013. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Eichengreen,  B.,  L.  Chiţu  and  A.  Mehl,  “Network  effects,  homogeneous  goods,  and 
international  currency  choice:  New  evidence  on oil  markets from  an  earlier  era”,  Canadian 
Journal of Economics, forthcoming (b). 
Eichengreen, B. and M. Flandreau (2009), “The rise and fall of the dollar, or when did the dollar 
replace sterling as the leading reserve currency?”, European Review of Economic History 13, 
pp. 377–411. 
Elayi, J. and Elayi, A.G. (1993), Trésors de monnaies phéniciennes et circulation monétaire 
(Ve-IVe siècle avant J.-C.). Supplément n°1 à Transeuphratène, Paris. 
European Central Bank (2015), The international role of the euro, Frankfurt am Main. 
Fahri, E., Gourinchas, P.O. and Rey, H. (2011), Reforming the international monetary system, 
CEPR, London. 
Feldstein, M. (1997), “EMU and international conflict”, Foreign Affairs 76, pp. 60–73. 
Friedman, M. (1969), “The euro-dollar market: some first principles”, Selected Papers, No. 34, 
Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago. 
Gopinath, G., Itskhoki, O. and Rigobon, R. (2010) “Currency choice and exchange rate pass-
through”, American Economic Review 100(1), pp. 304–336. 
Gourinchas, P.-O., Rey, H and Govillot, N. (2010), “Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty”, 
IMES Discussion Paper, No 2010-E-20, Tokyo. 
Gräb, J. and Lafarguette, R. (2015), Differences in exchange rate pass-through in the euro 
area: The role of currency invoicing, European Central Bank, mimeo, Frankfurt am Main. 
Krugman, P. (1980), “Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange”, Journal 
of Money, Credit and Banking 12, pp. 513–526. 
Krugman, P. (1984), “The international role of the dollar: theory and prospect”, in John Bilson 
and  Richard  Marston  (eds.),  Exchange  Rate  Theory  and  Practice,  Chicago:  University  of 
Chicago Press, pp. 261–278. 
Lindert, P. (1969), “Key currencies and gold, 1900–1913”, Princeton Studies in International 
Finance,  No.24,  International  Finance  Section,  Department  of  Economics,  Princeton 
University. 
Matsuyama, K., N. Kiyotaki and A. Matsui (1993), “Toward a theory of international currency”, 
Review of Economic Studies 60, pp. 283–307. 
Rey, H. (2001), “International trade and currency exchange”, Review of Economic Studies 68, 
pp. 443–464. 
Subramanian, A. (2011), “Renminbi rules: The conditional imminence of the reserve currency 
Transition”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 11–14. 
Triffin,  R.  (1960),  Gold  and  the  dollar  crisis:  The  future  of  convertibility,  New  Haven:  Yale 
University Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
