  Mario Draghi: Cross-border markets and common governance 
Luncheon speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Bank 
of England Open Forum, London, 11 November 2015. 
Summary 
 Cross-border markets and common governance 
Markets have never been more integrated than they are today. In the case of Europe, we 
benefit from open markets because we need to be able to invest abroad part of the savings 
that  will  finance  our  pensions.  The  European  Union  embodies  the  principle  of  an  open 
market economy in its Treaties. 
But  to  reap the  benefits  of  openness  markets  need  appropriate  governance.  For  example, 
people  need  confidence  that  contracts  entered  into  will  be  enforced.  Fair  rules  on 
competition,  property  rights  and  the  rule  of  law  are  essential.  For  financial  markets  this  is 
especially important given their inherent fragility. 
Regulations need to be sufficiently sound to preserve the integrity of the market but not so 
taxing  as  to  suffocate  it.  To  be  true  sources  of  opportunity,  markets  need  policing.  This 
makes the market a political construct. In a true market, one that is both open and free, there 
exists at the level of the whole market the three branches of government: legislative, judiciary 
and executive. 
It is well understood by all that a genuine single market in Europe has to be buttressed by 
appropriate and credible institutions. But political sovereignty and the market do not perfectly 
overlap  so  the  question  in  Europe  is  which  institutions  are  most  appropriate  to  uphold  as 
much freedom of the market as possible for different members. 
The single currency increases the benefits of a single market but also heightens the degree 
of  mutual  vulnerability  to  which  member  countries  are  exposed.  National  policymakers 
cannot  fully  protect  their  citizens  from financial  instability  without  pooling  more  sovereignty 
over  decision-making.  Countries  that  share  a  single  market  and  a  single  currency  need 
deeper institutional integration. 
The  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  an  example  of  this.  A  single  supervisor,  applying 
homogenous  methodologies,  internalises  mutual  trust.  The  case  is  clear  that  completing 
banking  union  is  a  priority, with  a  fully  equipped  single  resolution  mechanism  and  uniform 
deposit insurance scheme. 
Cross  border  markets  create  a  community  of  interest  from  which  each  member  stands  to 
benefit. But they also heighten shared exposure to the potential detriment of all, so they need 
governance. This is true at the global level and the European level. It is even more true for 
countries  sharing  the  single  currency.  For  them,  it  is  even  more  important  to  complete 
economic and monetary union in all its aspects. 
 Markets  can  be  defined  by  the  instruments  that  are  traded  on  them:  oil,  gold,  foreign 
exchange,  interest  rates.  But  they  are  also  defined  by  the  people  who  use  them.  A 
marketplace brings together people who, by virtue of trading with each other, share common 
interests.  It  forms  a  community.  And  as  for  all  communities,  the  protection  of  each  of  its 
members against potential abuse by others requires appropriate governance. 
This raises a particular issue for those markets that extend across national borders. It is that 
issue which forms the topic of my remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  facilitated  by 
is  ever  more 
technological  progress,  making 
The benefits of cross-border markets 
1. 
Cross-border markets are a fact of contemporary life. There have of course been periods of 
high integration of global trade and finance in the past – the decades immediately preceding 
World War I were a particularly stark example. But markets have never been more integrated 
than they are today. 
Trade 
the 
integration 
transportation of goods easier and faster; and by the fact that, in a digital age, a rising share 
of  services  in  global  output  makes  the  distance  on  the  ground  between  producers  and 
consumers less of an obstacle to transactions. 
That is why global integration of trade1 has risen sharply from 39% of GDP in 2000 to 48% in 
2014. For the euro area, trade openness has increased from 58% to 66% of GDP over the 
same period. 
The  same  applies  to  finance,  too  –  and  perhaps  all  the  more  so.  Capital  can  be  shipped 
across vast distances at virtually no cost. And there are good reasons why we should want in 
principle to facilitate cross-border investments. 
Financial markets intermediate between the needs of savers and borrowers; they open up a 
range  of  opportunities  to  both,  thereby  supporting  innovation;  and  they  allow  risks  to  be 
shared among those more willing or better equipped to bear them. All of this applies across 
borders as well as within borders. 
Let me give you an example. Countries, just like individuals, have different needs for capital 
at  different  stages  of  their  demographic  lifecycle.  Those  with  young  demographics  exhibit 
demand  for  capital  from  overseas,  while  countries  with  more  mature  populations  have 
excess  savings  as  they  accumulate  assets  for  retirement.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  our 
demographics would justify a moderate current account surplus and capital account deficit. 
Put differently, we benefit from open markets because we need to be able to invest abroad 
part of the savings that will finance our pensions.2 
For all these reasons, the belief that open markets are conducive to freeing human potential, 
expanding opportunities, and improving well-being is a fundamental principle upon which our 
societies are built. 
In  the  case  of  the  European  Union,  the  principle  of  an  “open  market  economy  with  free 
competition,  favouring  an  efficient  allocation  of  resources”,  is  inscribed  in  those  terms  in 
Article  120  of  the  Treaties.  It  is  also  explicitly  recalled  in  the  Statute  of  the  ECB  that 
everything we do has to be consistent with that principle. 
Why a free market depends on appropriate institutions 
2. 
But  it  is  not  enough  just  to  open  borders  to  have  free  markets.  To  reap  the  benefits  of 
openness, markets require appropriate governance. 
Indeed,  a  market  stipulates  not  just  the  freedom  to  take  part  in  the  market,  but  also  the 
means to protect that freedom. That means the confidence that contracts entered into will be 
enforced.  It  means  the  assurance  that  the  rules  of  fair  competition  will  be  upheld,  that 
property rights will be respected, that standards and codes will be applied properly. It means, 
in short, the Rule of Law. 
                                                
1  Defined as the sum of world total exports and imports to GDP. 
2  There are, of course, many other reasons for net capital flows. For example, one would expect capital to flow 
from richer to poorer and less capital-intensive areas. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  financial  markets  this  is  especially  important  given  their  inherent  fragility.  If  rules  and 
standards  are  not  effectively  applied,  it  can  produce  information  asymmetries  and  other 
destabilising forces which, in turn, lead to sudden reversals of confidence in the market. We 
have seen in the past how markets have run ahead of regulation leaving them vulnerable to 
such dynamics. 
Here  is  one  illustration:  during  the  crisis,  the  market  for  securitised  assets  was  all  but 
destroyed by a collapse of confidence. Lack of oversight allowed excesses to be committed 
and market abuse to take place. Securities that were previously deemed safe, certainly with 
some measure of complacency and too much blind confidence, turned out to be very unsafe 
indeed, and imparted significant losses on their holders. 
What  is  also  unfortunate  is  that  the  subsequent  attempts  to  re-regulate  that  market  have 
threatened to undermine the parts that are beneficial to many. There was too much opacity 
as  to  the  nature  of  the  assets  underpinning  asset-backed  securities,  too  damaging  a 
breakdown  of  confidence  in  the  integrity  of  those  who  packaged  and  sold  them.  And  the 
immediate temptation of regulators was to impose punishing capital charges on holdings of 
asset-backed securities, independent of their individual characteristics, mixing the wheat with 
the chaff. 
But  securitisation  in  itself  is  a  useful  financial  tool.  It  allows  the  diversifying  of  sources  of 
funding  for  many  borrowers  who,  otherwise,  would  have  no  access  to  capital  markets.  It 
allows  the  opening  up  of  new  channels  of  finance  for  the  real  economy.  And  it  can  allow 
cushioning  the  impact  on  the  supply  of  credit  that  would  otherwise  result  from  bank 
deleveraging. 
In this context, the ECB and the Bank of England took a joint initiative to promote and garner 
recognition  for  high-quality,  transparent  forms  of  securitisation.  This  was  useful  in  several 
ways: first, it sent a clear message to the private sector that key public-sector participants in 
ABS  markets  were  not  abandoning  these  assets,  which  had  been  lagging  in  terms  of 
issuance  volumes  and  liquidity.  Second,  it  signalled  to  other  policymakers  that  all  ABSs 
should not be tarred with the same brush. Third, it created a basis for additional coordination 
between  our  two  institutions  which,  in  an  era  of  increasingly  cross-border  regulation,  is 
crucial to avoid loopholes and inconsistencies. 
This experience with securitisation, then, was an example of what appropriate governance 
means: having regulations that are sufficiently sound to preserve the integrity of the market, 
but not so taxing as to suffocate it. That is why I said that free markets stipulate not just the 
right  to  take  part,  but  also  the  means  to  protect  that  freedom.  To  be  true  sources  of 
opportunity, and to protect the interests of those who use them, they need policing. And that 
makes the market, inevitably, a political construct. 
Consider the case of markets that are truly open – by which I mean, as open as the Single 
Market of the European Union, where internal frontiers have been abolished entirely, where 
passporting of services across the entire EU is a right, not a privilege. 
In  this  situation,  national  governments,  or  national  courts  of  law,  cannot  alone  provide  full 
protection to their citizens against abuse of property rights or any form of unfair competition 
that may arise from abroad. Nor can they alone protect the rights of their citizens to carry out 
business  abroad  unimpeded  by  protectionist  restrictions.  For  the  market  to  be  truly  free, 
there needs to exist a judiciary power that can enforce the Rule of Law on all, everywhere. It 
has to have jurisdiction across the entire market. 
A judiciary power implements the law, so there must then also exist a legislative power that 
writes the laws that govern the market in the first place. And in turn, if there exist a legislative 
and a judiciary, and if they are to have any effect, there must exist an executive power to 
enforce their decisions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  What this shows is that a true market, one that is both open and free, requires the existence 
of,  at  the  level  of  the  whole  market,  the  three  branches  of  government.  That  makes  it  an 
eminently political construct. 
There is nothing particularly novel or controversial in this statement. Consider for instance, 
the considerable amount of US legislation and the powers of its government that stem from 
the very short clause of the US Constitution – the commerce clause – that grants Congress 
authority  “to  regulate  commerce  with  foreign  nations,  and  among  the  Several  States,  and 
with the Indian Tribes”. And I think it is well understood by all in Europe that a genuine Single 
Market has to be buttressed by appropriate and credible institutions. 
But  what  is  different  from  the  US,  of  course,  is  that  in  our  case  the  area  of  political 
sovereignty and the area of the market do not perfectly overlap, and within the market there 
are some countries that share a currency and others that do not. The question then becomes 
which institutions are most appropriate to uphold as much freedom of the market as possible 
for different members. 
Lessons from the crisis for cross-border market governance 
3. 
For countries that are part of the Single Market and that also share a single currency, as in 
the  euro  area,  it  is  clear  that  a  fully  integrated  banking  and  capital  market  and  a  higher 
degree of institutional integration to protect that market is of great importance. This is for two 
reasons. 
First, as the vast majority of money is issued by private banks – bank deposits – there can 
only be a single currency if there is a single banking system. For money to be truly one, it 
has to be truly fungible independent of its form and independent of its location. That requires 
stronger  common governance  of  the  banking  sector  in  countries that  share  a currency,  so 
that bank deposits inspire the same level of confidence wherever they are located. 
Second,  sharing  a  single  currency  heightens  the  degree  of  mutual  vulnerability  to  which 
member  countries  are  exposed.  The  potential  spillovers  of  a  breakdown  of the market  are 
much stronger, not least because countries do not have their own exchange rate to “bottle 
up”  cross-border  capital  flows.  National  policymakers  cannot  therefore  fully  protect  their 
citizens  from  financial  instability  without  pooling  more  sovereignty  over  decision-making  at 
the level of the market. Let me again illustrate what I mean with an example. 
Before the crisis, the banking market in the euro area relied on the home supervision, host 
recognition model. Under this model, confidence that standards of supervision were broadly 
equal relied on mutual trust between supervisors. That trust, however, was weakened by the 
crisis, causing finance to retreat behind national borders. This manifested in some countries 
as  a  “sudden  stop”  of  capital  flows,  and  the  resulting  financial  fragmentation  led  to  the 
transmission of the single monetary policy being impaired in those areas. 
The creation of the Single Supervisory  Mechanism, which started operations just over one 
year ago, was in part a response to that problem. A single supervisor, applying homogenous 
methodologies,  internalises  mutual  trust.  And  this  not  only  provides  greater  protections for 
citizens, but also brings substantial benefits to member countries. Their financial institutions 
can fully exploit economies of scale within the single market, without having to contend with 
different interpretations of rules or different supervisory regimes. 
In sum, with a single currency the benefits of a single market are commensurately higher. 
But the costs of the market fragmenting are commensurately higher, too. For countries that 
share a single currency and a single market, therefore, the case is clear – I would say almost 
undeniable  – for  stronger  common governance  and  deeper  institutional  integration. Today, 
that  means  as  a  priority  completing  banking  union:  a  fully-equipped  single  resolution 
mechanism and a uniform deposit insurance scheme. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The question of how to safeguard mutual trust is inevitably more complex at a global level. 
There is no political entity that coincides with the global market, like in the European Union, 
that would allow the creation of institutions at the level of the market to enforce the rules – at 
least not in a way that would be politically legitimate and accountable to the community they 
serve. And this inevitably does not allow as fully open and irreversible a market as we have 
within the EU. 
This  issue  of  the  legitimacy  of  global  governance  was  highlighted  recently  by  the  interest 
shown by legislative bodies, the US Congress and the European Parliament in particular, for 
the work carried out under the aegis of international bodies such as the Basel Committee for 
Banking Supervision of the Financial Stability Board, which Mark Carney chairs. 
Yet,  we  need  global  standards  and  rules  to  uphold  the  freedom  and  openness  of  global 
capital markets. And if they are enforced in ways which are not comparable, then it may not 
allow for the mutual trust that is pivotal to opening up borders. 
The solution we have adopted so far is, I think, broadly the right one: to work as much as 
possible  within  the  framework  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  FSB  was 
established precisely to take forward the design of post-crisis financial reforms in a way that 
would  be  properly  co-ordinated  –  both  geographically  and  across  industry  sectors.  It  has 
helped deliver a set of reforms that have levelled the international playing field much more 
than before. In that sense, I think it has struck the right balance between enforcement and 
legitimacy. 
But  it  is  not  my  purpose  here  to  discuss  in  depth  the  merits  of  such  committees,  which  I 
believe are a matter of common wisdom. My purpose is to raise only the following point: that 
the more we want borders to be open, the more we recognise also the potential of integrated 
markets to produce financial contagion, spillovers and in some cases financial instability, the 
more we need to have global institutions to regulate those markets. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Cross-border  markets  create  a  community  of  interest  from  which  each  member  stands  to 
benefit. But they also heighten shared exposure to the potential detriment of all. For markets 
to be truly free, therefore, they need governance. 
This is true at the global level and it is true at the European level. But it is even more true for 
countries  that  share  a  single  market  and  a  single  currency.  Those  countries  have  entered 
into an irrevocable union, built on the fertile ground of Europe’s common values and history, 
but  also  on  deep  mutual  vulnerability.  For  those  countries  it  is  even  more  important  to 
complete economic and monetary union in all its aspects. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
