  Minouche Shafik: The interaction of monetary and macroprudential 
policy 
Speech by Ms Minouche Shafik, Deputy Governor for Markets and Banking of the Bank of 
England,  at  the  IMF  panel  on  “Revisiting  Monetary  Policy  Frameworks”,  Lima,  10  October 
2015. 
 I would like to thank David Aikman, Angus Foulis, Grellan McGrath and Alex Varadi for input to the preparation of 
these remarks and Don Kohn for comments on an early draft. 
      through  a  credit  cycle 
The  “lean  or  clean”  debate  used  to  be  one  of  the  most  contentious  in  monetary 
policy  until  the  crisis.  Should  monetary  policy  “lean  against  the  wind”  in  the 
expansion  phase  of  the  credit  cycle?  Or  should  it  remain  solely  focused  on 
delivering  the  inflation  target  and  “clean  up”  after  the  credit  cycle  contracts?  The 
crisis taught us that cleaning up afterwards is a very expensive proposition. But are 
we  confident  enough  in  macroprudential  tools  to  prevent  the  emergence  of 
unmanageable risks during the credit cycle? The debate remains very much live, in 
part  because  macro-prudential  policies  are  still  nascent  and  we  have  not  yet 
accumulated  sufficient  evidence 
to  make  definitive 
judgements about optimal policy. “Lean versus macropru” remains an area in which 
perfectly reasonable people can have very different opinions. 
At one end of the spectrum there are those – such as Lars Svensson – who argue 
that  the  cost-benefit  calculus  is  likely  to  be  tilted  heavily  away  from  directing 
monetary  policy  at  credit  bubbles.  At  the  other end  of the  debate  there  are  those 
such  as  Jeremy  Stein  who  argue  for  the  active  use  of  monetary  policy  to  lean 
against  the  wind  because  it  “gets  in  all  the  cracks.”  Or  Jaime  Caruana  and  his 
colleagues at the BIS who argue that it would be appropriate for advanced economy 
monetary policy to begin to normalise in order to head off emerging macroprudential 
risks. 
I will aim to show that there are merits to elements of all of these arguments. But 
where  the  institutional  set  up  and  full  spectrum  of  macro-prudential  tools  are 
available,  there  is  strong  case  for  using  monetary  policy  only  as  a  last  resort  for 
tackling financial stability risks. I will try to illustrate this argument with experience 
from the UK. 
Let  me  start  with  a  simple  question:  can  monetary  policy  be  used  to  lean 
against the wind? The answer to that question is “yes”, because monetary policy 
and  macroprudential  policy  both  affect  financial  conditions  and  clearly  have 
implications for one another. 
To illustrate the implications of monetary policy for macroprudential policy, consider 
the example of Hong Kong, where the unusually low interest rates since 2009 (as a 
result of their peg to the US dollar) have fuelled sharply rising prices across a range 
of  residential  and  commercial  properties  (He  2014).  Attempts  to  attenuate  the 
financial  stability  risks 
targeted 
macroprudential  measures  resulted  in  a  large  number  of measures  being  applied, 
even  including  LTV  restrictions  on  stand-alone  car  parking  spaces,  to  which  the 
boom had spread. 
If loose monetary policy can lead to a build up  of financial stability risks, then the 
converse must also be true – tighter monetary policy can be used as a means of 
reducing  financial  stability  risks.  Most  empirical  estimates  show  that  a  temporary 
tightening  of  monetary  policy  can  be  expected  to  reduce  real  debt  levels  –  and 
this  broad  property  price  boom  with 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      2 
  hence  the  probability  of  crisis  –  by  discouraging  households  and  firms  from 
increasing leverage in the medium term, even if the transmission (through reduced 
aggregate demand and a higher interest burden) involves a short-run move in the 
opposite direction (for example, Goodhart and Hofman (2008)). 
This  was  recognised  in  the  design  of  the  UK  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s  2013 
guidance  that  it  intended  to  maintain  a  highly  accommodative  stance  of  monetary 
policy  until  economic  slack  had  been  substantially  reduced.  Recognising  the 
financial  stability  risks  that  could  emanate  from  a  commitment  to  maintain  low 
interest rates, the MPC set a “knockout” whereby their guidance would cease to hold 
if the Financial Policy Committee judged that the stance of monetary policy poses a 
significant threat to financial stability that could not be contained by the combination 
of macro and micro prudential policy tools available. 
What about the more difficult question of whether monetary policy should be 
used to lean against the wind. The answer is a more obfuscating “that depends.” 
Specifically,  it  depends on  the  efficiency  and  efficacy  of the macroprudential  tools 
and institutional framework available, a point eloquently made by my colleague Don 
Kohn recently (Kohn 2015). 
Take  the  extreme  case  in  which  there  are  no  macroprudential  tools.  In  such 
circumstances  monetary  policy  may  be  the  only  means  of  tackling  system-wide 
financial  risks,  but  it  would  come  at  the  cost  of  significant  effects  on  the  real 
economy – precisely because monetary policy “gets in all the cracks.” For example, 
some empirical work by former Deputy Governor Charlie Bean suggests that setting 
Bank  Rate  around  200  basis  points  higher  than  it  was  over  the  over  the  period 
2003–2006 would have reduced the growth in the ratio of household debt to GDP by 
just 2 percentage points from 2003–2007 at a cost of GDP growth over this period 
being 2.6 percentage points lower (Bean et al 2010). 
By  contrast,  the  targeted  nature  of  the  tools  available  to  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee under the current institutional framework in the UK makes them a natural 
first line of defence for dealing with build-ups in financial system vulnerability while 
minimising the knock-on effects to the rest of the economy – as was recognised in 
the  financial  stability  knockout  built  into  the  MPC’s  forward  guidance.  These  tools 
can be broken into two groups: 
– 
Those  that  are  intended  to  directly  affect  the  build-up  of  imbalances:  for 
example,  the  FPC’s  ability  to  impose  sectoral  capital  requirements  and  its 
power  to  limit  loan-to-value  and  debt-to-income  ratios  in  the  residential 
housing market. 
Those intended to improve the resilience of the financial system in the event of 
shocks  and  thus  reduce  the  severity  of  a  cyclical  downswing,  including  the 
power to affect bank balance sheets through a counter-cyclical capital buffer, 
and a leverage ratio. 
 The  Bank’s  actions  in  the  residential  housing  market  in  June  2014  provide  an 
illustration  of  the  benefits  of  directing  targeted  macroprudential  policy  tools  at 
sectoral financial stability risks vis-à-vis raising interest rates. Motivated by concerns 
over  the growth  of  household  indebtedness,  the  FPC  recommended  that  no more 
than 15% of mortgages originated could have a loan-to-income ratio above 4.5. And 
in response to fears that households on variable rate mortgages could struggle to 
meet  mortgage  repayments  if  interest  rates  rose  significantly  in  future,  the  Bank 
recommended  a  minimum  3  percentage  point  interest  rate  stress  be  applied  at 
origination. So in a first best world where the institutional set up and macro-
prudential tools are available, I would let them do the leaning first rather than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
 
wield the heavy hammer of monetary policy. So far, this is the approach we have 
taken in the UK. 
Let  me  finish  with  a  few  words  on  the  development  of  macro-prudential 
frameworks across the globe. For the most part good progress has been made in 
setting up effective macroprudential frameworks at a national level. However, many 
emerging macro prudential risks are cross border in nature – for example the GFSR 
has identified global factors as having played an important role in the quadrupling of 
corporate  debt  across  major  emerging  economies,  much  of  which  is  in  foreign 
currencies. The risk inherent in this build up of leverage has motivated calls for a 
normalisation  of  advanced  economy  monetary  policy  sooner  rather  than  later  –  a 
global leaning against the wind. 
But  tightening  advanced  economy  monetary  policy  solely  to  discourage  further 
borrowing could make the job of getting inflation back to target more difficult. So, just 
as using a targeted macroprudential tool is preferable to using monetary policy to 
tackle domestic financial stability risks, so too would it be preferable to use efficient 
and  effective  international  macroprudential  tools  to  target  global  risks  to  financial 
stability. The framework for international macroprudential co-ordination is currently 
still in its infancy, and there is much room for improvement by way of surveillance, 
design and implementation of global macroprudential tools. This perhaps is the next 
frontier  for  macro-prudential  policy  and  an  important  one  for  the  FSB  and  IMF  to 
take forward given the potentially significant negative spillovers that might result. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
