  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Developing Malaysia’s payment system 
landscape 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Payment  System  Forum  and  Exhibition  2015 
“Moving Forward with e-Payments”, Kuala Lumpur, 3 November 2015. 
 Welcome to the 2015 Payment System Forum and Exhibition 2015, with the theme “Moving 
Forward with e-Payments”. This year is another important step in our effort to develop our 
country’s payment system landscape. It marks the mid-way point of our journey to transform 
our country’s payments infrastructure into one that is highly efficient, secure and competitive 
as outlined in the 10-year Financial Sector Blueprint from 2011 to 2020. 
I will focus on 3 areas in my remarks today. 
• 
First, I will provide you  with an update of where  we are in our migration path five 
years since we launched the Financial Sector Blueprint, and what we have done and 
achieved so far. 
Second,  I  will  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  how  collaborative  efforts  among 
various  stakeholders  in  the  payment  value  chain  can  leverage  and  thrive  on  e-
payments  as  a  strategic  tool  in  today’s  increasingly  dynamic  and  competitive 
environment, and 
Third, I will outline the opportunities that can be realised in relation to the Financial 
Sector Blueprint targets with specific emphasis on key priorities for 2016. 
  Migration path, five years after 
In  2011  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  had  developed  a  comprehensive  roadmap  in  its  Financial 
Sector Blueprint to drive the migration to e-payments with measurable targets to be achieved 
by 2020. Over the last 5 years, Bank Negara has worked with the payments industry to put in 
place  conducive  regulatory  frameworks,  agree  on  market  incentive  structures  and  build 
enhancements to e-payment infrastructure and services. Our aim is to provide an enabling 
environment  for  individuals  and  businesses  to  migrate  away  from  paper  based  payment 
methods and adopt e-payments instruments. 
The  results  have  been  encouraging.  Since  the  implementation  of  the  Pricing  Reform 
Framework  in  May  2013  and  the  e-Payment  Incentive  Fund  (ePIF)  Framework  in  January 
2015, cheques which had only declined at a marginal rate of 2% on average from 2011 to 
2013,  had  declined  at  a  higher  rate  of  10%  in  2014.  The  decline  in  cheque  usage  had 
accelerated to 16% for the first 9 months of this year. Consequently, the number of cheques 
cleared is projected to fall from about 207 million in 2010 to 149 million by the end of 2015. If 
such decline rate is sustained, the target of reducing cheques to 100 million per year by 2020 
would be achieved. The reduction of about 100 million cheques above saves a minimum of 
RM300m not taking into account other savings in terms of efficiency and security. 
Similar trend was observed in the number of electronic fund transfer transactions. Interbank 
GIRO (IBG) grew at a higher rate of 36% in 2014 and this strong growth rate was sustained 
at 36% in the first 9 months of this year compared to an average rate of 19% between 2011 
and 2013. Instant Transfer (IBFT), the real-time fund transfer service on the other hand, has 
consistently maintained its high growth rate of over 60% since 2011. This contributed to an 
increase  in  Malaysia’s  e-payments  per  capita  which  is  projected  to  increase  from  43  per 
capita in 2010 to an estimated 80 per capita in 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To  reduce  the  country’s  dependency  on  cash  usage,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has 
implemented the Payment Card Reform Framework this year with the objective to create an 
enabling environment for the expansion of payment card terminals and higher usage of debit 
cards at affordable and reduced costs. 
In  this  regard,  encouraging  progress  is  seen  in  the  area  of  deployment  of  payment  card 
terminals. Payment card terminal growth which had slowed from 14.6% in 2011 to 4.5% in 
2014, is likely to rebound to an estimated growth rate of 12.0% for 2015. This would increase 
the  number  of  payment  card  terminals  from  8  per  1,000  inhabitants  in  2014  to  9  per 
1,000 inhabitants  in  2015.  We  envisage  that  with  the  implementation  of  a  Market 
Development Fund by the payment card industry, about RM455 million funds would be used 
to deploy additional terminals and spur the expansion of the terminal network. This strategy 
would enable the target of 25 terminals per 1,000 inhabitants by 2020 to be achieved. 
Debit card transactions on the other hand, are likely to maintain its double digit growth rate of 
about 40% in 2015 (39% in 2014). Despite the encouraging progress, we are still a long way 
from achieving our target of 30 debit card transactions per capita by 2020. Moving forward, 
we need to drive the use of debit card by capitalizing on the enabling environment created by 
the Payment Card Reform Framework. We need to put in more efforts in this area. 
Of collaborative efforts and strategic tool 
Banking industry 
It is estimated that the cost of handling cash and cheques to the banking industry is about 
RM2.4 billion annually. This is sheer wastage when a cheaper alternative is readily available. 
There  is  substantial  room  for  our  banks  to  strengthen  their  operational  efficiency  through 
rationalization  of  business  model  and  internal  processes  by  emphasizing  the  use  of  e-
payments,  instead  of  the  more  manually-intensive  paper-based  payment  methods.  This 
would enable banks to achieve a lower cost-income ratio, thus enhancing productivity and 
competitiveness.  For  this  to  happen,  it  is  critical  that,  banks  should  upgrade  their 
management information system (MIS) to fully capture the cost of different payment methods 
and identify areas with potential for greater operational efficiency. In addition, banks should 
foster  better  coordination  between  their  respective  revenue  and  cost  centres  to  achieve 
optimal  financial  performance.  This  should  be  complemented  with  an  incentive  structure 
within each bank that not only rewards revenue generation but also cost reduction. 
Payment system infrastructure providers 
Basic  payment  infrastructure  should  be  viewed  as  a  form  of  ‘utility  services’  such  as 
electricity,  telephone  and  broadband  lines,  where  it  is  regarded  as  a  key  enabler  for 
innovation.  Hence,  access  to  payment  infrastructure  should  be  made  as  open  and  as 
affordable as possible. The bigger the network of a payment infrastructure, the more value it 
can  bring  to  its  participants  in  terms  of  economies  of  scale  and  multiplier  network  effects. 
Payment  system  infrastructure  development  should  be  shared  and  not  be  regarded  as  a 
competitive tool as investments in this space is expensive and continuous. 
Therefore,  payment  system  infrastructure  providers  such  as  MEPS  and  MyClear  should 
collaborate  more  effectively  to  avoid  duplication  and  wastage.  In  addition,  MEPS  and 
MyClear  should  also  collaborate  and  put  in  place  common  payment  system  infrastructure 
that  would  benefit  all  stakeholders.  The  recent  collaboration  between  MEPS  and  MyClear 
under the Malaysian Chip Card Specification (MCCS) initiative to migrate the domestic debit 
card to the Europay-MasterCard-Visa (EMV) standard and contactless feature is a step in the 
right direction. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Moving forward,  MEPS  and  MyClear  should  jointly  identify  areas for  strategic  cooperation, 
with  a  clear  line  of  sight  to  the  future,  to  ensure  that  payment  system  infrastructure  in 
Malaysia continue to keep pace with innovation and meet user needs. 
Merchants and consumers 
With  increased  transparency  in  payment  services  brought  about  by  the  various  regulatory 
and  industry  measures,  merchants  and  consumers  alike  should  leverage  on  expanded 
information disclosure to get the best deals that suit their requirements. A smart consumer 
will drive competition and reduce costs over the long run 
Processing payments and account reconciliation manually is a tedious affair and a source of 
much  inefficiency.  Merchants  in  particular  should  leverage  on  e-payments  as  a  means  to 
rationalize  their  business  processes  to  be  more  efficient,  so  that  more  resources  can  be 
directed  towards  growing  their  business.  Merchants  should  also  leverage  on  the  latest 
payments  technology  such  as  the  mobile  point-of-sale  (mPOS)  which  allows  them  to 
leverage  on  smart  devices  to  accept  payment  cards  on-the-go.  Consumers  on  the  other 
hand, should also embrace e-payments to be more efficient and safe by taking advantage of 
the various incentives provided by the banking industry. 
Opportunities and key priorities for 2016 
We have now reached a critical juncture in our migration to e-payments. With the enabling 
environment  in  place  and  the  encouraging  progress  recorded  for  the  past  five  years, 
emphasis  should  now  be  devoted  towards  implementation  and  facilitating  behavioural 
change among individuals and businesses. We must use as beacon the targets set out in the 
Financial Sector Blueprint. The achievement of such targets would put us on par with other 
advanced countries and become as competitive as we transition into a high value added and 
high income economy. The support from all relevant stakeholders is needed to ensure that 
such objective becomes a reality. 
As the catalyst for e-payment growth, the banking and payments industry should explore the 
possibility of forming strategic alliances with non-traditional partners. The recent partnerships 
between  banks  and  telcos  in  the  roll-out  of  mPOS  are  a  good  example  of  such  new 
partnership. 
Let me outline the key priorities for the banking and payments industry in the upcoming year 
of 2016. I would like to raise 6 points. 
i. 
First,  as  a  group,  we  need  to  ensure  there  is  no  delay  in  the  key  payment  card 
infrastructure  projects  such  as  migration  to  cardholder  verification  by  PIN  and  the 
migration  to  contactless  debit  cards  under  the  Chip  and  PIN  and  the  MCCS 
initiatives.  Coordinated  constant  and  effective  communication  strategies  must  be 
undertaken to ensure an effective and seamless migration; 
Second,  the  payments  industry  must  collaborate  towards  the  achievement  of  an 
additional  50,000  payment  card  terminals  and  137  million  debit  card  transactions 
under  the  Payment  Card  Reform  Framework.  In  this  regard,  the  industry  should 
devise creative measures to facilitate behavioural change. This may include offering 
incentives  and  educating  merchants  and  cashiers  to  motivate  customers  to  use 
debit cards instead of cash; 
Third, MyClear together with the banking industry should expand the biller base for 
JomPAY,  a  payment  system  launched  in  April  2015,  to  further  enhance  the 
efficiency and convenience of making and accepting online bill payments; 
Fourth,  the  banking  industry  should  undertake  effective  measures  to  reduce  the 
number  of  cash  and  cheques  used  for  credit  card  and  loan  repayments  which 
totalled  101  million  transactions  in  2014.  This  would  bring  about  operational 
ii.  
iii. 
iv. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 v. 
vi. 
 efficiency and reduce costs in the banks’ operations. The industry should strive to 
achieve an annual decline rate of 15% per year similar to that of cheques; 
Fifth, payment system infrastructure providers such as MEPS and MyClear should 
enhance  their  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  to  ensure  any  payment 
infrastructure development initiatives would not result in duplication of efforts by the 
banking system. In addition, both MEPS and MyClear should develop medium term 
roadmap  to  enhance  payment  system  infrastructure  to  keep  pace  with  innovation 
and  meet  user  needs.  This  must  be  supported  by  consultation  with  relevant 
stakeholders and robust market assessment and cost-benefit analysis; and 
Last  but  not  least,  it  is  critical  for  the  banking  and  payments  industry  to  maintain 
confidence  in  the  use  of  e-payments,  Hence,  the  industry  should  continuously 
enhance  their  risk  management  measures  and  security  features,  and  review  the 
effectiveness of their customer education and awareness programs. 
On this note, I wish all of you an engaging and productive forum. Please take the opportunity 
to  visit  the  exhibition  booths  to  find  out  more  on  how  you  can  benefit  from  the  various 
business and payment solutions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
