 Guy Debelle: Benchmarks 
 Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Bloomberg Summit, Sydney, 18 November 2015. 
 Thanks  to  Ellis  Connolly  and  Matt  Boge,  both  for  their  help  in  putting  this  speech  together,  but  also  for  their 
significant contributions to the domestic and global work on benchmark reforms. 
Today I am going to talk about benchmark rates, in both fixed income and foreign exchange. 
This  is  an  issue  that  might  seem  arcane  to  some,  but  like  Jonathan  Richman,  “I keep  my 
place in the arcane”. Benchmarks are very much at the heart of the plumbing of the financial 
system. Indeed, every investor with any global or fixed income exposure is almost certainly 
investing in a product that uses a benchmark rate, even if they don’t know it. After having 
been taken for granted for many years, benchmark rates have well and truly come into the 
public  domain  in  recent  years  with  headline-generating  legal  cases  and  multi-billion  dollar 
fines. They have also attracted considerable regulatory scrutiny and reform to redress some 
of their deficiencies which made them vulnerable to abuse. Participating in this global reform 
of benchmark rates has been my night job for the past couple of years and it is these reforms 
that I wish to talk about today. As participants in financial markets, it is important that you 
have some understanding about what these reforms are endeavouring to achieve. 
I will talk first about benchmark reform in foreign exchange and also mention briefly the work 
on  developing  a  single  code  of  conduct  for  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Then  I  will  talk 
about interest rate benchmarks, focussing on domestic reforms around the principal interest 
rate  benchmark  in  Australia,  the  bank  bill  swap  rate,  consideration  of  a  “risk-free”  interest 
rate for the domestic market and briefly some (small) changes to the calculation of the cash 
rate, the Reserve Bank’s operational target for monetary policy. 
FX Benchmarks 
I  will  start  with  foreign  exchange  (FX)  benchmarks.  Why  should  you  care  about  these 
benchmarks? For starters you might have a contract which explicitly references a particular 
FX benchmark. But probably more likely, if you invest in any sort of global portfolio, be it in 
fixed income or equity, it is highly likely that the portfolio uses an FX benchmark to weight the 
components  across  different  markets,  generally  the  London  4pm  set  of  foreign  exchange 
benchmarks  calculated  by  the  WM  Company.  Moreover,  as  the  portfolio  is  rebalanced 
periodically  (often  at  month  end)  to  reflect  movements  in  prices  over  the  period,  it  is  very 
likely that the foreign exchange transactions to rebalance the FX component of the portfolio 
occur  during  the  London  4pm  fixing  window  to  minimise  the  tracking  error  against  the 
calculated benchmark. So while you might think you are investing in equities or fixed income 
in your global portfolio, you are also passively investing in foreign exchange. 
From early 2013, concerns were increasingly raised about the integrity of FX benchmarks, 
particularly  around  the  potential  for  market  misconduct  in  the  trading  around  the  time  of 
benchmark fixings. Accordingly, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) formed a group chaired 
by  Paul  Fisher  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  me  to  firstly  analyse  the  structure  of  the  FX 
market and the incentives that might promote inappropriate trading activity around a fix, and 
then come up with some potential remedies to address the problems we found. 
After talking to participants from all sides of the FX market around the world, in September 
2014, we proposed 15 recommendations to reform the FX benchmark process, which were 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  endorsed  by  the  FSB.1  These  recommendations  were  in  four  main  areas:  benchmark 
methodology;  execution  of  benchmark  transactions;  market  conduct;  and  guidance  on 
reference rates produced by central banks. 
Earlier this year, at the request of the chair of the FSB, Mark Carney, I chaired a group that 
summarised the progress in implementing the 15 recommendations one year on, drawing on 
information gathered by the foreign exchange committees (FXCs) and central banks in the 
major FX centres. We put out a progress report on FX benchmarks just over a month ago.2 
I will provide a quick summary of what has happened in this space over the past year and 
briefly highlight some areas where there is still more to be done. 
In  terms  of  benchmark  methodology,  we  made  a  number  of  recommendations  concerning 
how WM calculate the London 4pm fix. In particular, we recommended widening the fixing 
window, and as a result, from February 15, WM widened their calculation window from one 
minute to five minutes. 
This widening of the window appears to be helping to achieve the intended outcomes and 
the progress report contains some data analysis to support this. It is early days yet, with only 
a few month-ends (where flows through the fixing window are generally the largest), but so 
far, it would appear, so good. If you are interested I would recommend reading Section 3 of 
the report which compares the exchange rate dynamics before and after the change in the 
window for a number of currency pairs including the Aussie ($US/$A). 
The wider window has  also helped to highlight the risk transfer involved between  the buy-
side firm initiating the transaction and the sell-side firm executing it for them. This in turn was 
very helpful in the communication of another of our recommendations, which garnered quite 
a  lot  of  attention,  namely  that  fixing  transactions  should  be  charged  for.  Previously, 
transactions  were  often  executed  for  free,  at  least  notionally.  The  “free”  cost  of  the 
transaction  probably  increased  the  incentive  for  manipulation  as  trading  desks  sought  to 
generate greater profitability to compensate for taking on this risk. 
The  widening  of the  window  in  February  served  as  a focal  point for  sell-side firms  to  start 
charging for these services. Most sell-side respondents to the FXCs’ surveys report that they 
are  now  charging  for  fixing  transactions,  particularly  those  linked  to  the  London  4pm  fixes 
and especially the most liquid currency pairs. That said, some respondents, who tended to 
be  smaller  banks  less  active  in  the  fix,  reported  they  were  still  reviewing  their  pricing 
structure for benchmark orders. 
Moreover, while there had been good progress in terms of the London fix, there was much 
less progress for other fixes. However, the scope for benchmark manipulation is there for all 
fixes,  not  just  the  London  4pm  fixes,  and  hence  it  is  important  to  reiterate  that  the 
recommendations  of  our  report  are  intended  to  apply  to  all  FX  benchmarks,  not  just  the 
London 4pm. 
So  how  are  fixes  being  charged  for?  A  mix  of  pricing  strategies  is  being  used.  Some  are 
applying a bid-offer spread, some a fixed fee, where the fee is based on an assessment of 
the  risk  transfer  involved.  Others  are  pursuing  a  strategy  which  could  be  called  “rent  my 
algo”, where a firm provides access for a fee to an algorithmic trading tool to directly execute 
their fixing transaction in the fixing window. 
This in turn, leads me to another of the recommendations of the report, namely that banks 
should establish separate processes for handling and executing their fixing orders from other 
                                                
1  These  recommendations  were  contained 
in  a  report  published  by 
<http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930.pdf>. 
the  FSB 
that 
is  available  at 
2  The  progress 
report 
is  available  at  <http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/FX-
Benchmarks-progress-report.pdf>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  orders. This recommendation was designed to address potential conflicts of interest arising 
from  managing  customer  flow.  A  sizeable  number  of  banks  have  implemented  this 
recommendation  by  shifting  the  execution  of  fixing  orders  from  the  spot  voice  FX  trading 
desk to electronic trading desks that execute them with algorithms. 
As a result, the share of fixing orders executed by algorithm has increased substantially, as 
we document in the progress report. There is also considerably enhanced internal scrutiny 
from senior management around fixing transactions. Some firms have physically separated 
their fixing desk from other desks. This segregation of trading functions has involved some 
cost. Other participants regarded the cost of implementing this recommendation as being too 
high,  given  the  size  of  their  business,  and  have  not  implemented  it  to  date.  Others  have 
decided to cease offering this service directly, in some cases offering customers a portal to 
other fixing services instead. 
Again, I would like to emphasise that the intention of our recommendations was that it was to 
apply  to  all  participants,  with  appropriate  consideration  to  the  size  and  structure  of  the 
market. 
In the case of smaller, less actively traded currencies, separation of business is clearly more 
complicated than for large actively traded currencies, but in these cases participants should 
still  be  able  to  demonstrate  to  their  customers  that  appropriate  processes  are  in  place,  in 
keeping  with  the  fundamental  motivation  of  the  recommendation  to  reduce  the  scope  for 
benchmark manipulation. 
In  terms  of  market  conduct,  we  made  a  number  of  recommendations  around  appropriate 
sharing  of  information,  including  around  trading  positions  (beyond  that  necessary  for  a 
transaction) and particularly customer information. These were picked up in a statement of 
Shared  Global  Principles  that  was  published  following  the  Global  FXC  meeting  in  Tokyo 
earlier  this  year.3  Many  market  participants  have  reflected these  principles  in  their  internal 
policies  and  codes  of  conduct,  as  well  as  revised  policies  around  benchmark  execution 
consistent with our recommendations. 
FX code of conduct 
More  broadly  in  terms  of  improving  market  conduct,  in  May  this  year,  the  BIS  Governors 
commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets  Committee  of  the  BIS  to  facilitate  the 
establishment  of  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the  FX  market  and  to  come  up  with 
mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the code.4 I am chairing this work, with Simon 
Potter of the New York Fed leading the work on developing the code and Chris Salmon of 
the Bank of England leading the adherence work.5 Our group comprises representatives of 
the central banks of all the major FX centres. It is very much a global effort. We are being 
supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David Puth of CLS, that 
contains people from all around the world on both the buy-side, including corporates, and the 
sell-side, along with trading platforms and non-bank participants. The intention is to have this 
work of developing a single code to replace the various regional industry codes completed by 
May  2017.  However,  we  intend  to  put  out  some  parts  of  the  global  code,  including  some 
material on order handling and execution, by May 2016. I will talk more about this next week 
at the FX Week conference in London. 
So why have I taken the time to run you through all of this? 
                                                
3  These principles are available at: http://www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf. 
4  http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
5  http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  As market participants, regardless of which side of the market you are on, it is important that 
you  are  aware  of  the  changes  that  have  occurred,  and  are  still  underway,  in  the  foreign 
exchange market. If you are on the sell-side, I would trust that you are well aware of these 
changes, and hopefully, I have provided you with some of the background and motivation for 
them. There is a fuller articulation of this in the FSB report itself. 
As I said earlier, particularly if you are in the asset management business, you may not have 
paid so much attention to the FX aspect of your business. But it is important that you also 
understand  the  context  for  the  changes  that  are  occurring.  Some  practices  that  you  were 
accustomed to in the past, or maybe were unaware of, may no longer be available, and you 
cannot expect your counterparty to provide them. 
The  motivation  for  these  changes  is  to  reduce  the  incentive  and  opportunity  for  improper 
trading behaviour by market participants around benchmark fixes. The implementation of the 
recommendations  in  our  report,  together  with  the  enhanced  scrutiny  externally  and  within 
organisations  on  fixing  transactions  appears  to  have  moved  the  market  in  a  favourable 
direction. 
As we develop the single code of conduct for the FX market, hopefully the market will move 
further  in  that  direction  and  allow  participants  to  have  much  greater  confidence  that  the 
market is functioning appropriately. 
Interest rate benchmarks 
Let me now turn to interest rate benchmarks. In light of the issues around LIBOR and other 
interest rate benchmarks, there has been a global reform effort also under the aegis of the 
FSB to improve the functioning of interest rate benchmarks.6 
Interest rate benchmarks are integral to the plumbing of the financial system. Many financial 
contracts reference interest rate benchmarks. The interest rate on a corporate loan is often a 
spread to an interest rate benchmark. Derivative contracts generally are based on them, as 
are most asset-backed securities. 
I will focus on the local market, where the primary interest rate benchmark is the bank bill 
swap rate (BBSW). 
BBSW 
As  you  may  be  aware,  a  few  weeks  ago,  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators  issued  a 
consultation paper on possible reforms to BBSW.7 I will run through the motivation for doing 
so as well as the possible options we canvassed in the consultation paper. 
Given  its  wide  usage,  BBSW  has  been  identified  by  ASIC  as  a  financial  benchmark  of 
systemic importance in our market.8 Hence it is important there is ongoing confidence in it. 
As you may know, BBSW was calculated for a number of years by, each day, asking a panel 
of banks to submit their assessment of where the market was trading in Prime Bank paper at 
a particular time of the day. While it was a submission-based process, it was different from 
                                                
6  See 
the  FSB’s 
report  on  Reforming  Major 
released 
in  July  2014,  
available  at:  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140722.pdf;  and 
the  July  2015  
update  on  progress,  available  at:  http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/wp-content/uploads/OSSG-interest-
rate-benchmarks-progress-report-July-2015.pdf. 
Interest  Rate  Benchmarks 
7  The consultation paper is available at: http://www.cfr.gov.au/publications/consultations/evolution-of-the-bbsw-
methodology/. 
8  See  ASIC’s  report  on  Financial  Benchmarks,  Report  440,  released 
http://download.asic.gov.au/media/3285136/rep440-published-8-july-2015.pdf. 
in  July  2015,  available  at: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  LIBOR  in  that  it  was  the  assessment  of  the  borrowing  cost  of  a  notional  Prime  Bank, 
informed by observable transactions, rather than an assessment of a submitting bank’s own 
borrowing costs. 
In  response  to  the  prospect  of  a  large  number  of  the  banks  on  the  submission  panel  no 
longer being willing to provide submissions, the calculation of BBSW was reformed in 2013 in 
line  with  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions’  (IOSCO)  Principles  for 
Financial Benchmarks, which were issued in July 2013.9 
Since  2013,  the  Australian  Financial  Markets  Association  (AFMA)  calculates  BBSW 
benchmark rates as the midpoint of the nationally observed best bid and best offer (NBBO) 
for Prime Bank Eligible Securities, which are bank accepted bills and negotiable certificates 
of deposit (NCDs). Currently, the prime banks are the four major Australian banks. The rate 
set  process  uses  live  and  executable  bid  and  offer  prices  sourced  from  interbank  trading 
venues approved by AFMA, which are currently ICAP, Tullett Prebon and Yieldbroker. The 
bids and offers are sourced from three times around 10am each day. 
While  the  outstanding  stock  of  bills  and  NCDs  issued  by  the  Prime  Banks  has  increased 
since  2013  to  around  $140  billion,  trading  activity  during  the  daily  BBSW  rate  set  has 
declined over recent years. The consultation paper illustrates how low the turnover currently 
is. There are quite a number of days where there is no turnover at all at the rate set. The low 
turnover in the interbank market raises the risk that market participants may at some point be 
less willing to use BBSW. 
This  is  the  motivation  for  the  CFR’s  consultation  to  ensure  that  BBSW  remains  a  trusted, 
reliable and robust financial benchmark. 
Some preliminary data collected from the four major Australian banks indicate that there is 
substantially more activity in the NCD market than is being measured at the rate set, with the 
activity  mainly  occurring  outside  the  interbank market.  At  least  $100 million  in  NCDs  were 
bought or sold on almost all business days, with activity almost entirely at the 1-, 3- and 6- 
month tenors. However, the non-bank participants that buy and sell NCDs tend to transact 
bilaterally  with  the  issuing  bank,  with  the  price struck  at  the  (yet to  be determined)  BBSW 
ahead  of  the  actual  rate  set,  rather  than  at  a  directly  negotiated  rate.  If  these  participants 
could be encouraged to buy and sell NCDs at outright yields, then these transactions may 
have the potential to underpin the BBSW benchmark. 
Hence  the  consultation  paper  proposes  one  option  for  reform  which  would  be  to  continue 
with the current NBBO calculation methodology, but to underpin the executable prices with a 
broader set of NCD market transactions contracted up to the time of the rate set. By more 
firmly  anchoring  the  BBSW  benchmark  to  observable  transactions  entered  into  at  arm’s 
length  between  buyers  and  sellers  in  the  market,  this  may  ensure  that  the  benchmark 
remains a credible indicator of rates in the market. 
For this option to be feasible, it would be necessary for the banks to directly negotiate the 
interest  rates  on  their  NCDs  with  third  parties,  rather  than  linking  the  rate  to  BBSW.  This 
would require a change to the existing market practice. (In this regard this option has some 
similarities  with  the  FX  benchmark  reforms  where  prior  to  the  reforms,  participants  also 
agreed to transact at a yet to be determined price and at the midpoint of the fix.) 
Another  option  for  reform,  akin  to  the  proposed  methodology  for  LIBOR,  would  be  for  the 
banks to submit to the benchmark administrator their assessment of their aggregate cost of 
wholesale  funding,  based  on  their  transactions  in  a  particular  window.  That  is,  the  banks 
would do the aggregation and the administrator would only need to average the (currently) 
four  submissions.  An  alternative  option  would  be  for  the  banks  to  submit  all  their 
                                                
9  The 
IOSCO  Principles 
pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD415.pdf. 
for  Financial  Benchmarks  are  available  at:  https://www.iosco.org/library/ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  transactional data to the benchmark administrator who would then itself do the aggregation. 
Both of these options would need to provide for circumstances in which the Prime Banks had 
not executed any transactions in the relevant window. 
The final option would be to accept the current system as it is, notwithstanding the very low 
turnover at the rate set. 
The consultation is open until 3 December.10 Given the importance of BBSW for the market, 
if you have any interest in the issue, I would ask that you consider making a submission. 
Risk-free rates 
Next I would like to briefly raise some issues around whether the use of BBSW needs to be 
quite  as  widespread  as  it  is.  In  a  number  of  instances,  BBSW  has  become  the  default 
reference  rate  without  much  thought  being  given  as  to  whether  it  is  the  most  appropriate 
reference rate. BBSW is a credit-based reference rate. It is based on the borrowing costs of 
the major banks, with the credit risk that entails embodied in the rate. 
For a number of purposes, such a credit-based rate is completely appropriate. However, for 
other purposes, a rate that is closer to risk-free may be more appropriate. For instance, in 
recent  years,  market  participants  have  moved  to  use  overnight-indexed  swap  (OIS)  rates 
more  often  when  discounting  the  cash  flows  in  their  swaps.  The  FSB,  through  its  official 
sector steering group (OSSG) on benchmark reform, is encouraging market participants to 
contemplate switching from credit-based benchmark rates like BBSW or LIBOR to risk-free 
rates,  where  appropriate.  We  are  working  with  AFMA  in  the  local  market  to  encourage 
market participants to consider this. 
One  example  where  a  change  in  reference  rate  could  be  contemplated  is  for  residential 
mortgage-backed  securities  (RMBS).  RMBS  coupon  payments  are  typically  priced  at  a 
spread to 1-month BBSW. Since the introduction of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, banks have 
little  incentive  to  issue  1-month  paper,  since  they  would  need  to  hold  high-quality  liquid 
assets against the funds raised. If they do issue, then the pricing will be different from the 
past.  A  rate  based  on  the  cash  rate  may  be  a  more  appropriate  benchmark.  Such  a  rate 
could be backward looking, like the actual cash rate itself, or forward looking, like OIS rates. 
Alternatively, a benchmark rate of 90 day BBSW which more robustly reflects bank funding 
costs, may be worth thinking about. 
That is one example worthy of consideration. There are a number of others. I know this is not 
necessarily an issue you may have thought that much about until now. At the very least, I 
would  encourage  you  to  at  least  ask  the  question  whether  the  product  you  are  issuing  or 
holding is using the most appropriate reference rate. 
Cash rate 
Finally,  I  will  briefly  mention  the  cash  rate.  As  the  RBA’s  operational  target  for  monetary 
policy and the reference rate for OIS and other financial contracts, the cash rate is another 
systemic benchmark. Consequently, we are making sure that our methodology for the cash 
rate is also in line with the IOSCO benchmark principles. We are in the process of ensuring 
that  our  data  collection  is  capturing  all  cash  market  trades  appropriately  and  that  we  can 
match data from both sides of the transactions. This will entail a few changes but we do not 
expect these to have any material impact on the calculated outcome for the cash rate. 
                                                
10  Responses can be sent to BBSWConsultation@rba.gov.au. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. You’ve probably heard more today about benchmarks than you ever really 
wanted  to  hear.  But  benchmarks  are  a  very  critical  part  of  the  plumbing  of  the  financial 
system. It is important that market participants have a reasonable awareness of how they are 
calculated  rather  than  simply  taking  them  for  granted.  But  even  more  importantly,  market 
participants need to have confidence in their robustness and integrity. To help ensure that is 
the case, a number of reforms to benchmarks have been undertaken. But the process is still 
ongoing to make sure this part of the market gets to a better place than where it has been in 
the past. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
