   Arjuna Mahendran: The latest financial crisis and Sri Lanka 
Speech  by  Mr  Arjuna  Mahendran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the 
International Research Conference, Colombo, 7 December 2015. 
 Professor  Yi  Fu  Lin,  Dr.  Harsha  De  Silva,  distinguished  delegates,  ladies  and  gentlemen. 
Welcome to this 8th research conference by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. I must congratulate 
Dr. Nandalal Weerasinghe and his colleagues who have developed this tradition which in no 
small way has established the Central Bank of Sri Lanka on the international research map as 
a meeting place for the profound minds of several leading academic and banking institutions. 
This conference itself is no small feat to have organized given that we have participants from 
several parts of the world in Europe and Asia including several areas that we have very strong 
relationship with as a country, and I think this is a great testimony to the continuing tradition 
that we have evolved in the Central Bank in terms of creating another center of excellence in 
Sri Lanka. 
In my opening remarks I thought I would perhaps take a leaf from Professor Lin’s commentary 
just now, and perhaps adapt Sri Lanka’s situation in terms of the structuralism or the lack of it 
that Professor Lin discussed. Now when you look at the total economy, we have in the last five 
years  gone  through  a  fairly  challenging  period.  As  Professor  Lin  said  we  had  the  great 
recession  of  2008  and  its  immediate  aftermath  what  you  found  was  that  three  strands  of 
relatively new economic activism manifested themselves. In the first instance you saw a huge 
pump-priming effort by the People’s Republic of China, which in its wake created perhaps the 
strongest commodity price boom that we have seen in recent history. That I think was a key 
take away from that period and China to some extent prevented the world from falling into a 
depression by stimulating its economy, and as Professor Lin has now elaborated to us, it falls 
in line with his perception that in times of recession developing countries are well-advised to 
go ahead and really stimulate domestic infrastructure construction etc. to take on the slack 
caused by international events. 
Secondly we saw the major central banks of the world, that includes the United States, the 
Europe, the United Kingdom, Japan and Switzerland, creating money on an unparallel basis 
which for my calculations to date add up to about 8 trillion dollars worth of new money created 
in the last 5 to 6 years. That is significant. That’s the second strand that emanated from this 
crisis period. And thirdly what we have seen is that the so called developing economies in a 
curious twist of their economy fate, actually became the biggest creditors in the world and the 
so called rich countries, the developed countries, were actually the biggest debtors. So you’ve 
turned the world upside down topsy-turvy and today we are seeing India along with other big 
emerging markets who are effectively lending money to the United States of America by buying 
their Treasuries and funding their development. So these three stands I think have to be taken 
into account because they are really new elements of the international financial architecture 
which have a bearing on how the global economy is going to perform. 
So  what  do  we  see  today  in  the  global  economy  that  is  different  apart  from  what  I  just 
mentioned.  First  of  all  you  have  a  liquidity  trap.  Keynes’s  classic  liquidity  trap  is  alive  and 
kicking around us. Whatever you do with interest rates it doesn’t care at all for production or 
for consumption because we have too much liquidity, the 8 trillion that I talked about. In that 
context how do governments stimulate their economies given that monetary policy has done 
the heavy lifting, it created this excess liquidity but now going forward there is a need for a new 
element, the Xfactor, which has to then propel the growth forward. You have very influential 
commentators  like  Larry  Summers  of  United  States  who  is  calling  for  another  round  of 
quantitative easing in the US because he feels that the long term growth path of the United 
States  economy  is  still  not  well  embedded  and  the  reason  for  that  is  partly  due  to  the 
demographics.  You  have  ageing  populations  in  Japan,  Europe  and  United  States,  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
means that this baby boom generation, the people who were born just after the second world 
war were now starting to retire are consuming less and saving more and as a consequence 
you probably don’t have that space for a consumption led economic impetus that developing 
countries such as ourselves dependent on for the last 30 or 40 years to grow our economies 
through an export-led strategy. 
So my first question is; is that export-led strategy relevant any more given these demographic 
changes  that  we  see  in  the  advanced  economies?  And  secondly  given  the  fact  that  the 
advanced economies are in debt – what happened in the great recession was they nationalized 
private  bad  debts  in  their  housing  sectors,  nationalized  it,  bought  it  into  the  government’s 
balance sheet and as a consequence that the western economies are effectively net borrowers 
in the system – do they then have all the gear to stimulate consumption and create another 
repeat cycle of that export-led boom that really lifted countries like China and other big Asian 
exporting economies out of the low income status that they had enjoyed for several decades. 
That to me is a very relevant question that we have to ask ourselves at this conference. 
Have we got to then look at a different model and that’s where I think one key element of the 
international economics situation is very important to understand and that has to do with the 
emergence  of  information  and  communication  technology  as  a  principal  driver  of  growth, 
specifically in the services sector of our economies and what have we used in that space to 
stimulate the growth impetus that previously resided in manufacturing. Now we have to also 
understand that the manufacturing space has largely converged in China. The Chinese have 
built an international value chain over the last 30 to 40 years which is unparalleled in terms of 
its complexity and its far reaching nature and unless small countries like Sri Lanka participate 
in that value chain we in a sense are losing out on a tremendous opportunity. I put it to you 
that Sri Lanka still has not integrated itself adequately in that international value chain which 
the  Chinese  has  built  up  in  the  last  30  to  40  years  effectively,  and  that  is  why  we  have 
effectively not fulfilled our growth potential in the last 5 years since the cessation of the internal 
civil conflict in this country. 
The second point I like to make is that we rely a lot on foreign savings for the growth of our 
economy. This a peculiarity of Sri Lanka that we resemble countries like Phillipines and Mexico, 
in a sense that we have large diasporas living overseas who are fairly high income earners 
relative to our levels of income in this country and I just asked Dr. Weerasinghe, our national 
savings  rate  is  about  25  percent,  and  of  that  perhaps  6  to  7  percent  is  accounted  for  by 
international savings component of our diaspora. That is a significant number; it means that 
we can afford investment rates of 26 to 28 percent perhaps even 30 percent in the medium 
term if we marshal these resources effectively and then create our own growth impetus which 
will engender a sustainable growth path and at the same time integrate ourselves with this 
global  value  chain  that  the  Chinese  have  constructed  very  effectively  over  the  last  few 
decades. 
But there are several challenges that face us in the near term. First of all we have to watch 
what the American monetary policy makers will do in the next few weeks. 
That could potentially create some turmoil for international markets including ours and in the 
process we could see some potential for dislocation which is why Sri Lanka has decided to 
reach out to multilateral agencies like the IMF and the World Bank to assist us in terms of 
sheltering or protecting the economy against any adverse developments that may occur in the 
near future as a consequence of any turmoil in international capital markets if and when US 
policy makers decide to raise interest rates. 
That is one hurdle we have to look at. The second hurdle I would say is the lack of a structural 
change the way international, particularly developed countries of the world, are managing their 
economic affairs. A lot of the changes that we have seen in the last 5 years has had to do with 
monetary policy and the aggressive easing of the monetary policy. But on the fiscal side, you 
haven’t seen any structural changes in countries like the United States and most European 
countries that took the world into the great recession in 2008 as a consequence of their housing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
bubbles. That structural change in terms of improving productivity, reducing the size of social 
security  programs  and  retooling  their  economies  to  become  more  productive  has  still  not 
started and until that happens we don’t have a sustainable basis for global growth to grow 
apace. 
So the question is, will this very complex Chinese driven global value chain face difficulties in 
terms of engendering growth, going forward in the absence of those structural reforms that we 
seek countries as diverse as Greece and Italy and even Ireland starting to implement as a 
means to fostering stronger growth going forward. That’s going to be a big challenge for us in 
the next few years and I think this conference would do well to try and give us a perspective 
on that examining in detail on how these structural changes in global economies impact small 
economies like Sri Lanka and perhaps give us a guidepost in terms of how we can integrate 
our economy further into the global value chain, which to me is essential for ensuring the future 
economic prosperity and stability of this country is well-bedded. 
Thank you very much for your time here this morning and I thank all the participants for your 
contributions and we look forward for a very stimulating couple of days in this hall. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
