   Norman T L Chan: Development of e-Cheque usage in Hong Kong 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Electronic Cheque (e-Cheque) service Launching Ceremony, Hong Kong, 11 December 2015. 
 Ms  Helen  Wong,  Mr  Allen  Yeung,  Mr  Wong  Kuen-fai,  distinguished  guests,  media 
representatives:  
1.  
Welcome to the official launch of the Electronic Cheque (e-Cheque) service jointly 
organised by the Hong Kong Association of Banks and the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. For 
the  first  phase  of  the  e-Cheque  service,  nine  banks  have  started  offering  the  e-Cheque 
issuance service, while all banks in Hong Kong can already accept e-Cheques deposited by 
their customers. 
2.  
Traditional  paper  cheques  have  been  widely  used  in  Hong  Kong,  but  there  are 
limitations. For example, the payer must deliver a physical cheque to the payee, and the payee 
must  also  physically  deposit  the  cheque  at  a  bank.  These  steps  involve  quite  some  time. 
Besides, paper cheques consume a lot of paper and are not environmentally friendly. In view 
of  this,  the  HKMA  began  work  with  the  banking  industry  on  developing  the  necessary 
infrastructure for the electronic form of cheque service three years ago. 
Benefits of e-Cheques 
3.  
believe they will become a popular form of electronic payment soon. 
I.  
As e-Cheques have a number of obvious benefits over their physical counterparts, I 
The  e-Cheque  issuance  and  deposit  service  is  available  via  Internet  banking 
platforms and the Hong Kong Interbank Clearing Limited’s portal on a 24-hour basis. 
Bank customers can process an e-Cheque any time. 
As physical boundaries and barriers are no more, both payers and payees can enjoy 
the  e-Cheque  service  with  the  convenience  of  mobile  phones  or  Internet  banking 
platforms anywhere. 
E-cheques are quick and easy to use. In just a few simple steps, the payer can issue 
an  e-Cheque  via  an  Internet  banking  platform.  Upon  receiving  the  e-Cheque, 
  Adopting  a  highly  secure  digital  signature,  e-Cheques  remove  the  need  for  the 
payer’s handwritten signature as required with paper cheques, reducing the risk of 
forgery. 
Unlike certain electronic payments or funds transfers, the payee does not need to 
disclose  his  bank  account  number  to  the  payer  in  order  to  receive  an  e-Cheque 
payment, which means greater privacy protection. For those payees who have more 
than one account, he can also enjoy the flexibility of deciding which account to deposit 
an e-Cheque into. 
Corporates and institutions which issue a huge volume of paper cheques can save 
substantial sums on printing, processing and mailing those cheques. In Hong Kong, 
listed  companies  process  over  2  million  physical  cheques  each  year  for  dividend 
payments. Both paper consumption and mailing costs can be reduced substantially 
each year if shareholders agree switchinig to e-Cheques to receive these payments. 
II.  
III.  
V.  
VI.  
Looking forward 
4.  
explore ways of expanding its application in two areas, namely: 
The e-Cheque is only at the beginning of its development. The HKMA will continue to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 I.  
II.  
  Cross-border  transactions  –  we  will  explore  with  the  Guangzhou  and  Shenzhen 
branches of The People’s Bank of China, and the Monetary Authority of Macao with 
a view to promoting the use and clearing of cross-border e-Cheques. 
Development of e-commerce – we will explore with the banking industry the use of e-
Cheques  in  supporting  e-commerce  portals. While  offering  an  additional  option  of 
payment  for  online  shoppers,  e-Cheques  can  also  increase  the  efficiency  of  e-
commerce operations. 
Acknowledgments 
5.  
The launch of the e-Cheque reflects the continuous effort of banks in Hong Kong to 
provide  a  wide  range  of  payment  services.  It  also  signifies  the  HKMA’s  commitment  in 
promoting the efficiency and modernisation of Hong Kong's financial infrastructure. Besides, 
the smooth development and launch of the e-Cheque has benefited immensely from the great 
support of relevant government departments. 
I.  
Firstly, amendments to the Electronic Transactions Ordinance were finalised by the 
Office of the Government Chief Information Officer in early 2015, giving electronic 
cheques the same legal status as physical cheques. The Pay e-Cheque portal was 
also  launched  on  7  December,  which  allows  the  public  to  make  payments  of 
government bills and fees with e-Cheques. 
The  Inland  Revenue  Department  became  the  first  government  department  to 
participate in the Pay e-Cheque portal, providing a convenient and easy option for 
paying tax demand notes, business registration fees, and stamp duties as well as 
purchasing tax reserve certificates. 
Lastly,  the  Treasury  has  also  actively  helped  promote  the  acceptance  by  other 
government departments of e-Cheques in paying general demand notes. 
6.  
I would like to thank all those involved in bringing the e-Cheque service into fruition. 
The HKMA will strengthen public education programmes with the Hong Kong Association of 
Banks to increase public understanding of the use and benefits of e-Cheques. 
7. Thank you. 
III.  
II.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
