  Patrick Njoroge: Improving financial services for the Kenyan population 
Speech by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of the 
FinAccess Geospatial Mapping Survey, 2015, Nairobi, 29 October 2015. 
 I  am  delighted  to  join  you  today,  to  launch  the  key  findings  of  the  FinAccess  Geospatial 
Mapping Survey, 2015. The Survey was conducted by the FinAccess Management Team, 
comprising  of the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  (CBK),  Financial  Sector  Deepening  Trust  (FSD), 
and  the  Kenya  National  Bureau  of  Statistics (KNBS),  with  funding  from  the  Bill  &  Melinda 
Gates  Foundation  (B&MGF).  The  fieldwork  was  conducted  by  Brand  Fusion  Limited,  a 
Research  House  contracted  by  B&MGF.  I  wish  to  thank  the  Bill  and  Melinda  Gates 
Foundation for funding this Survey and all those who, in one way or another, participated and 
made this Survey a success. 
Policy Goal: One of the goals of Kenya’s Vision 2030 is to foster greater efficiency 
1.  
and  delivery  of  financial  services  to  a  wider  population.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  all 
stakeholders and associated financial sector players, both in the private and public sectors, 
have  been  working  towards  increasing  financial  inclusion  through  offering  appropriate  and 
affordable financial products and services. There is more focus on low-income households 
and Micro-, Small-, and Medium- Sized Enterprises, who are, as a whole, benefitting from 
these positive and significant endeavours. The CBK in collaboration with FSD Kenya, KNBS, 
and other key stakeholders has taken a leading role in fostering Kenya’s financial inclusion 
agenda. It has also taken the lead in improving the measurement of financial inclusion and 
tracking its dynamics, thereby identifying evidence-based strategies to promote an inclusive 
and stable financial system. 
2.  
Existing  Financial  Inclusion  Landscape:  The  promotion  of  financial  inclusion  has 
been an area of focus of the Government over the past decade. Recent FinAccess Surveys 
indicated that Kenya has made significant progress in fostering financial inclusion since the 
first  baseline  survey  in  2006.  The  three  national  FinAccess  Household  Surveys  of  2006, 
2009  and  2013  and  the  FinAccess  Geospatial  Mapping  Survey,  2013  have  clearly 
demonstrated that Kenya’s financial inclusion landscape has changed considerably over the 
period 2006 – 2013. The proportion of adult population using formal financial services rose to 
66.7 percent in 2013, from 27.4 percent in 2006, and 41.3 percent in 2009. The proportion of 
the  financially  excluded  on  the  other  hand  has  been  falling  steadily  from  39.3  percent  in 
2006,  to  31.4  percent  in  2009,  and  25.4  percent  in  2013.  In  a  nutshell,  Kenyans  have 
enjoyed better financial access over that period. 
Kenya  committed  in  2012  at  the  G-20  Los  Cabos  Summit  to  achieve  a  higher  level  of 
financial  inclusion  through  targeted  interventions  and  strategies.  To  this  end,  a  range  of 
policies, strategies, products and technology-enabled delivery channels have been rolled-out 
by  the  public  and  private  sectors.  Ensuring  the  success  of  these  endeavours  is  key,  as 
financial inclusion is a vital component of sustained inclusive financial sector development, 
thus contributing significantly to inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Our efforts towards 
ensuring  improved  financial  inclusion  to  majority  of  the  Kenyan  population  have  not  gone 
unnoticed.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  Brookings  Financial  and  Digital  Inclusion  Project 
Report, 2015 ranked Kenya as the top-scoring country in financial inclusion world-wide. We 
are, however, cognizant that enhanced financial inclusion anchored on dynamic innovations 
brings forth some risks that we need to manage so that they do not negate the success so 
far achieved.  
3.  
Key  Findings:  The first FinAccess  Geospatial  Mapping  Survey  took  place  in  2013 
and  collected  Geographical  Information  System  (GIS)  data  on  all  the  financial  services 
access touch points as well as some operational and transactional data through interviewing 
the  financial  service  providers.  The  current  FinAccess  Geospatial  Mapping  Survey,  2015, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   touch  points, 
 
 
whose  results  I  am  pleased  to  launch  today,  collected  GIS  data  on  both  financial  and 
agricultural services access touch points as well as some operational and transactional data. 
This  Survey,  therefore, provides  an  update  of  datasets  collected  in  the baseline  survey  in 
2013  and  enhanced  understanding  of  the  financial  inclusion  landscape  in  Kenya  and  its 
dynamics over time. In particular: 
• 
The 2013 and 2015 GIS data provides a visual spatial distribution of the mapped 
financial and agricultural services access touch points. Analysis of the survey data 
provides  better  understanding  of  the  financial  inclusion  constraints,  potential 
opportunities  and  evidence-based  strategies  to  expand  inclusion.  The  success  of 
these endeavours is well captured in the 2013 and 2015 Survey results. 
As the results to be launched shortly will show, the financial system is now offering a 
wider range of financial services and products to more Kenyans, while covering a 
wider  geographical  spread.  Compared  to  the  2013  Survey,  which  captured 
64,740 financial  services  access 
the  2015  Survey  captured 
91,186 financial access touch points and 27,684 agricultural services access touch 
points, which represents a growth of 40.8 percent financial services access touch 
points over a period of two years. 
The  fieldwork  interviews  gave  some  interesting  feedback,  with  some  of  the  key 
issues that emerged indicating instances of fraud. Mobile money service providers 
reported the highest instances of fraud at 37 percent as compared to 10 percent of 
bank  agents.  Counterfeit  money  was  the  greatest  reported type  of fraud  amongst 
service  providers  in  forex  bureaus  and  mobile  money  providers,  while  fake 
identification  was  the  highest  reported  type  of  fraud  amongst  insurance  providers 
and capital markets service providers. 
The  results  we  are  releasing  today  are  derived  from  developments  in  the  wider 
economy, 
institutional 
developments as well as financial sector policy and regulatory reforms and financial 
markets  innovations.  I  am  delighted  that  the  sector  now  has  such  a  useful 
information resource at its disposal. 
Uses: For policy makers and regulators, the application of GIS analysis to assess 
4.  
the  spatial  distribution  of  financial  service  access  points  relative  to  population  and  other 
parameters  is  clear.  Such  data  can  be  used  towards  identifying  the  underserved 
geographical areas and instituting strategies and interventions that will address the identified 
bottlenecks to bring those populations who are otherwise excluded into the formal financial 
system. On the other hand, for the private sector players, GIS data can be used to identify 
opportunities  for  expansion  as  well  as  boosting  their  marketing  strategies  to  be  more 
geographically targeted for maximum effectiveness. It will also help to create rapid feedback 
loops about customer usage patterns and corridors of need. The analysis can also be used 
to better understand fraud events, profile of access touch points and determine risk profiles 
of clients. Moreover, the presentations will show that GIS analysis by private sector players 
can  comprehensively  identify  those  agents  where  cash  shortfalls  are  likely  to  manifest 
themselves, and therefore, proactively build liquidity management infrastructure where it is 
needed most. 
At this point, let me invite you to learn from today’s presentations and urge you to make use 
of  the  opportunity  offered  and  build-upon  this  information  platform.  The  sustainability  and 
growth  of GIS  data  collection  and  usage  will  be  driven  by  on-boarding  amongst  you,  both 
public and private sectors stakeholders. Be assured that we in the FinAccess Management 
Team in collaboration with B&MGF among other partners will champion such efforts and will 
facilitate learning opportunities with you. This effort will facilitate modalities of self-reporting 
GIS data as well as assisting you in capacity building towards usage of the datasets to inform 
policy and business strategies. Already B&MGF has initiated a pilot in self-reporting of GIS 
data in order to achieve sustainability and we welcome you all to participate.  
infrastructural 
technological 
innovations, 
facilities, 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Finally, I would like at this juncture to inform you that we have just concluded conducting the 
fourth round of the FinAccess Household Surveys, 2015 and data cleaning is on-going. In 
this  regard,  we  shall  be  inviting  you  to  the  launch  of  the  top-line  findings  early  next  year 
around  February  2016.  We,  therefore,  urge  you  to  diarise  this  activity  as  triangulation  of 
datasets from both FinAccess Geospatial Mapping Survey, 2015 and FinAccess Household 
surveys, 2015 will provide deeper understanding of Kenya’s financial inclusion landscape. 
With these few remarks, I welcome you to this breakfast event and launch the Survey key 
findings and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
