  Mario Draghi: Euro area economic outlook, the ECB’s monetary policy 
and current policy challenges 
Statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the thirty-second 
meeting of the International Monetary and Financial Committee, Lima, 9 October 2015. 
 Faced  with  a  more  challenging  external  environment  than  six  months  ago,  the  euro  area 
economy  has  shown  signs  of  resilience.  However,  developments  surrounding  the  slower 
growth in emerging market economies are posing renewed risks to the euro area outlook. 
Our monetary policy measures have supported, and continue to support, domestic demand, 
contributing to the euro area recovery and to a gradual improvement in the inflation outlook. 
Significant progress towards sound public finances, the implementation of structural reforms 
and further steps towards completing the banking union should buttress the so far moderate 
recovery,  while  a  new  convergence  process  is  needed  to  foster  the  euro  area’s  crisis 
resilience. 
The cyclical recovery in the euro area, which started more than two years ago, is continuing 
Real  GDP  rose  by  0.4%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  following 
growth  of  0.5%  in  the  first  quarter.  The  latest  data  and  survey  evidence  confirm  that  this 
growth  trend  will  continue  in  the  second  half  of  this  year.  Looking  ahead,  the  economic 
recovery  is  expected  to  continue.  While  external  demand  is  somewhat  weaker  than 
anticipated,  domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  the  main  driver  of  the  recovery,  and 
should continue to be supported by our monetary policy measures, progress made in terms 
of fiscal consolidation and structural reform, and low oil prices. However, economic growth in 
the  euro  area  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  dampened  by  the  necessary  balance-sheet 
adjustments  in  a  number  of  sectors  and  the  sluggish  pace  of  implementation  of  structural 
reforms.  At  the  same  time,  labour  markets  remain  weak  but  are  gradually  improving. 
Employment increased further in the second quarter of 2015, while the unemployment rate 
has  continued  to  decline.  Survey  data  point  to  further  improvements  in  labour  market 
conditions  in  the  period  ahead.  The  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  remain  on  the  downside, 
reflecting in particular the heightened uncertainties related to the external environment. 
Against  a  background  of  further  declines  in  commodity  prices,  notably  oil,  recent  HICP 
inflation  numbers  have  drifted  back  to  levels  around  zero,  following  the  rebound  from 
negative  rates  seen  earlier  in  the  year.  Looking  ahead,  headline  inflation  is  expected  to 
remain very low in the near term, until upward base effects relating to energy prices push it 
up towards the end of the year. Inflation rates are foreseen to rise further during 2016 and 
2017, supported by the expected economic recovery, the pass-through of past declines in 
the exchange rate, and, assuming current prices in futures markets materialise, somewhat 
higher oil prices in the years ahead. The Governing Council will continue to closely monitor 
the  risks  to  the  outlook  for  price  developments  over  the  medium  term,  in  particular  risks 
related  to  the  pass-through  of  the  monetary  policy  measures  as  well  as  global  economic, 
financial, commodity price and exchange rate developments. 
Our monetary policy continues to aim to safeguard price stability. Since mid-2014 we have 
taken  a  number  of  both  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  to  address  the 
heightened  risks  of  too  prolonged  a  period  of  too  low  inflation,  encompassing  targeted 
longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs),  a  third  covered  bond  purchase  programme 
(CBPP3) and an asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP). In January 2015, 
an  expanded  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  was  launched.  The  APP  continues  to 
proceed smoothly and – together with other monetary policy measures – has a favourable 
impact on the cost and availability of credit for firms and households, contributing to the euro 
area  recovery  and  a  gradual  rise  in  inflation.  We  intend  to  purchase  private  and  public 
securities until the end of September 2016, or beyond if necessary, and, in any case, until we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is consistent with our aim of achieving 
inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. In the light of renewed risks that 
have emerged on the back of recent developments in global and in financial and commodity 
markets, we are closely monitoring all relevant incoming information and are ready to use all 
the instruments available within our mandate to act, if warranted, in particular by adjusting 
the size, composition and duration of the asset purchase programme. 
Since  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  the  euro  area  has  made  significant  progress  towards  sound 
public finances and implementing structural reforms. Given the high structural unemployment 
level and low potential output, the ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective 
structural  policies.  Further  product  market  and  labour  market  reforms,  and,  in  particular, 
actions  to  improve  the  business  environment,  which  should  include  an  adequate  public 
infrastructure,  are  of  the  essence  and  need  to  gain  momentum  across  the  euro  area 
countries.  Such  reforms  will  increase  productive  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity,  while  increasing  the  adjustment  capacity  and  resilience  of  the  euro  area 
economies to global shocks. Fiscal policies should support the modest economic recovery 
and ensure debt sustainability, while remaining in full compliance with the EU’s fiscal rules. 
With bond yields subject to volatility, high-debt countries in particular need to pay attention to 
risks related to a reversal of the current low interest rate environment. 
We have achieved significant progress over the past year, with banking union becoming a 
reality  and  with  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
starting  their  operations.  However,  developments  in  Greece  in  the  first  half  of  this  year 
served as a reminder that the euro area architecture remains unfinished. As spelled out in 
the  Five  Presidents’  Report,  a  more  complete  union  is  necessary  to  make  our  monetary 
union in Europe stable and prosperous. The economic and monetary union will notably need 
to strengthen its tools for managing and preventing the build-up of fiscal, financial and other 
macroeconomic risks. 
It is also necessary for the euro area to move towards completing banking union in order to 
create  a  truly  single  banking  system  and  achieve  its  objectives  of  breaking  the  bank-
sovereign nexus, making the financial system more resilient, and protecting the interests of 
taxpayers.  In  parallel,  the  authorities  will  need  to  decisively  deal  with  remaining  crisis 
legacies to create a better foundation for bank lending to the real economy. 
To further widen the scope for cross-border private risk-sharing in Europe, the EU will have 
to make progress in developing a capital markets union (CMU). CMU will also play a key role 
in supporting European growth by diversifying sources of funding and increasing companies’ 
access  to  financing.  A  long-term  vision  accompanied  by  an  ambitious  agenda  for  further 
action will be necessary in order to achieve the ultimate aims of CMU. 
A more complete union in Europe will not only create a more prosperous and resilient euro 
area economy for its own citizens, but will also be in the best interests of the global economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
