   Yves Mersch: Interview in Les Echos 
Interview with Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in Les Echos, conducted by Mr Jean-Philippe Lacour and published on 15 November 2015. 
 Les Echos – What is your reaction to the terror attacks? 
Yves Mersch – We are deeply shocked by what happened in Paris. Those atrocious attacks 
have killed and wounded hundreds of people. We express our solidarity, our compassion, and 
our sincere condolences to the families and friends of the victims. 
Before being able to measure the consequences of these events, what is your 
diagnostic of the euro area economy? 
Recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  ongoing,  growth  is  showing  a  definite  resilience.  Domestic 
demand is supported by consumption thanks to the low price of oil, which increases purchasing 
power. But the other facet of demand, investment, is not at its best level. This is the case for 
public investment, especially in countries with room for manoeuvre, while private investment 
is being held back by the restructuring of balance sheets. The emerging economies are also 
having an impact on external demand. Inflation is expected to rise again at the beginning of 
next year owing to base effects on energy prices. However, analysts shouldn't focus so much 
on short-term data or on certain inflation expectations indices. Our approach is more holistic. 
We also look at underlying inflation and factors which accelerate inflationary pressures, such 
as phenomena that have an impact on the capacity for price-setting, etc. 
The Autumn 2015 European Economic Forecast also points to a divergence between 
the two large economies, France and Germany. Is it worrying to see that economic 
integration is not progressing in the euro area? 
Yes,  because  in  a  monetary  union,  differences  between  countries  shouldn't  be  such  as  to 
render monetary policy less effective. Economic structures may differ, but it would be better if 
economic cycles would converge. That is why we hope that economic cooperation in Europe 
will be strengthened. 
Rather than cooperation, Europe is showing divisions and tensions. With respect to 
Greece, where the situation with creditors is becoming more strained, should we be 
worried that the crisis experienced in the middle of the year will flare up again? How 
would the ECB react? 
We have asked Greece to adopt a large number of measures in a very short time. It appears 
that the Greek government is still finding it hard to implement the agreed programme. The 
Ministers  of  Finance  of  the  euro  area  are  confident  that  the  commitments  made  will  be 
honoured; they are convinced that the necessary measures will be taken in order to release 
the pledged funds. The ECB does not take a political stance on the matter. It follows rules 
which are transparent and public. 
Portugal, for its part, has plunged into a political crisis following the ousting of the 
pro-austerity government. Could it become a new Greece? 
Those two countries can't be compared. Each has its own experiences. At the ECB, we respect 
all  existing governments,  as  long  as  they  implement the commitments they  have  made  on 
behalf of their countries. That applies to Portugal and to all the other euro area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Is France going far enough when it comes to reforms? 
France is committed to implementing reforms, although I must say that the laws which have 
passed through parliament are often somewhat removed from what was originally announced. 
The Macron reforms, for example, concern a much lower number of professions than initially 
envisaged.  It's  noteworthy  that  other  European  countries  which  are  also  on  the  path  to 
economic reform, such as Italy, are implementing institutional reforms in parallel with structural 
reform. 
Is the situation in the euro area fragile enough to justify new measures by the ECB? 
We are waiting to see the outlook for 2017 in the updated Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections. At the last meeting in October, the Governing Council of the ECB agreed on the 
need  to re-examine,  in December,  the  degree of  monetary  policy  accommodation. We  will 
examine the effects of measures taken so far and decide if there is a need for further action or 
not. The discussion will be very detailed, and it is important that proper preparations are made. 
That work is currently being done by several committees made up of representatives 
of the national central banks and of the ECB. 
Those  experts  are  studying  all  the  options.  It  is  possible  that  their  work  could  lead  to 
recommendations being made. However, the Governing Council is independent and has sole 
authority. 
Several central bank governors have spoken in favour of the adoption of new 
measures. 
Of  course,  but  nothing  has  been  decided  on!  The  discussion  will  take  place  within  the 
Governing Council, not in the public arena. 
It is conceivable that one of the recommendations for supporting growth and inflation 
would be to expand the asset purchase programme launched in March, in other words, 
QE – a measure which can by nature be extended. However, it seems that the 
Governing Council is divided on the subject... 
The debate is ongoing. Nothing has been decided yet. 
And what do you recommend? 
We have not exhausted our options. QE is expected to continue until September 2016, at least. 
Our monetary policy is medium-term oriented. We are already taking stock of what has been 
done so far and what remains to be done. And we are making decisions for the future based 
on the marginal effectiveness of the options we have available to us. Given that a high number 
of securities have been purchased, if we stopped the programme overnight it would cause a 
"cliff, effect", that is, a sharp drop in liquidity. We must manage the programme in such a way 
as  to  avoid  that  situation  occurring  in  the  markets,  independent  of  pure  monetary  policy 
considerations. 
The other option referred to in Malta concerns a lowering of the Eurosystem deposit 
facility rate. The negative rate of –0.20%, in place since 2014, was supposed to be a 
floor. Why should the ECB change its mind? 
Negative rates, with which we have limited experience, have multiple consequences. Some 
are positive, others less so. They have, for instance, an influence on the exchange rate, which, 
as you know, is not a monetary policy objective. However, it is a very important transmission 
channel for prices and growth. Other countries have made use of that instrument, although 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   they are generally smaller, open economies in which the exchange rate plays an important 
role. 
It is highly likely that the US Federal Reserve System will increase its rates in 
December. That possibility has already affected the euro-dollar exchange rate. Could 
that exempt the ECB from taking action? 
Our discussion does not hinge upon the decisions of the Federal Reserve System. And I would 
remind you that the exchange rate is not a monetary policy objective. Our decision will be 
based on the development of the situation in Europe, which can of course be influenced by a 
change of direction by the Fed. However, like the changing price of oil, this is something we 
don't have control over. 
European banking supervision, under the authority of the ECB, has got off to a good 
start. All that remains to be put in place to complete banking union is a European 
deposit guarantee scheme. Does Germany's opposition to the plan worry you? 
When you have a single system of banking supervision, it is logical to have, in the long term, 
a  deposit  guarantee  system  that  makes  the  consequences  of  supervisory  failure  a  shared 
concern. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
