   Benoît Cœuré: Towards a political convergence process in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Interparliamentary  Conference  “Towards  a  Progressive  Europe”,  Berlin,  16  October 
2015. 
 Summary 
The effectiveness of the ECB’s action rests on the “M” in the EMU being kept free from political 
interference. But for this to be secured in a lasting way, we need to further develop the “E”, i.e. 
the economic union. 
In the past decade, intermediate solutions to save the euro area were found, but left the EMU 
still  vulnerable  to future crises.  Therefore, we  need  to  define  a  new  convergence  process, 
involving  converging  economic  structures  and  more  integrated  markets.  This  should  be 
complemented  by  fully  legitimate  institutions  with  the  right  instruments  to  intervene  if  the 
consensus is not respected. 
This new convergence process will lead to higher resilience against economic shocks on a 
national level and European level, via internal and euro-wide adjustment mechanisms. And it 
is a prerequisite before discussing a layer of fiscal stabilisation at the European level, which 
would protect monetary policy from bearing too much of the stabilisation burden. 
But such a new convergence process cannot be a technical exercise. For convergence to be 
lasting and to secure the buy-in of citizens and Member States, such a process needs to be 
political in nature. This requires a revived political narrative for euro area integration, and a 
coherent European social contract that brings out the best in each national social contract. 
 Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Dear Group Vice-President Carsten [Schneider], 
Many thanks for your kind introduction and for having me here today. I am glad to see that 
Parliaments are at the forefront of the debate on the future of Economic and Monetary Union 
or EMU. You may  wonder what an unelected central banker has to say about the political 
foundations of EMU. After all, the European Central Bank (ECB) is not a political institution. 
Indeed, for our work to be effective, the “M” in EMU must be kept free from political interference. 
But to secure this in the long term, we need to develop the “E”, so economic union, further. I 
will argue today that the political dimension of economic union will be crucial. 
Moving forward with passion and perspective 
Almost, one hundred years ago Max Weber famously described politics as “a strong and slow 
boring of hard boards which takes both passion and perspective” 1. 
The board we want to drill into today, the future of EMU, is certainly one of the hardest and 
thickest, requiring not only passion but also an ability to cope with frustration – had you asked 
me in July and August about my passion for attending lengthy Eurogroup meetings, night-long 
                                                
1  See Weber, M., “Politics as a Vocation” in Gerth, H.H. and Wright Mills, C. (eds.), “From Max Weber: Essays in 
sociology”, Routledge, 1991. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   negotiations and teleconferences, I would not have shown great enthusiasm; all too often, we 
lose perspective of what we want to achieve. 
First, some people simply want EMU to be dismantled – either in its entirety or at least where 
their country is concerned. They can be found on both the left and right of the political spectrum. 
This is what I would call the “ostrich fallacy”. As a euro area country, you may theoretically give 
up your voice in the euro project. But you cannot forgo interdependence. We are too closely 
interlinked and frankly too small individually to solve problems alone in the face of globalisation. 
Sticking our heads in the sand will not make these facts go away. This was why we moved 
from fixed exchange rate regimes – which were more volatile, asymmetric and unpredictable 
than what we have today – to a single currency. And this single currency, as recent months 
have once again shown, is here to stay. 
Second, other people think that we can continue to muddle through with the architecture and 
arrangements that we have today, occasionally propped up by crises. They recall how much 
has been achieved over the last half-decade to shore up the construction of EMU, and they 
are right. But the developments over the summer, the state of our economy and the apparent 
problems implementing the new, recently agreed rules all point to the fact that what we have 
today is not enough. We need to go beyond the quick fixes and intermediate solutions that 
were necessary, but insufficient to make EMU strong enough to weather future crises and to 
be the foundation for sustainable growth. 
Third, there is the temptation to view a transfer of all important economic policy functions to 
the European level as the “silver bullet solution or, as Charles De Gaulle once said, to jump up 
and down on  your chair like a goat kid bleating “Europe! Europe!”. The argument goes as 
follows:  If  only  Europe  could  help  formulate  the  right  policies  and  actively  enforce  those 
policies, the continent would prosper again. And once our policy output improved, this would 
give the European project the legitimacy it had partly lost in the eyes of citizens in recent years. 
Even we at the ECB are not immune to this temptation. But it would be unrealistic to cling to it 
too much for this is not an idea that European citizens are prepared to accept today. 
So, today I want to propose that we move forward without losing perspective.2 In particular, 
and  in  my  view,  this  means  moving forward  economically  and  politically at the  same  time; 
moving towards more common decision-making regarding our economic policies while at the 
same time increasing the European legitimacy of this decision-making. 
A political narrative for EMU 
We should never forget that, at its heart, European integration has always been a political 
project. When six countries decided in 1951 to unify their coal and steel markets, this was 
fuelled by the deep conviction that binding these countries together with a common destiny 
was the best way to avoid another war. Europe was never first and foremost about economic 
functionalities and necessities. In the same spirit, I am convinced that to take the next step in 
economic integration, we will need to revive the political narrative for European integration. 
However, when we look at the past decade, we can appreciate that the need to move ahead 
was a direct consequence of the crisis. The European Stability Mechanism and its precursors 
– beginning with the bilateral loans to Greece in May 2010 – were established in response to 
an imperative imposed by the urgency of the situation; yet they have changed the nature of 
EMU forever and have emphasised how deeply interconnected we are. 
The steps that came next – the strengthening of the governance framework, the fiscal compact, 
banking union – were the first manifestations of this change, and I know that many of you have 
actively contributed to these achievements. But they still very much followed the functional 
                                                
2  See Coeuré, B., “Is eurozone governance fit for purpose?”, keynote speech at a dinner organised by the Centre 
for European Reform, London, 30 January 2014. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   narrative of immediate crisis management and prevention, a narrative of functional necessity 
and not so much of political choice. 
These steps were essential for shoring up EMU and for showing the world that we were willing 
to do what is necessary. However, the basic set-up in terms of the allocation of competencies 
under the Maastricht framework has remained unchanged: labour market legislation, social 
protection schemes, tax policies, many aspects of the product markets, and the overwhelming 
majority of business environment factors, such as judicial systems, have remained within the 
remit of Member States. 
Incidentally,  these  policies  are  the  most  sensitive  politically,  while  the  policies  that  were 
perceived as more bureaucratic and technical in nature – monetary policy, standard-setting in 
the internal market, competition policy or financial legislation – were subsequently transferred 
to the European level. This initial allocation of tasks was also viewed by many as a way of 
protecting historically evolved and deeply embedded national, social and economic models 
and preferences. 
The crisis has shown, however, that this divide was all but artificial, that it did not address the 
spillover effects created by monetary union and, indeed, that it was not able to shield social 
contracts at the national level. In fact, it made things worse: the crisis showed that sovereignty 
over economic policies cannot be exclusively national. Sooner or later, pursuing policies that 
are inconsistent with being part of a monetary union will end in failure. Like a boomerang, 
policy  mistakes  come  back  to  haunt  countries  and  their  neighbours  in  a  monetary  union, 
because policies are interdependent, and because important adjustment tools are no longer 
to hand. 
In  our  case,  the  boomerang  took  the  form  of  bubbles  bursting  and  loss  of  market  access, 
followed  by  harsh  macroeconomic  adjustment  programmes.  These  programmes  were 
necessary, and they worked. But they nevertheless came with economic, social and political 
price tags: economic and social, because implementing ad-hoc measures and the disorderly 
correction of imbalances always come at a greater cost than preventing imbalances in the first 
place. And political, because drastic corrections have consequences for political stability; they 
challenge the legitimacy of EMU. 
Going  forward,  there  is  thus  a  clear  choice:  either  we  engage  in  a  debate  and  end  up 
collectively  deciding  how  our  economic  and  social  policies  can  form  a  coherent  European 
social  contract  that  brings  out  the  best  in  each  national  social  contract  and  renders  these 
sustainable,3 or we continue to rely on the premise that the most essential economic and social 
policies are decided at the national level alone and wait for the boomerang to come back again. 
To my mind, this should not be a difficult call to make. 
But  making  this  call  and  moving  forward  without  losing  perspective  will  mean  progressing 
beyond the functional narrative that has, in my view, reached its limits. It will require, once 
more, a clear political narrative to justify why drawing closer together is not only necessary, 
but is actually a good idea. In particular, such a narrative should demonstrate that, when we 
speak about more Europe, this does not mean that our cherished European social model is 
under  attack;  rather,  more  Europe  is  precisely  what  can  protect  and  sustain  the  social 
achievements that set us apart from the rest of the world and that can help to further develop 
our social model to cope with the challenges of globalisation. 
Conceptualising this kind of political narrative is, by definition, not the role of a technocrat; it is 
your job, not mine. But I would like to provide you with some reasons why I believe that a new 
                                                
3  See Coeuré, B., “Revisiting the European social contract”, speech at the European Conference at Harvard, 
Europe 2.0 – Taking The Next Step, Cambridge, MA, 2 March 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   political and economic convergence process as proposed in the Five Presidents’ Report4 could 
lead you to such a narrative. 
Towards a political and economic convergence process 
A “convergence process 2.0”5 should foster convergence, not towards nominal targets this 
time, but towards a similar level of resilience for economic structures. 
“Resilience”  is  to  be  understood  here  both  at  the  level  of  individual  countries  (i.e.  internal 
adjustment  mechanisms,  such  as  price  and  wage  flexibility  to  compensate  for  the  loss  of 
nominal  exchange  rates)  and  at  the  level  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  (i.e.  cross-border 
adjustment mechanisms, such as risk pooling in capital markets or labour mobility). 
Yet, in order to foster not only economic convergence and, moreover, go beyond this to create 
political convergence and lasting buy-in through a new political narrative, requires a process 
that is both economic and political. 
What would be the key features of the economic dimension of the process? 
In my view, a small number of simple, but important conditions would need to be met, namely 
a) consensus on designating economic policies as a shared competence; b) agreement on 
which  policy  areas  should  be  subject  to  convergence;  and  c)  a  mechanism  ensuring  that 
convergence will continue beyond the end of the initial process. 
If these conditions are fulfilled, a “convergence process 2.0” would not only be an effective 
instrument for preventing and managing imbalances and macroeconomic risks. In my view, it 
would also be a precondition for adding a layer of fiscal stabilisation at the European level. 
Sufficient  convergence  in  terms  of  resilience  could  help  Member  States  to  deal  with 
asymmetric shocks without leading to permanent transfers in one direction. 
This is a necessity in a mature monetary union. It protects monetary policy from bearing a 
disproportionate share of the economic stabilisation burden. It also avoids what I have referred 
to elsewhere as “structural dominance” over fiscal policy, which amounts to fiscal policies being 
forced  to  do  all  the  heavy  lifting  to  stabilise  the  economy  and,  over  time,  to  fiscal  space 
becoming  progressively  exhausted.  This  overreliance  on  fiscal  policy  can  in  turn  lead  to 
dominance of fiscal policy over monetary policy.6 
But we should not be fooled: common fiscal policies will be neither economically desirable nor 
politically feasible without a successful economic convergence process. Nor should we make 
the mistake of believing that they can replace the need to conduct sound fiscal policies at the 
national level. On the contrary, building trust and creating symmetry through conducting sound 
domestic  policies  and  enhancing  market-based  adjustment  capacities  will  be  a  necessary 
condition for moving forward.7 
Indeed, this  is  why  a forceful  and thorough  implementation  of the  current framework  – the 
Fiscal Compact, Stability and Growth Pact, Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure and Country 
Specific Recommendations – is indispensable for future progression. 
But how should the conditions I have just outlined be translated into action? I believe that this 
is where we need to go beyond the functional narrative. 
                                                
4  Juncker, J.-C. et al, “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union”, June 2015. 
5  See Coeuré, B., “Investing in Europe: towards a new convergence process”, Athens, 9 July 2014. 
6  See Coeuré, B., “Lamfalussy was right: independence and interdependence in a monetary union”, speech at 
the Lamfalussy Lecture Conference organised by Magyar Nemzeti Bank in Budapest, 2 February 2015. 
7  See Coeuré, B., “ The future of Europe: building on our strengths”, speech at the plenary session on “The Future 
of Europe” during the fifth German Economic Forum, Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 2013. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Why is this the case? As I stated at the beginning, there is a significant temptation to devise 
such a convergence process with a sole focus on output legitimacy: experts determine the 
relevant policy areas and the right policies, and a new strong independent institution enforces 
them afterwards. This would then lead to sound policy outcomes which would legitimise the 
process after the event. But this would bring us back to the functional narrative. 
Indeed, a new convergence process cannot be a technical exercise for two reasons: first, the 
matters under discussion – be they labour market institutions, taxation, or the organisation of 
the judicial system and administrative capacity – are inherently political and much closer to the 
day-to-day  life  of  citizens  than,  for  example,  monetary  policy  ever  will  be.  Second,  an 
institutional architecture in a democratic system cannot be based mainly on coercion. After all, 
in  our  everyday  lives  we  do  not  follow  rules  because  we  constantly  fear  punishment,  but 
because  we  believe  in  the  purpose  of  the  rules and  understand that  they  can  only  work  if 
adherence to them is the norm, not the exception. 
We need a process that ensures the buy-in of citizens, governments and parliaments, that 
fosters a broad debate concerning our common understanding of what economic policies in a 
monetary union should look like, and that, for the most part, works based on consent to a 
common  framework  and  provides  fully  legitimate  institutions  with  the  right  instruments  to 
intervene if the consensus is not respected. 
This kind of political convergence process represents an opportunity: it could lead us to the 
political narrative I mentioned before. 
But  for  that  to  emerge  we  would  need  to  develop  a  common  understanding  of  economic 
policies – it could mean that national parliaments and the European Parliament need to speak 
to each other more, as we are doing today. 
If we were to commit to such a process, there would be a political cost to pay upfront as this 
would  mean  admitting  to  citizens  that  national  parliaments  alone  cannot  address  all  future 
challenges on their own anymore. But let us acknowledge that there is no such thing as a free 
lunch. This political cost is precisely the visible measure of collective commitment to the single 
currency project, which is necessary to ensure the economic and political resilience of EMU in 
the future. 
European  political  parties  could  be  a  catalyst  for  such  a  debate  –  by  organising  more 
discussions than they do now, not along national lines, but according to social preferences. 
This could also mean that social partners would need to go beyond their national remit and 
adopt a European perspective. 
Conclusion 
The outcome of this kind of process would certainly not be optimal from a purely economic 
standpoint. That is a key feature of democracy. But it would be legitimate; it would not have to 
rely on its outcome alone to be acceptable, and it would give citizens a clear indication as to 
why we must move forward together. In my view, this would be a major achievement that would 
provide the political underpinning for EMU. It would not only create a more stable environment 
for growth and prosperity; it would also allow us, as a central bank, to conduct our monetary 
policy in an environment of much greater certainty. In the end, the more developed the “E” in 
EMU, the better we can do our job on the “M” side. 
What I have proposed today is an opportunity for politics to reconnect with what matters most 
to our citizens; and an opportunity for Europe to move forward in the Weberian sense, with 
both  passion  and  perspective,  preserving  what  we  have  in  common  while  accommodating 
differences  where  these  are  an  asset.  This  would  indeed  be  faithful  to  the  model  of  the 
European Union – united in diversity. 
Thank you very much for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
