  
Luis M Linde: New challenges for a new era 
 Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  8th  Santander 
International Banking Conference, Madrid, 26 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good morning. First, I would like to thank Banco Santander for inviting me to participate in 
this new edition of your International Banking Conference. 
The first edition took place in the autumn of 2008, right after the fall of Lehman Brothers and 
just  before  the  G20  leaders  agreed  to  launch  the  financial  regulatory  reform  in  an 
unprecedented globally coordinated action. The objective was clear and so was the mandate 
given to the Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: to 
build a stronger and more resilient financial system. 
Since then, the main pillars of the reform have been put in place. The list of new measures 
implemented  is  long  and,  I  would  say,  impressive.  I  will  not  review  the  list,  which  is  very 
clearly and well explained in the latest progress reports published by the Financial Stability 
Board and the Basel Committee. 
I will focus my remarks on three different aspects of the global post-crisis reform that I find 
particularly relevant for the topic of this Conference: 
 
 
First of all, the finalisation, next year, of the Basel III framework. 
Second, the new total-loss-absorbing-capacity (TLAC) standard, developed by the 
Financial Stability Board and recently endorsed by the G20 leaders. 
To finalise, I will briefly  refer to a line of work that the Financial Stability Board is 
coordinating  to  address  the  systemic  risks  associated  with  misconduct  in  financial 
institutions and markets. 
 The completion of Basel III 
2. 
When the crisis started, the global banking system had built up several vulnerabilities: 
 
 
 
 
 
Many banks were highly leveraged. 
Capital proved to be insufficient and its quality was low. 
There was an excessive exposure to liquidity risk. 
The measurement of risk had major shortcomings. 
And  there  was  a  lack  of  awareness  of  the  dangers  associated  with  systemic  risk 
stemming from complex, opaque and highly interconnected global financial markets. 
Basel III is the regulatory response to address these vulnerabilities and, as such, it is one of 
the  main  elements  of  the  global  banking  prudential  reform.  With  Basel  III  the  Basel 
Committee has: 
 
 
Raised the level and quality of capital, especially core Equity Tier 1 capital. 
Introduced additional requirements in order to reduce systemic risk, such as those 
imposed on systemically important banks, or the countercyclical capital buffers. 
Introduced two new liquidity ratios to mitigate liquidity risk. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1
     Introduced  a  new  leverage  ratio  to  limit  leverage  and  reinforce  risk-based 
requirements. 
Developed  a  large-exposures  framework  to  limit  the  maximum  loss  in  case  of 
counterparty’s failure. 
Last,  but  not  least,  the  Basel  Committee  has  improved  the  effectiveness  of 
supervision by upgrading its Core Principles and by strengthening the supervision of 
systemically important banks. 
Many of these new rules are now in place and we can say that banks are more resilient now 
than  in  2009.  But  different  weaknesses  persist.  For  this  reason,  the  Basel  Committee  is 
undertaking  a  review  of  the  capital  framework  that  will  be  finalised  by  the  end  of  2016.  In 
particular, the methodologies used to measure banks’ risks are being reviewed, both under 
the standardised approaches and under internal models. 
The standardised approaches are being revised to incorporate the lessons learned from the 
crisis so as to increase their risk sensitivity without, however, making them unduly complex. 
Regarding  the  internal  models,  they  have  been  criticised  because  of  their  lack  of 
comparability, the variability of the resulting risk-weighted assets, and their complexity and 
lack  of  transparency.  These,  let’s  say,  “faults”  have  undermined  the  credibility  of  capital 
ratios.  Therefore,  the  Basel  Committee  is  considering  including  several  constraints  on 
internal models in order to strike a better balance between simplicity, comparability and risk 
sensitivity. 
The  other  remaining  major  challenge  is  calibration.  Basel  III  has  changed  the  prudential 
setting quite significantly. The days when there was a single metric (the risk-weighted capital 
ratio)  are  over.  We  now  have  several  prudential  measures  that  will  most  probably  be 
interacting  in  different  ways.  Banks  will  have  to  comply  with  a  risk-weighted  capital  ratio 
(including  additional  buffers);  a  leverage  ratio;  two  liquidity  ratios  and  the  large  exposure 
limits. Additionally, banks that apply internal models will most likely face capital floors based 
on  standardised  approaches.  Finally,  some  systemic  banks  will  have  to  hold  additional 
capital  to  meet  global-systemically-important-bank  (GSIB)  buffer  and  total-loss-absorbing-
capacity (TLAC) requirements. 
Applying different metrics will make the framework more resilient because some metrics will 
avoid the limitations of others. For instance, floors based on standardised approaches are 
meant to be a kind of control or safeguard on internal model risk calculations. 
Therefore, during 2016 the Basel Committee will be quite busy deciding on the constraints on 
internal models, calibrating the risk-weighted assets under standardised approaches (as well 
as the floors to be based on such standardised approaches) and performing a review of the 
calibration of the leverage ratio. 
I would like to underline that this calibration process will build upon the information provided 
by  banks  in  the  context  of  the  next  Quantitative  Impact  Study  (QIS)  exercises  that  will  be 
undertaken by the Committee. As always when quantitative issues are involved, the quality 
of the data will be a main driver for success in the calibration process. It is therefore very 
important  that  banks  provide  accurate  data  to  these  impact  studies.  Of  course,  any 
constructive feedback on the Committee’s consultative documents will also be very helpful in 
order to improve the whole exercise. 
The new TLAC framework 
3. 
The agreement on total-loss-absorbing-capacity, which was published on 9th November and 
endorsed by the G20 leaders, is an example of cooperation at global level towards ending 
the too-big-to-fail problem. 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
This  new  TLAC  standard  guarantees  that  global-systemically-important-banks  (GSIBs)  will 
have  a  sufficient  (and  well  distributed)  amount  of  loss  absorbing  capacity  to  ensure  the 
continuity of their critical functions at the point of resolution, avoiding the use of public funds. 
As such, it will contribute to the credibility of bail-in as an effective resolution tool. 
The TLAC requirement establishes that a banking group will have to issue (and maintain) a 
minimum amount of capital and debt liabilities to absorb losses first in case of resolution. The 
minimum external TLAC requirement would be placed at each “resolution entity” within the 
group (that is, the legal entity where resolution actions would take place). 
G-SIBs must comply with the TLAC minimum standard from 1st January 2019, subject to a 
phase-in.  This  minimum  requirement  will  be  calculated  as  the  higher  of  16  %  of  the  risk 
weighted  assets  associated  to  the  consolidated  balance  sheet  of  the  resolution  group  and 
6% of the denominator of the Basel III leverage ratio. As of 1st January 2022, these minimum 
requirements  will  rise  up  to  18  %  and  6.75  %  respectively.  The  TLAC  will  be  required 
alongside  minimum  Basel  III  capital  requirements,  and  the  extra  capital  buffers  (systemic, 
conservation and countercyclical) will sit on top of the TLAC risk-weighted metric. In addition, 
in order to ensure that there is enough recapitalisation capacity in resolution, one-third of the 
minimum  TLAC  requirement  is  expected  to  be  covered  with  instruments  other  than  CET1 
(that is, debt). 
It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  TLAC  establishes  a  common  minimum  global 
requirement  and  that  national  authorities  have  the  right  at  any  time  to  apply  higher 
requirements in their jurisdictions. 
The TLAC is a new prudential requirement that has different objectives than the capital ratio. 
Regulatory capital is mainly to absorb losses in a going-concern situation, whereas TLAC is 
meant to ensure loss absorption in gone-concern situations (that is, beyond the point of non-
viability). 
I should add that, in a resolution context, the location of loss absorbing resources becomes 
very  important  and,  for  this  reason,  the  TLAC  standard  gives  guidance  on  how  these 
resources should be distributed within the banking group. This highlights another important 
difference  between  the  capital  framework  and  TLAC:  the  location  of  resources.  While  the 
former is required on a consolidated basis for the group as a whole, TLAC is required where 
resolution takes effect and where critical functions are performed. 
One  of  the  most  complex  issues  in  the  design  of  the  TLAC  was  the  need  to  ensure 
consistency  between  the  two  main  banking  resolution  strategies:  the  Single  Point  of  Entry 
and the Multiple Point of Entry. 
Under a Single Point of Entry strategy, resolution actions will be taken in a single legal entity 
that is basically the parent company of the group, which will have to hold sufficient external 
TLAC. Additionally, a certain amount of loss-absorbing capacity should be pre-positioned in 
all  material  subsidiaries.  This  would  ensure  that  losses  are  up-streamed  to  the  resolution 
entity, thus avoiding putting the material subsidiary into resolution. 
By  contrast,  under  a  Multiple  Point  of  Entry  strategy,  the  application  of  resolution  tools  to 
different  parts  of  the  group  is  allowed  under  the  assumption  of  limited  interconnections 
between them. Therefore, in this model, loss-absorption capacity is primarily located in each 
resolution entity (subsidiaries and the parent company). This is the resolution model chosen 
by the global Spanish banks as it is a better fit with their business model. 
As I said, one of the most complex issues in the design of the TLAC standard was to find the 
correct  balance  between  taking  into  account  the  particularities  of  each  resolution  strategy 
and  ensuring  consistent  treatment  between  them.  In  this  respect,  the  Bank  of  Spain 
welcomes the inclusion of certain elements that go in the correct direction towards achieving 
regulatory  consistency  between  resolution  strategies.  Let  me  stress,  when  mentioning 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3
   
consistency, that it is important that different jurisdictions also strive to achieve this objective 
when introducing the TLAC standard into their regulations. 
Crisis  Management  Groups  (CMGs)  will  also  play  a  crucial  role  in  ensuring  consistency. 
Therefore, coordination between the different national authorities participating in these CMGs 
will  be  relevant  in  the  application  of  TLAC.  Some  examples  of  these  key  decisions  are: 
(1) determining  adjustments  for  Multiple  Point  of  Entry  groups  regarding  the  location  of 
deductions and requirements; (2) identifying material subsidiaries and resolution entities; and 
(3) discussions as to whether the minimum TLAC is sufficient to ensure orderly resolution or 
whether additional firm-specific requirements are needed. 
TLAC  is  quite  a  demanding  new  standard.  The  estimated  increase  in  issuances  of  TLAC 
debt  is  not  negligible,  if  we  consider  the  impact  assessment  performed  by  the  Financial 
Stability Board and the Basel Committee: the aggregate shortfall for G-SIBs under the low 
calibration represents 16.9 % of the €4.5 trillion G-SIBs unsecured debt market. 
Compliance  will  be  facilitated  by  the  agreed  phase-in  for  TLAC  and  the  replacement  of 
unsecured  liabilities  maturing  in  coming  years  which  will  be  an  important  source  of  TLAC 
eligible  instruments.  However,  the  success  of  both  the  roll-over  and  the  issuance  of  new 
TLAC-eligible instruments will depend on the absorption capacity of financial markets. In any 
event,  we  should  monitor  compliance  with  the  requirements  and  any  potential  unintended 
impact during the transition period. 
The plan to address misconduct risks 
4. 
With  the  publication  of  the  TLAC  term  sheet,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  virtually 
completed its work to address the too-big-to-fail problem in the banking sector. But there are 
other important areas where the FSB is working to fulfil the G20 mandate. 
In  particular,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  claimed  that  the  problems  of  misconduct  in 
some financial institutions have the potential to create systemic risks, considering the scale 
of the associated fines and sanctions which could run into the millions and also the negative 
impact on confidence. This is a serious threat that must be properly addressed. The banking 
business  is  about  trust;  if  confidence  in  the  financial  institutions  and  markets  is  lost,  the 
potential for finance to serve the real economy and foster growth will be undermined. 
In response to this threat, a new area of FSB-coordinated work has been set up. An action 
plan has been launched which, among other measures, explores the pivotal role played by 
compensation  structures  and,  more  generally,  corporate  governance 
in 
preventing and mitigating bad practice. The FSB is examining whether the reforms already in 
place,  mainly  as  a  result  of  principles  and  standards  issued  by  the  OECD,  the  Basel 
Committee and the FSB itself, have proven effective or if, on the contrary, more preventive 
measures are required. 
frameworks 
Closing remarks 
5. 
Let  me  conclude.  Back  in  2009  the  FSB  and  other  standard-setting  bodies  (such  as  the 
Basel Committee) received a mandate from the G20 to restore the resilience of the financial 
markets and make future financial crises less frequent and costly. Most of the agreed post-
crisis measures are now in place and have already begun to deliver benefits in terms of bank 
resilience and financial stability. 
The Basel Committee intends to finalise the Basel III framework in 2016. In this respect the 
two  main  challenges  are:  (i)  to  find  a  solution  to  measure  risks  in  a  sensitive,  simple  and 
comparable way; and (ii) to provide calibration of the capital floors and leverage ratio. A key 
driver for success in this calibration exercise will be having access to accurate data. 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   
I have outlined the main strategic aspects of the new TLAC standard, designed to provide a 
first line of defence in a gone concern situations. Meeting TLAC and Basel III requirements 
will pose a challenge for banks. 
One of these challenges has to do with the potential systemic impact of misconduct risks, 
which  can  undermine  confidence.  Having  in  place  adequate  compensation  structures  and 
sound corporate governance frameworks is the best way to tackle this. 
The Financial Stability Board is leading the work to determine if and when more measures 
might  be  needed  to  ensure  a  strong  culture  in  the  finance  industry,  so  that  confidence  is 
preserved and financial markets can continue to serve the real economy. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a fruitful and interesting discussion in the rest of the 
Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5
