  Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus: Crisis preparedness menu for guardians of 
financial stability 
Opening address by Ms Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  14th  IADI  Conference  on  “Crisis  Preparedness 
Institutional  Arrangements  and  Coordination,  Crisis  Communication  and  Contingency 
Planning”, Kuala Lumpur, 28 October 2015. 
 reforms, 
the  supporting 
infrastructure  and 
focused  on  policy 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  amongst  the  company  of  distinguished  members  of  the 
deposit  insurers’  fraternity,  fellow  supervisors  and  central  bankers.  We  meet  here  today, 
almost seven years, after the collapse of a single firm that shattered conventional  wisdom 
and redefined the “rules of the game” for the management of financial system stability. Seven 
years later and counting, the path to sustainable recovery remains unclear. The cumulative 
impact  of reforms  in  the financial  sector  also  remains  to  be  seen.  In  such  an  increasingly 
unpredictable world, crisis preparedness has become more important. 
Much is already being done on various fronts to prepare us better to manage crises. This has 
mostly 
institutional 
arrangements.  Also  important  however,  and  much  less  discussed,  are  aspects  of  crisis 
preparedness  that  cannot  easily  be  reduced  to  a  pre-defined  framework  or  template  for 
action. These aspects are humility, agility and trust, and this is what I would like to address 
today. 
Let me begin with a short story. On 10 May 1996, three teams set out to conquer the world’s 
tallest peak, Mount Everest. Due to a combination of factors, including over- confidence, a 
hostile  environment  and  poor  communication,  the  expedition  ended  in  one  of  the  worst 
tragedies of the peak’s history. Rob Hall, one of three team leaders of the great expedition, 
had  successfully  scaled  the  mountain  numerous  times  before.  Underestimating  the  risks 
when faced with unstable weather conditions, Hall decided to proceed with the climb rather 
than turning back. He had strong belief that his past successes, which invariably inflated his 
confidence, sufficiently equipped him for the challenges ahead. 
This  has  now  become  a  classic  case  study  on  leadership  and  risk  management  under 
extreme conditions. Interesting parallels can be drawn in the context of crisis preparedness 
in the financial sector. 
Over the course of crises history, policymakers and market participants that were involved in 
every financial bubble were repeatedly afflicted with the conviction that “this time would be 
different”.  The  majority  voice  was  quick  to  dismiss  rising  risks,  and  contrarian  views  were 
often ignored. It was reasoned that efficient markets would work as they should to contain 
risks, and economies would have the structural flexibility to adjust to residual risks that might 
materialise.  In  hindsight,  such  views  were  surprisingly  intractable  throughout  periods  that 
have followed multiple episodes of crises – from the 30’s Great Depression, the 80’s debt 
crisis, the 90’s Asian and Latin American meltdowns, to the Great Recession of this century. 
Conditions  surrounding  each  crisis  differed  widely,  but  this  recurring  mindset  appeared  to 
prevail in the run-up to each major collapse. 
Playing to form, during the period of the Great Moderation, it was held that central banks and 
policymakers  had successfully  moderated  destabilising  booms  and  busts  in  the  long  term. 
Financial  ‘innovation’,  while  not  eliminating  risk  completely,  had  found  new  ways  to 
effectively  distribute  risks  across  diversified  agents  and  borders.  Or  so  it  seemed,  even 
though no one fully understood or had enough information to know where the risks ultimately 
ended up. All of the above lent credence to the deep-seated faith that “this time would be 
different”, until the extended period of macroeconomic calm was abruptly brought to a jolting 
halt by the Great Recession. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The  future  terrain  of  crises  will  continue  to  be  fraught  with  uncertainty  and  a  humbling 
recognition of our inherent limitations. Policymakers therefore need to proceed with a healthy 
dose  of  humility.  Much  like  the  harsh,  volatile  weather  conditions  at  the  world’s  highest 
peak,  the  next  crisis  will  be  unpredictable,  and  likely  exceed  our  capacity  to  control  or 
prevent. In this post-crisis era, we have seen wide ranging policy and institutional reforms in 
many jurisdictions. They are important, even critical, to correct past errors and respond to 
future  anticipated  challenges.  But  their  implementation,  and  our  reliance  on  them,  should 
acknowledge  the  constraints  that  we  face.  Contemporary  understanding  of  the  sources, 
drivers and transmission channels of systemic risks remains incomplete. Multifaceted policy 
frameworks  and  toolkits  designed  to  curb  systemic  risks  and  manage  crisis  are  also  still 
evolving. We can certainly expect that data quality and analytical frameworks will continue to 
improve over time. But our understanding of future crisis dynamics will never be perfect. Far 
from  it.  This  means  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  change  course  when  required  and 
acknowledge errors in judgment sooner rather than later, even if it means re-evaluating well-
reasoned positions. 
This brings me to my second point on agility. Financial crises are inflection points of a cycle 
which materialise in the least predictable manner. This demands a high degree of agility of 
policymakers and the financial system to adapt to the new operating reality. Such agility is 
derived  from  crisis  management  frameworks  that  are  well-anchored  in  clearly  defined 
strategic  outcomes  and  accountability  structures,  but  also  flexible  enough  to  respond  to  a 
range of conditions. And critically, it requires investing in resources with deep experience and 
knowledge. 
Going back to the 1996 Everest expedition, Hall and his team had made every reasonable 
effort to incorporate comprehensive risk management and contingency planning into the pre-
climb  plan.  As  things  turned  south,  it  became  clear  that  the  team  was  unable  to  respond 
quickly  to  the  dynamic  situation.  Outdated  and  inefficient  radio  systems  led  to  a 
communication  breakdown  of  vital  information.  Physiological,  psychological  and  technical 
readiness of some of the climbers was also in question. Their inability to respond fluidly to 
changing conditions created an overdependence on key resource persons. Combined with 
lack of experience to deal with a series of new challenges, leaders were incapacitated and 
team dynamics disintegrated quickly. 
In  essence,  crisis  preparedness  frameworks  should  provide  clarity  of  purpose  for  actions 
taken,  enable  policy  options  to  be  properly  evaluated,  and  support  effective  and  swift 
execution  of  crisis  responses,  including  the  communication  of  such  responses.  It  is  not 
however intended to be a fail-safe mechanism with a pre-set comprehensive plan, designed 
exclusively for each likely manifestation of a crisis. We need to anticipate that plans will fall 
apart  midway,  or  work  selectively  throughout  various  stages  of  the  crisis  for  a  variety  of 
reasons.  Market  participants  are  irrational,  infrastructures  flawed,  economies  and  financial 
systems are imperfect, and the political environment is unpredictable. Markets are also prone 
to excesses, manipulations and fickleness. Therefore crisis preparedness frameworks need 
to flex and evolve accordingly and ensure that framework, instrument and resource rigidities 
do not become binding constraints to the effective management of future crises. 
At the heart of the operational and governance framework for crisis management will be a 
team  comprising  first  responders,  surveillance/crisis  experts  and  decision  makers,  cutting 
across a range of competent authorities. The ability of these key operating agents to respond 
nimbly is imperative during a fast-moving crisis to reconnect the financial system lifeline, and 
maintain coherence in the overall crisis management process. This in turn depends on the 
ability to bring together a dynamic set of crisis managers across jurisdictions and agencies. 
Such  a  pool  of  crisis  expertise  needs  to  be  identified  beforehand  and  continuously 
developed, including through simulations, to reduce the time to action during a crisis. 
Last,  but  certainly  not  least,  is  the  element  of  trust.  In  the  panic  and  chaos  during  crisis 
situations, feeble coordination and communication arrangements will falter easily. This can 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
occur  even  with  well-established  frameworks  and  dynamic  resource  persons  at  hand. 
Communication  failures  during  Robert  Hall’s  expedition  were  not  caused  by  the  lack  of 
infrastructure  or  defined  channels  for  information  dissemination.  It  stemmed  from  a  more 
fundamental issue. Those involved in the final climb were complete strangers until several 
weeks  before.  Unfamiliarity  among  team  members  generated  communication  barriers, 
distrust and uncertainties. This did not engender efforts to create a robust co-dependency 
and coordination structure to collectively weather extremities faced on Mount Everest. Strong 
policy  frameworks  and  institutional  arrangements  only  make  interagency  coordination  and 
communication feasible. But it is entrenched mutual trust, fostered during stable times, that 
makes  them  credible  in  challenging  times.  Trust  ensures  that  collaboration  arrangements, 
secured  in  good  times,  remain  firm  and  functional  in  the  face  of  crises.  Trust  nurtures 
confidence and enables reliance on the competence of others. Without trust and symbiotic 
crisis networks within and across agencies, a crisis framework offers little more than false 
comfort during crises. 
The Bank’s own experience in the management of crises, as well as global reforms that are 
taking place in this area, continue to be useful in guiding us as we navigate this increasingly 
demanding policy domain. We have continued to make important progress. In the spirit of 
building  trust  and  agility  during  normal  times,  we  have  worked  hard  to  strengthen 
coordination arrangements with our regional counterparts and key domestic authorities. To 
name  a  few,  this  has  included  the  development  of  crisis  management  protocols  that  are 
outlined  in  the  Strategic  Alliance  Agreement  with  PIDM,  the  Operational  Framework  for 
Financial  Crisis  Management  and  Resolution  with  the  Securities  Commission,  and  the 
Executives’  Meeting  of  Asia-Pacific  Central  Banks  (EMEAP)  Crisis  Management  and 
Resolution  Framework 
jurisdictions.  Numerous  refinements  have  been 
introduced,  and  several  crisis  simulations  were  conducted.  All  in  response  to  anticipated 
changes in the financial and regulatory landscape, and to continuously elevate our level of 
operational  preparedness. We  remain  committed  to  building  strong relationships  based  on 
mutual trust that will serve us well through the uncertainties that invariably accompany any 
crises.  And  we  continue  to  work  on  ensuring  that  these  arrangements  are  credible  when 
disaster  strikes.  For  us,  it  is  as  important  to  encourage  open  and  honest  communications 
with  our  counterparts,  as  it  is  to  have  formal  arrangements  for  information  exchange. We 
cooperate  with  each  other  in  conducting joint  surveillance  and  capacity  building  initiatives. 
Through these collaborations, we gradually build respect, trust and goodwill, the kind that no 
framework can hope to manufacture. 
Let me  now  conclude.  In  no trivial  part  due  to my  mentors,  predecessors  and  colleagues, 
past  crises  that  affected  Malaysia  were  well-managed,  leading  to  speedy  recovery  with 
minimal  losses  to  taxpayers,  and  the  equally  important  structural  transformations  that 
followed.  Clear  statutory  remits.  Independent  policy  making.  Effective  coordination  and 
implementation.  Sound  governance  and  accountability.  Building  agility  and  trust.  And 
proceeding with utmost humility. These building blocks and experience accumulated laid the 
necessary foundation for the Bank’s work on crisis management, and continue to anchor our 
efforts to enhance crisis preparedness on various fronts. 
involving  11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
