   
Yves Mersch: The future of Europe’s financial market infrastructure – the 
Eurosystem’s Vision 2020 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Sibos conference, Singapore, 14 October 2015. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, members of the panel, 
The  beauty  of  innovation  is  that  it  never  ends. Even  the  best  ideas  can  be  enhanced  and 
complemented. The Eurosystem, the euro area’s network of central banks, has developed two 
major innovations in the field of financial market infrastructure over the past 15 years: TARGET 
(now TARGET2) and TARGET2-Securities, or T2S. 
Both platforms have significantly improved the way payments and securities are processed in 
Europe.  However,  as  we  look  to  the  future,  we  see  room  for  further  enhancements  and 
consolidation. 
As  we  think  about  where  we  want  to  go  next,  I  should  stress  that  our  vision  for  market 
infrastructure  integration  is  not,  nor  should  be,  ours  alone.  Following  the  success  of  our 
collaboration  with  the  market  during  the  development  of  T2S,  we  intend  to  take  the  same 
approach going forwards – to work together with the market to identify what its needs are and 
to draw on the expertise in both the public and the private sectors. Through collaboration we 
will define where European market infrastructure should be heading. 
As we think about future innovation, allow me to look briefly at past innovations. The digital 
camera, the mobile phone and the internet were three revolutionary innovations of the last 
century. But the reason why so many of us now have a smartphone in our pockets is because 
the innovation did not end there – someone had the idea to combine these tools into a single 
device. 
The Eurosystem’s vision for 2020 is not so different. Over the coming years, we will seek to 
draw  on  the  synergies  between  TARGET2  and  T2S.  One  idea  is  to  consolidate  some 
components of the technical infrastructure and maybe even form a single platform. This will 
allow  TARGET2  to  benefit  from  some  of  the  state-of-the-art  features  of  T2S,  such  as  the 
implementation of ISO 20022 standards. Migration to ISO 20022 in TARGET2 was originally 
planned for November 2017, but upon the banks’ request, we have postponed implementation 
and will work together with the market, under the umbrella of our Vision 2020, to find the most 
appropriate method and timing for migration. 
The enhancements we envisage for Europe’s financial market infrastructure will benefit users 
from a technical perspective in that they will have access to all available services via a single 
gateway. Moreover, these enhancements will provide an opportunity to further increase the 
resilience of the system. 
As regards the business benefits for users, we will seek to enhance the services currently 
provided  by  TARGET2,  for  example  by  further  optimising  liquidity-saving  mechanisms.  In 
addition,  it  could  be  possible  to  add  statistical  tools  to  support  banks  with  their  regulatory 
reporting. 
In other words, just as new apps are constantly being developed for smartphones, so too will 
we be able to add new  functionalities to the platform to meet emerging market needs and 
requirements. These functionalities will benefit from being designed for a single, harmonised 
platform. 
As we consolidate the financial market infrastructure in Europe, another area requiring further 
attention  is  that  of  collateralisation.  With  increased  regulation  following  the  financial  crisis, 
collateral  requirements are  higher than  ever. This  is  why  it  is  so  important that  banks  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   financial  institutions  are  able  to  manage  their  collateral  in  an  efficient  way  and  why  the 
optimisation of liquidity-saving measures presents such a benefit to market participants. With 
T2S, it is now possible to have a single, centralised, pool of collateral, making it much simpler 
and faster to move collateral from where it is to where it needs to be. 
This then brings to the fore the issue of harmonising our own collateralisation techniques and 
procedures. As we look to the future, the Eurosystem will seek to drive harmonisation forwards, 
particularly as regards Eurosystem operations for the mobilisation of marketable assets, as 
well as the handling procedures for non-marketable assets. 
We  live  in  a  fast-paced  world,  and  customers  have  come  to  expect  instant  services  in  all 
aspects of life, including from their banks. This is why part of our vision for 2020 is to support 
the development of pan-European instant payment services, so that customers can send and 
receive payments at the same speed with which they can send and receive e-mails. The Euro 
Retail Payments Board is a multi-stakeholder body which helps foster the development of an 
integrated,  innovative  and  competitive  market  for  retail  payments  in  euro.  This  summer  it 
mandated  the  payments  industry  to  design  a  scheme  for  instant  payment  services  by 
November 2015. The Eurosystem could also consider a possible service expansion in this 
context, at least on the settlement layer, in order to meet the needs of potential future instant 
payment providers. 
TARGET, T2S and SEPA have been important milestones on our journey towards European 
integration. The Eurosystem’s Vision 2020 will set out the next steps. The actions we take over 
the coming years will complement the European Commission’s project to establish a Capital 
Markets Union in Europe – a project which the ECB and the Eurosystem fully support. In fact, 
T2S and its harmonisation agenda have already laid the groundwork for such a union. With 
the action plan published at the end of September, the European Commission has transformed 
its vision into concrete steps. I am confident that through our joint efforts and complementary 
initiatives we can deepen financial integration and complete the Single Market in Europe in a 
lasting way. 
I have briefly outlined a few components of the Eurosystem’s Vision 2020. Let me summarise 
the three main points: 
• 
The Eurosystem is exploring synergies between TARGET2 and T2S, with the ultimate 
goal of achieving a consolidated Eurosystem market infrastructure. 
We  are  assessing  new  service  opportunities  arising  from  bringing  the  two 
infrastructures closer together. In particular, we are considering enhancements to the 
TARGET2 services in the field of instant payments. 
The Eurosystem will increase harmonisation of its own collateralisation techniques 
and procedures. We will also consider the business case for a common Eurosystem 
collateral management system. 
  As part of this morning’s panel, we will delve a little deeper into this vision and will discuss 
some of the challenges we can expect the future to bring. 
I would like to welcome the panel members and Marc Bayle who will moderate this session. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
