  Yves Mersch: Means of payments and SMEs – where are we heading? 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the dinner debate, organised by the Think tank Etienne Marcel, Paris, 29 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Cohen-Hadad, (Mr President) 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
No  economy  can  prosper  without  healthy,  competitive  and  flourishing  small  and  medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs). They are the foundation on which the European economy is built 
and constitute more than 99% of all firms in the euro area. They employ more than two-thirds 
of the workforce and generate around 60% of value added. According to recent research, 
SMEs accounted for around 85% of total employment growth between 2002 and 2010 and 
have much higher employment growth rates than large enterprises. 
The financial crisis hit the financing of SMEs particularly hard. This explains why, in recent 
years,  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission  have  strongly  emphasised  measures  that 
support  both  bank  and non-bank financing  of  the  European  SME  sector. These  measures 
and policy initiatives include strengthening bank financing by facilitating longer-term financing 
and promoting healthier balance sheets. They also aim to diversify into non-bank financing 
via  more  efficient  securitisation,  better 
transparency  and  more  efficient  wholesale 
infrastructure.1 This is why the ECB strongly supports the European Commission’s initiative 
to establish a European capital markets union, which will allow businesses to enjoy a greater 
range of funding choices and help reduce the link between a firm’s location and its funding 
costs. 
However, there are other policies that have received less public attention in relation to the 
competitiveness of the European SME sector, one of the most important being integration 
and innovation in the retail payments market, particularly for payments in euro. This is what I 
will focus on tonight. 
Past achievements 
2. 
Over the past years the public and private sectors have worked together to create the Single 
Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA).  Regulatory  measures  and  market  developments  have 
combined to remove the distinction between domestic and cross-border payments in euro. 
Retail  payments  have  become  much  faster,  cheaper  and  more  secure.  Instead  of  taking 
three  to  five  days,  euro  credit  transfers  and  direct  debits  are  now  executed  within  one 
business day, not only at the domestic level but also across borders. Fees for cross-border 
euro transactions decreased to the same level as those for domestic transactions. Last, but 
certainly not least, payments in general have become more secure due to stronger regulatory 
attention and requirements. 
However,  work  still  remains  to  further  develop  an  integrated,  innovative  and  competitive 
market for euro retail payments. To this end, the ECB established the Euro Retail Payments 
Board (ERPB) at the end of 2013. In this high-level strategic body the demand and supply 
sides  of  payment  services  are  given  equal  importance.  SMEs,  as  a  key  demand-side 
                                                
1   See, for example, “SME access to finance in the euro area: barriers and potential policy remedies”, Monthly 
Bulletin, ECB, Frankfurt am Main, July 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
stakeholder group, are represented by UEAPME and Mr Cohen-Hadad. I am convinced that, 
with this collaborative governance structure, we can be both efficient and output driven. 
What will the future bring? 
3. 
Let me turn now to the future. How will the work of the Euro Retail Payments Board benefit 
SMEs? 
First, the  ECB  and  ERPB  are  monitoring  the  completion  of  SEPA  migration,  which  is  due 
next year, with the phasing out of national niche credit transfers and direct debits and 
other waivers. Furthermore, full migration to SEPA credit transfers and SEPA direct debits by 
non-euro area countries is being monitored. This final stage of the long process of adapting 
common standards for basic payment services will deliver on the promise to be able to use 
one single account for euro payments throughout the EU. 
Second,  the  ERPB  has  called  for  the  launch  of  a  pan-European  instant  credit  transfer 
scheme in euro. Instant payments are retail payments where the funds sent by the payer 
are  irrevocably  credited  to  the  beneficiary’s  account  within  seconds  of  the  payment  being 
initiated. Payment service providers are already working on an instant SEPA credit transfer 
scheme.  I  expect  that  instant  payment  services  in  euro  will  be  made  widely  available  to 
European consumers and small businesses by 2018. 
The  experiences  of  other  markets  –  particularly  the  United  Kingdom  –  show  that  SMEs 
greatly  benefit  from  faster  payment  execution.  Receiving  and  making  credit  transfers 
instantly  will  free  up  cash  flow  and  ease  working  capital  needs.  It  can  also  replace  card, 
cheque or cash payments in business situations where goods or services are only delivered 
against immediate and irrevocable payment and where accepting or making payments with 
these traditional payment instruments is cumbersome. 
Third, electronic invoicing has long been on the agenda of European policy-makers. The 
ERPB  could  investigate  how  a  pan-European  electronic  invoicing  landscape  could  be 
enriched  with  more  efficient  links  to  payment  services.  By  replacing  paper  invoices  with 
electronic  ones  and  creating  a  seamless  link  between  the  invoicing  process  and  payment 
initiation, significant resources can be freed up and used for other purposes. This requires 
pan-European standards and networks to ensure that as many billers and payers as possible 
are reached. All this will be discussed at the next meeting of the ERPB in November with a 
view to the direction to take. 
Fourth, as many SMEs are small merchants accepting hundreds or thousands of payments 
every  day  at  physical  points  of  sale  or  online from  consumers,  the  work  of the  ERPB in 
consumer card and mobile payments is particularly relevant, as this represents a rapidly 
growing share of the payment mix. The ERPB could focus on two areas here: i) person-to-
person  mobile  payments  enabling  the  convenient  initiation  of  payments  to  another  mobile 
phone  user  (be  they  consumer  or  merchant);  and  ii)  contactless  payments  where  a  fast 
payment  can  be  made  by  simply  holding  the  mobile  device  or  card  above  a  merchant’s 
terminal. 
Finally, the ERPB also oversees work on traditional technical card standardisation. Such 
technical  standardisation  will  greatly  contribute  to  a  competitive  card  acquiring  industry.  In 
the  longer  term,  this  will  lead  to  significantly  lower  costs  for  handling  card  terminals  and 
accepting cards, especially for small merchants. 
All of these initiatives aim to contribute to a more efficient and competitive landscape for euro 
payment services. It is vital to maintain their momentum because they come at a time when 
the  digitalisation  of  communication  and  information  technology  is  triggering  fundamental 
structural changes in banking and finance. The traditional retail payments business of banks 
faces  strong  competition  from  financial  technology  (“FinTech”)  companies.  These  are  not 
only small start-ups but also large international  enterprises. The so-called GAFAs; namely 
Google,  Apple,  Facebook  and  Amazon,  are  all  offering  payment  services  or  considering 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
doing so. While the new players bring further competition to the market, which is welcome, it 
is important that there is a level playing field for competition that ensures compliance with 
regulatory requirements and appropriate customer protection. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
Let me conclude. 
Although the contribution of retail payments integration to the competitiveness of SMEs has 
received  less  public  attention  than  other  related  measures,  SMEs  have  significantly 
benefitted from the creation of the Single Euro Payments Area, as well as from the ERPB 
initiatives  that  will  deepen  the  integration  achieved  by  SEPA  and  exploit  the  innovative 
potential of digitalisation. 
However, there is no room for complacency. When building the retail payments infrastructure 
of tomorrow, we certainly need the supply side, but we also want the demand side to shape 
the  products  according  to  its  needs.  The  Euro  Retail  Payments  Board  offers  a  unique 
opportunity for all stakeholders to articulate their concrete expectations and requirements. I 
therefore invite you to represent SMEs in the ERPB with the same enthusiasm, energy and 
vigour as when Etienne Marcel – the eponymous Provost of Merchants under Jean II le Bon 
– stood up for the small tradesmen of Paris in the 1300s. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
