  Thomas Jordan: The Swiss National Bank’s monetary policy and the 
Swiss financial centre 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  Jordan,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss  National 
Bank,  at  the  first  meeting  of  the  “Rencontres  économiques  de  Genève”,  organized  by 
Fondation  Genève  Place  Financière,  Institut  National  Genevois,  Investment  Strategists 
Association of Geneva, Geneva, 3 November 2015. 
 The speaker would like to thank Samuel Reynard and Rina Rosenblatt for their valuable support in preparing this 
speech, and Katrin Assenmacher, Petra Gerlach and Rita Kobel for their helpful comments. 
Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you tonight in Geneva, a key pillar of the Swiss 
financial sector. I also feel very honoured to be addressing you at the very first meeting of the 
“Rencontres  économiques  de  Genève”.  Indeed,  the  financial  centre  of  Geneva  is  also 
important from an international point of view. Its roots as a financial centre go back several 
hundred  years.  In  the  early  18th  century,  the  minute  Republic  of  Geneva  was  one  of  six 
major international financial centres, together with London, Paris, Amsterdam, Frankfurt and 
Brussels.  It  owed  its  ascent  to  its  cosmopolitanism.  Several  factors  bear  witness  to  this, 
including the city’s political neutrality and the fact that it welcomed protestant Huguenots who 
had  been  persecuted  in  France.  In  the  18th  century,  close  personal  relationships  were 
established  with  the  leading  Parisian  banks  and  the  French  court.  In  this  way,  Geneva 
bankers  were  eventually  among  the  main  financiers  of  France.  Jacques  Necker,  who  had 
been born in Geneva, was Minister of Finance under Louis XVI. After the French Revolution, 
Geneva  began  to  evolve  into  an  important  wealth  management  centre.1  In  1857,  the  first 
Swiss stock market was founded in Geneva, before those in Zurich and Basel. The Geneva 
stock market soon ranked fifth among European stock markets. Geneva remains one of the 
major  world 
to  private  wealth 
management.2 
The  financial  sector  in  Geneva  is  an  engine  for  the  regional  economy.  In  2014,  around 
120 banks were based in Geneva. The financial sector creates a significant part of cantonal 
value added and is a major employer.3 
A  strong  financial  sector,  such  as  that  in  Geneva,  makes  a  substantial  contribution  to 
economic growth. It is therefore a crucial foundation, both for the regional economy and for 
the Swiss economy as a whole. A robust financial sector is also very important for the Swiss 
National Bank (SNB). The SNB interacts closely  with the financial sector, and in particular 
with the banking sector. I will talk about this later. 
In  my  presentation,  I  will  begin  by  explaining  how  the  SNB  and  the  financial  sector  are 
interlinked. Then I will discuss the importance of an independent monetary policy in providing 
stability  as  a  long-term  asset.  However,  in  the  short  term,  this  long-term  stability  may 
generate  costs.  I  will  then  explain  the  SNB’s  current  monetary  policy  and  our  reaction  to 
international developments. Finally, I will place the challenges that face us within a long-term 
perspective. 
financial  centres  today,  particularly  when 
it  comes 
                                                
1  Youssef Cassis, Les Capitales du Capital. Histoire des places financières internationales 1780–2005, Geneva 
(Éditions Slatkine, Pictet & Cie) 2005, 47–48.  
2  Cf. www.ville-geneve.ch/histoire-chiffres/place-financiere/ and www.geneve-finance.ch/en-ch/overview/geneva 
-financial-center. 
3  Cf. www.geneve-finance.ch/en-ch/overview/facts-figures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Close interactions between the SNB and the Swiss financial sector 
As an independent central bank, the SNB’s mandate is to ensure price stability, while taking 
due account of economic developments in Switzerland. It also has the task of contributing to 
the stability of the financial system. 
Banks, and the financial sector in general, contribute to the prosperity of our nation. On the 
one  hand,  financial  intermediation,  wealth  management  and  the  various  other  financial 
services provided by the financial sector are vital for an efficient economic environment. On 
the other hand, the same activities create employment and value added, both directly and 
indirectly. They are thus a source of economic prosperity. 
The  activities  and  goals  of  the  SNB  and  the  financial  sector,  apparently  unrelated,  are 
however  closely  interlinked.  The  connections  between  the  two  were  particularly  apparent 
during the recent financial and European debt crises. The SNB and the financial sector need 
one another, as I will now show (cf. chart 1). 
Banks need the SNB to conduct their various business activities, since the SNB acts as the 
bank of banks. First, banks use the currency issued by the SNB as the numeraire in their 
daily business. The credibility that the SNB has acquired over decades guarantees a stable 
currency.  This  constitutes  a  perfect  numeraire  for  banking  activities.  Second,  the  money 
issued  by  the  SNB,  i.e.  deposits  that  banks  hold  at  the  SNB  and  banknotes,  is  the  Swiss 
legal tender. It represents the anchor of the Swiss monetary system. If their customers wish, 
banks  exchange  the money  in  customers’  deposits  against  banknotes  issued  by  the  SNB. 
Third,  banks  use  the  SNB’s  infrastructure,  the  Swiss  Interbank  Clearing  system,  for  their 
payment transactions. And fourth, the SNB provides liquidity to the banks, which they hold in 
the form of deposit accounts or banknotes. In this way, the SNB ensures that the payment 
system  functions  well  and  the  demand  for  banknotes  can  be  satisfied.  By  fulfilling  its 
mandate, the SNB thus provides fundamental services for the operations of banks and the 
financial sector. 
At  the  same  time,  the  SNB  needs  the  financial  sector  in  order  to  fulfil  its  mandate.  The 
financial sector transmits the SNB’s monetary policy actions to the Swiss economy through 
its lending and borrowing decisions. Based on short-term money market conditions set by the 
SNB,  banks  adjust  the  cost  of  borrowing  for  households  and  firms.  Through  their  core 
business, banks thus contribute to monetary policy transmission. 
More generally, the financial sector transmits changes in the short-term policy interest rate to 
other  assets  of  different  maturities. The resulting change  in  overall  yields  on  Swiss  assets 
influences  their  relative  attractiveness.  This  also  affects  Swiss  franc  exchange  rates.  Both 
exchange  rates  and  interest rates  then  determine  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland,  and 
thus eventually output and inflation. 
Although short-term interest rates are the main monetary policy instrument, the SNB has, in 
recent years, been using exchange rate interventions as an additional tool. Due to the safe-
haven status of the Swiss franc, the SNB has been active on the foreign exchange market. 
We are also willing to intervene, as required, as part of our current monetary policy. Once 
again, banks have been at the heart of monetary policy transmission. They have acted as 
intermediaries of the SNB’s foreign exchange interventions.4 
With  depressed  international  demand  and  a  strong  Swiss  franc  weighing  on  GDP,  credit 
availability has been crucial for the domestic economy. Low interest rates and ample liquidity 
provision  by  the  SNB  have  facilitated  banks’  intermediation  activities.  In  short,  the  SNB’s 
                                                
4  For further details, cf. Lukas Altermatt and Romain Baeriswyl, The effect of the monetary base expansion on 
the  balance  sheet  of  domestic  banks,  SNB  Quarterly  Bulletin,  1/2015,  and  Raphael  Auer,  A  safe  haven: 
international demand for Swiss francs during the euro area debt crisis, SNB Quarterly Bulletin, 2/2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  policy has supported the banks’ provision of credit to the real economy. The banking sector, 
which is traditionally procyclical, has in turn benefited from improved economic conditions. 
In order to fulfil our mandate we need a stable banking system. Financial stability is key, both 
for  the  SNB  and  the  whole  economy.  Without  it,  Switzerland  as  a  financial  centre  and  a 
leader  in  wealth  management  would  lose  its  attractiveness.  Moreover,  only  a  stable  and 
healthy  banking  sector  can  transmit  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  to  domestic  monetary 
conditions  effectively.  Overall,  our  economy  could  not  prosper  with  impaired  financial 
intermediation. 
That is why, in addition to being responsible for monetary policy, the SNB also has the task 
of contributing to the stability of the financial system. The financial system itself should not be 
a source of excessive risk for the rest of the economy. Failures resulting from excessive risk-
taking  can  affect  the  whole  financial  system  and  prove  extremely  costly  for  the  economy. 
Stringent  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  and  self-regulation  by  the  banking  industry  are 
essential for enhancing financial stability. 
There is also a broad consensus that macroprudential tools are required to address systemic 
risk. We therefore analyse sources of risk to the financial system continuously, and identify 
areas  where  action  is  needed.5  In  addition,  we  help  design  and  implement  a  regulatory 
framework for the financial sector. We also oversee systemically important financial market 
infrastructures. 
Our aim  is to  increase  the  resilience  of the financial  sector  by mitigating  systemic risk. To 
ensure  this,  we  work  closely  with  the  Financial  Market  Supervisory  Authority  (FINMA),  the 
Federal  Department  of  Finance  and  various  international  standard-setting  bodies.  The 
adjustment of the “too big to fail” regulations approved by the Federal Council on 21 October 
is  an  example  of  such  cooperation.  The  new  capital  requirements  will  strengthen  the 
resilience of the Swiss banking system considerably. In a crisis there should not be any need 
for systemically important banks to be bailed out by the state. 
Monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  measures  are  closely  linked.  Sometimes  monetary 
policy  demands  a  low  policy  interest  rate  in  order  to  ensure  price  stability  and  support 
economic activity, especially if the Swiss franc is overvalued. However, low interest rates can 
translate into a build-up of imbalances on the mortgage and real estate markets. To increase 
banks’  resilience  to  the  correction  of  these  imbalances,  macroprudential  measures  are 
needed. The countercyclical capital buffer, for which the SNB may propose changes, is one 
such measure. 
Stability: a long-term asset with potential short-term costs 
Ladies and Gentlemen, price stability and financial stability are indeed important long-term 
assets for the financial sector and the entire economy. As an independent central bank with 
its own currency, the SNB has been successful in providing long-term stability. Switzerland 
has  had  significantly  lower  and  more  stable  inflation  rates  than  most  other  countries 
(cf. chart 2). Our long history of price stability, a reliable political and legal environment, and 
efficient institutions have resulted in an interest rate bonus. This is more pronounced for the 
long-term  part  of  the  yield  curve  than  for  the  short-term  part.  Ten-year  government  bond 
yields have typically been lower in Switzerland than in Europe and the US. 
In addition, having its own currency plays an important role in Switzerland’s attractiveness. It 
makes  it  possible  for  us  to  conduct  our  own  monetary  policy,  with  monetary  conditions 
adapted to the Swiss economy. It enables us to create long-term stability. And this in turn is 
an asset for the whole economy and the financial sector in particular. 
                                                
5  Cf.  SNB  annual  Financial  Stability  Report,  in  which  the  SNB  presents  its  yearly  assessment  of  the  Swiss 
banking sector’s stability: www.snb.ch/en/iabout/pub/oecpub/id/pub_oecpub_stabrep. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Due  to  Switzerland’s  stability,  domestic  and  foreign  investors  find  it  attractive  to  invest  or 
have their wealth managed here. Of course, high-quality services provided by banks are an 
additional  factor  making  Switzerland  attractive  for  investors.  Price  stability  is  also  an 
advantage.  It  makes  the  future  more  predictable  and  decreases  the  uncertainty  of 
investments.  Customers  of  Swiss  banks  are  not  investing  exclusively  in  Swiss  assets  or 
Swiss  francs.  But  part  of  the reason  why  they  want  to  have  their  wealth  managed  here  is 
because of the stable political, economic and monetary conditions. 
These stable conditions have supported the development of a strong and globally attractive 
financial sector. Swiss banks are global leaders in managing cross-border assets and wealth 
management. At the end of 2014, roughly half of the assets under management at banks in 
Switzerland  were foreign customer assets.6 The Swiss franc plays an important role in the 
international financial system. Measured by foreign exchange turnover, the Swiss franc was 
the sixth most important currency worldwide in 2013.7 
The  banking  sector  is  also  an  important  part  of  the  Swiss  economy.  The  Swiss  banking 
sector currently generates about 6% of GDP (cf. chart 3). With close to 120,000 employees8 
in  2014,  the  banking  sector  is  a  major  employer.  The  size  of  the  banking  sector,  as 
measured by the ratio of total assets to GDP, is high by international standards.9 
Macroeconomic stability is thus a long-term asset for Switzerland. Low interest rates make 
borrowing conditions for firms and households cheaper. This leads to higher investment and 
supports  the  real  sector.  Macroeconomic  stability  is  not  only  a  precondition  for  sustained 
economic growth, but has helped to build a stable and robust financial sector. It is the long-
term stability, combined with high quality work, which has helped create ‘brand Switzerland’. 
The Swiss financial sector has not only benefited from this brand but also contributed to its 
international propagation. 
However, long-term stability can sometimes be associated with short-term costs. As a small 
open  economy,  Switzerland  can  be  subject  to  short-term  exchange  rate  volatility  resulting 
from the safe-haven status of its currency. The costs of this volatility are substantial at times. 
Strong fluctuations in the Swiss franc have had major effects on the Swiss economy in the 
past.  For  example,  in  the  early  1990s,  during  the  European  Monetary  System  crisis,  the 
Swiss franc appreciated strongly against European currencies. The entire economy had to 
adjust to a strong currency. 
More  recently,  Switzerland  has  been  particularly  heavily  affected  by 
international 
disturbances since the beginning of the financial crisis. The Swiss economy and its inflation 
outlook  have  been  subject  to  strong  downside  pressures,  due  to  massive  exchange  rate 
appreciation,  weak  international  demand,  and  volatile  financial  markets.  The  Swiss  franc 
remains significantly overvalued. 
The financial sector has also suffered from the effects of the recent crisis on Switzerland and 
its currency. For instance, the current account shows that exports of banking commissions 
have diminished markedly since the financial crisis. Indeed, the entire Swiss economy has 
had to adapt to new international monetary conditions. At the SNB we have geared monetary 
policy towards this new and difficult situation. 
                                                
6  Swiss Bankers Association, Banking Barometer, September 2015.  
7  BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey 2013.  
8  Full-time equivalents. 
9  Cf.  Final  report  of  the  group  of  experts  for  the  further  development  of  the  financial  market  strategy,  dated 
1.12.2014;  Annex  to  the  Review  of  the  Swiss  TBTF  regime  by  international  standards  –  Basis  for  an 
evaluation in accordance with Article 52 of the Banking Act, p. 55. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Monetary policy during the financial and European debt crises 
The  Swiss  economy  is  currently  being  hit  by  external  shocks.  In  such  a  context,  the  SNB 
aims to dampen short-term costs without jeopardising the long-term goals of monetary policy. 
The challenge for monetary policy in recent years has been to react to sudden developments 
in  international  markets  and  geopolitical  risks  that  have  endangered  Switzerland’s  real 
economy and price stability in the medium term. The goal has been to steer policy responses 
in a way that reduces short-term costs while preserving the stability achieved over the past 
four decades of independent monetary policy. In order to meet these challenges, we have 
had to use unconventional instruments for the implementation of monetary policy. 
Our current monetary policy is based on two pillars. These are designed to dampen upward 
pressure on the Swiss franc. The first pillar is the negative interest rate on sight deposits at 
the SNB. The second pillar is our willingness to intervene on the foreign exchange market as 
required. The SNB monitors developments in the foreign exchange market and their potential 
effects on the Swiss economy very carefully. 
At a global level, interest rates have been on a downward trend for more than two decades 
(cf. chart 4). This development reflects, on the one hand, an overall decrease in inflation. On 
the  other,  quantitative  easing  programmes  implemented  by  various  central  banks  in 
response  to  the  financial  crisis  have  brought  global  interest  rates  close  to  zero.  In  an 
interconnected financial world, it was impossible for Swiss interest rates to diverge from this 
strong  and  persistent  downward  trend.  Very  low  global  nominal  yields  have  reduced  the 
interest rate differential between foreign and Swiss interest rates. 
By the end of last year, the spread between short-term interest rates on assets denominated 
in  euros  and  those  denominated  in  Swiss  francs  had  almost  vanished.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  interest  rates  have  traditionally  been  lower  in  Switzerland  than  abroad.  However, 
during  the  financial  crisis,  foreign  interest  rates  decreased  to  a  greater  extent  than  their 
Swiss  counterparts.  With  both  foreign  and  Swiss  interest  rates  close  to  zero,  the  spread 
between euro and Swiss interest rates disappeared. 
This created upward pressure on the Swiss franc. A narrower interest rate differential acts 
like a bonus on Swiss franc holdings. The appetite for Swiss franc assets increased among 
both foreign and Swiss investors. In the context of a financial and debt crisis, and in a world 
of  high  geopolitical  risks,  a  narrower  interest  rate  differential  makes  the  Swiss  franc 
particularly attractive for investors. 
At the same time it is important to recognise that the current situation cannot be compared to 
that of 2011. At that time, the Swiss franc was appreciating strongly against all currencies, 
and,  as  a  response,  we  introduced  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  Now  the  situation  is 
characterised by a general weakness in the euro. Thus, at the end of 2014 and the beginning 
of  2015,  the  euro  lost  substantial  value,  not  just  against  the  Swiss  franc  but  also  against 
other important currencies such as the US dollar and the pound sterling (cf. chart 5). 
In  this  new  environment,  we  introduced  negative  interest  rates  to  partially  restore  the 
traditional  differential  between  interest  rates  on  euro  and  Swiss  franc  assets.  Monetary 
conditions were adjusted, as the monetary policy stance relative to that abroad had changed. 
With short-term interest rates in the euro area at zero, negative Swiss interest rates helped 
restore,  at  least  partially,  the  pre-crisis  interest  rate  differential.  The  decrease  in  Swiss 
interest  rates  makes  the  holding  of  Swiss  franc  assets  more  expensive  relative  to  other 
currencies. This makes the Swiss franc relatively less attractive and counteracts the upward 
pressure. 
Introducing negative interest rates on sight deposits at the SNB is designed to allow interest 
rates  to  take  on  an  important  role  in  monetary  policy  transmission  again.  Since  2000,  the 
short-term interest rate at which banks borrow and lend liquidity to each other has been the 
SNB’s  main  policy  instrument  for  fulfilling  its  mandate  of  price  stability.  Negative  interest 
rates  on  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  affect  interest  rates  of  different  maturities  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  economy  as  a  whole  through  financial  markets  and  the  banking  sector.  This  change  in 
overall  yields  on  Swiss  assets  influences  their  attractiveness  and  thus  exchange  rates 
against the Swiss franc. 
The current policy of negative interest rates differs from the exceptional measures taken by 
Swiss  authorities  in  the  late  1970s.  At  that  time,  negative  rates  were  levied  directly  on 
deposits  in  Swiss  francs  made  by  non-residents.  Moreover,  private  persons  or  companies 
residing in Switzerland were not allowed to sell domestic securities to non-residents. These 
measures and restrictions – directly targeted at foreign customers – were, however, not very 
effective since too many loopholes existed. Moreover, they created serious distortions and 
had a negative impact on Switzerland’s position as a financial centre and on its international 
wealth management. Our current negative interest rates are more effective since they impact 
overall macroeconomic conditions without loopholes and because they do not interfere with 
trading freedom. 
Although negative interest rates may be painful for banks and investors in general, they are 
important  measures  for  guaranteeing  long-term  macroeconomic  stability  under  the  current 
circumstances.  They  make  the  holding  of  Swiss  assets  relatively  more  expensive.  In  this 
way, they dampen the upward pressure on the Swiss franc and reduce the adjustment costs 
for the  Swiss  economy. They  thereby  also  support the financial  sector. Negative  rates  are 
thus  a  fundamental  pillar  of  our  current  monetary  policy.  It  is,  however,  also  important  to 
recognise that negative interest rates are a response to the current international environment 
and do not represent a long-term equilibrium. 
Challenges ahead and long-term perspective 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am coming to my final comments. Looking ahead, a robust and well-
functioning financial sector will remain of utmost importance to Switzerland. It makes a major 
contribution  to  national  GDP  and  provides  vital  financial  services  to  the  economy.  These 
functions are also required during business cycle troughs and at times of exceptional policy 
measures. It is therefore important that banks remain resilient in difficult circumstances. 
It  is  crucial  that  the  Swiss  financial  sector  adapts  to  the  new  environment  and  meets  the 
current challenges. The macroeconomic cyclical headwinds in the recent crisis were followed 
by changes in the regulatory environment such as Basel III, the ‘too big to fail’ measures for 
systemically  important  banks  and  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  These  measures  are 
necessary to increase resilience. Banks also need to adjust to changing customer needs and 
to a more competitive and global environment.10 This process of adaptation is challenging for 
the financial sector, but will be beneficial in the long term. 
The  SNB  also  faces  challenges.  The  current  significant  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc 
implies macroeconomic costs in terms of lower growth and employment as well as negative 
inflation.  While  these  costs  must  be  set  against  the  long-term  benefits  of  macroeconomic 
stability, they engender painful adjustment processes in the economy. Our current monetary 
policy  therefore  reflects  this  difficult  economic  environment.  Its  two  pillars,  i.e.  negative 
interest rates and foreign exchange interventions as required, serve to reduce the significant 
overvaluation of the Swiss franc and to guarantee price stability in the long run. 
To  conclude,  I  would  again  like  to  emphasise  that  in  order  to  achieve  the  goals  of  the 
financial sector and the SNB, we both need one another. On the one hand, the SNB acts as 
the  bank  of  banks,  providing  a  stable  currency,  liquidity  and  a  payment  system  on  which 
banks rely.  By  ensuring  price  stability  and  contributing  to financial  stability,  the  SNB  helps 
create the conditions in which the financial sector can flourish. Banks benefit from a strong 
                                                
10  See  also  Geneva  Financial  Center,  Economic  Survey  2015–2016,  October  2015,  which  sets  out  the 
challenges Geneva, as a financial centre, is facing.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  economy and long-term macroeconomic stability. On the other hand, the financial sector acts 
as  an  intermediary  between  monetary  policy  decisions  and  the  overall  economy.  It 
contributes to an efficient economic system and to the prosperity of our country. The SNB 
thus needs a competitive and stable banking system to fulfil its mandate. 
The long-term goals of the SNB and the banking sector usually go hand-in-hand. Monetary 
stability and a strong financial sector are in our common interest. They represent long-term 
assets for the whole economy and for Switzerland as a country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
 Charts 
Chart 1 
 Source: SNB 
Chart 2 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 3 
Chart 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
 Chart 5 
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
