  Mario Draghi: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, before 
the  Hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 12 November 2015. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am pleased to be back again with this committee for the last hearing of 2015. The ECB’s 
accountability  to  you,  the  European  Parliament,  is  a  central  counterpart  to  the  ECB’s 
independence. And transparency is a precondition for your holding us to account. As you are 
aware, following a public access request, last week we released the diaries of all members of 
the ECB’s Executive Board ‒ including my own ‒ for the period from August 2014 to end-July 
2015. But we will not stop there. Starting next February, we will publish these diaries on a 
monthly basis. 
It  is  only  natural  that  some  of  you  will  raise  questions  with  regard  to  the  meetings  my 
colleagues and I have had; after all, the whole point of publishing the diaries is to give the 
public and you a better understanding of with whom we are interacting. But let me be very 
clear: whatever the date, we have had and still have a clear rule – we do not discuss market-
sensitive  information  in  non-public  meetings.  For  our  monetary  policy  to  be  effective, 
however, it is important to meet market participants and to also hear their views. 
For  the  remainder  of  my  remarks,  I  will  mainly  talk  about  two  issues:  first,  our  current 
economic  outlook  and  the  upcoming  reassessment  of  it  at  our  December  meeting;  and 
second, as requested by ECON coordinators, the macroeconomic adjustment programmes 
over the last half-decade and the ECB’s role in them. 
Economic developments and monetary policy 
Incoming data confirm that the recovery in the euro area is progressing moderately. So far, 
economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  has  shown  some  degree  of  resilience  in  the  face  of 
external influences that tend to weaken demand. While external demand has receded, euro 
area  exports  market  shares  have  increased.  The  lower  cost  of  energy  and  our  monetary 
policy measures are supporting consumption and, increasingly, new capital formation. 
However,  downside  risks  stemming  from  global  growth  and  trade  are  clearly  visible. 
Moreover, inflation dynamics have somewhat weakened, mainly due to lower oil prices and 
the delayed effects of the stronger euro exchange rate seen earlier in the year. In addition, 
price pressures – such as from producer prices – remain very subdued. Signs of a sustained 
turnaround  in  core  inflation  have  somewhat  weakened.  While  the  recovery  will  gradually 
strengthen the impulse underlying the inflation process, the protracted economic weakness 
of the past years continues to weigh on nominal wage growth, and this could moderate price 
pressures  as  we  move  forward.  From  today’s  perspective,  this  suggests  that  a  sustained 
normalisation  of  inflation  could  take  longer  than  we  anticipated  in  March  when  we  first 
appraised the overall impact of our measures. 
We  will  closely  monitor  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  thoroughly  assess  the  strength  and 
persistence of the factors that are slowing the return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 
2%. At our December monetary policy meeting, we will re-examine the degree of monetary 
policy  accommodation.  We  will  use  as  one  input  the  Eurosystem  staff  projections  we  will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  receive  in  December.  Another  input  will  be  the  work  of  our  staff  in  consultation  with  the 
Eurosystem committees on the monetary policy stimulus that has been achieved so far and 
the  range  of  instruments  available  in  case  more  accommodation  should  be  seen  as 
necessary. 
If we were to conclude that our medium-term price stability objective is at risk, we would act 
by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  our  mandate  to  ensure  that  an  appropriate 
degree of monetary accommodation is maintained. Consistent with our forward guidance, the 
asset  purchase  programme  is  considered  to  be  a  particularly  powerful  and  flexible 
instrument.  In  fact,  we  have  always  said  that  our  purchases  would  run  beyond  end-
September 2016 in case we do not see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation that is 
consistent with our aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term.  Other  instruments  could  also  be  activated  to  strengthen  the  impact  of  the  purchase 
programme if necessary. 
The ECB and the macroeconomic adjustment programmes 
Let me now turn to a topic that the Chair has asked me specifically to address, namely the 
macroeconomic  adjustment  programmes  and  the  ECB’s  role  in  their  negotiation  and 
monitoring. Benoît Cœuré spoke on this topic here last year, so I will be brief; but of course, 
we can discuss more during the Q&A session if you wish. 
To understand our role in the programme work, one needs to recall the initial conditions in 
which  the  programme  setup  was  established.  In  spring  2010  there  was  no  framework  in 
place  at  the  European  level  to  negotiate  and  monitor  adjustment  programmes.  In  this 
situation,  Member  States  turned  to  the  IMF  and  the  Commission  for  help,  and  they  also 
asked the ECB to contribute its expertise at a time when Europe needed it most. This setup 
was codified in the ESM Treaty and by the co-legislators in the two-pack; the ECJ confirmed 
its  legality.  In  line  with  this,  the  ECB  has  since  provided  its  advice  in  programmes  in  five 
Member  States.  But  we  should  not  forget  that  the  respective  national  governments  are 
responsible  for  programme  implementation,  while  the  final  responsibility  for  programme 
design and the disbursement of financial assistance lies with the Eurogroup. 
Since 2010, three countries have now successfully completed their programmes, and Ireland 
is  a  particularly  good  example  of  how  such  programmes  can  deliver  the  necessary 
adjustment and restore financial stability, economic competitiveness and fiscal sustainability. 
It has shown that a country which takes strong ownership of its programme can come out of 
it with robust growth and a more stable financial system, and that eventually employment will 
also rebound. 
There is no doubt that the adjustment process was painful. But we should keep in mind that 
the  adjustment  would  have  caused  significantly  more  hardship  in  the  absence  of  financial 
assistance. The  programmes  had  to  address  excessive  macroeconomic  imbalances  which 
had  accumulated  over  several  years  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis,  often  reflecting  misguided 
national economic policies. As we have said before: don’t blame the fire damage on the fire 
brigade. 
Throughout the programmes in Ireland and elsewhere, the ECB has played the role assigned 
to it under the Treaty – to be the central bank for the euro area and to provide liquidity to 
financial institutions, including those in programme countries, when warranted. At times, this 
meant  that  risk-management  considerations  made  it  necessary  for  us  to  consider  the 
progress of programme implementation when deciding on provision of further liquidity if the 
soundness of the domestic financial sector was intimately linked to programme success. We 
did so in full accordance with our rules and legal framework and in full independence. This 
was the case for Ireland. And this continues to be the case for Greece and Cyprus. 
Please allow me to conclude. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Five years ago, the programme framework came to life. It is certainly part of our path toward 
a genuine Economic and Monetary Union to integrate the European Stability Mechanism and 
the related programme work fully into the legal framework of the European Union; we again 
called for this most recently in the Five Presidents’ Report. But it is even more important that 
we take decisive steps to avoid a Member State needing a programme in the first place. That 
is why completing the banking union, embarking on a new economic convergence process 
towards  more  resilient  economies  and  achieving  a  fiscal  union  that  ensures  both  fiscal 
sustainability and fiscal stabilisation are all crucial to providing a long-term vision of where 
EMU is heading. The Commission package adopted three weeks ago is a first step in this 
direction. But more will need to follow. 
Thank you for your attention, and I am now looking forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
