   Stephen S Poloz: Prudent preparation – the evolution of unconventional 
monetary policies 
Remarks by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Empire Club of 
Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 8 December 2015. 
 Introduction 
It’s no secret that economists love a good debate, so much so that they often have the same 
debates  over  and  over.  A  lively  argument  is  currently  under  way  about  what’s  causing 
disappointingly weak growth in the world economy. 
A prominent Harvard University economics professor once suggested that the U.S. economy 
was headed for what he called “secular stagnation.” Extended periods of strong economic 
growth were no longer likely, he said, because of a chronic shortfall in demand. 
I’m not referring to Harvard’s Professor Lawrence Summers, who holds this secular stagnation 
view today. Rather, I’m talking about Professor Alvin Hansen, who coined the phrase “secular 
stagnation” in 1938, during the Great Depression. 
Of  course,  soon  after  Hansen  published  his  views,  U.S.  growth  took  off  amid  a  burst  of 
spending and demand related to the Second World War. And stagnation did not return after 
the war ended; instead, the United States experienced one of the strongest and longest-lasting 
expansions on record. 
What happened? Hansen’s population assumptions changed, for one thing, as the post-war 
period saw increased immigration and a baby boom. Technological advances helped boost 
productivity growth, for another thing. But an important ingredient was the revival of what John 
Maynard Keynes famously described as “animal spirits.” During the Depression, consumer and 
business pessimism was pervasive. Once confidence revived, pent-up demand was unleashed 
and self-sustaining growth returned. 
Current economic perspectives 
This bit of history should help us to understand the global situation today. Many countries, 
including Canada, are again facing the sort of demographic challenges that Hansen saw in the 
1930s. And many would argue that technological advances are less likely to fuel steady growth 
as they did in the 1950s and 1960s. Summers and other secular stagnation supporters argue 
that the level of interest rates needed to bring the economy back to full capacity is below the 
effective lower bound for monetary policy, so central banks are powerless to stimulate enough 
demand to use up excess supply. 
Others, including me, disagree. It’s true that demographic forces are leading to slower growth 
in the labour force, which reduces the neutral interest rate in the economy and increases the 
chances that monetary policy will be constrained by the lower bound on interest rates. But 
recovering from a shock like the global financial crisis can be a long drawn-out process – just 
as it was in the 1930s – as consumers and businesses repair their balance sheets and rebuild 
their  confidence  in  the future.  Ultimately,  I  see this  as  a  cyclical  issue,  not  a  secular  one, 
although the cycle is proving to be longer than usual. 
More to the point, I take issue with the word “stagnation.” The world’s policy-makers put in 
place  measures  to  mitigate  the  damage  of  the  crisis  and  prevent  the  worst.  We  have 
strengthened our financial architecture to protect against future crises, and the system is still 
adjusting. Growth has been slow, but it hasn’t been non-existent. Many of those policies remain 
in place, sustaining growth and avoiding stagnation until such time as Keynes’s animal spirits, 
which have been crushed over the past seven years, revive. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
No matter where you stand on the issue, it’s clear that the expansion in the developed world 
is slower now than it was in previous decades, and it will probably remain that way. This is 
because population growth is slowing as the positive impact of the post-war baby boom is 
mostly  behind  us  now.  However,  economic  progress  can  still  come  through  productivity-
enhancing technologies, which historically have defied prediction. And there is a plethora of 
structural policies that can raise trend economic growth – such as trade liberalization or labour 
market reform – which are being actively discussed by the G20. 
In the Bank’s last Monetary Policy Report (MPR) in October, we forecast that the Canadian 
economy would return to positive growth in the second half of this year, and that annual growth 
would continue to increase in 2016 and 2017. That would see the economy use up its excess 
capacity, and return inflation sustainably to the 2 per cent target, around mid-2017. 
So far, that forecast seems to be playing out, as we said in our interest rate announcement 
last  week.  Beneath  the  surface,  however,  our  economy  faces  a  complex  and  lengthy 
adjustment to lower resource prices – an adjustment that will unfold over the next several 
years. While the resource economy works through this adjustment, the non-resource economy 
should continue to gather momentum, driven by improved export performance. This will be 
followed by rising investment, growth in the population of companies and a steadier trend in 
new job creation. The adjustment process is being facilitated by a stronger U.S. economy, a 
lower Canadian dollar and low interest rates. 
The risks around this outlook are roughly balanced, which is to say that there are things that 
could  disappoint  us  and  others  that  could  surprise  us  on  the  upside.  On  the  downside, 
weakness in emerging markets such as Brazil and China could turn out to be more pronounced 
than we expect, or commodity prices could fall further as new supply weighs on prices. On the 
upside, however, it is possible that as momentum builds consumer and business confidence 
will see a synchronized upturn – not just in Canada, but in the United States – adding more 
momentum to growth. This factor is important to economic cycles, yet inherently it can’t be 
forecast. 
There are many such elements of uncertainty in the process of making monetary policy. That’s 
why the Bank has characterized its decision-making process as one of risk management. We 
go beyond determining the most likely outcome for the economy. We also identify the major 
risks we face, in either direction, and think about how we should react if those risks materialize. 
In short, we’re paid to worry, and to be prepared. That’s just prudent policy-making. 
So it’s fair to ask what we would do in the unlikely event that the economy was hit with another 
major negative shock, one that significantly threw off our projection. With the economy already 
exhibiting slow growth and interest rates already very low, there would appear to be very little 
room to manoeuvre. Indeed, the Bank’s policy rate today is 0.5 per cent, just one-quarter point 
above the record low set in 2009, a dark time for the global economy. Back then, at the height 
of the financial crisis, we believed that our key rate was at its effective lower bound, and we 
would need other tools in order to provide any additional monetary stimulus. 
As a result, the Bank spelled out how it would conduct unconventional policies in an annex to 
our April 2009 MPR. Since then, we have reflected on our experience and have seen how 
other central banks have conducted their own unconventional policies. We have updated that 
document and are publishing it on our website today. 
I’m going to elaborate on these policies, but before I do, I need to be absolutely clear about 
two things. First, today’s remarks should in no way be taken as a sign that we are planning to 
embark on these policies. To reiterate, our base case sees the Canadian economy returning 
to full capacity around mid-2017 and the risks to the outlook are roughly balanced. We don’t 
need unconventional policies now, and we don’t expect to use them. However, it’s prudent to 
be prepared for every eventuality. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Second, I should stress that the framework we’re publishing today won’t be the last word on 
unconventional policies. The post-crisis adjustment process is still unfolding and central banks 
continue to learn lessons from the experience. Best practices will continue to evolve. 
Tools in the central bank tool kit 
So, what’s in the central bank’s tool kit when interest rates are already very low? Let me remind 
you of some key principles around the use of unconventional policies. These haven’t changed 
since 2009. 
Regardless  of the  situation, the  Bank  will  keep  its  primary focus  on  achieving  the  inflation 
target. And because we want our policies to be as effective as possible, we’d concentrate the 
use  of  our  tools  in specific sectors  or markets, while  aiming  to minimize  any  unnecessary 
market distortions. Finally, we would conduct operations carefully in order to minimize the risks 
to our balance sheet. 
Forward guidance 
The first  tool  is  one that  many  have  used  to  good  effect,  and that’s forward  guidance.  By 
forward guidance I mean more than simple boilerplate language a central bank might use to 
indicate the expected direction of the next interest rate move. I’m referring to statements such 
as the conditional commitment we made in 2009 – when we pledged to keep the key policy 
rate unchanged for a year as long as the outlook for inflation didn’t change. 
Forward guidance can lower longer-term interest rates by signalling to investors that the policy 
rate will stay at a given level longer than previously anticipated. It also provides more certainty 
about the path for short-term interest rates, reducing the risk premium built into longer-term 
rates. By lowering the entire yield curve, the policy action affects a wider range of borrowers, 
boosting demand in the economy and leading to higher output and inflation. 
For forward guidance to be most effective, it has to be credible. When we made our conditional 
commitment,  both  words  were  important:  “conditional”  and  “commitment.”  We  backed  our 
commitment  by  offering  term  financing  at  the  overnight  rate  for  the  entire  period.  And  we 
repeatedly stressed that the pledge was conditional on the inflation outlook. As it turned out, 
we raised interest rates weeks before the commitment expired because we saw signs that 
inflation  was  returning  to  its  target  more  rapidly  than  we  anticipated.  That  conditionality 
demonstrates that the inflation target remains the Bank’s primary mission. 
As I’ve said before, forward guidance comes with costs. It distorts the market’s processing of 
new information by taking specific types of uncertainty off the table. This concentrates the 
market’s position on one side of the distribution of possible outcomes. Exiting from forward 
guidance restores two-way trading and the market’s ability to absorb economic and financial 
volatility, which is natural. 
Large-scale asset purchases 
A  second  tool  that  the  Bank  outlined  in  2009,  but  has  never  used,  is  large-scale  asset 
purchases.  I  emphasize  the  term  “large-scale”  because  a  central  bank  engages  in  asset 
purchases in the normal course of business – that is how the central bank balance sheet grows 
along with the economy and enables the distribution of a growing stock of bank notes. 
Large-scale asset purchases, often referred to as “quantitative easing,” entails the central bank 
creating  new  reserves  and  using  them  to  purchase  large  quantities  of  securities  such  as 
government  bonds  or  private  assets  including  mortgage-backed  securities  and  corporate 
bonds, from the private sector. 
Such purchases have three effects. First, they create new liquidity in the banking system, which 
can increase the availability of credit if the system has tightened, allowing firms and households 
to continue to make buying decisions and supporting economic growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
Second, large-scale asset purchases tend to lower the interest rates on the purchased assets, 
and on other types of debt of similar duration, which in effect flattens the yield curve, bringing 
longer-term interest rates down closer to short-term interest rates. As with forward guidance, 
this can enhance the impact of lower policy rates by spreading the effect to a wider range of 
borrowers,  thereby  boosting  economic  growth.  At  the  same  time,  higher  asset  prices  can 
create a “wealth effect,” which can also boost spending and confidence. 
Third, such purchases of assets tend to put downward pressure on the exchange rate, since 
they reinforce market expectations of a lower profile for interest rates for a longer period. This 
can boost aggregate demand further, through increased export sales or, more simply, because 
existing export sales produce more revenue measured in domestic currency. 
All this can happen while the central bank’s policy rate is unchanged. Several major central 
banks have deployed this tool since the crisis, including the U.S. Federal Reserve, the Bank 
of England, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Bank of Japan. Their experience shows 
that this tool can be effective in extending the central bank’s impact well out on the yield curve. 
Funding for credit 
A  third  unconventional  monetary  policy  tool  that  has  been  developed  since  2009  is  called 
funding for credit. The idea is to make sure that economically important sectors continue to 
have access to funding even when the supply of credit is impaired. In this case, the central 
bank would provide collateralized funding at a subsidized rate as long as banks met specified 
lending objectives. The Bank of England and the U.K. Treasury set up such a program in 2012. 
It was designed to encourage lending to households and businesses at a time when banks 
were  facing  increasing  funding  costs,  which  meant  that  borrowers  weren’t  getting  the  full 
benefit of low policy rates. 
While the Bank of Canada has never engaged in funding for credit, at the height of the crisis 
the government put in place the “Insured Mortgage Purchase Program.” Under this program, 
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation bought insured mortgages from lenders, which 
made room on their balance sheets for new mortgage lending. This program was clearly aimed 
at one market segment that was at risk of impairment and so had a similar purpose to funding 
for credit. 
Negative interest rates 
The fourth unconventional monetary policy tool I want to cover is negative interest rates, which 
is something you have heard a lot more about recently. In 2009, the Bank said it couldn’t cut 
its policy rate below 0.25 per cent, because we believed that zero or negative interest rates 
might be incompatible with some markets, such as money market funds. This was a common 
view at the time. 
Since then, we have seen the experience of several central banks, such as the ECB and Swiss 
National  Bank,  which  have  adopted  negative  policy  interest  rates.  There,  we’ve  seen  that 
financial markets have been able to adapt and continue to function. Given these and other 
developments, the Bank is now confident that Canadian financial markets could also function 
in a negative interest rate environment. 
Let me pause at this point to answer an obvious question. Why would anyone ever accept a 
negative nominal return when they could always simply hold cash and earn a zero return? A 
big part of the answer is that there are costs to holding currency, particularly in large quantities, 
and these costs affect the lower bound. Because of the costs, which include storage, insurance 
and security, central banks can charge negative rates on commercial bank deposits without 
seeing a surge in demand for bank notes. 
Last month, the Bank published a staff discussion paper that analyzes those costs and the 
convenience benefits of electronic payments, and reflects on the experience of other countries. 
We now believe that the effective lower bound for Canada’s policy rate is around minus 0.5 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
per cent, but it could be a little higher or lower. This suggests that we have more room to 
manoeuvre in response to adverse shocks than we believed back in 2009. We will continue to 
watch the experience of other countries – the Swiss policy rate, for example, is currently minus 
0.75 per cent – and we will also consider what adjustments might need to be made to the 
Bank’s operational framework should they ever be required. 
To sum up, once interest rates reach very low levels, the central bank still has meaningful tools 
that  it  can  deploy  in  its  pursuit  of  its  inflation  target:  offering  forward  guidance  to  financial 
markets to enhance policy effectiveness, large-scale asset purchases, funding for credit, and 
pushing short-term interest rates below zero. 
What else have we learned? 
There are a few other lessons we’ve learned about unconventional monetary policies in the 
past few years. Let me just touch on a couple. 
One lesson concerns when to use which tool. When we published our unconventional policy 
framework in 2009, there was an implied sequence to the various measures. Forward guidance 
was tried first, with quantitative easing and other measures held in reserve in case forward 
guidance proved to be insufficient. But what we’ve learned since is that there shouldn’t be a 
pre-determined order. The effectiveness of each tool will depend on the situation, making it 
more a matter of choosing the right one at the right time. Furthermore, the various measures 
can be mutually reinforcing when used in combination, so it makes little sense to commit to a 
particular sequence for using them. 
Another  lesson  we’ve  learned  from  the  global  experience  is  that  while  unconventional 
monetary policies can help stimulate the economy, there may be limits to their impact. Take 
negative interest rates, for instance. While we now believe that interest rates can be pushed 
below zero, there still is a lower bound, so we can’t be cavalier about how much more room to 
manoeuvre we have. Further, there is evidence that consumers and businesses respond less 
to interest rate declines when interest rates are already very low. And there is evidence that 
their responsiveness is also lower when confidence is low and they are trying to reduce debt. 
I expect that few of us find this to be surprising. 
At the same time, it is fair to say that the limits of large-scale asset purchases are still being 
tested. Our understanding of this tool will grow as we watch it being used in other economies 
– and this includes the eventual conclusion, and exit from, their programs. 
Fundamentally, economists have long been aware that the effectiveness of monetary policy 
has its limits once interest rates reach very low levels. As Keynes noted as he watched the 
Great Depression unfold, fiscal policy tends to be a more powerful tool than monetary policy 
in such extreme circumstances. It may sound ironic, but the circumstances under which it may 
be appropriate to consider unconventional monetary policies are also those under which fiscal 
policy tends to be most effective. Even so, it is worth knowing that monetary policy can still 
make a meaningful contribution in such extreme conditions, alongside fiscal and structural 
policies, in restoring growth and achieving our inflation targets. 
A final lesson I must touch on is that very low interest rates – and the unconventional monetary 
policy tools that can be deployed to enhance their effects – tend to create financial imbalances 
that can grow through time. These risks must be accepted should the downside risk to the 
economy lead to even worse outcomes if realized. But the dynamic effects of those growing 
financial imbalances on the future economy must be taken into account by policy-makers – 
and that is a complex task, indeed. 
Conclusion 
It’s time for me to bring us back to the present and conclude. In a world where many economies 
continue to resort to unconventional monetary policies, Canada’s outlook is encouraging. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
lower Canadian dollar and the interest rate actions taken earlier this year are working and it 
will be some time before we see their full impact. The overall economy is growing again, even 
as the resource sector contends with lower prices, because the non-resource sectors of the 
economy are gathering momentum. This is all taking longer than we imagined back in 2008, 
but our judgment is that our economy can get back to full capacity with inflation sustainably on 
target around mid-2017. 
Given this outlook, it may seem like an odd time to be updating our unconventional monetary 
policy tool kit. I certainly hope we won’t ever have to use these tools. However, in an uncertain 
world, a central bank has to be prepared for all eventualities. We will continue to watch how 
these policies work in other economies and adjust our own thinking at the Bank of Canada as 
appropriate. In short, should the need arise, we’ll be ready. 
I would like to thank Stephen Murchison for his help in preparing this speech. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
