   
Andreas Dombret: Capital requirements, the shadows and a level playing 
field – current challenges in financial regulation 
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Bank  of  France  conference  “Financial  Regulation  –  Stability  versus 
Uniformity. A focus on non-bank actors”, Paris, 28 September 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Mesdames, Messieurs, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at today’s conference. It is a great pleasure to be here at 
the  Banque  de  France.  The  Bundesbank  works  closely  together  with  our  colleagues  and 
friends  from  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  ACPR,  so  there  is  no  way  I  would  miss  this 
prestigious event. 
As a banking supervisor, my focus, as you would suspect, lies mainly on the supervision and 
regulation of banks. Much has been done in this area since the financial crisis, and maybe 
some of these regulatory projects could also be assigned to non-banks. 
Higher capital requirements – not only for banks? 
2. 
One of the main lessons from the financial crisis was that the rules governing the banking 
system  were  rather  inadequate.  We  saw  excessive  risk-taking,  insufficient  loss  absorbing 
capacity and banks that were “too big to fail” – to name just some of the problems that led to 
the crisis. 
Regarding capital requirements, the most important regulatory measure was Basel III, which 
introduced not only stricter capital requirements but also new liquidity rules. In the EU, CRD IV 
and CRR ensure harmonised implementation of the Basel III framework across all member 
states. 
When Basel III is fully implemented in 2019, regulatory capital requirements will be significantly 
higher and tougher than under Basel II, and I am sure that the financial system is already today 
more stable than before. But will more and better capital and new liquidity rules be enough? 
Certainly not. And therefore, besides the Basel III regime, many other regulatory projects have 
been launched in response to the financial crisis. Two important ones are also the topic of this 
panel: a regulation to solve the “too-big-to-fail” problem and efforts to regulate the shadow 
banking system. 
At the global level, the G20 intend to approve at their summit in November a standard that 
global systemically important banks will have to fulfil in future regarding their capital structure. 
In  particular,  these  banks  will  need  to  ensure  a  minimum  amount  of  total  loss-absorbing 
capacity, TLAC for short. This will make global banks more resilient, and it will allow for their 
orderly restructuring or resolution. 
Work on TLAC is making good progress, and I am quite optimistic that we can finalise the 
requirements by the end of 2015. 
One question we might discuss in this panel is whether TLAC can be extended to non-banks. 
Please  allow  me  to  make  one  general  remark:  Strengthening  loss  absorbing  capacity  to 
facilitate restructuring or resolution processes is, of course, generally useful for all financial 
institutions. 
However,  regulatory requirements tailored  specifically  to  banks  cannot, and  should  not,  be 
superimposed on other financial market participants, since business models, risk profiles and 
resolution procedures are fundamentally different. And we must not forget that these regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   requirements have not yet been implemented for banks, let alone other players. This means 
that, even for banks, we have no practical experience yet. 
Ladies and gentlemen, in my view, there is no one-size-fits-all solution for non-banks. As a 
case  in  point,  insurers  differ  fundamentally  from  financial  market  infrastructures  or  from 
pension funds. 
Nevertheless,  those  specific  policy  instruments  to  strengthen  non-banks’  loss-absorbing 
capacity that even exist are still in their infancy. For central counterparties, for instance, they 
will probably be discussed in the framework of the upcoming EU regulation for restructuring 
and resolution of central counterparties. 
An everlasting challenge: regulating the shadows 
3. 
When entertaining the idea of extending TLAC to non-banks, we have to bear one important 
aspect in mind: this extension will only reach those non-banks that are already regulated today 
such as insurance companies, for instance. 
And, more generally,  tightening regulation might  set  off a  trend  to relocate  activities  to the 
unregulated  non-banks  also  known  as  the  “shadow”  banking  sector.  This  is  something 
regulators have to watch closely. 
Without a doubt, shadow banks can become a source of systemic risk, especially when they 
are highly interconnected with the regular financial system. It is therefore of utmost importance 
to monitor shadow banks’ activities and try to regulate them adequately. At their 2014 Brisbane 
summit, the G20 agreed on a new roadmap for regulating the shadow banking sector. Work is 
being conducted simultaneously by the FSB, the Basel Committee and IOSCO. 
But the ambitious reform agenda is far from being completed. In my view, a key task on the 
way  towards  transforming  shadow  banking  into  resilient  market-based  financing  is  now  to 
identify  areas  where  additional  FSB  recommendations  are  needed  and  where  existing 
recommendations  should  be fleshed  out. We have  to  drive  this reform agenda  with  all  our 
efforts. 
4. 
Conclusion: International cooperation as precondition for effective regulation 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude my remarks with something that is very important to 
me.  Any  regulatory  project  needs  international  cooperation.  If  we  do  not  coordinate  our 
approaches  towards  regulation,  we  will  create  a  fragmented  financial  system  with  vast 
opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. 
When all is said and done, we are all pursuing the same objective: a stable financial system – 
certainly at the national level, but it is equally important at the global level. As regulators, we 
therefore must work together in an effort to avoid any form of fragmentation of the regulatory 
space. The issue of derivatives oversight is just one example where international cooperation 
is essential. 
Thank you for your attention – merci de votre attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
