   Louis Kasekende: Modernising agriculture – a difficult challenge facing 
Uganda 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Launch of 
the 2015 Agricultural Finance Yearbook, Kampala, 1 December 2015. 
 Hon Members of Parliament, 
The Executive Director, Economic Policy Research Centre, 
The Leadership team of the Uganda Agribusiness Alliance 
Representatives of GIZ and other development partners, 
Representatives of Ministries, Departments and Agencies of GOU, 
All distinguished participants, 
Good evening, 
Let  me  begin  by  commending  everyone  who  worked  on  the  2015  Agricultural  Finance 
Yearbook for their contributions to this project. Before we launch the Yearbook, I would like to 
comment  on  two  of  the  issues  addressed  in  it  which  I  believe  are  especially  pertinent  for 
agricultural policy: first, the appropriate role of the budget and second, characteristics of the 
support needed by smallholder farmers. 
The modernisation of agriculture requires support from the Government budget for the supply 
of public goods and services needed by farmers. However, budgetary resources are scarce 
and  hence  it  is  essential  that  they  are  allocated  only  to  areas  of  expenditure  which  can 
generate the highest social rates of return. 
As  is  demonstrated  in  chapter  1.4  of  the  Yearbook,  on  fiscal  issues,  the  provision  of  tax 
exemptions for agriculture and agricultural lending, of various kinds, has delivered few, if any, 
tangible benefits for farmers in this country. Any benefits accruing from these tax exemptions 
were mostly captured by non-farm sectors, such as importers and banks, and not passed on 
to farmers. This finding is consistent with what is generally known about tax exemptions in 
countries all over the world; they are rarely effective and very difficult to target accurately and 
they entail substantial losses of public revenues. The scope of some of these tax exemptions 
was curtailed in the 2014/15 budget, which is a step in the right direction. Given these findings, 
the remaining tax exemptions should be abolished quickly so that public resources can be 
focussed on areas which can really deliver benefits for farmers.  
Public expenditure can contribute to agricultural development, but to maximise the benefits 
from a highly constrained budget resource envelope, spending must be allocated efficiently. 
The priority for public spending on agriculture should be goods and services which clearly have 
the characteristics of public goods, in that they cannot be supplied by the market in an optimal 
manner. In addition, these goods should benefit the smallholder farmers who constitute the 
vast majority of farmers in Uganda. Examples of these goods and services are agricultural 
extension services and research and development.  
The modernisation of agriculture requires comprehensive, country wide, agricultural extension 
services.  Such  a  service  will  have  to  be  funded  predominantly  with  public  resources.  In 
addition, budget resources are needed to ensure that the rural infrastructure, such as rural 
feeder roads, is adequate to support commercial agriculture throughout the country. Scarce 
budget resources should not be misallocated to the provision and subsidy of marketable inputs, 
especially those which benefit mainly larger farmers.  
The  second  issue  I  want  to  highlight  is  how  we  can  develop  a  feasible  strategy  for  the 
transformation of smallholder farming. Chapter 2.2 of the Yearbook presents some interesting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   findings on projects run by the One Acre Fund which aim to support smallholders in East Africa; 
findings which are consistent with those of similar projects and of research in the region. 
The support which smallholder farmers need to enable them to increase their yields and raise 
their  incomes  is  holistic.  It  includes  technical  advice  and  training  in  the  use  of  improved 
agricultural techniques, the provision of improved seeds and fertilisers together with credit to 
purchase these inputs, with repayment of the credit aligned with the sale of farm output, and 
training  and  support  for  post  harvest  handling  and  storage.  With  such  a  holistic  support 
package, substantial increases in farm output and incomes can be realised. The provision of 
finance alone will do little to help smallholder farmers overcome the constraints that they face 
in raising farm yields and marketing more of their output.  
Unfortunately,  only  a  small  minority  of  the  country’s  more  than  3  million  smallholder  farm 
households currently receive the type of holistic support provided by the One Acre Fund and 
similar projects, which addresses all of the constraints that they face. To modernise agriculture, 
this approach must be applied much more widely, so that all smallholders can benefit. Both 
the public sector and non government organisations can contribute to this objective, but it is 
self evident that substantial public resources will be required to fund it, which emphasises the 
importance of properly prioritising public spending on agriculture.  
Modernising agriculture is one of the most difficult challenges facing Uganda, but given that 
more than 60 percent of the labour force relies on agriculture as their primary source of income, 
it  is  a  challenge  which  is  central  to  socio-economic  development  and  poverty  reduction. 
Despite  the  country’s  abundant  natural  resources,  Uganda’s  agricultural  performance  has 
been poor; real output growth has failed to even match population growth rates over the last 
two decades and labour productivity in the sector is very low.  
Modernising  agriculture  should  be  integral  to  Uganda’s  development  plans,  but  for  that 
objective  to  be  realised,  we  need  well  thought  out  feasible  strategies,  which  focus  on 
supporting smallholder farmers. By highlighting the constraints facing farmers in different sub-
sectors in Uganda and initiatives which have helped to alleviate them, the Agricultural Finance 
Yearbook can contribute to the strengthening of our agricultural policies.  
I would now like to formally launch the 2015 Agricultural Finance Yearbook.  
Thank you for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
