  Benoît Cœuré: Interview in El Financiero 
Interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of the  Executive  Board  of the  European  Central 
Bank,  in  El  Financiero,  conducted  by  Ms  Leticia  Hernández  Morón,  and  published  on 
4 November 2015. 
 How can the financial system be kept stable amid divergent monetary policies? 
Monetary policies in advanced economies are indeed set on different courses as a result of 
different positions in the business cycles. The United States is at a more advanced stage in 
the  cycle  compared  with  the  euro  area,  where  the  policy  is  and  will  remain  more 
accommodative. In view of the current volatility on the global financial markets, it is vital that 
these different paths are not in themselves a source of instability. I think the key word here is 
transparency.  As  central  banks,  we  need  to  be  as  clear  as  possible  about  what  we  are 
thinking and heedful of the financial reaction. In the case of the ECB we introduced forward 
guidance in 2013, we have been very clear about the path of accommodative policy due to 
the economic situation, and we have been specific about the downside risks in the scenario, 
particularly  at  the  ECB’s  most  recent  meeting  in  Malta.  The  Governing  Council  saw  an 
increased  risk  that  inflation  would  stay  too  low  for  too  long,  and  concluded  that  additional 
monetary  policy  reactions  could  be  warranted,  should 
this  risk  materialise.  Thus 
transparency is the key word. 
What are the side effects of the ECB’s monetary policy outside the euro area? 
We are mindful of the impact of our decisions on the rest of the world, and in particular on 
neighbouring economies. But our mandate is limited to the euro area and in the end, the best 
contribution that we can make to the global economy, also to neighbouring economies, is to 
make Europe as robust and stable as possible. 
How have you handled the effects of the monetary policy of the US? 
The decisions taken by the ECB are based on the region’s economic and financial situation 
and  do  not  specifically  follow  any  adjustment  made  in  the  United  States  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System or in any other part of the world. We ensure that the financial conditions in 
Europe are appropriate for the economy. 
What measures have to be taken to manage the risks of greater global financial 
integration without losing the benefits that it brings? 
Volatility is currently high in global capital markets, due to macroeconomic uncertainty and 
changing business models. In such an environment, policy-makers could be tempted to take 
a protective stance and ring-fence their financial systems. But that would hamper the efficient 
allocation of resources in the global economy, or in other words, that would be bad for growth 
and jobs. The Financial Stability Board and the other financial standard-setting bodies, such 
as  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  which  I  chaired  last  week  in 
Mexico,  play  an  important  role  in  keeping  everyone  together  and  ensuring  that  the  new 
financial  regulations  are  implemented  consistently.  Financial  protectionism  is  a  temptation 
that we all have to resist. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Do you think that developments in the financial sector have made the world a riskier 
place? 
The  financial  sector  is  much  more  secure  than  in  2008  because  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  environments  have  been  much  strengthened.  The  banks  are  smaller,  their 
conduct  has  improved  and  they  are  better  capitalised.  The  financial  system’s  resilience  to 
shocks  is  much  better  now  than  in  2008.  But  there  is  no  room  for  complacency.  Digital 
banking  and  digital  finance  have  the  potential  to  change  market  structures  very  rapidly. 
There is also room for better oversight of non-bank players (“shadow banking”) and better 
incentives  for  bank  senior  managers.  The  regulatory  community  has  to  address  these 
changes. But in general I think that we are at a more secure juncture than before the crisis, 
especially because the banking industry is more regulated and better supervised. And in the 
euro area, by taking responsibility for banking supervision exactly one year ago, the ECB has 
certainly contributed to this. 
The surplus liquidity is not getting to the market and is reflected in the prevailing 
deflationary conditions. Where is this liquidity staying? 
The  most  important  question  for  me  is:  how  can  the  economy  create  better  long-term 
investment  opportunities,  so  that  liquidity  goes  to  the  right  place?  This  is  the  question  on 
which  policy-makers  should  focus  their  attention.  Central  banks  can  provide  liquidity  and 
improve financing conditions, but at the end it is the responsibility of elected governments to 
make their economies more business-friendly so that profitable projects can materialise. 
What did the ECB learn from the Greek episode? 
Greece is unique and but the Greek experience offers useful lessons on the functioning of 
our monetary union: until 2010 in Greece, wrong decisions were taken in the public sector 
and macroeconomic imbalances were allowed to build up. The lessons for the future are that 
euro  area  countries  should  understand  that  their  decisions  will  also  impact  on  their 
neighbours,  and  that  they  have  to  enforce  policies  that  are  fiscally  prudent  and  prevent 
imbalances  from  emerging.  Prevention  is  key.  Coming  back  to  Greece,  Member  States 
agreed  in  August  to  provide  further  financial  assistance  in  exchange  for  a  comprehensive 
reform programme. The conditions are now met for confidence and financial stability to return 
as soon as possible, provided that the programme is implemented swiftly. The health check 
by  the  ECB  of  the  large  Greek  banks  is  another  step  forward,  and  bank  recapitalisation 
should be completed by the end of the year. 
Do other countries worry you? 
The situation in the euro area is considerably more robust than it was a couple of years ago. 
Financial  conditions  have  improved  thanks  to  ECB  measures;  governance  has  been 
strengthened and we have instruments to maintain stability that we didn’t have a couple of 
years  ago.  Banking  union  delivers  strong  banking  supervision.  Finally,  reforms  in  various 
countries such as Spain and Italy have already started strengthening those economies. That 
is why our recovery is now solid, and the main risks to it come from outside of Europe. 
Is there a before and after for the euro area following the Greek crisis? 
Policy-makers are learning that being part of the single currency comes with benefits but also 
with responsibilities. Monetary union is not a technical enterprise: it is a political project. A 
stable  monetary  union  requires  convergence  in  economic  performance,  sound  national 
policies  and  a  sense  of  shared  responsibility,  with  common  instruments.  A  lot  has  been 
achieved  already  but  we’re  not  yet  at  the  end  of  this  process,  as  the  “Five  Presidents’ 
Report”  (signed  by  the  European  Council,  European  Commission,  Eurogroup,  ECB  and 
European Parliament Presidents) demonstrated earlier this year. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What’s the outlook for the year ahead? 
The first thing we want to achieve is price stability and that means maintaining trust in our 
capacity to raise inflation to close to 2% over the medium term. That’s our priority. A second 
one  is  to  continue  the  construction  of  banking  union  by  delivering  strong  and  harmonised 
supervision across the 19 participating countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
