  Ewald Nowotny: Boosting EU competitiveness – the role of the CESEE 
countries 
Opening remarks by Prof Dr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic 
of  Austria,  at  the  Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration  (CEEI)  2015,  Warsaw, 
15 October 2015. 
 Dear President Belka, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
• 
       Let me express a very warm welcome to this joint event also on behalf of the co-
organizer,  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank.  Cooperating  on  a  joint  project  is 
always a great opportunity to learn from each other, to establish contacts with new 
people and to view one and the same topic from different angles. The impressive 
conference program that we have on the agenda today and tomorrow is excellent 
proof of the benefits of such joint ventures. 
But  changing  the  setting  of  a  well-established  conference  series  may  also  be 
somewhat  risky.  I  am  therefore  very  glad  to  see  that  many  of  the  traditional 
participants in the OeNB’s Conference on European Integration have joined us here 
in Warsaw. 
I would like to thank President Belka and the conference team at the Polish central 
bank  for  their  tireless  efforts  in  making  this  event  happen  and  for  their  great 
hospitality. 
Both conference series, the OeNB’s Conference on European Economic Integration 
and  the  NBP’s  Conference  on  the  Future  of  the  European  Economy  share  a 
common focus on the path of future integration in Europe. 
Since its very beginning, the European integration process has been a dual process 
of both deepening and enlargement. What started out as just a small community of 
no more than six countries with a very narrow cooperation focus aimed to prevent 
any  future  wars  in  Europe  has  now  reached  a  stage  where  the  European  Union 
counts 28 members and where monetary union and banking union have become a 
reality for a subset of 19 countries. 
Even more importantly, we have found a way to deal with the fact that EU Member 
States  proceed  with  integration  at  different  speeds.  In  particular  the  euro  area 
countries  have  further  deepened  their  integration,  for  example  via  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM),  which  later  may  attract  additional  members.  This 
paves the way for progress even in view of diverging opinions while respecting the 
different political and economic conditions of the member countries. 
I fully agree with my friend Marek that the two biggest challenges that the EU and 
especially EMU have to tackle today are anemic growth and uncertainties relating to 
the future of EMU and also of the EU. 
The growth perspectives are directly related to the ECB’s mandate, which has price 
stability as a prime goal. The ECB – and many other central banks – define price 
stability  as  an  inflation  rate  of  below,  but  close  to,  2  %.  For  2015  our  inflation 
forecast for the euro area is 0.1%, for 2016 it is 1.1%. So we will clearly miss our 
target. A main cause for this is the dramatic fall in the price of oil and raw materials, 
which central banks clearly cannot influence. But core inflation rates are also clearly 
below  our  target.  It  is  obvious  that  under  such  a  constellation  we  need  stronger 
economic growth, which should help reduce unemployment and bring us closer to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        2 
  our goal of price stability. ECB is using the monetary policy instruments available – 
but it is quite obvious that in the current macroeconomic situation additional sets of 
instruments are necessary. These include structural measures – and here we are at 
the  heart  of  the  conference  topic:  competitiveness.  But  let  us  not  forget  that 
economic growth depends not only on the supply side, but also on the demand side 
and the institutional settings of an economy. 
With  respect  to  the  uncertainties  regarding  the  future  of  EMU  and  the  EU,  the 
severe  crisis  we  experienced  has  reminded  policymakers  of  the  pitfalls  of  an 
incomplete  monetary  union.  President  Belka  already  mentioned 
the  “Five 
Presidents’ Report”, which highlights four pillars: an economic union that promotes 
convergence  and  social  cohesion,  a  financial  union  that  integrates  banking  and 
capital  market  regulation,  a  fiscal  union  that  supports  the  soundness  of  public 
finances  and  a  political  union  that  strengthens  democratic  accountability  and 
legitimacy. 
Suddenly  many  good  ideas  are  on  the  table  to  push  the  European  integration 
process further. But these different approaches will need to be developed in more 
detail and will have to pass the reality check. In this crucial moment with discussions 
still ongoing, it is up to research to come up with feasible approaches. 
The OeNB, for example, hosted another conference just a couple of weeks ago with 
the  aim  of  stimulating  academic  debate  on  ways  to  proceed  with  integration. 
Throughout  the  event,  which  was  entitled  “Toward  a  Genuine  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union,”  a  broad  consensus  emerged  about  the  need  for  a  fiscal  and 
economic policy framework that combines risk reduction and risk sharing. In other 
words: a genuine EMU needs more discipline and solidarity. 
And  here  I  am  coming  back  to  today’s  conference  topic  –  “Boosting  EU 
competitiveness.” I see the ongoing integration process as a central precondition for 
ensuring  competitiveness  in  the  long  term.  While  competitiveness  is  largely  a 
challenge  for  national  polices,  European  policies  can  and  need  to  deliver  their 
important contributions to this overall aim. 
At the euro area level, this will require steps to complete monetary union. Diverging 
economic  developments  and  unbalanced  growth  models  as  well  as  the  lack  of 
correcting  and  equilibrating  mechanisms  were  the  origin  of  the  current  crisis  and 
seriously threatened Europe’s competitive position. 
At the EU level, the policy challenge will be to encourage trade within the EU and 
with the rest of the world with the aim that countries benefit from the division of tasks 
and from economies of scale, while at the same time shielding European exporters 
from  the  repercussions  of  international  crises.  This  requires  a  high  degree  of 
regional and sectoral diversification of exports. The recent automobile scandal is a 
cautionary tale of how quickly the benefits of trade integration may turn into adverse 
contagious effects. 
I am very much looking forward to the contributions to these issues by our speakers 
from  central  banks,  international  institutions  and  academia  and  to  the  interesting 
discussions I am sure we will have in this inspiring setting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
