  
 
Pentti Hakkarainen: Finance cycles and macroprudential tools – the case 
of Finland within the euro area 
Speech by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the Seventh 
High-Level  Policy  Dialogue  of  the  Eurosystem  and  Latin  American  Central  Banks,  Madrid, 
11 November 2015. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website. 
First let me thank the organisers for inviting me to this panel with a very topical theme. I am 
glad  to  share  some  experiences  Finland  as  a  small  country  has  had  relating  to  financial 
cycles and how we see the macroprudential policy and its tools to be implemented. 
What do we know about financial cycles? 
What does economics tell us about credit cycles, and their impact on the real economy? The 
topic  is  not  new.  We  can  find  these  issues  already  in  late  19th  century  writings  by  Knut 
Wicksell  the  famous  Swedish  monetary  economist.  Later,  Milton  Friedman  and  other 
monetarists emphasized the impact of banking panics on the U.S. Great Recession in the 
1930s. However, these contributions did not see the financial cycle as a regular phenomenon 
that would be different from the business cycle. 
In the Post World War II era, many economists discussed phenomena very similar to what 
we  now  call  financial  cycles.  Minsky’s  financial  instability  hypothesis  and  the  way  it  sees 
financial markets as a self-destabilizing process is a narrative approach to the financial cycle 
phenomenon. 
However,  until  recently  macroeconomics  paid  little  attention  to the  special  role  of financial 
markets.  Many  simulation  and forecasting  models  had few  if  any financial  markets related 
variables apart from the short-term interest rate. Such models are still being used by many 
central banks, although it has become commonplace to include financial frictions in them. 
Financial liberalization in the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s was followed by extreme 
cyclical swings in many countries, for example in Finland, Sweden and Norway. First, there 
was  a  credit  boom  almost  immediately  after  the  liberalization.  A  serious  banking  crisis 
followed  a  few  years  later.  This  boom-bust  type  of  instability  in  Northern  Europe  was 
obviously something else than a mere normal business cycle. 
It  may  not  be  a  random  coincidence  that  the  first  academic  publications  that  used  the 
concepts  “credit  cycle”  and  “financial  cycle”  were  published  in  the  late  1980s  and  early 
1990s,  i.e.  when  a  handful  of  advanced  countries  had  reached  the  crisis  phase  of  their 
boom-bust experiences after financial deregulation. This field of research has been mostly 
empirical. Theory has been slow to explain destabilizing behaviour in a way that would be 
applicable in practice. 
Banking  crises  can  be  interpreted  an  extreme  manifestation  of  the  financial  cycle 
phenomenon. There is a lot of empirical literature on their early warning indicators. Because 
no  country  has  had  enough  banking  crises  to  have  a  representative  sample  of  them,  this 
literature  is  almost  exclusively  based  on  panel  data.  For  instance,  recent  working  papers 
published by the European Systemic Risk Board and the Bank of Finland have systematically 
tested the predictive power of different early warning indicators. 
Banking crises are in most cases preceded by three parallel phenomena, namely excessive 
credit  growth,  house  price  bubbles  and  large  current  account  deficits.  These  three 
phenomena preceded the Scandinavian crises more than 20 years ago, as well as the most 
extreme  recent  crises  in  Europe  and  the  Great  Recession  of  the  U.S.  Banks’  increasing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
reliance on money market funding other than retail deposits is also observed quite regularly 
in the development before crises. 
Therefore,  the  archetypal  banking  crisis  is  preceded  by  a  phase  when  banks  finance  the 
current  account  deficit  by  borrowing  in  international  wholesale  markets  and  channel  this 
funding  to  the  domestic  economy  by  granting  loans  to  customers  who  buy  real  estate. 
Although business loans are more likely to be written off as loan losses, macro level studies 
have  found  housing  loans  more  destabilizing  than  corporate  loans.  (Detken  et  al  2014, 
Kalatie & al 2015) 
According to Claudio Borio, we can measure the credit cycle phenomenon pretty well just by 
focusing on credit volumes and property prices. Judging by the results from standard filtering 
techniques, the credit cycle seems much longer than the ordinary business cycle, possibly 
about  15  years.  If  anything,  financial  cycles  are  becoming  longer  and  more  pronounced. 
Some academics, including Martin Hellwig and Charles Goodhart, have even argued that the 
capital requirements have actually amplified the financial cycle; banks restrict lending when 
capital adequacy requirements are about to be violated, which slows down economic growth 
and puts downwards pressure on asset prices, worsening credit risks. 
Financial cycles in Finland (slide 2) 
What  has  Finland  learnt  on  the  financial  cycles  as  a  small  country  and  a  member  of  the 
monetary union? At the moment, it seems that being a member of the monetary union has 
had a rather limited direct impact on the cycle in Finland. The Finnish financial sector has 
been rather well insulated from the instability experienced in some other member countries. 
Three Bank of Finland economists, Adam Gulan, Markus Haavio and Juha Kilponen, have 
presented  a  decomposition  of  the  fluctuations  of  the  Finnish  GDP  since  the  1980s.  They 
analyzed  which factors – financial or real, domestic or external  – have moved the Finnish 
GDP.  According  to  their  results,  the  era  of  monetary  union  has  been  characterized  by 
relatively stable domestic financial markets. Loan supply had a moderate stimulating impact 
on the economy in the mid- 2000s, but we cannot blame domestic financial instability for the 
deep recession that hit our economy in 2009. The reduction in export demand in particular 
and direct negative influences from global financial markets had a strong adverse impact on 
output, but these effects were direct, not transmitted through the national financial market. 
These results obtained with sophisticated econometric techniques are consistent with what 
one can easily observe. The recession of 2009 hardly affected our domestic banking market, 
and e.g. loan losses remained at a historically low level. The solvency of banks was hardly 
affected. Simultaneously, the banking systems of some other countries within the monetary 
union were on the verge of collapse. 
The stability of the Finnish financial sector is in strong contrast to the experience during the 
Nordic banking crisis 20 years earlier. We had in Finland a very pronounced financial cycle 
overheating  in  the  late  1980s.  Banks’  lending  grew  too  rapidly.  Something  needed  to  be 
done,  but  there  were  few  previous  examples  of  what  we  would  now  call  countercyclical 
macroprudential  policies.  However,  it  was  discussed  back  then  that  the  problem  could  be 
solved with Pigouvian tax; lending growth could be subject to a tax to be paid by banks. 
In  March  1989,  a  new  system  of  additional  reserve  requirements  was  introduced.  The 
requirement was conditional on the lending growth rate of each bank. No interest was paid 
on  these  extra  central  bank  reserves.  During  an  era  of  high  interest  rates,  this  was  a 
substantial cost burden for a bank that preferred to continue its expansion. Most banks kept 
the  growth  of  their  loan  stocks  below  the  threshold  that  would  have  triggered  the  extra 
requirement. The measure obviously helped to slow down credit growth, but in retrospect, it 
is easy to say that it should have been implemented earlier. 
Finland  experienced  one  of  the  worst  banking  crises  in  history  only  a  few  years  later. 
Unsurprisingly, banks that chose to continue granting more and more loans despite of the 
costly extra reserve requirement were the first to end up in nightmarish problems a couple of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
years  later.  With  hindsight,  a  sufficient  macroprudential  toolkit  should  have  been  created 
already when times were calm and their activation was not immediately not required. 
Macroprudential policy in the euro area 
Along with single banking supervision within the banking union, the European Central Bank 
was also given a mandate in macroprudential policy. The ECB can impose more – but not 
less  –  stringent  requirements  than  the  actions  taken  at  national  level  on  the  basis  of  EU 
legislation. 
(Slide 3) 
The purpose of these asymmetric powers of the ECB is to prevent what is called the inaction 
bias in the conduct of macroprudential policy by national policy-makers. This bias towards 
inaction  might  arise  because  the  deployment  of  macroprudential  instruments  is  unpopular 
and tends to meet with opposition from the banks and their customers alike. 
In  the  euro  area,  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  an  important,  although  a  shared 
responsibility in the macroprudential field. This has the advantage that national analysis is 
complemented  with  independent  ECB  analysis  and  the  state  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole 
being reflected in policy actions. 
For  example:  In  a  monetary  union  where  monetary  policy  is  designed  for  the  area  as  a 
whole, it may be unable to temper national credit cycles.Nationally targeted macroprudential 
policy is useful and it needs to take the limitations of monetary policy into account. 
National  credit  cycles  vary  both  in  frequency  and  amplitude.  For  this  reason,  the 
development of macroprudential policy is of particular importance for the euro area countries. 
National authorities’ role is very important in the conduct of macroprudential policy within a 
monetary union. The analysis of the macroeconomic situation and the local conditions is the 
foundation for policy making. One function of national macroprudential policy is also to act as 
first line of defense against systemic risks. That benefits a country’s neighbours as well: in 
integrated markets, systemic risks and problems spread rapidly across sectors and borders. 
The macroprudential framework in Finland (slide 4) 
The Finnish macroprudential framework is pragmatic. In a small country the framework was 
built on within the existing institutional structures. A close co-operation between the relevant 
institutions is of key importance and in particular the synergies between the central bank’s 
maroeconomic  expertise, 
[macroprudential  analysis]  and  supervisor’s  regulatory  and 
institution-specific expertise. 
The  decision  making  body  is  the  Board  of  the  Finnish  Supervisory  Authority  (Fin-FSA), 
chaired  by  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland.  The  Fin-FSA  is  the  national 
macroprudential authority. Staff analysis and policy proposal, serving the decision making, 
are  prepared  jointly  by  the  Fin-FSA  and  the  Bank  of  Finland.  The  Bank  of  Finland,  the 
Ministry of Finance as well as the Ministry of Social Affairs & Health are asked to express 
their opinions on the Fin-FSA Director General’s regular quarterly policy proposals. All these 
institutions have also possibility to make initiatives of their own for the consideration of the 
Board of the Fin-FSA regarding the use of macroprudential tools. 
Finnish economy and its outlook 
Finland is a small open economy with a very good growth record in the long term. However, 
economic growth in Finland has now been slow for a prolonged period, both historically and 
by  international  comparison.  Finnish  exports  have  suffered  a  considerable  loss  of  market 
share since 2009, the most severe year of the recession. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
According  to  the  last  Bank  of  Finland  forecast  Finland  will  not  soon  catch  up  with  the 
recovery foreseen in the other euro area countries. 
Growth has been depressed by cyclical, sectoral and structural problems. The labour market 
situation has deteriorated rapidly during the past year. Unemployment is now higher than in 
the recession year 2009, the unemployment rate standing at around 9.5 %. 
Over the past 5 years there has been a soft, if lengthy landing in the Finnish housing market, 
reflecting the protracted period of slow economic growth. The regional divergence, driven by 
both demand and supply-side factors, in house prices and household indebtedness is wide. 
Growth  areas,  mainly  the  biggest  cities  with  universities,  are  characterised  by  increasing 
population, younger residents, a better employment situation and higher household income 
than the national average. This is also reflected in housing markets, as higher house prices 
and larger housing loans in these areas. 
At current juncture, our financial cycle is lackluster. As required by legislation, we have made 
quarterly  decisions  on  countercyclical  capital  buffer  since  the  beginning  of  2015. This  has 
enabled us to gain some practical lessons on how macroprudential analysis is done and how 
the decision making with respect to financial cycles is managed. 
Lessons learned 
The diversity in economic history, the economic outlook and in the local conditions justifies 
the  importance  of  national  discretion  in  macroprudential  policy  making  also  in  a  monetary 
union. 
However, one should go even deeper than the national level into the regional and sectoral 
differences. For example, we could foresee that urbanization drives housing demand to the 
extent that regional housing bubbles can become a systemic risk, with negative percussions 
on real economy, unless problems are appropriately addressed in time. 
In addition, we have the well-known problems with data. Namely, the data is in many cases 
lagging, often revised afterwards and therefore backward looking. We should not make policy 
by  looking  at the rear-view  mirror. Therefore, judgment,  discretion  and a  holistic  approach 
are essential in policy making. 
Macroprudential policy is a new field of economic policy. Its creation is an outcome of the 
global financial crises. Monetary policy and good supervision were not sufficient for financial 
stability. One needs to see the forest from trees. 
We need to learn the lessons of the crisis, while not fighting the last war. No crisis exactly 
repeats the  previous  one.  Some more  recent  phenomena  require  also particular  attention: 
increased importance of the debt securities market, re-emergence of shadow banking and 
the phenomenon digitalization. 
To conclude, what is the biggest challenge for authorities? We have some new powers and a 
range of instruments for the conduct of macroprudential policy. We know that the direction is 
correct but we should also remember that these instruments are not properly tested yet. We 
do not know yet enough about their potential consequences and side effects. This advices 
caution. However, despite these difficulties, I believe these new powers and tools given to 
authorities are necessary. We are on a right track. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
