Haruhiko Kuroda: Challenges to achieving the price stability target of 2 
percent 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting, held by the 
Naigai Josei Chosa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 6 November 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is my great honor to have the opportunity to address you today at the Naigai Josei Chosa 
Kai. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 30, the Bank of Japan produced the Outlook 
for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) and published its projections for Japan’s 
economic activity and prices through fiscal 2017. 
Looking at the recent economic developments, Japan’s exports and production have been 
sluggish,  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  China.  On  the  price 
front, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh 
food)  has  declined  and  reverted  to  about  0  percent,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the 
substantial decline in crude oil prices. 
However,  as  I  will  explain,  the  fundamentals  of  Japan’s  economy  are  sound  and  the 
environment surrounding firms and households has significantly improved compared to some 
years  ago.  Moreover,  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has  been  improving  steadily. 
Quantitative  and  qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE),  which  the  Bank  introduced  in  April 
2013, has been exerting its intended effects toward overcoming deflation. 
The Bank will continue to steadily pursue QQE and solidly maintain accommodative financial 
conditions. In this circumstance, firms and households are expected to be more proactive in 
economic  activity,  Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential,  and  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  certainly  would  be  achieved.  Today,  I 
would like to explain the Bank’s view on the outlook for economic activity and prices, as well 
as on its monetary policy while touching on the Outlook Report. I would first like to elaborate 
on the Bank’s baseline scenario regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices, which 
is considered most probable, and then touch on risks to the baseline scenario. 
I. 
Current situation of Japan’s economic activity and its outlook 
Corporate profits at high levels and firms’ positive investment stance 
Let me start by discussing the current situation of Japan’s economic activity and its outlook. 
As  many  of  you  must  be  aware,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  particularly  China, 
has become marked recently, and this has affected Japan’s exports and production. In the 
April-June quarter of 2015, private consumption was somewhat weak, reflecting in part bad 
weather. Against this backdrop, the projected real economic growth rate for fiscal 2015 was 
revised  downward  to  1.2  percent  in  the  Outlook  Report  compared  with  the  projection  of 
1.7 percent in the July 2015 interim assessment (Chart 1). 
Nevertheless,  corporate  profits  have  been  seeing  record  highs,  and  improvements  in  the 
employment and income situation have continued. A virtuous cycle from income to spending 
has  been  operating  steadily  in  both  the  corporate  and  household  sectors,  and  it  is  judged 
that Japan’s economy has continued to recover moderately. 
A situation in which corporate profits continue increasing despite the flattening of exports and 
industrial production was not commonly observed in Japan’s past economic recoveries. Let 
me point out two reasons why this time is different. The first is firmness in domestic demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
In the past economic recoveries, the general course of events was an increase in exports 
leading  to  rises  in  corporate  profits  and  business  fixed  investment  in  the  manufacturing 
sector; this time, the nonmanufacturing sector has shown a strong recovery on the back of 
resilience in domestic demand. This can be observed in a clear improvement in the diffusion 
index for business conditions and corporate profits of the nonmanufacturing sector compared 
to  the  manufacturing  sector,  as  shown  in  the  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of 
Enterprises  in  Japan)  (Chart  2).  As  the  current  economic  recovery  has  been  driven  by 
domestic demand, even though Japan’s exports have become more or less flat due to the 
slowdown  in  overseas  economies,  the  tolerance  of  Japan’s  economy  for  this  slowdown 
seems to be relatively high compared to the recoveries in the past. Second, the decline in 
commodity  prices,  mainly  crude  oil  prices,  affected  in  part  by  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies,  has  pushed  up  profits  through  an  improvement  in  the  terms  of  trade.  Put 
differently,  a  sort  of  automatic  adjustment  has  been  working  in  which  the  negative  impact 
from a decline in quantity has been offset by positive effects in terms of prices. In addition, 
the rise in repatriated income from overseas business through dividends and interest, which 
has accelerated partly as a result of the depreciation of the yen, has contributed to the recent 
improvement in corporate profits. 
Under this favorable situation in corporate profits, firms’ fixed investment stance has become 
positive. According to business plans for fiscal 2015 released in the September Tankan, the 
year-on-year rate of growth of fixed investment plans for all enterprises and industries was 
revised upward from the June Tankan, from 3.4 percent to 6.4 percent. 
Turning  to  overseas  economies,  as  shown  in  the  October  2015  World  Economic  Outlook 
(WEO) published by the IMF, global growth for this year is projected to decline compared to 
2014, but to accelerate toward 2016 (Chart 3). Advanced economies have continued to see a 
firm recovery trend, mainly in the United States. Emerging economies are likely to continue 
their slowdown for the time being. Since the Chinese authorities, having relatively large room 
for  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  have  proactively  been  carrying  out  economic  stimulus 
measures, the Chinese economy is expected to follow a generally stable growth path, albeit 
at a somewhat reduced pace. Emerging economies other than China are also likely to move 
out  of  their  deceleration  phase  on  the  back  of  the  robust  growth  in  advanced  economies. 
Based  on  these  projections  of  overseas  economies,  the  favorable  developments  seen  in 
Japan’s corporate sector are likely to continue. 
Improvement in the employment and income situation, and resilient private 
consumption 
I  would  next  like  to  explain  developments  in  the  household  sector.  Needless  to  say,  the 
employment  and  income  situation  is  a  key  factor  in  deciding  household  spending.  On  this 
point, the tightening trend in labor market conditions has continued. Namely, the active job 
openings-to-applicants ratio is currently 1.24 times, a high level last seen in 1992, and the 
unemployment rate has declined to 3.4 percent, a low level last seen in 1997 (Chart 4). What 
is  worth  noting  is  that  the  labor  market  has  continued  to  tighten  despite  the  flattening  of 
exports  and  production.  In  fact,  as  seen  in  the  diffusion  index  for  employment  conditions 
released  in  the  September  Tankan,  a  perception  of  labor  shortage  has  heightened  further 
among  firms,  and  the  labor  market  can  be  regarded  as  being  in  a  situation  of  “full 
employment.” 
As corporate profits have increased to their highest level historically and tightening in labor 
market conditions has continued, there has been upward pressure on wages. Based on the 
Monthly Labour Survey, scheduled cash earnings have increased, reflecting in part a rise in 
base pay, which was seen for two consecutive years (Chart 5). According to various survey 
results, summer bonuses this year were raised in many sectors and firms. As a result, the 
employment  and  income  situation  has  been  improving  steadily,  and  consumer  sentiment, 
which deteriorated after the consumption tax hike in 2014, has been on an improving trend 
on the whole (Chart 6). Private consumption for the April-June quarter was somewhat weak 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
due to lackluster sales of small cars and the effects of bad weather, but results of various 
sales statistics suggest that private consumption has turned to an increase since around July 
in many categories, and can be judged as being resilient on the whole. 
With a virtuous cycle from income to spending in both the corporate and household sectors, 
Japan’s  economy  through  fiscal  2016  is  likely  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its 
potential, which is currently estimated to be around 0.5 percent or lower. Thereafter, through 
fiscal 2017, the economy is projected to maintain its positive growth, although with a slowing 
in its pace to around a level somewhat below the potential growth rate. The slowdown is due 
mainly to (1) the effects of a front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to 
and after the consumption tax hike planned in April 2017 and (2) cyclical deceleration. 
II. 
Price developments and the path toward achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent 
Current state of and outlook for prices 
Let me turn to price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items 
less fresh food, which was minus 0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE, increased 
to as high as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike. 
However,  as  somewhat  weak  developments  in  private  consumption  continued  after  the 
consumption tax hike and crude oil prices declined substantially from the summer of 2014, 
annual CPI inflation declined and has been about 0 percent in recent months (Chart 7). 
Nevertheless, the underlying trend in inflation has steadily improved, excluding the effects of 
the decline in energy prices. For example, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all 
items less fresh food and energy has been positive for 24 consecutive months since October 
2013, increasing to 1.2 percent this September. This was the first time since the late 1990s, 
when  Japan’s  economy  fell  into  deflation,  that  a  continued  price  increase  was  seen. 
Meanwhile,  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  daily  or  weekly  price  indices,  such  as  for  food  and 
daily necessities, has followed an accelerating trend since this April. Firms’ price-hiking has 
become widespread and sustained, as seen in the fact that the share of items in the CPI for 
which  prices  have  risen  has  been  outweighing  that  for  which  prices  have  declined  by  an 
increasing margin (Chart 8). 
Monthly data for the CPI are susceptible to various factors, such as developments in import 
prices that reflect changes in energy prices and fluctuations in foreign exchange rates. On 
the other hand, the underlying trend in inflation is determined mainly by the output gap and 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations. From this perspective, significant changes that 
have not been seen in recent years are taking place. I will elaborate on these two aspects as 
follows. 
Developments in the output gap 
The output gap indicates the supply and demand balance of Japan’s economy as a whole; 
that  is,  the  extent  to  which  capital  and  labor  are  utilized.  Although  capacity  utilization  has 
continued its increasing trend as the economy continues to recover moderately, the effects of 
the  flattening  of  exports,  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  have  been 
observed recently (Chart 9). Meanwhile, labor market conditions have continued to tighten. 
This  is  partly  because,  reflecting  firmness  in  domestic  demand,  the  current  economic 
recovery has been largely attributable to the nonmanufacturing sector, which is more labor-
intensive than the manufacturing sector. Therefore, the output gap has steadily followed its 
improving  trend,  mainly  on  the  labor  side  (Chart  10).  Looking  ahead,  with  the  economy 
expected  to  continue  growing  at  a  pace  above  its  potential,  capital  and  labor  utilization  is 
likely  to  rise  further  and  thereby  the  output  gap  is  expected  to  continue  improving  further. 
Thus, upward pressure on prices stemming from the output gap is likely to increase steadily. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
Let me move on to inflation expectations. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear 
to  have  been  rising  on  the  whole  from  a  somewhat  long-term  perspective.  Inflation 
expectations can be assessed from various market indicators and survey results. Although 
there are some indicators or results showing that inflation expectations have been somewhat 
weak, they have been flat on the whole recently, despite the significant decline in crude oil 
prices  (Chart  11).  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  analyze  firms’  and  households’  views  on 
prices upon which they engage in economic activities. Since the turn of the fiscal year, firms’ 
price-hiking behavior has been increasingly conspicuous. At the same time, households have 
come  to  accept  price  increases  as  well,  against  the  backdrop  of  actual  and  prospective 
increases  in  their  income. The  increases reflect  rises  in  wages,  including  base  pay,  which 
took place at many firms. This makes a striking contrast with the episode that occurred last 
April, when many firms attempted to raise their sales prices, only to back off rather quickly as 
demands faltered, perhaps because this move coincided with the consumption tax hike. As 
firms’ and households’ views on prices have changed clearly, especially since the turn of the 
fiscal  year,  a  positive  feedback  between  the  increase  in  wages  and  the  moderate  rise  in 
inflation is now firmly in place on the back of record profits. 
Relationship between wage increases and inflation 
I would like to elaborate on the relationship between wage increases and inflation of goods 
and  services.  Our  experience  shows  that  wage  increases  have  been  moving  almost  in 
parallel with inflation of goods and services (Chart 12). It often is said that, if wages do not 
match  up  with  inflation,  real  income  will  decrease,  thereby  exerting  negative  effects  on 
consumption. However, such developments, if they occur at all, will not last for long, at least 
in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  This  is  because,  if  they  were  to  occur,  consumption  will 
decrease, making it difficult for firms to keep raising prices. In turn, if wages increase, firms 
will  be  urged  to  raise  their  sales  prices  in  order  to  secure  their  profit  margins,  leading  to 
higher inflation. Thus, there are only two scenarios in reality: either both wages and prices 
increase or neither wages nor prices increase. Wage increases and price rises are two sides 
of  the  coin,  so  to  speak.  QQE,  which  the  Bank  has  been  pursuing,  is  not  intended  to 
engineer increases merely in prices by any means. But rather, it is designed, in accordance 
with the mechanism of the economy, to realize a moderate inflation being accompanied with 
wage increases. 
Looking ahead, as the Bank pursues QQE and the observed inflation rate rises, medium- to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  are  also  likely  to  follow  an  increasing  trend  and  gradually 
converge to around 2 percent – the price stability target. Accordingly, firms’ wage- and price-
setting behavior is expected to be more proactive, and inflation rates are likely to gradually 
rise accompanied by wage increases. 
The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food is likely to be about 
0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices and, as the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  steadily  rises  and  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  crude  oil  prices 
dissipate, the rate of increase is expected to accelerate toward 2 percent – the price stability 
target. Although the timing of reaching around 2 percent depends on developments in crude 
oil prices, it is projected to be around the second half of fiscal 2016, assuming that crude oil 
prices  will  rise  moderately  from  the  recent  level.  As  shown  in  the  October  2015  Outlook 
Report,  the  projected  rates  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  fiscal  2015,  2016,  and  2017  are 
0.1 percent, 1.4 percent, and, excluding the direct effects of the scheduled consumption tax 
hike, 1.8 percent, respectively (Chart 1). Compared to the projections in the July 2015 interim 
assessment, the projected rates of increase in the CPI for fiscal 2015 and 2016 are lower 
due mainly to the effects of the decline in crude oil prices, but the projection for fiscal 2017 is 
more or less unchanged. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Risk factors regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices 
III.  
I have so far explained the baseline scenario regarding the outlook for economic activity and 
prices. However, there are various uncertainties surrounding the economy, and I would like 
to touch on the risk factors that can affect the outlook for economic activity and prices. 
The  most  important  risk  factor  with  regard  to  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  is  the 
slowdown in emerging economies, particularly in China. The Chinese economy is currently in 
the  transition  process  from  investment-driven  high  growth  to  consumption-driven  stable 
growth. The industrial structure is also shifting from one centered on manufacturing to one on 
nonmanufacturing.  It  is  in  this  context  that  economic  activity  in  manufacturing  has  been 
sluggish  recently,  whereas  that  in  nonmanufacturing  maintains  its  robustness  (Chart  13). 
With  regard  to  short-term  developments,  the  pace  of  increase  in  spending  by  local 
governments,  whose  deceleration  was  one  of  the  sources  of  sluggishness  in  the  Chinese 
economy in the first half of this year, has accelerated recently, due partly to instructions by 
the  central  government  and  the  measures  taken  to  facilitate  the  financing  of  local 
governments (Chart 14). It therefore is expected that the growth rate in China will accelerate 
toward next year. 
That  said,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  the  risk  that  the  structural  problems,  such  as  excess 
capacity  in  steel,  automobiles,  and  other  industries,  will  be  protracted  in  the  transition 
process  toward  stable  economic  growth.  There  is  also  an  uncertainty  about  the  impact  of 
fiscal stimulus, depending on its composition, on boosting the economy. Even if the growth 
rate  in  China  picks  up,  its  impact  on  other  economies  in  East  Asia  should  be  carefully 
assessed (Chart 15). In China, the relative weight of nonmanufacturing has been on the rise, 
and  even  within  the  manufacturing  sector,  domestic  production  of  manufactured  parts  and 
products  with  high  value-added,  which  were  mostly  imported  previously,  has  been 
increasing. Against this background, the effects of the economic growth in China stimulating 
exports of other countries in East Asia via a trade channel have been getting smaller. Taking 
this into account, there remains uncertainty about the impact of the positive spillover from the 
recovery of the Chinese economy on other economies in East Asia. 
As  I  described  earlier,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies  already  has  been  exerting 
downward pressure on Japan’s exports and production, which already is incorporated in the 
baseline  scenario.  If  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies  is  within  the  range  of  our 
assumption, notwithstanding its negative impact, Japan’s economy is expected to continue to 
grow,  reflecting  the  steady  increase  in  domestic  demand  and  the  positive  impact  of  the 
decline in energy prices on real income. However, if the slowdown in emerging economies 
becomes  much  deeper  than  expected  or  prolonged,  the  negative  impact  on  Japan’s 
economy  accordingly  will  be  larger.  What  matters  most  is  the  impact  on  the  business 
confidence of Japanese firms. If firms start to downsize their fixed investment plans or wage 
increases against the backdrop of increasing concerns over the developments in emerging 
economies,  this  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  steady  increase  in  domestic  demand. 
Although  this  is  currently  one  of  the  risk  factors  rather  than  a  probable  scenario,  we  are 
mindful of it. 
When it comes to the impact on prices, the focal point is the developments in wage increases 
toward next fiscal year. As I described earlier, the rates of increase in wages and in prices 
move  almost  in  parallel  in  the  long  run,  and  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  already  has 
shown  a  clear  improving  trend.  In  order  to  maintain  the  real  wages  and  income  of 
households,  it  is  important  for  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  to  be  reflected  in  wage 
increases, notwithstanding the recent seeming decline in the rate of change in inflation. In 
the  baseline  scenario,  wage  increases  that  are  consistent  with  the  trend  inflation  are 
expected. We are mindful of a downside risk, however, of firms becoming more cautious with 
regard to wage increases against the backdrop of uncertainties regarding developments in 
overseas economies, particularly emerging economies. There is also a downside risk that, in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
the  case  of  insufficient  wage  increases,  consumers  will  become  more  resistant  to  price 
increases on goods and services, pushing down the pace of inflation. 
Challenges toward overcoming deflation 
IV. 
Japan’s economy has been improving steadily toward achieving the price stability target of 
2 percent, but it is only halfway through and due attention needs to be paid to risk factors 
including  developments in  emerging  economies.  In my  concluding remarks,  I  would  like  to 
touch on the challenges toward overcoming deflation and achieving the price stability target 
of 2 percent, particularly those of firms’ behavior and monetary policy. 
As  I  described  earlier,  firms  are  now  enjoying  record  profits  and  the  labor  market  can  be 
considered to be in a situation of full employment. In light of the mechanism of the economy, 
under  such  favorable  circumstances,  firms  are  expected  to  increase  business  fixed 
investment for their future growth, and to raise wages to secure the labor force needed for 
the further expansion of business and production. Indeed, they continue to show a positive 
stance toward fixed investment, and wages have been rising moderately, including base pay 
increases. At the same time, however, the data to date give us an impression that the pace 
of  increase  in  fixed  investment  and  wages  is  not  at  a  high  enough  level  in  light  of  record 
profits. The fact that firms are still restrained from spending amid a high level of profits is also 
evidenced from the ample cash they hoard, which has accumulated to an even higher level 
(Chart 16). 
One of the reasons behind such restrained behavior of firms – exemplified by record profits 
mostly  being  used  just  to  build  up  already  ample  cash  rather  than  being  used  for  fixed 
investment  and  wages  –  is  that  the  deflationary  mindset  of  firms  still  has  not  necessarily 
been removed. From a different perspective, firms tend to see the current high level of profits 
as  windfall  profits,  being  only  transitorily  helped  by  the  current  benign  circumstances,  and 
thus they restrain from taking advantage of them. 
Given that Japan’s economy has been mired in deflation for a long period of time, it is never 
easy to get out of such a situation and dramatically change firms’ persistent mindset. But the 
direction is clear. Firms should be strongly encouraged to devise a new strategy that fits with 
the  post-deflation  era  based  on  the  prospect  of  Japan’s  economy  overcoming  deflation. In 
light of this prospect, firms’ forward-looking actions, which were not sufficiently rewarded in 
the  deflationary  period,  look  quite  promising.  Firms  should  recognize  that,  without  such 
actions, it will be difficult to generate profits in the future and to increase firms’ value. Not all 
firms  need  to  change  at  the  same  time.  The  more  firms  start  to  act  in  view  of  such  a 
prospect,  the  more  vibrant  the  economy  will  become.  Some  forward-looking  firms  have 
started  to  act  already,  and  they  will  be  rewarded  in  the  end  if  such  actions  become 
widespread. 
The Bank of Japan will definitely and decisively play its role to make this happen. For these 
past  two  and  half  years,  the  Bank  has  strongly  committed  to  achieving  the  price  stability 
target  of  2  percent  and  has  been  pursuing  QQE.  Japan’s  economy  has  been  improving 
steadily toward achieving the target. The Bank will continue the unprecedented large-scale 
monetary easing to achieve the target. As I explained, the Bank currently is of the view that 
the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  can  be  achieved  through  continuation  of  the  current 
policy.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  carefully  assess  economic  activity  and 
prices, recognizing downside risks to them, including the effects of the slowdown in emerging 
economies.  The  Bank  will  make  the  most  appropriate  policy  decisions  by  scrutinizing  the 
current situation of economic activity and prices and their outlook, various risk factors, and 
developments  in  financial  and  capital  markets  at  every  Monetary  Policy  Meeting.  Let  me 
reiterate  that  the  Bank  will  make  adjustments  without  hesitation  if  judged  as  necessary  to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7 
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
