   Lars Rohde: Denmark’s economy, housing market, krone, and crisis 
management of mortgage banks 
Speech by Mr Lars Rohde, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the annual meeting 
of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks 2015, Copenhagen, 1 October 2015. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak for the third time at the annual meeting of the Association 
of Danish Mortgage Banks. Let me start by saying how much I appreciate our good working 
relationship. 
Today I will concentrate on these subjects: the Danish economy, the housing market, the krone 
and finally crisis management, with focus on mortgage banks. 
 The Danish economy is in an upswing. Employment has risen steadily over the last two years, 
and unemployment has fallen. It is now only slightly above the cyclically neutral level. Growth 
in GDP has been positive for eight quarters in a row at a level above the potential growth rate 
of the economy. 
Strong forces are currently driving the economy – oil prices have dived sharply and the level 
of interest rates remains very low. The same forces are at work in our key export markets. 
Moreover, real household disposable income is rising and so is wealth. The drop in equity 
prices over the last month plays only a minor role in this context. Whichever way you look at 
it, there is a basis for stronger growth in consumption. 
Danmarks Nationalbank expects the growth rate to be 1.8 per cent this year and slightly higher 
next year. We also predict that employment will grow by another 80,000 or so from mid-2015 
until the end of 2017. There is room for both higher employment and wage increases as the 
cyclical  position  normalises.  But  unemployment  is  low  relative  to  the  forecast  growth  in 
employment, and therefore most of the increase must come from an expansion of the labour 
force.  Otherwise  there  is  a  risk  that  the  current  upswing  will  be  very  short  and  result  in 
pressures on the economy. 
 The housing market is now picking up in practically all municipalities, and the annual rate of 
increase in house prices in Denmark overall has risen since New Year. In some parts of the 
country,  prices  have  begun  to  rise  only  recently,  so  there  are  still  large  differences  in  the 
housing market across the country. 
As such, it is positive that the housing market is picking up. That is a natural element of the 
current upswing. But in the large towns and cities there is a risk of price increases being self-
reinforcing. The rate of price increase for e.g. owner-occupied flats in Copenhagen has been 
around 10 per cent for several years, and many buyers seem to expect that prices will continue 
to rise. It goes without saying that price increases on the scale seen in Copenhagen in recent 
years are not sustainable in the longer term. 
During previous upswings, the housing market has been a source of macroeconomic instability 
and overheating of the economy. This was particularly true during the upswing in the 2000s. A 
contributory  factor  was  the  absence  of  sufficient  automatic  stabilisers  in  the  structure  of 
housing taxes. The current housing tax rules have also led to a considerable geographical 
spread in the rate of taxation – by which I mean the tax payable relative to the value of the 
property. 
In the Danish mortgage credit system, everyone has access to loans if they can pledge sufficient 
collateral. Marginal lending is typically provided by the banks. But there is reason to exert caution 
in this respect. In many cases it would be prudent for the banks to require a considerably larger 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   down payment than the 5 per cent of the purchase price that will be included in the rules on good 
practice  for  financial  enterprises  from  1  November.  More  equity  among  the  households  will 
strengthen their resilience and the robustness of the financial sector. 
 It is important that you do not go right to the statutory limits, but only grant loans if you assess 
them to be sound. Easier access to credit should not be a competitive parameter. 
For example, a variable rate mortgage loan should not mechanically be granted, even though 
the borrower meets the “good practice” requirements and can be approved for a 30-year fixed 
rate loan with amortisation. At present this means a fixed rate of around 3 per cent. That is 
very  low,  and  the  variable  rate  may  soon  rise  to  a  higher  level.  This  should  be  taken  into 
account when approving a borrower. If it is assessed that the customer may have problems 
servicing the loan if interest rates rise to a considerably higher level, a fixed rate loan should 
be  granted.  Even  when  this  is  not  required  in  order  to  observe  the  “good  practice” 
requirements. 
Total lending by Danish banks and mortgage banks has been virtually unchanged over the last 
year. But the level is high, also when viewed relative to GDP. And it should be remembered that 
lending has not declined even though it rose strongly in the pre-crisis years. During that period, 
the  economy  overheated,  and  later  it  turned  out  that  some  banks  had  eased  their  credit 
conditions far too much. So a rise in lending is not immediately on the cards. 
Credit institutions operating in such a market should be particularly thorough when assessing 
potential borrowers. This includes taking into account the fact that house prices can fluctuate 
considerably. When the housing bubble of the 2000s burst, it became clear that a maximum 
LTV ratio of 80 per cent for mortgage loans does not necessarily ensure that the value of the 
home exceeds the value of the mortgage loan when prices fall. 
If we look at the mortgage statistics, we can see that lending is increasing most strongly in the 
urban areas, which is hardly surprising as this is where the largest house price rises are seen. 
Demand for loans is also highest in these areas. But new loans are also being granted in rural 
areas, and the number of municipalities where extraordinary prepayments are exceeding new 
lending is very small. This indicates that if there is sufficient collateral to mortgage, loans are 
granted. No matter where the property is located. The challenge of declining populations in 
some areas is not solved by granting more credit. 
*** 
Turning to monetary policy, the beginning of the year was unusually eventful. Following the 
decision by the Swiss National Bank on 15 January to discontinue the minimum exchange rate 
for the Swiss franc against the euro, we saw an unprecedented increase in demand for Danish 
kroner. 
Against  that  background,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  took  a  number  of  unusual  steps.  We 
intervened in the foreign exchange market by selling kroner for a larger amount than ever before 
in  our  history,  and  the  benchmark  monetary  policy  interest  rate  –  the  rate  of  interest  on 
certificates of deposit – was reduced to –0.75 per cent. On the recommendation of Danmarks 
Nationalbank, the Ministry of Finance also suspended issuance of Danish government bonds 
temporarily,  and  finally  an  extraordinary  increase  of  the  limit  on  the  monetary  policy 
counterparties’ current account deposits at Danmarks Nationalbank was introduced. 
These measures had the desired effect. The krone remained stable close to its central rate, 
and towards the end of February the inflow of foreign exchange ceased. In recent months, the 
situation in relation to the krone has gradually normalised, and Danmarks Nationalbank has 
sold foreign exchange in the market for a considerable amount. On the recommendation of 
Danmarks Nationalbank, the Ministry of Finance has therefore decided to resume issuance of 
government bonds effective from October 2015. At the same time, the extraordinary increase 
of the current account limit has been rolled back. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   January-February this year was by no means the first time Danmarks Nationalbank had to take 
resolute action to defend the fixed exchange rate policy. And it will probably not be the last 
time. Situations where the krone is under pressure seldom resemble previous situations. The 
triggers and series of events differ from time to time, and although Danmarks Nationalbank in 
principle  applies  the  same  reaction  function,  our  reaction  must  be  adapted  to  the  specific 
circumstances. Nevertheless, I think we should reflect on the lessons than can be learned from 
the most recent episode. 
Firstly, we must realise that pressure on the krone can go either way. There is no law of nature 
saying that the krone always tends to weaken in a crisis. On the contrary, Denmark’s role as a 
creditor nation, which means that we have net foreign assets, means that future krone crises 
are likely more frequently to result in upward pressure. 
In January-February, capital flows were larger than in previous episodes when the krone has 
been under pressure. While the interest rate typically is the most important instrument in a 
situation  where  the  krone  tends  to  weaken,  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market 
potentially plays a larger role when capital is flowing into the country. In that situation there is 
no upper limit to the amount that Danmarks Nationalbank can make available in kroner. The 
very low level of interest rates in Denmark means that Danmarks Nationalbank profits from the 
increase in the foreign exchange reserve. 
The  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  has  served  Denmark  well  for  more  than  30  years  and  is  the 
foundation  for  stable  macroeconomic  development.  The  pressure  on  the  krone  gave  us  an 
opportunity to demonstrate, once again, that this policy is not up for discussion. Denmark’s overall 
economic policy is aimed at supporting the fixed exchange rate policy, and we have the means 
and the will to defend the krone. Even if the situation calls for extraordinary measures. 
 Finally,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  what  the  new  crisis  management  regime  means  for  the 
mortgage banks. 
Basically, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive establishes a common framework for 
the resolution of credit institutions across the EU. The underlying philosophy is that losses 
should be borne by those who took the risks. In other words, owners and creditors. Public 
funds should be protected. Those are the rules applying to other firms, and they should also 
apply to banks and mortgage banks. That will support market discipline. 
It shall be ensured that resolution of an institution does not have serious implications for the 
economy and for financial stability. The functions that are critical to general economy must 
therefore be preserved in the event of resolution, irrespective of the organisational set-up. In 
this way, society in general is not taken as a hostage and forced to bail out an institution in 
difficulties. That can only be achieved via robust planning of recovery and resolution. Such 
planning will also ensure that bail-in becomes a real option in the future. 
Since mortgage credit is a core element of the Danish financial system, the new framework 
will  obviously  affect  the  individual  mortgage  banks.  Overall,  there  are  three  reasons  why 
difficulties experienced by a mortgage bank may have serious implications for the economy 
and for financial stability. These should be taken into account in our planning. 
Firstly, the mortgage credit sector is large and highly concentrated. Mortgage loans make up 
around  three  quarters  of  all  lending  by  credit  institutions  to  households  and  the  corporate 
sector. And these loans are provided by just a small number of mortgage banks. 
Secondly, the mortgage credit sector is closely interconnected with the rest of the financial 
system, in that mortgage bonds, especially covered bonds – SDOs, are used as liquidity and 
wealth instruments. So if their value deteriorates, this will affect the rest of the system. 
Thirdly, all mortgage banks are based on more or less the same business model. This means 
that they are also faced with more or less the same risks. If the market loses confidence in a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   bond issued by one mortgage bank, confidence in and thus funding for the rest of the sector 
may rapidly evaporate. 
Therefore recovery and resolution planning should ensure that a mortgage bank in difficulties 
will still be able to lend on market terms so that the lending capacity of the system does not 
decrease. And it is necessary to ensure that the problem is contained within the mortgage bank 
in  question.  Finally,  it  is  essential  that  the  government  is  not  compelled  to  take  on  any 
significant risk. 
To  prevent  a  situation  where  resolution  becomes  necessary,  each  mortgage  bank  must 
prepare a recovery plan. The plan should examine the steps that may be taken if the mortgage 
bank is in difficulties. This will allow you to spot any weaknesses and inappropriate structures 
yourselves. 
The recovery plan should take into account challenges in relation to both solvency and liquidity. 
Obviously,  it  is  critical  for  an  institution  if  losses  reach  a  magnitude  that  jeopardises  its 
solvency. But that will happen at a very late stage. Doubt about the viability of the business 
model  will  arise  at  a  much  earlier  stage,  namely  when  the  mortgage  bank  can  no  longer 
maintain SDO status for bonds issued and fund itself on market terms. So it is crucial for the 
mortgage bank to have a reliable plan to minimise the risk that this situation arises. 
The plan should cover situations where only the mortgage bank itself is under stress as well 
as  situations  where  stress  affects  the  entire  financial  system.  This  has  a  bearing  on  the 
potential courses of action. In a situation where the entire financial system is under stress, the 
option to divest and access to new capital may be limited. 
In  the  event  that  a  mortgage  bank  is  deemed  likely  to  fail,  resolution  procedures  must  be 
initiated. If this is to be effected in an expedient way, it is necessary to have a robust plan 
ready. That is the responsibility and task of the authorities. This task is fundamental to financial 
stability.  Together  with  the  two  resolution  authorities  –  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority and Financial Stability – Danmarks Nationalbank is therefore working actively with 
such plans for the systemically important financial institutions in Denmark. 
The work on the resolution plans and the assessment of whether they will work involves a large 
element of learning by doing. It is not work that will be completed this year. And the plans will 
need to be updated on a continuous basis. 
The mortgage banks are fully comprised by the crisis management regime. However, there is 
one significant exemption, in that the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities 
does not apply to them. This means that bail-in is not an option in connection with resolution. 
Instead, the mortgage banks must hold a “debt buffer” of 2 per cent of their lending. 
Right now, it is an open question whether a plan for resolution of a mortgage bank can observe 
the resolution targets I have already mentioned without the bail-in tool. This also applies in 
relation to the special winding-up model which the Mortgage Credit Act provides for. As we 
have previously said, it would have been better if a minimum requirement for own funds and 
eligible liabilities had to be set. In a resolution situation it would then have been possible for 
perform bail-in on uncollateralised liabilities to a sufficient extent to ensure the operation of the 
mortgage bank and the value of the SDOs – thereby supporting confidence in the mortgage 
credit system. And the Danish mortgage credit model would not have acquired yet another 
element that is not in conformity with the market. 
*** 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
