   Haruhiko Kuroda: The current situation in Japan’s financial system and 
macroprudential policy 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Paris EUROPLACE 
Financial Forum, Tokyo, 7 December 2015. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to speak before the Paris Europlace Financial Forum 
today. Before I begin, I would like to offer my deepest condolences to the victims of the recent 
terrorist attacks in Paris. 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  “macroprudential”  perspective  has  become  widely 
recognized.  Underlying  the macroprudential framework  is the  view  that, to  ensure financial 
stability, it is necessary to devise institutional designs and policy measures to prevent systemic 
risk from materializing, based on analyses and assessments of risks in the financial system as 
a whole, taking into account the interconnectedness of the real economy, financial markets, 
and financial institutions’ behavior. 
Today,  I  will  start  by  providing  an  assessment  of  the  current  situation  in  Japan’s  financial 
system from a macroprudential perspective. I will then share with you my views on some of 
the issues regarding macroprudential policy. 
Assessment of the Current Situation in Japan’s Financial System 
Let me begin with an overview of the current situation in Japan’s financial system. The Bank 
of Japan has been pursuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) since April 
2013, and the policy has been steadily exerting its intended effects toward achieving the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  financial  system  serves  as  an 
important transmission channel through which QQE produces its effects. 
Indeed, the following positive financial effects have been observed in the past two and a half 
years: (1) stability of long-term interest rates at low levels and declines in credit risk premiums; 
(2) progress in portfolio rebalancing among financial institutions and institutional investors; and 
(3) a positive spillover to asset prices. Looking ahead, further enhancement of the financial 
intermediation function continues to be expected as financial institutions have secured robust 
capital bases. 
As such, the effects of QQE are gradually becoming evident on the financial front as well. From 
a  macroprudential  perspective,  however,  the  more  financial  activity  increases,  the  more 
important it becomes to be vigilant as to whether such effects of QQE would lead to financial 
excesses or imbalances. Under the current framework for the conduct of 
monetary policy, the Bank examines financial imbalances - from a longer-term perspective - 
as a risk that will significantly affect economic activity and prices. As part of the examination 
process, the Bank releases semiannually its Financial System Report. In this report, it makes 
a  forward-looking  assessment  of  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  from  various  angles  - 
including  analyses  of  the  balance  between  financial  institutions’  risks  and  financial  bases, 
macro  stress  testing,  and  the  monitoring  of  risk  indicators  that  suggest  signs  of  financial 
imbalances - and presents tasks and challenges toward achieving financial stability. Taking 
the latest findings into account, significant financial imbalances are not observed at present. 
That said, the Bank will continue to examine developments without presumption. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Macroprudential Policy 
I  will  now  turn  to  macroprudential  policy.  In  recent  years,  this  area  has  seen  various 
international discussions conducted and measures implemented worldwide. First, “structural 
measures” for enhancing the resilience of the financial system, including implementation of the 
Basel III requirements and responses to the “Too Big to Fail” problem, have been proceeding 
steadily. Second, many countries have been making use of macroprudential measures aimed 
at  containing  excessive  financial  cycles  and  the  accumulation  of  imbalances.  These  are 
sometimes referred to as “time-varying macroprudential policy,” thereby distinguishing them 
from  structural  measures.  In  what  follows,  I  will  touch  upon  some  of  the  issues  regarding 
macroprudential policy. 
First, let me discuss the selection and application of “time-varying” macroprudential tools. 
Many of the measures that have been adopted recently in various countries are ones with 
which to lean against financial cycles, by utilizing regulatory ratios such as the countercyclical 
capital buffer (CCB) and the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio. The introduction of the CCB regime is 
scheduled  for  2016  in  countries  worldwide,  including  Japan.  Among  countries  that  already 
have proceeded with the activation of these measures, some have noted that the measures 
have  been  exerting  their  intended  effects  on  such  sectors  as  the  housing  market,  where 
overheating has been observed. At the same time, some point to the considerable uncertainty 
surrounding the measures’ effects and to difficulties that accompany their application, including 
the following. First, there is a lag after activation before the measures begin producing effects. 
Second,  leakages  of  policy  effects  to  unregulated  sectors,  such  as  shadow  banking 
institutions, as well as to overseas, may well occur. And third, measures intended for specific 
sectors, such as housing, give rise to the issue of conflict with other governmental measures. 
In fact, the inability to employ these macroprudential tools in a timely fashion entails the risk of 
accelerating financial cycles. 
“Hard”  measures,  which  involve  the  adjustment  of  regulatory  ratios  in  a  countercyclical 
manner,  are  relatively  new.  Given  this,  the  ultimate  challenge,  including  responses  to  the 
various others I have just mentioned, is how to carry out these measures in an accountable 
manner. 
One point I want to stress in relation to this is that, in dealing with financial imbalances, what 
is important and effective is supervisory guidance by central banks and financial authorities - 
namely, their “soft” approach, by which they issue advance warnings while providing guidance 
and  advice  to  financial  institutions  based  on  assessments  of  financial  system  stability. 
Supervisory  guidance  for  financial  institutions  is  primarily  regarded  as  a  microprudential 
measure. By carrying them out from a macroprudential perspective in an industry-wide and 
collective manner, however, the soft approach is capable of producing effects as a form of 
macroprudential  policy.  Moreover,  compared  with  hard  approaches  like  the  CCB,  this 
approach allows for more forward-looking and flexible responses. 
Based on such understanding, the Bank’s disclosure of the challenges and risks involved in 
ensuring  financial  stability,  through  the  publication  of  the  Financial  System  Report,  and  its 
responses  to  these  issues,  through  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring,  are 
considered part of macroprudential policy. 
Second, let me shift my focus to international financial regulations as a form of “structural” 
macroprudential policy. Reform of international financial regulation is entering its final stages. 
Basel III and responses to the issue of “Too Big to Fail,” such as TLAC (Total Loss-Absorbing 
Capacity),  are  measures  designed  to  substantially  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  global 
financial system. Furthermore, it is important to acknowledge the fact that financial authorities 
and the financial industry worldwide have developed a common understanding on international 
regulation, overcoming differences in their views. This indicates a major step forward, in that 
we have created a foundation for international cooperation to tackle many issues and crises 
that could arise in the future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Having  said  this,  I  would  like  to  mention  several  points  with  regard  to  the  finalization  and 
gradual implementation of the Basel III regulatory reforms. 
The  first  point  is  the  importance  of  a  comprehensive  calibration  of  the  framework  in  its 
finalization. Several of the remaining issues involve quite a number of calibrations based on 
the accumulation of very technical and expert considerations, such as the measurement of 
risk-weighted assets. The outcome of these considerations would have a significant impact on 
the determination of required macro capital and the risk-taking behavior of financial institutions. 
I would like to emphasize that the calibration should be finalized in such a way that the amount 
of risk-weighted assets and required capital as a whole would be maintained at an appropriate 
level, while taking a holistic approach in examining effects on the institutions. 
The second point is the necessity of a review of the effects and impacts of these regulatory 
reforms after their implementation. Reforms of international financial regulations to date have 
been drastic enough that it is no exaggeration to refer to them as a “fundamental re-design.” 
Looking at individual countries, large-scale financial and structural reforms are underway, as 
typified by the Volcker rule in the U.S. The extent of the effects and impacts of these regulatory 
reforms on international financial intermediation and flow of funds in the financial sector as a 
whole  remains  unknown,  and  therefore  requires  close  monitoring.  From  a  long-term 
perspective,  in  order  for  the  financial  system  to  ensure  stability  and  in  turn  contribute  to 
sustainable economic growth, financial institutions need to be sufficiently profitable through 
active  and  innovative  financial  intermediation.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  remove  any 
regulatory excess, inconsistency among regulations, and uncertainty regarding the regulatory 
environment. 
Concluding Remarks 
That brings me toward the end of my speech. Topics for discussion regarding macroprudential 
policy go beyond those I have raised today. One such topic regards the effective institutional 
arrangements  for  macroprudential  policy.  Needless  to  say,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a 
universally optimal set of arrangements, as financial and economic structures as well as legal 
frameworks differ from country to country. Moreover, the desirable form of arrangements would 
vary  depending  on  the  kind  of  macroprudential  measures  each  country  intends  to  utilize. 
Looking  at  the  recent  developments  in  countries  with  multiple  regulatory  and  supervisory 
authorities, there has been quite a number of movements to establish new bodies or councils 
in charge of macroprudential policy. In Japan, the Financial Services Agency (FSA) - which is 
legally authorized to conduct industry-wide supervision and inspections - and the Bank - which 
contributes to financial system stability, such as through the “lender of last resort” function - 
are  making  joint  efforts  in  carrying  out  macroprudential  policy,  fulfilling  their  respective 
functions. 
Furthermore, in June 2014, the two entities together established a task force with the aim of 
holding regular joint meetings, and they have been fostering further coordination. The Bank is 
determined to continue with its efforts to contribute to ensuring the stability of the financial 
system, making use of these arrangements. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
