  Fernando Restoy: The Banking Union – achievements and challenges 
Speech by Mr Fernando Restoy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the closure of the 
presentation  of  the  third  report  on  the  Banking Union  “La  Unión  Bancaria:  suma  y  sigue”, 
organised  by  Centro  de  Sector  Financiero  PwC  and  IE  Business  School,  Madrid, 
2 December 2015. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Let me begin by thanking the organisers, both PWC and the Instituto de Empresa, for their 
kind  invitation  to  participate  in  the  closure  of  this  presentation  of  the  third  report  on  the 
Banking Union. 
We can hardly overstate the importance of the Banking Union for the European construction 
project and, in particular, for ensuring the sound working of Economic and Monetary Union 
(EMU).  A  true  monetary  union  among  sovereign  States  is  not  confined  to  the  use  of  the 
same  banknotes  and  coins  in  each  country,  nor  to the  denomination  of  trade  transactions 
with the same metric. Monetary union requires the conditions in which liquidity is exchanged 
to  be  homogeneous  across  the  entire  area.  Insofar  as  these  exchanges  are  typically 
intermediated  by  financial  institutions,  by  means  of  whose  liabilities  trade  and  financial 
transactions are settled, the appropriate flow of liquidity  within a monetary union demands 
that  the  risk  associated  with  these  liabilities  should  not  depend  on  the  location  of  the 
institution issuing them. 
Naturally, to achieve this homogeneity, bank crisis-prevention and management mechanisms 
are  needed  along  with  risk-mutualisation  arrangements  that  minimise  the  link  between 
national economic and fiscal conditions and the ability to preserve the value of bank liabilities 
in  each  jurisdiction.  These  requirements  include  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  as  a 
prevention tool, a single resolution mechanism that pursues the homogenous treatment of 
banks with viability problems and has a common fund to make this economically feasible, 
and an integrated deposit guarantee scheme that ensures identical coverage throughout the 
monetary area for eligible deposit-holders. 
We can already claim that the project to set up a Banking Union that includes the above-
mentioned  ingredients  is  close  to  becoming  a  tangible  reality.  Just  a  few  weeks  back  we 
celebrated the first anniversary of the start-up of the first of the three pillars of the Banking 
Union project, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM); the Single Resolution Mechanism, 
the second pillar of the Banking Union, is now under way and will be fully operational from 
1 January 2016. 
Admittedly, certain relevant aspects have still to be set in train. First, the single resolution 
fund  must  be  strengthened  to  ensure  that  it  is  strong  enough  to  withstand  future  banking 
crises, without destabilising the public finances of the countries concerned. Further, we must 
step up efforts to move forward on the third pillar of the Banking Union, the establishment of 
a  common  deposit  guarantee  scheme,  based  on  the  proposal  released  by  the  European 
Commission last week. 
I  would  like  to  focus  today  on  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  most  developed 
component of the Banking Union. In this connection, I shall review the milestones reached 
and address what I consider are the main challenges ahead for us. 
SSM milestones 
2. 
The first SSM milestone took place precisely before it assumed full supervisory responsibility, 
and  it  entailed  successfully  conducting  the  “comprehensive  assessment”  of  all  significant 
euro area banking groups. This review helped to enhance the information on the situation of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
European  banks  and  to  identify  the  measures that  could  be  necessary  to  strengthen their 
solvency. 
In this respect, it should be recalled that Spanish banks were those that evidenced fewest 
incidents in the asset quality review process, which entailed adjustments of little more than 
0.1% of its risk-weighted assets. This outcome, along with the limited impact of the stress 
tests,  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  reform  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  undertaken  in 
previous years had met its objectives. 
At  present,  we  are  working  on  the  stress  test  scheduled  for  the  coming  year.  This  test, 
following the methodology of the European Banking Authority, will be made on a sample of 
banks – six of which Spanish – covering 70% of euro area banking assets. The results will be 
published at the start of the third quarter of 2016. 
One of the main challenges of the SSM at the outset was to make its complex governance 
structure workable. This complexity derives from the institutional restrictions imposed by the 
Treaty,  from  the  need  to  ensure  the  separation  of  the  monetary  policy  and  prudential 
supervision functions attributed to the ECB, and from the objective of achieving a suitable 
incorporation  of  the  national  authorities  into  the  new  framework  without  impinging  on  the 
ECB’s leadership in supervisory decisions. 
As you know, the central SSM body is the Supervisory Board, which is responsible for the 
planning and implementation of oversight tasks and for submitting decision-making proposals 
to  the  Governing  Council,  which  the  latter  may  approve  or  object  to,  but  not  amend.  The 
Board  is  made  up  of  25  members:  the  Chair,  Vice-Chair,  four  members  appointed  by  the 
ECB Governing Council and the representatives of the national supervisory authorities of the 
19 participating Member States. 
The Supervisory Board is intensely involved in all the SSM’s key actions, as a result of the 
competencies  directly  attributed  to  it  under  the  prevailing  European  Regulation  and  the 
absence  of  extensive  delegation  powers.  Indeed,  in  its  first  year  alone,  the  Supervisory 
Board has adopted around 1,200 decision proposals. This heavy workload, far greater than 
is habitually the case for the maximum decision-making bodies of supervisory agencies in 
other jurisdictions, is an operational challenge of the highest order that the Board is so far 
responding to with considerable effectiveness, maintaining a high frequency of face-to-face 
meetings complemented by numerous teleconferences and written procedures. 
More  generally,  the  start-up  of  the  SSM  has  necessitated  major  changes  in  the  internal 
structure  of  both  the  ECB  and  the  national  authorities.  In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  four  new 
directorates  general  for  microprudential  supervision  have  been  created,  and  the  staff  has 
been increased to assign to this new function more than 1,000 employees. 
At  the  same  time,  the  national  authorities  have  made  a  great  effort  to  adapt  to  this  new 
framework.  In  our  case  at  the  Banco  de  España,  the  Directorate  General  Banking 
Supervision was restructured and its departments reorganised to create a structure mirroring 
that adopted by the ECB, so as to provide for smoother interaction between both institutions. 
However, the most significant change has been the creation of the joint supervisory teams, 
made up of employees from the ECB and from the national authorities. These teams are the 
basis  for  the  day-to-day  supervision  of  each  significant  bank.  They  are  coordinated  by  an 
ECB member of staff, who is assisted by one or several sub-coordinators from the national 
authorities, on whom the coordinator draws support for the organisation of the work and the 
management of the local teams. This admittedly novel design is in response to the need to 
combine  a  centralised  management  framework  while  harnessing  the  knowledge  and 
proximity to banks that national supervisors provide. 
It should be stressed here that more than two-thirds of the members of these teams are from 
the national supervisors. The staff from these authorities are also generally entrusted with 
leading  on-site  inspections  within  their  jurisdiction.  Moreover,  as  you  know,  the  national 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
supervisory agencies keep functions relating to the direct surveillance of the so-considered 
less significant banks. 
This all explains why the start-up of the SSM has meant no saving in supervisory resources 
at  the  national  level.  On  the  contrary,  the  national  authorities  have  had  to  address  the 
considerable  challenge  posed  by  the  loss  of  human  resources  to  the  ECB.  In  our  case, 
thanks to the success of Banco de España candidates in selection processes, approximately 
one-quarter of our supervisory staff have moved to work for the ECB, including three senior 
managers  who  today  occupy  high-responsibility  posts  –  one  Director  General  and  two 
Deputy Directors General – in this institution. 
The third milestone has been the setting in place of an operational framework for the pursuit 
of the supervisory functions of the SSM. In this connection, work has been performed since 
the  outset  of  the  project  to  define  common  frameworks  for  action  enabling  the  different 
practices  pursued  by  different  national  authorities,  with  their  greatly  differing  supervisory 
cultures, to be overcome. This work saw a Supervisory Manual devised in which processes 
and the operational methodology are described. Naturally, certain key aspects of supervisory 
procedures  have  still  to  be  smoothed.  In  fact,  the  Manual  should  be  seen  as  an  evolving 
document, the regular update of which on the basis of experience accumulated is needed to 
complete convergence towards better supervisory practices. 
Likewise,  to  achieve  greater  consistency  in  the  regulatory  framework,  it  has  also  been 
necessary to review the national application of the various options permitted under European 
regulations. 
European  solvency  regulations  –  namely 
the  Directive  and  Regulation  on  capital 
requirements  –  confer  some  degree  of  discretion  upon  Member  States  and  national 
supervisors in the implementation  of specific regulatory aspects. Such aspects include the 
timetable  for  the  progressive  adoption  of  new  solvency  standards  and  the  granting  of 
exceptions in respect of compliance with certain prudential requirements. 
This degree of national flexibility had to be accepted at the time by European legislators in 
the  complex  Directive  and  Regulation  negotiations.  Naturally,  the  fact  such  a  diversity  of 
rules  are  in  place  hampers  supervisory  action  and  prevents the  homogenous  treatment  of 
banks based on their objective position. 
Accordingly, in recent months, the SSM Supervisory Board has worked intensely in this field. 
Their efforts have seen a preliminary agreement allowing a common approach to be adopted 
in relation to the application of these “national options and discretions” in the hands of the 
supervisory  authorities.  The  terms  of  this  agreement  are  now  being  subjected  to  public 
consultation, a process which will finalise on 16 December. I trust that this agreement, once it 
is finally approved by the ECB, may be implemented in the opening months of 2016 and that, 
in any event, future revisions of European legislation will envisage less room for discretion on 
the  part  of  the  Member  States,  so  that  the  singleness  of  the  relevant  legal  framework  for 
banking activity throughout the EU may become firmly anchored. 
To wrap up this first part of my speech, allow me to highlight certain relevant decisions taken 
by the Supervisory Board during this first year. Among the most important are those relating 
to the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP), which has for the first time been 
carried  out  with  a  common  methodology  for  all  SSM  banks.  This  process,  which  includes 
both  quantitative  and  qualitative  aspects,  determines  the  risk  profile  of  each  significant 
institution, the sufficiency of its liquidity and solvency in terms of this profile and, finally, it 
sets the minimum capital levels to be maintained. The decisions on capital, the adoption of 
which for 2016 will be shortly formalised, will, for all the SSM’s significant institutions, entail 
average  capital  requirements  somewhat  higher  than  those  of  the  previous  year:  around 
30 basis  points  (bp),  rising  to  50  bp  if  the  impact  of  the  phasing-in  of  the  capital  buffers 
envisaged in European legislation is taken into account. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
As you will recall, in January this year a recommendation on dividend distribution policy was 
adopted in which banks were urged to keep conservative dividend distribution arrangements 
so as to preserve their solvency. This recommendation will be shortly reassessed. In turn, 
common criteria have been laid down for recurring decisions such as authorisations for the 
acquisition of qualifying holdings in credit institutions, assessment of fitness and properness 
of board members, or the requirements to be made in capital reductions and issuances. 
Finally, I must highlight the relevant role played by the SSM in the management of the Greek 
crisis.  The  SSM  not  only  monitored  the  situation  of  the  banks  continuously,  but,  once 
agreement was reached between the European and Greek authorities last summer, it was 
entrusted  with  determining  the  recapitalisation  requirements  of  Greece’s  four  significant 
institutions  on  the  basis  of  a  specific  comprehensive  assessment  exercise,  whose  results 
were  recently  published. 
the 
recapitalisation of these banks goes ahead as stipulated. 
the  SSM  must  ensure 
the  coming  months, 
that 
In 
Some challenges 
3. 
That said, and as I stated at the outset, the SSM has numerous challenges to face in the 
near future. I would like to mention four in particular. 
Firstly, the microprudential policy stance sought must be clearly defined. The SSM, despite 
its  exemplary  start-up,  is  still  under  construction  and  its  criteria,  practices  and  specific 
objectives have not yet reached the degree of stability desirable. Evidently, we must shorten 
the  transition  as  far  as  possible,  so  that  banks  are  aware  with  sufficient  certainty  of  the 
supervisor’s  requirements  in  the  short  and  medium  term  and  can,  in  this  way,  effectively 
design their strategic and management measures. 
True,  this  objective  is  currently  hampered  by  the  still-unstable  international  regulatory 
framework. I trust the Basel Committee’s announced intention in its recent report to the G20 
to see through the regulatory reform next year will be fulfilled. In any event, in the supervisory 
realm  we  must  make  further  efforts  to  specify  with  greater  precision  and  permanence  the 
solvency requirements for each bank based on its risk profile, and to establish certain clear 
guidelines on the application of restrictions on the remuneration of capital instruments and on 
directors’ variable remuneration. 
At the same time, as I previously pointed out, we must continue to work on the convergence 
of supervisory practices, moving towards better standards, and on smoothing the differences 
that  still  persist  across  the  different  SSM  jurisdictions.  For  example,  while  some  national 
authorities  have  traditionally  focused  on  reviewing  management  procedures,  others  have 
placed  particular  emphasis  on  reviewing  the  classification  and  valuation  of  assets  on 
financial  statements.  These  differences 
turn, 
heterogeneity  in  the  professional  profile  of  the  employees  of  the  various  authorities  now 
sharing missions within the SSM. 
Against  this  background,  the  Banco  de  España  has  a  tradition  –  one  that  I  think  it  is 
comprehensively  successful  –  of  conferring  high  importance  in  its  supervisory  work  to 
monitoring  the  rigour  of  financial  information  and  of  the  models  used  to  calculate  risk-
weighted  assets.  Naturally,  it  is  our  wish  that  these  elements,  which  crucially  affect  the 
supervisor’s  capacity  to  properly  measure  banks’  solvency  situation,  should  be  part  of the 
common model adopted by the SSM and applied uniformly to all banks. 
A third significant challenge concerns achieving a fruitful framework of interaction between 
the SSM and the Single Resolution Mechanism. The regulations have set in place a complex 
structure in Europe, which includes the creation of a resolution agency (the Single Resolution 
Board)  separated  institutionally  from  the  supervisor.  This  agency  has  been  granted  wide-
ranging powers both in respect of the definition of resolvability requirements – which include 
the determination of a minimum volume of instruments capable of absorbing losses – and of 
in  supervisory  practices 
involve, 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
the activation of resolution procedures for non-viable banks, as well as the selection of the 
most suitable tools to implement them. 
Resolution  actions  have  direct  consequences for financial  stability,  which  is  a  public  good 
that  the  SSM  seeks  to  protect,  and  they  turn  on  the  more  vulnerable  banks,  which  are 
precisely those that require greater attention from the prudential supervisor. Accordingly, the 
defining  of  effective  information  and  analysis  co-operation  and  exchange  procedures 
between  the  Supervisory  and  Resolution  Boards  is  crucial  for  preventing  dysfunctions, 
overlaps  and  frictions  that  hamper  the  proper  functioning  of  the  Banking  Union.  A 
Memorandum of Understanding between both agencies is currently being drawn up and will, 
I hope, contribute to achieving the necessary coordination. 
Lastly, we should sustain our efforts in order to achieve the degree of cohesion between the 
various  components  of  the  SSM  that  effective  supervision  requires.  The  SSM  directly 
supervises  122  European  banking  groups,  encompassing  some  1,200  institutions.  This  is 
done with supervisory teams that draw on staff from various institutions, with highly diverse 
skill  sets,  seniority,  experience  and  working  conditions.  Evidently,  we  must  strive  to  fully 
develop  a  sense  of  mission  to  which  all  the  component  parts  must  contribute,  under  the 
leadership  of  the  ECB  and  its  Supervisory  Board,  without  exclusions  or  unnecessary 
subordination.  That  is  vital  for  maintaining  the  motivation  and  commitment  of  all  SSM 
supervisory staff, irrespective of the authority to which they are attached. Indeed, they have 
to date shown exceptional professionalism. 
Final remarks 
In concluding, I will say that the past year has seen major headway in setting the Banking 
Union in place, but we still have some way to go. We must move ahead in a setting that will 
be complex for the European banking industry. 
Specifically,  economic  activity  remains  relatively  sluggish,  price  stability  is  subject  to 
significant risks and, as a result of this, interest rates are holding at very low levels. Against 
this  background,  banking  business  is  feeling  the  effects  of  the  difficulties  in  reactivating 
credit, of modest net interest income and of the impaired assets still on their balance sheets. 
And  compounding  this  are  growing  regulatory  demands  which,  though  they  should  be 
conducive to the industry’s stability in the medium term, are raising the pressure in the short 
term on profitability. 
It is essential in this setting for managers and supervisors to revise the soundness of banks’ 
business model and, in particular, their capacity to generate resources in a stable manner 
that will ensure satisfactory levels of profitability and solvency in the medium term. That may 
require a correction of the European banking industry’s excess capacity apparently prevailing 
at present. It is important that the authorities involved should attempt to facilitate the process 
–  which  should  in  any  event  be  led  by  banks  themselves  –  so  that  the  correction  comes 
about in the most orderly fashion possible. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
