   Mark Carney: Closing remarks to the Open Forum 
Closing remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the 
Financial Stability Board, to the Bank of England Open Forum, London, 11 November 2015. 
 Let me begin by thanking the Lord Mayor and his team for their gracious hospitality once again. 
The Guildhall really is a fantastic venue, and I want to take this opportunity, as we approach 
the end of your term as Lord Mayor, to salute you for the emphasis that you have put on the 
broader role of finance in society, the broader role of the City of London in the UK economy 
and in the global economy, and your broader contributions to society. City Giving Day is but 
one example of that, and we are all very much in your debt for your enormous contribution. 
On behalf of my colleagues, I want to thank the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the President 
of  the  European  Central  Bank  for  their  insightful  comments.  Let  me  also  thank  all  of  the 
panellists for their well-chosen, provocative, and effective contributions. I am also grateful to 
the moderators here today, in person or online from across the country, for helping drive our 
Open Forum. 
Most of all, let me thank our steering committee, those 20 people from all walks of life, who put 
a tremendous amount of time and thought into the sessions. I also want to thank Andy Haldane, 
our communications staff at the Bank, and our colleagues tasked with making the logistics 
work – all the way to Edinburgh. Last but certainly not least, let me thank those of you who 
spent the day with us at Guildhall, those who followed online, and those who participated in 
our sessions in Birmingham and Edinburgh, Cambridge and Manchester and our many school 
sessions.  Apart  from  coming  up  with  the  words  “Open  Forum”,  I’ve  added  little  to  this 
memorable day, but I have taken away a great deal! 
Let  me  spend  a  couple  of  minutes  on  a  few  of  these  takeaways.  They  are  far  from 
comprehensive, and only a starter, because part of the point is that we all need to go back and 
reflect on what we learned and what we’d like to prioritise. 
The  first  thing  that  struck  me  was  the  almost  universal  reaffirmation  of  the  importance  of 
markets. Whether it was the vox-pops in the streets of Leeds or Belfast, the feedback from our 
event in Birmingham, the interventions here in Guildhall, there was a clear recognition of how 
important these markets are not just to the economy, and not just in an abstract sense, but to 
people’s everyday lives. 
At the same time, the level of trust in institutions and market mechanisms is quite low. As 
Elizabeth Corley highlighted, there is a disconnect between how we in finance – and I include 
the public sector here – see the sector and how the general public sees the sector. 
Interestingly, that disconnect is much less prompted by questions over the health of our banks. 
Alex Brummer made this same point in terms of a sense of optimism around institutions. That 
is a good thing because a tremendous amount has been done over the past seven years in 
order to make banks much stronger. I will not go into all the details, but banks are indeed now 
beginning to adjust their business models. 
I’ll add a very clear message on behalf of those of us on the regulatory side to the bankers in 
the room and those watching from outside: there is no Basel IV. There is no other big wave of 
capital regulation coming. With the agreement on Total Loss Absorbency Capacity, the last 
pieces of the puzzle have been put in place. 
It is true that we do have to make some adjustments to risk weights; and there will always be 
things to iron out, but I repeat there is no big other prudential regulatory wave for the banking 
sector. As Andrew Bailey made clear in one of the break-out sessions I attended, the focus 
now is about greater certainty and adjusting business models to these new realities. As Andrew 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
noted, given the scale of the regulatory effort, that means that the business models pre-crisis 
are not necessarily going to be very effective now. 
Let me turn back to trust. Why is trust still so low? My sense from the discussions is that trust 
remains  low  for  two  reasons.  First,  because  of  misconduct,  and  secondly,  because  of  a 
perceived – and, potentially, actual – lack of adequate client focus. 
The  frequent  references  to  misconduct  reinforced  in  my  mind  the  importance  of  individual 
accountability, the focus of the Fair and Effective Markets Review, chaired by Minouche Shafik. 
It also emphasised the importance of the senior managers’ regime coming into effect in the 
first quarter of next year, and the importance of applying it to true codes and standards in 
wholesale markets, in a manner that market practitioners understand. The people at coal-face 
– junior traders, investors and asset managers – must understand what a true market is and 
their responsibility to act in a way that is consistent with maintaining true markets. 
In terms of a perception of a lack of client focus, I took away two gaps that were raised. The 
first is a financing gap, which I felt came out during the first panel, and which some economic 
historians in the room compared to the ‘Macmillan gap’ – the distance between finance and 
industry being too great. People talk today about an excess of savings not finding a home. In 
this country, it is felt most in terms of SME and mid-cap finance. 
Many were struck by the potential ability of financial technology – fintech – to help bridge this 
financing gap, but I would emphasise that there was also bit of a caution, as I believe Reverend 
Giles Fraser noted in the last panel. We should not get too far ahead of ourselves, but look to 
further evidence that it can bridge the gap. I think the Chancellor is absolutely right that fintech 
has potential both in terms of expertise in finance and capability in technology. If these can be 
married effectively, we have an opportunity. 
There were a few specific examples that were mentioned that I would just like to reinforce. 
First, and as Alex Brummer very rightly emphasised, the opportunities that come from big data 
and a greater open architecture that is already there. As our Chief Operating Officer Charlotte 
Hogg would note, the Bank of England is one of the biggest repositories of big data. There is 
always a question about to what extent that can be leveraged more broadly into the system, 
and though it is still early days, the Bank may want to consider taking this on as a challenge. 
Jon Cunliffe raised a separate and important issue with receivables finance, where fintech 
could make a real difference. Following the crisis, payment terms for companies increased to 
120 days and have not come back. We know there are effective fintech solutions to this which 
leverage off the credit of the payer. In such circumstances, and more broadly where fintech 
moves further into more traditional banking areas such as peer to peer and other lending, the 
Bank recognises that we need to think about and take forward a proportionate, activity-based 
regulatory response. 
Let me turn to the second gap in relation to a lack of client focus: an engagement gap, if I can 
put it that way. This manifests itself in a number of ways, as noted during the many insightful 
interventions during our panel sessions. Perhaps Julia Black put it best when she described 
the dangers of groups of professionals talking just amongst themselves. 
This has been part of the issue with financial reform – a sense that reform was a pre-packaged 
process  built  on  discussions  between  regulators,  banks,  and  investors,  with  sympathetic 
academics adding in their words of support. 
Part of the reason for our broader discussions today is to ensure we move out of this state of 
affairs. And of course, once we bring in other perspectives, it changes our own perspective 
and underscores just how hermetically sealed the industry in its broad sense can be. Let me 
say a couple of words on this. 
It should be recognized that the industry has made tremendous strides to address a number 
of issues. An issue touched on earlier in the day was reporting and accounting, and one of the 
things the industry has done is to come up with something called the Enhanced Disclosure 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Task Force. The Taskforce proposed a set of recommendations for banks to develop high-
quality, transparent disclosures that clearly communicate banks’ business models and the key 
risks that arise from them, so that people who supply capital to the banks can follow how they 
make money, how they think about managing risk, and make judgments on the basis of that. 
The important point was that this was industry-led, and co-chaired by a London-based bank. 
There was some input from the authorities, but the industry led the initiative, and it’s a model 
we may use in other areas of finance. 
I mentioned Total Loss Absorbing Capacity earlier – I won’t use the acronym! I’m aware the 
full name doesn’t necessarily make it any more intelligible, but this is basically another layer of 
capital, and the ability to absorb losses in the event that a firm fails. It is more cost effective – 
so the cost is not passed on to borrowers. And the technology behind this was developed by 
the private sector, with the authorities contributing to ensure it could work effectively and on a 
global basis. But it was the industry, once again, that came up with the solution. 
Further innovations are needed if the sector is to come to terms with the new business models 
that Andrew Bailey and others have mentioned today. For example, innovations in the way 
banks are organised that are consistent with orderly resolutions. 
Separately, and as noted in a number of panels today, asset managers also need to innovate 
to  adapt  to  the  new  realities  of  market  liquidity.  The  increase  in  the  scale  of  the  asset 
management  sector  since  the  crisis  has  been  notable,  as  has  been  the  emergence  of 
investment funds that offer daily liquidity while investing in securities that only appear liquid. 
The Bank, the Financial Conduct Authority and the Financial Stability Board are keenly aware 
of these risks, and we are working to resolve them in an orderly manner. 
The area of market liquidity is one place where there may be duplicative regulations and scope 
for adjustment. Market participants should rest assured we have made adjustments in the past 
where we have gotten things wrong. We adjusted the liquidity coverage ratio. President Draghi 
noted the joint work between the Bank and the European Central Bank to change securitisation 
– an example of fixing something we had not gotten exactly right. We will continue to adjust 
our market operations. 
Let me move towards the conclusion of my conclusion. 
The point about reform and review being a continual effort came through in spades. David 
Kynaston noted that there have been four big bursts of reform in the last 150 years. This one 
does  not  need to  end  –  not  because  we  are  due  Basel IV,  or another raft  of reforms,  but 
because we will continually adjust as the industry itself innovates. Adjustments will be based 
on improved engagement with the industry about what’s necessary and conversations with a 
much wider range of people. 
Buried in your iPads, under the financial regulation section, is a list of all the current work 
streams of the FPC, FSB, BCBS, EC, CMU, et cetera – it’s all in there. Of course, there are 
very few people who know what all those acronyms are and what they mean – and shame on 
them if they do! 
This reinforces the point about comprehension, one of the most important takeaways from 
today. As Jon Cunliffe noted just a short while ago, rather than burying people in acronyms, 
the responsibility of the official sector is to explain what’s going on, why certain things are being 
done, and what else is necessary. In other words, as a senior banker once told me early on in 
my career in the private sector, “If it doesn’t make sense, it doesn’t make sense”. I asked him 
to repeat it because it didn’t make sense to me at first. 
If someone in finance explains something and it doesn’t make sense, and if when they repeat 
it still doesn’t make sense, it’s very likely that they don’t understand it themselves, which is 
quite often the case, or that, actually, it doesn’t add up. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
And that is a good challenge for us at the Bank as well as the broader official community when 
explaining  what’s  happening  and  how  the  system  works.  Lack  of  understanding  leads  to 
disengagement, which in turn leads to mistrust. 
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  the  huge  range  of  people  across  the  country  who  really  did 
engage, who did spend the time here with us today. The long-term reward of course, is a more 
resilient financial system that better serves the needs of society. In the short-term, I hope you 
will join us for a quick drink in the Crypt of this fantastic building. For those of you in Edinburgh, 
Alex Brummer would be happy to stump up. And for those of you at home, I hope you will join 
us in spirit with a drink at your local pub – put it on the Bank of England as a form of quantitative 
easing. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
