  Mario Draghi: Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  Prometeia40, 
Bologna, 14 December 2015. 
 Summary 
The tools we have deployed since June 2014 are producing the intended effects, said Mario 
Draghi in a speech in Bologna today. Following the recalibration of our instruments decided 
by  the  Governing  Council  earlier  this  month,  the  ECB  expects  inflation  to  return  to  its 
objective without undue delay. The President also said that if the ECB had to intensify the 
use of its instruments to ensure that it achieves its price stability mandate, it would. 
However,  while  monetary  policy  can  deliver  price  stability,  that  alone  does  not  guarantee 
lasting prosperity. To have a structural recovery we need to raise not just current growth but 
potential growth as well. The key to this is higher investment. Investment has been held back 
in the euro area by three things: weak demand dynamics, the still-high private debt overhang 
and fragile private sector confidence. 
The  euro  area  today  needs  to  take  additional  steps,  alongside  supporting  demand,  to 
address the debt overhang and fragile confidence. Structural reforms are key to this end. It is 
clear  that,  in  some  countries,  the  large  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  is  still 
preventing a stronger recovery in credit. All this explains why facilitating a work-out of NPLs 
has to be part of the package of policy actions to restore productive investment. The ongoing 
work towards a Capital Market Union (CMU) is an opportunity to accelerate progress also on 
this front. If we are to truly underpin confidence, it is important that, even while dealing with 
more pressing priorities, we do not lose sight of the need to complete our monetary union. 
 After a crisis lasting eight years, the European economy appears at long last to be on a more 
solid footing. The recovery is now led by domestic demand rather than exports; it has proven 
to be resilient to the recent slowdown in global trade. 
Monetary policy has given a decisive impetus to this. The tools deployed since June 2014, in 
particular the asset purchase programme of public and private sector securities introduced in 
September  of  last  year  and  expanded  in  January  this  year,  are  producing  their  desired 
effects. Following the Governing Council’s recalibration of our instruments earlier this month, 
we expect inflation to reach our objective without undue delay. 
But  we  continue  to  closely  observe  movements  in  economic  and  financial  conditions.  As  I 
said at the last Council meeting, and again more recently, “there is no doubt that, if we had to 
intensify the use of our instruments to ensure that we achieve our price stability mandate, we 
would”. 
But the shocks that have hit our economy since 2008 were not merely of a cyclical nature. 
They were also structural. 
In  this  context,  while  monetary  policy  can  secure  price  stability,  that  alone  cannot  bring 
lasting prosperity for our economies. It is essential, therefore, to intervene on both the supply 
and demand sides and to act consistently on all fronts to consolidate the turning of the cycle, 
and at the same time create the conditions for a sound and lasting recovery. What I would 
like  to  discuss  today  is  the  way  in  which  different  policies  can  help  achieve  this  result,  by 
acting not sequentially but simultaneously in their respective spheres of responsibility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The role of monetary policy 
One  characteristic  of  this  crisis  was  the  fall  in  the  potential  growth  rate  in  the  euro  area, 
which is the pace at which the economy can grow on a stable basis without overheating, and 
so  without  generating  inflation.  It  is  estimated  that  this  rate  is  now  around  1%  in  the  euro 
area,  compared  with  around  2%  in  the  United  States,  where  the  crisis  was  in  fact 
accompanied by a decline in the potential growth rate as well. This means that even with a 
strong cyclical recovery growth will be fairly low. To ensure a structural recovery, we must 
boost not just short-term cyclical growth, but also long-term potential growth. 
In determining potential growth, the role of investment is crucial. It increases at once today’s 
demand and tomorrow’s supply. In the euro area, however, the recovery has thus far mainly 
concerned consumption and only to a lesser degree involved investment, which is still 15% 
lower  than  its  pre-crisis  levels.  This  weakness  is,  moreover,  common  to  other  advanced 
economies as well. 
In the euro area, investment is being held back primarily by three factors: weak demand, the 
debt  overhang,  which  was  building  up  already  in  the  period  preceding  the  crisis,  and  the 
private sector’s shaky confidence in the growth prospects of our economies. 
At  the  same  time,  as  in  a  virtuous  circle,  an  increase  in  investment,  by  strengthening 
demand, supports the recovery, lessens the debt burden and boosts confidence. To this end, 
monetary policy can play a vital role in speeding up the return of output to its potential level if 
the output gap is wide and inflation below the objective. This is what the ECB is doing with 
the  measures  implemented  since  the  middle  of  last  year,  in  a  context  of  prolonged  low 
inflation. 
We have cut the official rates down to negative levels, approved a credit easing packages – 
most  notably  with  the  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  –  and  expanded  our 
purchase programme of public and private sector securities. Since June 2014 banks’ lending 
rates to firms have fallen steeply, by about 80 basis points for the euro area as a whole and 
with decreases of up to 100–140 basis points in the countries most badly hit by the crisis. So 
the transmission of our monetary policy has been powerful: in June 2014, to have a similar 
effect  on  banks’  lending  rates,  we  would  have  had  to  lower  monetary  policy  rates  by 
100 basis  points,  something  which  at  that  time was  clearly  not  possible.  These  measures, 
according  to  Eurosystem  staff  estimates,  will  help  to  increase  growth  in  the  euro  area  by 
about 1% overall between 2015 and 2017. 
The fall in rates has been accompanied by a recovery in lending to businesses. Last May, 
before the credit easing measures were announced, lending was declining at an annual rate 
of about 3% in the area as a whole. Since July, that trend has been halted; in the euro area 
on average, lending is growing once again, albeit at modest rates. At the height of the crisis, 
in 2012, small firms reported that access to credit was their principal problem, immediately 
after the need to find customers. Since April this year, however, access to credit has been 
one  of  the  least  significant  of  the  factors  holding  back  business  activity  for  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises,  according  to  our  surveys.  Lending  terms  and  conditions  have 
begun to converge rapidly towards those enjoyed by large-scale borrowers. 
Our  measures  have  therefore  proved  to  be  effective  in  two  ways:  they  have  reduced  the 
divergence in lending conditions among euro area countries and they have compressed the 
dispersion between different categories of borrowers. 
All of this has helped not just to consolidate the recovery but also to make it more flexible. 
The weakening of foreign demand from the emerging countries has been offset by increased 
demand within the euro area, especially from the economies of the “non-core” countries. By 
supporting the budding recovery, our monetary policy measures have thus made it possible 
to mitigate the negative effects of the weakening of the emerging countries’ economies on 
the euro area’s main exporting countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  important  that  the  positive  effects  of  our  measures  have  also  reached  small  firms 
because  this  means  that  they  have  been  felt  by  a  large  audience  and  not  just  by  specific 
economic  and  social groups,  as  is  sometimes claimed. We must  not forget that  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  make  up  99%  of the  total  number  of firms  in Europe  and, more 
importantly, provide jobs for two-thirds of all those in employment. 
Why were our monetary policy measures effective? 
One  of  the  reasons  that  lending  rates  to  firms  were  high  in  the  past  is  that,  given  the 
weakness of economic conditions, banks particularly feared the risk of enterprises becoming 
insolvent,  and  for  this  reason  raised  their  risk  premia.  However,  these  higher  rates  also 
caused the demand for credit from healthy firms to fall, thus worsening the conditions of the 
economy and justifying, ex post, the higher risk premia. And so a vicious circle was created. 
By  reducing  borrowing  costs  for  new  loans,  our  measures,  especially  the  targeted  longer-
term  refinancing  operations,  have  encouraged  banks  to  resume  lending.  The  increased 
competition in credit markets has in turn compressed rates, driving lending and improving the 
macroeconomic picture. We have thus succeeded in breaking the vicious circle. 
The  public  and  private  sector  purchase  programme  has  also  fuelled  competition  in  credit 
markets by driving down the yields on sovereign bonds and thus reducing their appeal with 
respect to loans, ensuring that a growing volume of banking activity is directed towards the 
real economy. In addition to the direct impact of targeted longer-term refinancing operations, 
analyses  conducted  by  the  ECB  show  that  the  asset  purchase  programme  has  had  an 
indirect effect on credit supply conditions, by also improving the macroeconomic outlook and 
further reducing risk premia. 
And  these  measures  have  not  damaged  the  banks.  Far  from  it.  Although  they  may 
sometimes  have  led  to  a  contraction  in  interest  income,  our  measures  have  also  led  to 
capital gains in banks’ assets, and higher volumes and quality of credit. Considering all of 
these  effects,  the  staff  of  the  ECB  estimate  that  the  impact  of  our  measures  on  the 
profitability of the banking sector has been essentially nil for the euro area as a whole. 
The role of other policies 
The effectiveness of our monetary policy shows that the ECB has all the appropriate tools to 
achieve our price stability objective and thus to support demand. And within our mandate we 
are unconstrained in our choice of instruments and the way we deploy them. We can always 
bring inflation to our objective; we must, and we will. 
But monetary policy cannot and must not be the only instrument. On the one hand, the risks 
of a very accommodative monetary policy over an extended period must be addressed with 
the most appropriate macroprudential instruments. On the other hand, it is clear that there 
are  other  economic  policy  instruments  which  could  improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy in closing the output gap. In the past, the limited space for the deployment of fiscal 
policy has increased the burden on monetary policy; today, the two policies seem to be more 
coherent in this regard. 
So  monetary  policy  benefits  if  other  policy  areas  play  their  part  in  their  spheres  of 
responsibility.  At  the  same  time,  insofar  as  monetary  policy  succeeds  in  supporting  the 
cyclical recovery, this facilitates the introduction of structural policies which could encounter 
greater resistance in a weak macroeconomic climate. 
None of this is controversial. The G20 finance ministers and central bank governors clearly 
stated  it  in  the  communiqué  issued  after  the  meeting  in  Ankara  in  September:  “Monetary 
policies will continue to support economic activity consistent with central banks’ mandates, 
but  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  lead  to  balanced  growth”.  For the  euro  area  this means 
that additional steps need to be taken, alongside supporting demand, to address the other 
two factors holding back investment: the debt overhang and fragile confidence. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  So what does this entail? Let me highlight two points in particular. 
First,  structural  reforms  clearly  have  to  be  part  of  the  equation.  Beyond  current  demand, 
investment largely depends on firms’ sentiment about the future: at the micro level, how easy 
it will be for them to do business, and at the macro level, how confident they feel about future 
growth. If obstacles to entrepreneurship are high, or if there is too much uncertainty about 
growth prospects, investment will be lower than it could be. That is why structural reforms are 
important. 
By reducing red tape, they cut the costs for firms of starting new projects, thereby raising the 
effective return on investment. And by encouraging higher labour participation and boosting 
productivity, reforms raise expectations of demand, giving firms greater confidence to invest 
today. Investment is, after all, a bet on the future. 
So  structural  reforms  are,  in  fact,  essential  to  comply  with  that  part  of  the  Treaty  which 
espouses the objectives of balanced growth, full employment and social advancement, and 
the  promotion  of  scientific  and  technological  progress.  None  of  those  objectives  will  be 
achieved  unless  firms  invest  in  research  and  development,  and  in  exploiting  new 
technologies  and  developing  skills  at  the  upper  end  of  the  value  chain;  unless,  in  other 
words, the conditions that favour high private investment are re-established. 
Moreover,  it  is  worth  remembering  that  reforms  that  raise  potential  growth  produce 
permanently higher income not just for the economy as a whole, but also for governments, 
through higher tax revenues and more sustainable public debt, which opens up fiscal space. 
And that, in turn, means there is more scope for fiscal policy to support monetary policy in 
stabilising the economy. 
Second, in the area of structural reforms, special attention should be paid to measures that 
bring about a reduction in the debt overhang. Certainly, a lot has already been achieved in 
the  banking  sector  with  the  creation  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  and  as  part  of 
that,  the  comprehensive  assessment  and  the  ensuing  significant  recapitalisation  of  the 
banking sector. This has also supported the repair of the banking lending channel and the 
monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  But  it  is  clear  that,  in  some  countries,  the  large 
stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) is still preventing a stronger pick-up in lending. 
High stocks of NPLs can dampen credit supply for several reasons: they absorb resources 
and  operational  capacity;  they  tie  up  bank  capital  in  unproductive  uses;  and  they  reduce 
bank profitability, which weighs on banks’ capacity to generate capital internally. Such effects 
on  lending  tend  to  be  exacerbated  for  smaller  firms,  which  are  more  dependent  on  bank 
lending. 
Moreover, slow resolution of NPLs hampers the necessary process of corporate restructuring 
during  which  viable  firms  reduce  their  debt  and  start  investing  again,  and  non-viable  firms 
exit from the market. Creating the conditions for a rapid workout of NPLs has to be part of the 
economic policy actions to restore conditions that favour productive investment. 
Each country has its own list of actions needed to speed up this process, and delays on this 
front are a serious drag on growth. In particular, well-designed insolvency regimes are key in 
separating viable from non-viable borrowers and in facilitating the valuation of assets to be 
sold off. An efficient judicial system is also essential. Analysis by ECB staff shows that the 
pace of deleveraging is faster in countries that have a strong and effective legal apparatus. 
From this perspective, the recent reform of insolvency law in Italy is welcome. It is estimated 
that the average length of bankruptcy procedures will be halved. Foreclosure times are also 
expected  to  decrease  significantly.  This  is  important  because  a  shorter  time  to  recover 
collateral  brings  the  market  value  of  non-performing  assets  closer  to  a  level  at  which 
transactions can take place, meaning bank deleveraging can accelerate. 
The  ongoing  work towards  a  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU)  is  an  opportunity  to  accelerate 
progress on all fronts. A true CMU should aim to harmonise insolvency regimes and improve 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  their  overall  quality  by  converging  towards  international  best  practices. That  should  in  turn 
also  help  expand  secondary  markets for  distressed  debt,  helping  banks  get  NPLs  off their 
books more easily. And if CMU is successful in developing European markets for SME asset-
backed  securities,  banks  will  be  able  to  diversify  credit  risks  from  lending  to  SMEs  more 
easily, strengthening credit supply. 
Finally,  if  we  are  to  truly  underpin  confidence,  it  is  important  that,  even  while  dealing  with 
more pressing priorities, we do not lose sight of the need to complete our monetary union. In 
that  context  several  steps  taken  by  the  Commission  are  steering  the  process  in  the  right 
direction. But what is also important for confidence is that those steps form part of a longer-
term vision that removes fragility from our union. 
In sum, the combination of our monetary policy measures on the demand side, coupled with 
structural reforms on the supply side, goes a long way towards creating the conditions for a 
genuinely  structural  recovery.  Monetary  policy  and  structural  reforms  together  support 
demand, deleveraging and confidence, all of which are key for increasing investment. 
But when it comes to actually implementing the reform agenda, in many countries of the euro 
area hesitation seems to prevail over determination. Certainly, we need to bear in mind that 
the necessary changes are on such a scale as to be unachievable without major consensus. 
But we also need to bear in mind that delays in making important structural reforms, which 
make a country more prosperous and more able to face today’s challenges, may sometimes 
have political reasons, but never economic ones. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
