  Mark Carney: Opening statement at the European Parliament’s ECON 
Committee 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of 
the  Financial  Stability  Board,  at  the  European  Parliament’s  ECON  Committee,  Brussels,  7 
December 2015. 
 Mr Chair, 
Honourable Members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, 
It is a pleasure to address you in my capacity as Vice-Chair of the European Systemic Risk 
Board. 
Maintaining financial stability requires strong policy frameworks, a dynamic understanding of 
risks, and, when appropriate, co-ordination of individual macro-prudential policies. 
The need for a coordinating authority within the EU is particularly important, given the unique 
nature of the single market and its high degree of integration. In fulfilling this role, the ESRB 
is making financial stability policy more effective across the EU. 
On openness in the EU 
1. 
The openness of European member states supports economic dynamism by facilitating trade 
and specialisation, by enhancing competition, and by encouraging more diversification and 
risk-sharing. 
Larger  markets  mean  wider  choice,  bigger  incentives  for  innovation,  and  greater  scope  to 
realise economies of scale. 
While  openness  boosts  dynamism,  it  also  increases  exposure  to  shocks  from  abroad. 
Financial  linkages  in  particular  can  create  new  vulnerabilities  and  the  potential  to  deepen 
shocks. 
The  ESRB  can  help  build  the  resilience  to  maximise  the  benefits  from  openness  and 
minimise the risks it entails. In this spirit, I would like to outline three specific contributions of 
the ESRB during my time as Vice Chair. 
Building stronger macroprudential frameworks 
2. 
The ESRB has promoted stronger macroprudential frameworks across the Union. 
Specifically  the  ESRB  has  issued  recommendations  to  encourage  national  legislators  to 
establish macroprudential authorities within their jurisdictions. 
Its  Handbook  on  Operationalising  Macroprudential  Policy  in  the  Banking  Sector  embodies 
practical information on how to set policy using the newly-established powers. 
The  Handbook  sets  out  best  practice  on  an  instrument  by  instrument  basis,  suggests 
indicators to guide their use, and outlines the legal framework governing them. It also details 
potential spillovers. Where it judges that best practice is not being followed, the ESRB can 
use  “soft  law”  to  issue  recommendations  on  an  “act  or  explain”  basis  to  mitigate  financial 
stability risks and curb spillovers. For example, last year the ESRB gave guidance to national 
macroprudential authorities on how to set countercyclical capital buffer rates. The ESRB will 
follow up that guidance with a published assessment of implementation in 2016 Q3. 
With macroprudential policy still in its adolescence, the ESRB is helping it to mature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Recent ESRB studies have evaluated the case for using margining to counteract pro-cyclical 
behaviour in derivatives and securities financing transactions. 
And this year, the ESRB assessed the value of including macroprudential buffers within the 
leverage ratio framework. The Bank of England has followed this approach to ensure that the 
leverage ratio complements the risk-weighted capital framework in a way that makes it robust 
to cyclical and structural risks. 
One of the strengths of the ESRB is its ability to harness data and conduct analysis across 
all EU Member States. 
In  its  work  on  the  leverage  ratio,  the  ESRB  collected  new  empirical  evidence  showing 
banking  sector  leverage  has  been  pro-cyclical  at  an  aggregate  level  in  almost  all  Member 
States. Average risk weights tend to fall in credit booms and rise in downturns.  
Working  with  EBA  data,  the  ESRB  found  that  systemically  important  banks  in  Europe 
typically have lower risk weights and leverage ratios than other types of banks. 
Taken  together,  theory  and  evidence  demonstrate  the  importance  of  a  dynamic  leverage 
ratio to a robust macroprudential framework. 
Another  way  that  the  ESRB  has  led  in  identifying  best  practice  and  influencing  the 
international agenda has been to take a macroprudential perspective on how elements of the 
financial system can support long-term prosperity. 
For  example,  in  its  examination  of  Solvency  II,  the  ESRB  has  considered  how  long-term 
investors like insurers can bring diversity and stability to the system. 
In  my  view,  more  can  be  done  to  ensure  that  Solvency  II  creates  the  right  framework  for 
long-term investment. The ESRB can provide a constructive and objective macroprudential 
perspective  as  an  input  to  Parliament’s  review  in  2018  of  aspects  of  the  operation  of 
Solvency II. 
Openness puts a premium on shared understanding of risks. The ESRB plays a vital role for 
the EU, enhancing members’ assessment of new and evolving risks. 
The structure of the financial system has changed significantly since the crisis. Virtually all of 
the  net  credit  growth  since  then  has  been  from  the  bond  markets.  In  tandem,  the  assets 
under  management  have  risen  by  60%  globally  and  80%  in  the  EU.  These  trends  will 
continue as the Capital Markets Union is developed. 
The ESRB is currently contributing in two ways to more resilient capital markets. 
First, it is promoting a shared understanding of the fundamental drivers of market liquidity. 
Second, it is gathering consistent information on the nature and size of the risks associated 
with market-based finance. 
The  ESRB  has  unique  powers  in  this  regard  given  its  ability  to  collect  information  from 
financial participants from across the EU.1  
The ESRB is currently surveying market makers and asset managers as part of a broader 
study into the risks from a reduction in market liquidity. This work should be completed by 
mid-2016. 
The  survey  will  draw  out  the  implications  for  liquidity  conditions,  including  whether  open-
ended funds have liquidity sufficient to meet redemptions in the event of market stress. 
                                                
1   Of course, the ESRB must exercise this power with care and precision. And the case for doing so must be 
compelling. But the rapid growth of market-based finance satisfies these tests. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In a similar survey of 143 investment funds, the Bank of England found that, in aggregate, 
these funds expected to be able to liquidate in one day roughly three times estimated dollar 
corporate  bond  market  turnover;  clearly  a  fallacy  of  composition.  The  ESRB  survey  will 
provide a valuable wider perspective. 
Armed with such insights, the ESRB can help design appropriate policy responses. Stress 
testing of the investment fund sector can be expected in the future, complementing existing 
stress tests of banks, insurers and pension funds. 
The  ESRB  is  also  beginning  to  access  detailed  derivative  trade  reports  from  trade 
repositories across the Union. 
By pooling national expertise and leveraging the ESRB’s unique access to the entire set of 
trades,  authorities  can  better  understand  the  complex  webs  of  derivative  transactions  and 
how they could propagate and dampen risk across the system. 
It can also assess the impact of mandatory central clearing and whether it shifts risks to other 
parts of the system such as direct clearing banks. 
Greater openness can require shared approaches to managing risks 
3. 
In some cases, shared understanding is not sufficient; authorities also need shared ways of 
managing  risks.  The  ESRB  is  the  only  hub  where  all  the  relevant  authorities  are  present, 
including  central  banks,  bank  supervisors,  and  securities  authorities.  Through  our  regular 
dialogue we can establish and update best practice. 
Consider  residential  real  estate.  This  year  ESRB’s  work  emphasised  how  these  markets 
were influenced by structural differences, from Loan-to-Value restrictions to tax treatments, 
across the EU. 
Its  analysis  identified  the  tools  authorities  may  use  to  respond  to  different  vulnerabilities, 
ranging from capital measures to restrictions on debt-to-income ratios and collateral. 
Key lessons of the analysis include that: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
flexibility is needed in both design and calibration of macroprudential tools; 
no single tool can combat all property risks; 
tools need to be appropriate to domestic circumstances; and 
domestic policies are more effective for both domestic and EU financial stability if 
their spillovers are managed. 
The ESRB has built a framework to assess and manage such spillovers, which should be 
agreed  soon  and  be  operationalised  early  next  year.  Its  central  feature  is  reciprocity  – 
eliminating regulatory arbitrage to give domestic policy greater traction. It will be member led, 
but,  importantly,  backed  by  ESRB  recommendations.  Compliance  will  be  on  an  “act  or 
explain” basis but the presumption will be that many exposure-based measures (e.g. LTV, 
LTI and maturity) will be reciprocated. 
This is significant. The ESRB has been notified of macroprudential actions 69 times this year, 
and 173 times since the introduction of the CRR/CRD in 2014. Although many notices are 
procedural, they show the direction of travel. More countries are using macroprudential tools, 
creating an increasing need for a “clearing house” that is both comprehensive and timely. 
The  ESRB  will  also  evaluate  the  ways  national  macroprudential  authorities  might  apply 
countercyclical capital buffers against financial exposures from countries outside the EEA – a 
tool given to the ESRB under Union law. That will further bolster collective resilience against 
the global financial cycle and spillovers from outside the Union. 
While risks in property markets reflect national differences, other risks such as misconduct 
have more common determinants. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In the past five years, misconduct penalties imposed on EU banks have totalled €50bn. 
Those costs have direct implications for the real economy. At 5% leverage, that capital could 
have supported €1 trillion of lending capacity. 
More fundamentally, repeated episodes of misconduct undercut public trust in the system.2  
The ESRB’s work has helped catalyse sensible actions to begin the process to rebuild that 
trust. 
First,  it  has  proposed  capturing  misconduct  costs  in  stress  tests  to  ensure  banks  remain 
resilient even under severe outcomes. 
The Bank of England has followed this approach in its most recent stress test which included 
and  additional  £40bn  of  misconduct  costs.  These  costs  were  calibrated  to  have  a  low 
likelihood  of  being  exceeded  and  are  therefore,  by  design,  much  larger  than  the  amounts 
already provided for by banks. 
Second, the ESRB has also proposed tackling misconduct at source by increasing individual 
accountability. This can be done by reforming remuneration – using variable pay, combined 
with Malus and Clawback, to hard-wire stronger incentives for good behaviour within firms. 
The  UK  is  committed  to  this  approach  with  the  toughest  remuneration  regime  in  the  EU, 
including the longest deferrals and claw backs. 
However, the effectiveness of such measures across the EU is being tempered by the bonus 
cap.  For  example,  in  2013,  the  ratio  between  fixed  and  variable  for material  risk takers  at 
major UK banks was around 1:3 – meaning three quarters of remuneration was at risk from 
individual misconduct. The next year, when firms first had to apply the bonus cap, that ratio 
had fallen to around 1:1, with the overall level of remuneration unaffected. 
Prompted by the ESRB, the FSB is now examining the impact of various compensation tools 
on  misconduct,  and  if  appropriate,  it  will  recommend  improvements  to  next  year’s  G20 
summit. 
Reforms  to  compensation  are  necessary  but  not  sufficient.  ESRB  reports  have  rightly 
stressed that more should be done to hold senior individuals to account. 
Prompted in part by the ESRB, the FSB members will share experiences on the role of bank 
regulatory  powers  to  address  misconduct  and  on  approaches  to  enhancing  individual 
accountability. 
In the UK, we are implementing a new regime to ensure senior managers right across the 
financial system are held directly accountable for failures in their areas of responsibility. That 
will  be  buttressed  by  clear  code  of  conduct,  designed  by  practitioners,  to  ensure  high 
standards are understood by all. 
Conclusion 
4. 
All  member  states,  and  more  fundamentally  all  EU  citizens,  have  a  stake  in  EU  financial 
stability. The ESRB helps deliver this foundation of prosperity. 
The financial crisis starkly illustrated how quickly risks could spill across borders, the need for 
wide-ranging reforms, and a new approach to addressing risks. 
With  your  leadership,  the  reform  programme  is  substantially  complete,  and  authorities  are 
now implementing it to maximise its effectiveness. 
                                                
2   Bank  of  England  survey  results.  Respondents  were  asked  for  their  views  on  the  statement  ‘I  believe  that 
financial  markets  work  in  the  interest  of  society’.  Possible  responses  were:  strongly  agree,  agree,  neutral, 
disagree, strongly disagree. Only one third agreed or strongly agreed. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But durable financial stability requires more than microprudential standards that bolster the 
resilience of individual firms. 
It also requires a macroprudential perspective, with flexibility to respond to shocks wherever 
they occur; with higher standards for systemically important firms; and to increase levels of 
resilience when risks increase. 
The  ESRB  has  been  helping  Member  states  fulfil  these  roles,  and  it  remains  alert  to 
emerging vulnerabilities. As President Draghi recently described to this Committee, over the 
coming year, the ESRB will develop assessments of the macroprudential stances of Member 
States to complement its existing risk monitoring and focus on the risks of low interest rates 
on financial stability and an abrupt transition to a low-carbon economy. 
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to your comments and questions. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
