  Janet L Yellen: Supervision and regulation 
Testimony by  Ms Janet L Yellen, Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 4 November 2015. 
 Chairman  Hensarling,  Ranking  Member  Waters,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to testify on the Federal Reserve’s regulation and supervision of 
financial institutions. One of our most fundamental goals is to promote a financial system that 
is strong, resilient, and able to serve a healthy and growing economy. We work to ensure the 
safety  and  soundness  of  the firms  we  supervise  and  also  to  ensure that  they  comply  with 
applicable  consumer  protection  laws,  so  that  they  may,  even  when  faced  with  stressful 
financial conditions, continue serving consumers, businesses, and communities. 
At today’s hearing, I would like to discuss the lessons of the financial crisis and how we have 
transformed our regulatory and supervisory approach. Before the crisis, our primary goal was 
to ensure the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions. A key shortcoming of 
that approach was that we did not focus sufficiently on shared vulnerabilities across firms or 
the systemic consequences of the distress or failure of the largest, most complex firms. In 
the fall of 2008, the failure or near-failure of several of these firms – many of which we did 
not supervise at the time – sparked a panic that engulfed the financial system and much of 
the economy. 
Today  we  aim  to  regulate  and  supervise  financial  firms  in  a  manner  that  promotes  the 
stability of the financial system as a whole. This shift in focus has led to a comprehensive 
change  in  our  regulation  and  supervision  of  large  financial  institutions.  As  I  will  discuss  in 
more detail, we have introduced a series of requirements for large banking organizations that 
reduce the risks to the system and our economy that could result from the failure or distress 
of these institutions. In addition, we have made changes in our supervision that now allow us 
to supervise large financial institutions on a more coordinated, forward-looking basis. 
At the same time, we have been careful to make more-measured changes in our approach to 
regulating and supervising firms at the other end of the spectrum. Smaller institutions did not 
emerge from the financial crisis unscathed, and we have identified several areas in which the 
supervision of these institutions can be strengthened. At the same time, we are well aware 
that  regulatory  and  compliance  costs  can  impose  a  burden  that  is  disproportionate  to  the 
risks  these  institutions  pose  to  taxpayers  and  financial  stability.  We  are  committed  to 
ensuring that the supervision of smaller institutions is tailored appropriately to their risk. 
Strengthening the regulation and supervision of the largest financial institutions  
Regulatory framework 
The regulatory reforms we have adopted since the crisis have been designed to address the 
risks posed by large financial institutions in one of two ways. First, our reforms are designed 
to reduce the probability that large financial institutions will fail by requiring those institutions 
to  make  themselves  more  resilient  to  stress.  However,  we  recognize  that  we  cannot 
eliminate the possibility of a large financial institution’s failure. Therefore, a second aim of our 
post-crisis reforms has been to limit the systemic damage that would result if a large financial 
institution does fail. This effort has involved taking steps to help ensure that authorities would 
have  the  ability  to  resolve  a  failed  firm  in  an  orderly  manner  while  its  critical  operations 
continue to function. 
To  reduce  the  probability  of  a  large  financial  institution’s  failure,  we  and  the  other  federal 
banking  agencies  have  implemented  a  series  of  reforms  that  strengthen  the  firms  we 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  includes  risk-based  and 
regulate. We have implemented capital rules that require large banking organizations to hold 
substantially  larger  amounts  of  high-quality  capital. Working  with  the  other federal  banking 
agencies,  we  also  have  adopted  a  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  rule  that  requires  large 
banking  organizations  to  hold  a  buffer  of  high-quality  liquid  assets  sufficient  to  meet  net 
liquidity outflows during a period of severe stress. In addition, the Board has established a 
broader  set  of  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large  domestic  and  foreign  banking 
organizations pursuant to section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer 
Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act),  which 
leverage  capital 
requirements, liquidity standards, risk-management requirements, and stress testing.1  
We  have  also  adopted  risk-based  and  leverage  capital  surcharges  for  the  handful  of  U.S. 
firms that we have identified as global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs), 
which require these firms to hold larger amounts of loss-absorbing capital than other firms.2 
The  U.S.  GSIBs  are  central  intermediaries  in  U.S.  financial  markets,  and  their  failure  or 
distress would thus likely cause the most harm to the financial system. Under the framework 
that the Board adopted this summer, a GSIB’s risk-based capital surcharge would reflect the 
effect  that  its  failure  would  have  on  the  financial  system.  In  effect,  the  risk-based  capital 
surcharge confronts each U.S. GSIB with a choice: It can hold more capital, or it can reduce 
its  systemic  footprint.  Although  similar  to  the  international  risk-based  capital  surcharge 
framework that we helped design, the rule adopted by the Board is calibrated at a level that 
requires  U.S.  GSIBs  to  hold  significantly  more  capital  than  would  be  required  under  the 
international  framework.  A  second  important  difference  between  the  Board’s  rule  and  the 
international framework is that the Board’s rule incorporates a measure of each GSIB’s use 
of short-term wholesale funding, which is a key determinant of a GSIB’s systemic footprint. 
To limit the systemic effect of a large financial institution’s failure, the Board and the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have adopted a resolution plan rule that requires large 
banking organizations to show how they could be resolved in an orderly manner under the 
bankruptcy code. 
Last week the Board proposed another reform that would establish long-term debt and total 
loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements for U.S. GSIBs. We see these requirements as 
critical to avoiding the choice that authorities faced in the most recent crisis between bailing 
out large financial firms and allowing those firms to fail in a manner that would impose large 
costs on the broader economy. With the new requirements, if losses were to wipe out a firm’s 
capital and push a firm into resolution, a sufficient amount of long-term unsecured debt would 
provide  a  mechanism  for  absorbing  additional  losses  and  recapitalizing  the  firm  without 
generating contagion across the financial system and damaging the economy. In effect, this 
requirement  provides  a  means  for  “bailing  in”  a  firm’s  long-term  debt  holders  so  that  a 
taxpayer  bailout  will  be  unnecessary.  These  requirements  also  should  improve  market 
discipline by ensuring that each GSIB has a class of creditors with clear incentive to monitor 
the firm’s risk-taking. 
Supervisory approach 
In addition to strengthening the regulation of the largest, most complex financial institutions, 
we  have  also  transformed  our  supervision  of  these  firms.  Our  work  is  now  more  forward 
looking  and  multidisciplinary,  drawing  on  a  wide  range  of  staff  expertise. We  put  this  new 
                                                
1  The enhanced prudential standards we have established require foreign banking organizations with large U.S. 
operations  to  organize  their  U.S.  subsidiaries  under  an  intermediate  holding  company.  This  intermediate 
holding company requirement provides a basis for regulating and supervising the U.S. operations of foreign 
banking organizations on a more robust and consistent basis. 
2  The firms currently identified as U.S. GSIBs are Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon 
Corporation; Citigroup, Inc.; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JPMorgan Chase & Co.; Morgan Stanley; State 
Street Corporation; and Wells Fargo & Company. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  approach  into  operation  with  the  creation  of  the  Large  Institution  Supervision  Coordinating 
Committee  (LISCC).  The  LISCC  is  charged  with  the  supervision  of  the  firms  that  pose 
elevated  risk  to  U.S.  financial  stability.  Those  firms  include  the  eight  U.S.  banking 
organizations  that  have  been  identified  as  GSIBs,  four  foreign  banking  organizations  with 
large and complex U.S. operations, and the four nonbank financial institutions that have been 
designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC).3 
The supervisory approach embodied in the LISCC differs from our more traditional approach 
to  supervision  in  that  it  is  oriented  toward  both  the  safety  and  soundness  of the  individual 
firms, and the stability of the financial system as a whole.4  
The LISCC program is distinguished by several characteristics. First, the LISCC, led by the 
Board’s director of the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, has implemented a 
more  centralized,  multidisciplinary  supervisory  approach  by  bringing  together  experts  from 
around  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  the  areas  of  supervision,  research,  legal  counsel, 
financial  markets,  and  payments  systems.  Second,  the  LISCC  takes  a  forward-looking 
approach by focusing on capital and liquidity resiliency under normal and potentially adverse 
conditions  in  the  future  as  well  as  governance  and  recovery  and  resolution  preparedness. 
And,  third,  the  LISCC  complements  traditional,  firm-specific  supervisory  work  with  annual 
“horizontal” programs that examine the same firms at the same time and on the same set of 
issues  in  order  to  promote  better  monitoring  of  trends  and  consistency  of  assessments 
across all of the LISCC firms. The Federal Reserve conducts three major horizontal reviews 
of  the  LISCC  banking  firms  each  year  that  are  focused  on  capital  adequacy,  liquidity 
resiliency, and preparedness for recovery and resolution. 
With regard to capital adequacy, the Federal Reserve’s Comprehensive Capital Analysis and 
Review (CCAR) is designed to ensure that large U.S. bank holding companies, including the 
LISCC firms, have rigorous, forward-looking capital planning processes and have sufficient 
levels  of  capital  to  operate  through  times  of  stress,  as  defined  by  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
supervisory stress scenario. The program enables us to make a quantitative and qualitative 
assessment of the resilience and capital planning abilities of the largest banking firms on an 
annual basis and to limit capital distributions for firms that exhibit weaknesses. 
With  regard  to  liquidity  resiliency,  under  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Comprehensive  Liquidity 
Analysis  and  Review  (CLAR),  LISCC firms  are subject  to  a  comprehensive  review  of  their 
liquidity  positions  and  liquidity  risk  management,  including  internal  stress-testing  practices. 
Firms with weak liquidity positions or practices are directed to improve those practices and 
augment their liquidity positions as needed. Similar to CCAR, CLAR is designed to ensure 
that LISCC firms have rigorous, forward-looking liquidity stress testing and risk-management 
practices that account for unique risks, and that the LISCC firms maintain sufficient liquidity 
to  continue  to  operate  through  a  period  of  acute  stress.  The  program  allows  the  Federal 
Reserve  to  compare  the  range  of  practices  across  firms  and  form  a  view  on  liquidity 
vulnerabilities  and  funding  concentrations  in  the  system  as  a  whole.  Unlike  CCAR,  which 
currently  applies  to  all  firms  with  $50  billion  or  more  in  total  assets,  only  firms  within  the 
LISCC portfolio are required to participate in CLAR. 
LISCC  firms  are  also  subject  to  an  annual  review  of  their  recovery  and  resolution 
preparedness. The program evaluates progress in implementing operational capabilities and 
legal  entity  rationalization  that  would  facilitate  recovery  or  resolution  under  a  range  of 
scenarios and provides the Federal Reserve with the ability to compare progress on recovery 
                                                
3  The  foreign  banking  organizations  whose  U.S.  operations  are  currently  supervised  as  part  of  the  LISCC 
program are Barclays PLC, Credit Suisse Group AG, Deutsche Bank AG, and UBS AG. The firms designated 
by the FSOC for supervision by the Federal Reserve are American International Group, Inc.; General Electric 
Capital Corporation, Inc.; MetLife, Inc.; and Prudential Financial, Inc. 
4  Further  information  on  the  LISCC,  including  a  full  list  of  the  supervised  firms,  is  available  on  the  Board’s 
website at www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  and resolution planning across firms. We are working with the FDIC to evaluate the GSIBs’ 
most recent resolution plans, which were submitted in July. 
As I noted, the LISCC is also responsible for the supervision of nonbank financial companies 
that have been designated by the FSOC. The Federal Reserve currently conducts active, on-
site  supervision  of  all  four  of  the  designated  firms.  We  are  tailoring  our  supervisory 
framework to the specific business lines, risk profiles, and systemic footprints of these firms. 
Our supervisory efforts to date have focused on strengthening the firms’ risk identification, 
measurement,  and  management; 
internal  controls;  and  corporate  governance.  Our 
objectives  for  the  designated  holding  companies  are  to  ensure  that  the  consolidated  firms 
operate  safely  and  soundly  and  to  mitigate  risks  to  financial  stability.  We  coordinate  our 
consolidated supervision of the three designated insurance companies, as well as the other 
insurance  holding  companies  we  supervise,  with  state  insurance  regulators,  who  continue 
their established oversight of insurance legal entities within the consolidated firms. We do not 
regulate  the  manner  in  which  insurance  is  provided  by  these  companies  or  the  types  of 
insurance they provide. Those important aspects of the firms’ activities are the province of 
state insurance supervisors. 
Regulation and supervision of large and regional companies 
In  supervising  banking  organizations  with  more  than  $50  billion  in  assets  but  outside  the 
LISCC  program,  the  Board  focuses  on  ensuring  that  companies  are  well  managed, 
appropriately capitalized, and prepared to withstand potential adverse developments in the 
business  environment.  However,  because  the  distress  or  failure  of  a  non-LISCC  firm  is 
unlikely to have the same effect on financial stability as that of a LISCC firm, we do not apply 
the full range of rules that we apply to those in the LISCC portfolio. For example, the Board’s 
risk-based and leverage capital surcharges, as well as the recently proposed long-term debt 
and  TLAC  requirements,  only  apply  to  GSIBs.  Similarly,  the  advanced  approaches  capital 
rules, countercyclical capital buffer, supplementary leverage ratio, and full LCR only apply to 
internationally active banking organizations.5 We also scale our examination procedures to 
reflect the lower level of systemic risk presented by non-LISCC companies. 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  requirements  are 
for  regional  banking 
organizations,  defined  as  those  with  total  assets  between  $10  billion  and  $50  billion.  For 
example,  while  regional  banking  organizations  must  comply  with  recently  implemented 
changes that strengthened the risk-based capital rules, they are not subject to a supervisory 
stress  test  or  CCAR.  Rather,  as  required  by  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  regional  banking 
organizations perform their own stress tests. Similarly, these companies are not subject to 
enhanced  prudential  standards  established  under  section  165  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the 
LCR,  or  other  related  requirements.  Instead,  we  conduct  regular  inspections  and  evaluate 
their  safety  and  soundness  based  on  each  company’s  individual  circumstances.  Because 
many  regional  banking  organizations  concentrate  their  assets  and  activities  in  banking 
subsidiaries  that  are  supervised  by  other  federal  banking  agencies,  we  coordinate 
supervisory  activities  closely  with  our  regulatory  colleagues  and  rely  significantly  on  the 
results of their examinations, focusing our own inspections on the parent company and its 
ability to serve as a source of strength to the banks. 
tailored 
further 
Community bank supervision 
I know that community banks play a vital role in many of your districts. Let me say that the 
experiences  and  challenges  of  community  banking  are  not  new  to  me.  Before  I  became 
Chair of the Board of Governors and Vice Chair before that, I spent six years as president of 
                                                
5  An  “internationally  active  banking  organization”  is  defined  as  a  banking  organization  with  more  than 
$250 billion in total assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposure. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco.  In  that  role,  I  was  responsible  for  the 
supervision of a substantial number of community banking organizations in the nine states of 
the  San  Francisco  District.  Among  the  lessons  that  experience  reinforced  is  that  when  it 
comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. To effectively promote 
safety and soundness and ensure consumer compliance without creating undue regulatory 
burden, rules and supervisory approaches should be tailored to different types of institutions 
such as community banks. 
The  Federal  Reserve  supervises  more  than  830  community  banks  and  more  than  4,000 
holding companies that control small depository institutions. These are banking organizations 
with  total  assets  of  $10  billion  or  less.  In  supervising  these  institutions,  we  follow  a  risk-
focused  approach  that  aims  to  target  examination  resources  to  higher-risk  areas  of  each 
bank’s  operations  and  to  ensure  that  banks  maintain  risk-management  capabilities 
appropriate  to  their  size  and  complexity.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  we  are  taking  steps  to 
refine  this  process  by  using  the  financial  data  we  collect  from  banks  to  calibrate  our 
examination  procedures  based  on  risk.  We  believe  this  will  help  us  to  be  more  forward 
looking  in  addressing  emerging  risks  and  to  ensure  that  community  bank  examiners  with 
specialized expertise and experience are allocated to the institutions exhibiting the highest 
risks.  We  have  also  implemented  a  new  risk-focused  consumer  compliance  examination 
framework  that  is  intended  to  allow  examiners  to  spend  less  time  on  low-risk  compliance 
issues so that issues more likely to result in harm to consumers get more attention. And we 
continue  to  improve  our  examiner  commissioning  training  program  to  ensure  that  it  fully 
reflects the lessons of the recent crisis. 
With the Congress’s support, we have also taken action to relieve small holding companies 
of  certain  requirements  by  raising  the  asset  threshold  for  the  Board’s  Small  Bank  Holding 
Company Policy Statement from $500 million to $1 billion, and by applying this statement to 
small  savings  and  loan  holding  companies.  The  Small  Bank  Holding  Company  Policy 
Statement promotes local control of community banking organizations by acknowledging that 
smaller  companies  have  less  access  to  the  capital  markets  and  allowing  them  to  fund 
acquisitions with a higher level of debt than would otherwise be allowed. We also relieved 
small holding companies of requirements to comply with consolidated capital requirements, 
recognizing that their bank subsidiaries make up most of their assets and are already subject 
to capital rules. In addition, in conjunction with this change, we eliminated quarterly and more 
detailed consolidated financial reporting requirements for holding companies with less than 
$1  billion  in  assets,  and  instead  require  parent-only  financial  statements  on  a  semiannual 
basis.6  
Consistent with the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA), 
the  Board  is  also  working  with  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  to  identify  banking 
regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. As part of the EGRPRA 
review,  the  agencies  have  held  several  public  outreach  meetings  with  bankers,  consumer 
groups, and other stakeholders.7 Several themes have emerged during the discussions. For 
example,  community  bankers  in  rural  areas  have  noted  that  it  can  be  difficult  to  find  an 
appraiser with knowledge about the local housing market at a reasonable fee. Bankers have 
asked the agencies to consider increasing the dollar threshold for requiring appraisals, which 
could allow them to use a less formal valuation of collateral for a larger number of mortgage 
loans. In addition, bankers have raised concerns about the extent of the financial reporting 
requirements established by the banking agencies. In response, the banking agencies have 
already  taken  steps  under  the  auspices  of  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination 
                                                
6  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), “Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to 
Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and 
Loan Holding Companies,” press release, April 9. 
7  An additional EGRPRA outreach meeting is scheduled to be held in Washington, D.C., on December 2, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Council to consider options to eliminate or revise Call Report data items and to develop a 
streamlined reporting form for community banks.8  
Bankers have also asked whether the agencies could review the statutorily mandated safety-
and-soundness examination frequency for banks, which varies based on a bank’s asset size 
and condition, as a way to ease the burden of frequent on-site examinations. Other bankers 
have commented on the burden associated with recently implemented changes to the capital 
guidelines  and  have  encouraged  the  agencies  to  consider  simplifying  requirements  for 
community banking organizations. 
The  Federal  Reserve  is  giving  all  of  these  suggestions  careful  consideration  and  will  be 
working closely with the other banking agencies in developing a report to the Congress at the 
conclusion of the EGRPRA review. Given the important role that community banks play in 
their communities and the economic support they provide across the country, we recognize 
that  our  supervision  of  community  banks  must  be  balanced  and  avoid  unnecessarily 
constraining their activities. 
Current conditions 
Having  reviewed  the  major  changes  we  have  made  to  our  regulatory  and  supervisory 
programs, let me offer a few brief remarks about the current state of the firms we regulate. 
The  financial  condition  of  the  firms  in  the  LISCC  portfolio  has  strengthened  considerably 
since the crisis. Common equity capital at the eight U.S. GSIBs alone has more than doubled 
since 2008, representing an increase of almost $500 billion. Moreover, these firms generally 
have much more stable funding positions: The amount of high-quality liquid assets held by 
the eight U.S. GSIBs has increased by roughly two-thirds since 2012, and their reliance on 
short-term wholesale funding has dropped considerably. Our new regulatory and supervisory 
approaches are aimed at helping ensure these firms remain strong. Requiring these firms to 
plan for an orderly resolution has forced them to think more carefully about the sustainability 
of their business models and corporate structures. 
Nevertheless,  while  we  have  seen  some  evidence  of  improved  risk  management,  internal 
controls, and governance at the LISCC firms, they continue to have substantial compliance 
and  risk-management  issues.  Compliance  breakdowns  in  recent  years  have  undermined 
confidence in the LISCC firms’ risk management and controls and could have implications for 
financial stability, given the firms’ size, complexity, and interconnectedness. The LISCC firms 
must address these issues directly and comprehensively. 
Our examinations have found large and regional banks to be well capitalized. Both large and 
regional banking organizations experienced dramatic improvements in profitability since the 
financial crisis, although these banks have also faced challenges in recent years due to weak 
growth  in  interest  and  noninterest  income.  Both  large  and  regional  institutions  have  seen 
robust growth in commercial and industrial lending. 
Finally, community banks are significantly healthier. More than 95 percent are now profitable, 
and capital lost during the crisis has been largely replenished. Loan growth is picking up, and 
problem loans are now at levels last seen early in the financial crisis. 
Conclusion 
While more work remains to be done, I hope you will take away from my testimony just how 
much  has  changed.  Taken  as  a  whole,  the  reforms  we  have  adopted  since  the  crisis, 
including those mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act, represent a substantial strengthening of 
                                                
8  See  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council  (2015),  “FFIEC  Announces  Initiative  to  Streamline 
Reporting Requirements for Community Banks,” press release, September 8. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the regulatory framework for the largest financial institutions and should help ensure that the 
U.S.  financial  system  remains  able  to  fulfill  its  vital  role  of  supporting  the  economy.  Our 
supervisory  approach  is  more  comprehensive  and  forward  looking  while  also  tailored  to fit 
the level of oversight to the risks and scope of the institution. 
We know our work is not complete. In the coming year we anticipate moving forward on other 
rulemaking  initiatives  that  will  complement  the  steps  we  have  already  taken.  The  Federal 
Reserve is committed to remaining vigilant, diligent, and forward looking as a regulator and 
supervisor of the financial institutions that serve our economy. We will do everything we can 
to fulfill the responsibility that has been entrusted to us by the Congress and the American 
public. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to respond to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
