  Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 December 2015. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis. 
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  today  conducted  a  thorough 
assessment  of  the  strength  and  persistence  of  the  factors  that  are  currently  slowing  the 
return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% in the medium term and re-examined the 
degree of monetary accommodation. As a result, the Governing Council took the following 
decisions in the pursuit of its price stability objective: 
First, as regards the key ECB interest rates, we decided to lower the interest rate on the 
deposit  facility  by  10  basis  points  to  –0.30%.  The  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing 
operations and the rate on the marginal lending facility will remain unchanged at their current 
levels of 0.05% and 0.30% respectively. 
Second, as regards non-standard monetary policy measures, we decided to extend the 
asset purchase programme (APP). The monthly purchases of €60 billion under the APP are 
now intended to run until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case 
until  the Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in the  path  of  inflation  consistent 
with its aim of achieving inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. 
Third,  we  decided  to reinvest the principal payments  on  the securities  purchased  under 
the  APP  as  they  mature,  for  as  long  as  necessary.  This  will  contribute  both  to  favourable 
liquidity conditions and to an appropriate monetary policy stance. The technical details will be 
communicated in due time. 
Fourth, we decided to include, in the public sector purchase programme, euro-denominated 
marketable debt instruments issued by regional and local governments located in the 
euro  area  in  the  list  of  assets  that  are  eligible  for  regular  purchases  by  the  respective 
national central banks. 
Fifth,  we  decided  to  continue  conducting the  main  refinancing  operations  and  three-month 
longer-term refinancing operations as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment for 
as long as necessary, and at least until the end of the last reserve maintenance period of 
2017. 
Today’s decisions were taken in order to secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that 
are below, but close to, 2% and thereby to anchor medium-term inflation expectations. The 
latest  staff  projections  incorporate  the  favourable  financial  market  developments  following 
our last monetary policy meeting. They still indicate continued downside risks to the inflation 
outlook  and  slightly  weaker  inflation  dynamics  than  previously  expected.  This  follows 
downward  revisions  in  earlier  projection  exercises.  The  persistence  of  low  inflation  rates 
reflects sizeable economic slack weighing on domestic price pressures and headwinds from 
the external environment. 
Our  new  measures  will  ensure  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  further  strengthen 
the  substantial  easing  impact  of  the  measures  taken  since  June  2014,  which  have  had 
significant  positive  effects  on  financing  conditions,  credit  and  the  real  economy.  Today’s 
decisions also reinforce the momentum of the euro area’s economic recovery and strengthen 
its  resilience  against  recent  global  economic  shocks.  The  Governing  Council  will  closely 
monitor the evolution in the outlook for price stability and, if warranted, is willing and able to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  act  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its  mandate  in  order  to  maintain  an 
appropriate degree of monetary accommodation. In particular, the Governing Council recalls 
that  the  APP  provides  sufficient  flexibility  in  terms  of  adjusting  its  size,  composition  and 
duration. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Euro  area  real  GDP  increased  by  0.3%,  quarter  on  quarter,  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015, 
following a rise of 0.4% in the previous quarter, most likely on account of a continued positive 
contribution  from  consumption  alongside  more  muted  developments  in  investment  and 
exports.  The  most  recent  survey  indicators  point  to  ongoing  real  GDP  growth  in  the  final 
quarter of the year. Looking ahead, we expect the economic recovery to proceed. Domestic 
demand should be further supported by our monetary policy measures and their favourable 
impact  on  financial  conditions,  as  well  as  by  the  earlier  progress  made  with  fiscal 
consolidation  and  structural  reforms.  Moreover,  low  oil  prices  should  provide  support  for 
households’  real  disposable  income  and  corporate  profitability  and,  therefore,  private 
consumption  and  investment.  In  addition,  government  expenditure  is  likely  to  increase  in 
some  parts  of  the  euro  area,  reflecting  measures  in  support  of  refugees.  However,  the 
economic recovery in the euro area continues to be dampened by subdued growth prospects 
in emerging markets and moderate global trade, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in 
a number of sectors and the sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms. 
This  outlook  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  December  2015  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual real GDP increasing by 1.5% in 2015, 
1.7%  in  2016  and  1.9%  in  2017.  Compared  with  the  September  2015  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic projections, the prospects for real GDP growth are broadly unchanged. 
The risks to the euro area growth outlook relate in particular to the heightened uncertainties 
regarding developments in the global economy as well as to broader geopolitical risks. These 
risks have the potential to weigh on global growth and foreign demand for euro area exports 
and on confidence more widely. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  0.1%  in 
November 2015, unchanged from October but lower than expected. This reflected somewhat 
weaker price increases in services and industrial goods, mainly compensated for by a less 
negative  contribution  from  energy  prices.  On  the  basis  of  the  information  available  and 
current oil futures prices, annual HICP inflation rates are expected to rise at the turn of the 
year,  mainly  on  account  of  base  effects  associated  with  the  fall  in  oil  prices  in  late  2014. 
During  2016  and  2017,  inflation  rates  are  foreseen  to  pick  up  further,  supported  by  our 
previous  monetary  policy  measures  –  and  supplemented  by  those  announced  today  –  the 
expected  economic  recovery,  and  the  pass-through  of  past  declines  in  the  euro  exchange 
rate.  The  Governing  Council  will  closely  monitor  the  evolution  of  inflation  rates  over  the 
period ahead. 
This broad pattern is also reflected in the December 2015 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 0.1% in 2015, 1.0% in 
2016 and 1.6% in 2017. In comparison with the September 2015 ECB staff macroeconomic 
projections, the outlook for HICP inflation has been revised down slightly. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm solid growth in broad money (M3), 
with  the  annual  rate  of  growth  of  M3  increasing  to  5.3%  in  October  2015  from  4.9%  in 
September.  Annual  growth  in  M3  continues  to  be  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid 
components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 growing at an annual rate of 11.8% in 
October, after 11.7% in September. 
Loan  dynamics  continued  the  path  of  gradual  recovery  observed  since  the  beginning  of 
2014.  The  annual  rate  of  change  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  (adjusted  for  loan 
sales and securitisation) increased to 0.6% in October, up from 0.1% in September. Despite 
these  improvements,  developments  in  loans  to  enterprises  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged 
relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  non-financial sector balance sheets. The annual growth rate of loans to households (adjusted 
for  loan  sales  and  securitisation)  increased  to  1.2%  in  October,  compared  with  1.1%  in 
September.  Overall,  the  monetary  policy  measures  in  place  since  June  2014  have  clearly 
improved  borrowing  conditions  for  both  firms  and  households  and  credit  flows  across  the 
euro area. 
To sum up, a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming 
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  further  monetary  stimulus  in  order  to 
secure a return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%. 
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its 
accommodative stance supports economic activity. However, in order to reap the full benefits 
from  our  monetary  policy  measures,  other  policy  areas  must  contribute  decisively.  Given 
continued high structural unemployment and low potential output growth in the euro area, the 
ongoing cyclical recovery should be supported by effective structural policies. In  particular, 
actions to improve the business environment, including the provision of an adequate public 
infrastructure,  are  vital  to  increase  productive  investment,  boost  job  creation  and  raise 
productivity. The swift and effective implementation of structural reforms, in an environment 
of accommodative monetary policy, will not only lead to higher sustainable economic growth 
in  the  euro  area  but  will  also  raise  expectations  of  permanently  higher  incomes  and 
accelerate the beneficial effects of reforms, thereby making the euro area more resilient to 
global  shocks.  Fiscal  policies  should  support  the  economic  recovery,  while  remaining  in 
compliance with the fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of 
the Stability and Growth Pact is crucial for confidence in our fiscal framework. At the same 
time, all countries should strive for a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
