   Cecilia Skingsley: Are non-banks reshaping the retail payments 
market? 
Speech  by  Ms  Cecilia  Skingsley,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
conference “Non-banks in Payment Market: Challenges and Opportunities”, organised by 
the Bank of Lithuania and the Sveriges Riksbank, Vilnius, 8 October 2015. 
 The  retail  payments  market  is  undergoing  a  structural  change,  potentially  unparalleled 
with  anything  we  have  seen  in  a  long  time.  This  gives  rise  to  a  number  of  important 
questions as regards competition and cooperation, regulation and where this development 
may take us in the long run. 
An interesting and important market 
The retail payments market is an interesting and important market. Important because it 
underpins the modern economy. If we were unable to pay in a safe and efficient way, the 
economy  would  soon  grind  to  a  halt  when  markets  for  goods  and  services  stopped 
functioning. Interesting because of its rapid development. It is here the action is. On a 
global level, the payments market has grown by some 8 per cent a year for a decade. 
Growth  has  been  higher  not  only  in  the  developing  world,  reflecting  overall  higher 
economic growth rates, but also in Europe and North America, where it has been some 
four per cent annually. Given the financial crisis and the relatively low economic growth, 
this is a healthy growth rate. 
On a global level, estimates indicates that the retail payments market is worth several 
hundred US billions in revenue from transactions. If we add account-related revenues and 
interest rate  and  penalty fees from  credit  cards, the figures  increase further. With  this 
growth rate and potential revenue, it is no wonder that the retail payments market attracts 
so much attention. 
There are other factors that help explain why so much has happened over the last few 
years and that continue to drive the development. The rapid techno-logical development 
of smartphones, tablets, and high-speed Internet connection is one of the most important 
factors. Today, approximately half of all adults in the world have a smartphone and this 
share  is  likely  to  increase  significantly.  Some  40  percent  of  the  global  population  use 
Internet. This technology is widespread and accessible at a reasonable cost and it has 
changed the way we shop. We purchase goods and services in new ways and because 
of this we also demand payment services that are suited to this new type of interaction. 
E-commerce is the prime example. This year some 38 billion e-commerce transactions 
will take place. We interact with e-merchants who we have no previous relationship with. 
We download or stream music and movies. We order taxis through a smartphone app. To 
maximize convenience, we demand tailored payment solutions increasingly often. 
Businesses are in a similar situation. In e-commerce the purchase is often aborted if the 
payment  method  is  not  quick  and  convenient  enough.  They  want  to  be  able  to  offer 
payment alternatives that customers want to use. 
This  new  technology  has  not  only  created  a  demand  for  new  or  improved  payment 
services, it has also provided payment service providers with new channels through which 
their services can be supplied. The growing number of mobile payment services is an 
example of this. 
A number of challenges for the banks 
Banks have dominated the retail payments market for a long time and they still have a 
strong position. They are the “factories” of the retail payments market. They are usually 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   large  scale  and  sell  standardized  payment  services.  However,  they  have  to  meet  a 
number of challenges. 
One challenge relates to the fact that banks operate on a vast scale providing payment 
services that can be used in a broad variety of situations. In an environment that quickly 
changes and where tailor-made payment solutions are increasingly demanded, it is a tall 
order to meet such a variety in demand. We should also remember that the core business 
of banks is financial services including payment intermediation. They are not technology 
firms even though they are heavy users of technology. 
Innovation in payment services is usually not a question of inventing a wholly new payment 
process from account to account. Rather it is taking some service that is already out there 
and offering a new way of accessing that service. As an example, many mobile payment 
services and electronic wallets are just new ways of initiating card payments. A recent 
example is Apple Pay. 
The possibility to create new access channels provides opportunities for nimble firms that 
are not banks to act as middle men and provide interfaces that facilitate the initiation of 
the underlying, more old-fashion payment. Remember that payment initiation services and 
third-party  providers  have  been  at  the  centre  of  the  discussions  on  the  new  Payment 
Service Directive. These firms don’t compete outright with the banks and in some cases 
they may even directly cooperate with them. 
In other cases, the non-bank may compete directly with the banks. It may even have built 
its own infrastructure or account structure through which it processes payments. This is 
most likely in cases where the non-bank already has a kind of network that it can adapt 
and utilize for payments. Telecom operators and Internet service providers are examples 
of such firms. A concrete example of such a case is M-Pesa, the mobile payment service 
launched  by  SafariCom  in  Kenya.  Initially  intended  for  person-to-person  payments,  it 
quickly became a success and a platform for a number of financial services. 
Non-banks  can  also  act  as  suppliers  of  services  to  the  banks,  e.g.  payment  switches 
routing  the  payment  information  or  the  outsourcing  of  back-end  services  such  as  the 
operation  of  large  IT-platforms,  etc.  These  are  all  essential  inputs  for  payment 
intermediation. 
Because non-banks can enter the payment process in so many places, we have longer 
and more complex payment processes with more actors involved. Banks, at least for some 
type of payment services, have less direct contact with the end-users. This development, 
whether we like it or not and depending on who we are, is a reality that we have to relate 
to. In this structural development in the payment market, there will be several challenges 
for commercial players, as well as for those of us working on the public side. Evolvement 
is seldom a gradual and smooth process. This gives rise to a number of interesting issues 
that we have the chance to address here today. It also explains the conference agenda. 
Three topics for the conference 
The first topic concerns the current development. How do the different market players view 
the evolving ecosystem? Are the banks hurt or do they benefit from the entry of non-banks 
as  a  result  of  an  increase  of  payment  traffic  through  their  systems  and  between  their 
accounts?  Are  all  market  players  a  big  happy  family  where  everyone  cooperates  with 
everyone else or is it razor-sharp competition, a dog-eat-dog market? Who, if anyone, is 
gaining the upper hand? I’m looking forward to learning more about this type of issue in 
the first session. 
The  second  topic  concerns  the  regulatory  environment.  The  central  role  of  the  retail 
payments market for social welfare ensures that the authorities will want to promote an 
efficient outcome. How to balance cooperation and competition? How to ensure a level 
playing  field  and  how  to  protect  consumers?  For  example,  is  the  current  supervision 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   sufficient or will we have to sharpen it in the future? Central banks have an additional 
stake in this game. Cash is one of our main products and an increased supply of services 
from  non-banks  is  likely  to  reduce  its  usage.  On  the  one  hand,  central  bank  should 
embrace the development from an efficiency point of view. On the other, a rapid decrease 
in the use of cash is not without problems. This is only a few of the aspects that may be 
debated in the second session. 
The third topic is the future and we all want to know what it will look like. Will the banks be 
reduced  to  mere  suppliers  of  infrastructure  and  account  holding  services  while  other 
actors, the non-banks, have most of the end-user relation-ship? Or will the banks win by 
knock-out? Will the non-banks become banks over time as their activity expands? Will 
payment services be delivered to us by Apple? Google? Facebook? Alibaba? What about 
Bitcoin and its peers? Will we simply have payment services provided by an anonymous 
network? 
In addition to having all these kinds of issue debated among representatives for market 
actors  and  authorities,  we  will  also  have  the  pleasure  of  listening  to  the  academic 
perspective of Professor Charles M. Kahn from the University of Illinois. 
I’m really looking forward to learning more about all these topics today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
