   Marius Jurgilas: Who are non-banks and why are they important for us? 
Opening remarks by Mr Marius Jurgilas, Member of the Board of the Bank of Lithuania, at the 
conference “Non-banks in Payment Market: Challenges and Opportunities”, organised by the 
Bank of Lithuania and the Sveriges Riksbank, Vilnius, 8 October 2015. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to open the conference on non-banks in payment market. In 2007 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City hosted a similarly titled conference. It was the time when 
Europe was still debating the modalities of the upcoming PSD and Steve Jobs just introduced 
the first iPhone to the world. Now we have iPhone 6 and PSD2 and because of the another 
innovation by Apple over that time – ApplePay the link between the two is relevant more than 
ever. 
Let me briefly elaborate on two points: who non-banks are and why they are important for us. 
In  general  non-banks  in  the  payment  market  mainly  refer  to  the  financial  institutions  that 
facilitate payment transactions for end-users. Sometimes the definition goes even further and 
includes those entities that provide technology for the banks to facilitate for those payments. 
Both groups are relevant as they deal with different problems. Overall these institutions do not 
engage in financial intermediation or credit risk taking, like shadow banks, which do. 
We could start the list of non-banks in payments with traditional post offices that have been 
more or less active in payment market for ages. Many have turned into banks or quasi banks 
by now. Then we have electronic money institutions and payment institutions that joined the 
club not long ago. Some of them tried to mimic banks’ payments model and failed. A new wave 
of non-banks emerged in the age of smart phone. Equipped with the latest technology and out-
of-box thinking they made a bald step – implemented new business models, in sectors where 
banks were slow to act. Nevertheless, many early initiatives are struggling for a number of 
reasons. Regulators as well as the industry need to understand what is still missing. Payment 
initiation services as defined in the PSD2 are a good bet. 
But the outlook is not all dark shades. Last year the Economist featured an article on the future 
of payments titled “Payments: the end of monopoly”. The title speaks for itself – banks are 
losing the grip on payments market. But according to McKinsey 34% of global profits banking 
industry  is  making  from  payments.  Therefore  the  question,  raised  by  the  Economist  -why 
banking industry appears to be taking a back seat and just observing the new entrants come 
in droves? Is this just a clever distraction? 
I have been told once by a CEO of a major bank, half joking, that once they grow, we will buy 
them. There is some truth to this statement. A great number of non-bank payment initiatives 
ended  up  being  provided  either  in  collaboration  with  banks,  via  banks  directly,  or  outright 
owned by banks. Therefore when  we talk about increased competition that non-banks can 
bring into the field of payments we have to ask ourselves if that is just a wishful thinking or 
these new institutions really have a chance? I hope we will go deeper into this topic during the 
conference. 
Introduction of these disruptive technologies, like internet, smartphones, etc. are bound to lead 
to  major  innovations  in  payments.  But  technology  is  not  the  only  ingredient  for  successful 
payment business. Network and trust are also of key importance. Moreover, often the main 
breakthroughs  are  made  when  market  participants  join  forces  together 
to 
standardization. Be it the promotion of a new and efficient payment scheme or setting up an 
underlying infrastructure. At the same time competition authorities become very uneasy, once 
they see market participants sitting around the table discussing future market arrangements. 
This is the reason why we need to find a healthy and comfortable format for these discussions 
to take place. 
leading 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Progress in technology is a powerful wind of change. But regulation can also lead to positive 
change if it is implemented with good timing and with an appropriate scope. I strongly believe 
that the right regulatory framework, that provides incentives and embraces new technology 
could modernize payment services and change the status-quo. 
I will stop here by saying that here at the central bank we have high expectations built on non-
banks  both  for  channeling  innovations  and  for  refreshing  competition.  Currently  Lietuvos 
Bankas is working on a comprehensive National Payments Transformation Strategy and non-
banks, I expect, will be one of the key players there. The main objective of this conference 
from our side is to hear the views of a wider audience and to learn what the near future is about 
to bring. 
I would like to thank Sveriges Riksbank for organising this event jointly with Lietuvos Bankas 
and for close cooperation during preparations and would like to invite Ms Cecilia Skingsley, 
Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, for the introductory presentation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
