  Josef Bonnici: Strengthening economic resilience 
Address by Professor Josef Bonnici, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, at the Annual 
Dinner of the Institute of Financial Services, Saint Julian’s, 20 November 2015. 
 Honourable Minister, members of the Institute, distinguished guests, 
I would like to thank the President and Committee of ifs Malta for once again organising this 
Annual Dinner and giving me the opportunity to share my thoughts with such a distinguished 
audience. 
Mr  President,  I  am  pleased  to  hear  you  speak  about  the  Institute’s  commitment  towards 
raising the standards of financial services education, as this is exactly what we need for our 
dynamic  financial  sector  to  remain  successful  and  a  key  contributor  to  our  economic 
development. 
Over the years, the Central Bank of Malta has worked closely with the Institute, and more 
recently  participated  in  the  successful  ifs  Annual  Conference  on  The  Future  of  Pensions. 
This  national  conference  acted  as  a  catalyst  to rekindle  the  debate  on  private  pensions  in 
Malta.  I  commend  the  Institute  for  this  important  initiative.  I  wish  you  success  in  all  the 
Institute’s future endeavours. 
Introduction 
The current international economic environment poses a number of key challenges, including 
the  weak  recovery  in  the  euro  area,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies,  the  enduring 
geopolitical tensions, and possible spill-overs from the US monetary policy that could affect 
financial  conditions  on  a  global  scale.  Clearly,  our  economy  is  not  immune  from 
developments  beyond  our  shores.  Against  an  uncertain  economic  and  political  landscape, 
our vision should be to turn challenges into opportunities to sustain economic growth in the 
long term. 
Factors underpinning Malta’s remarkable resilience 
The Maltese economy has been vibrant, showing remarkable economic resilience in the face 
of  the  unstable  economic  environment  elsewhere.  In  fact,  the  theme  “Vibrant  Malta”  has 
been chosen for the European Cultural Days at the ECB in Frankfurt, which this year focus 
on  Malta.  Earlier  this  month,  we  launched  a  cultural  programme  aimed  to  enhance 
awareness of Malta’s cultural heritage. The theme reflects not only the current cultural scene 
but also our vibrant economy. 
Malta is the most open economy in the euro area, having exports and imports of goods and 
services each over 150% of GDP. Despite this challenging factor, the Maltese economy has 
managed to outperform its peers, with GDP growth consistently above that of the euro area 
average. A good perspective to this positive outcome is given in Chart 1, which is an update 
of a Chart I used in last year’s presentation; since the onset of the global financial crisis in 
2008,  Malta’s  GDP  increased  by  18%,  whereas  that  of  Germany  and  the  United  Kingdom 
rose by just 5%, while that of the euro area as a whole contracted by 0.5%. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Chart 1: Real GDP growth by group of countries 
Chart 2 shows the unemployment rate in the stressed and non-stressed euro area members 
and  Malta  since  2005.  Over  this  period,  Malta’s  performance  has  been  quite  distinct, 
outperforming  the  non-stressed  countries,  while  having  a  declining  trend  since  2013.  This 
year, at 5.4%, it is the second lowest in the euro area, after Germany. 
 Chart 2: Unemployment rates by groups of countries 
Chart 3 shows the employment performance. Since 2008 employment in Malta increased by 
around 18%, compared with a rise of just under 3% in the non-stressed economies and a 
contraction in employment in the stressed ones. In particular, the private sector employment 
growth rate averaged above 3% per year over the past three years. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 3: Employment growth by groups of countries 
 Of significant importance is the strong potential output growth, which has been supported by 
the  robust  dynamics  in  the  Maltese  labour  market.  In  its  projections,  the  European 
Commission had foreseen potential output growth in 2015 in excess of 3.5%, compared with 
around  1%  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  as  shown  in  Chart  4.  In  fact,  according  to  the 
European  Commission,  Malta  and  Germany  were  the  only  two  Member  States  in  which 
potential GDP in 2014 had already exceeded its pre-crisis growth rate. 
Chart 4 – Potential GDP 
 Labour  market  participation  is  a  critical  factor  supporting  potential  output,  particularly  the 
steady increase in female participation. This is further reinforced by inward migration, mostly 
from  the  European  Union.  In  fact,  we  estimate  that  in  the  period  2010  to  2014,  migrant 
workers  contributed  to  0.6  percentage  point  of  potential  output  growth.  It  is  important  to 
recognise  that  the  bulk  of  migrant  workers  are  in  managerial,  professional  and  technical 
occupations,  although  there  is  a  growing  number  of  foreign  workers  in  elementary 
occupations  in  the  hotel  and  restaurant  sector,  and  in  clerical  and  other  support  duties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  These workers enhance the human capital stock, bringing new skills and knowledge, while 
also  helping  to  avoid  bottlenecks  in  the  labour  supply  in  expanding  sectors,  including  in 
tourism related jobs. 
The  buoyant  performance  in  output  and  employment  has  dampened  concerns  about 
macroeconomic imbalances. The current account of the balance of payments turned positive 
in 2012 and has remained in surplus on an annual basis since then, as shown in Chart 5. 
The  shift  into  surplus  in  recent  years  was  driven  by  exports  of  services  on  the  back  of  a 
strong performance in tourism and the development of new areas of economic activity. 
Chart 5: Current account 
 Imbalances in the public sector have also been narrowing. Malta has successfully emerged 
from the European Commission’s excessive deficit procedure, and this year Government is 
aiming at a deficit of 1.6% and a declining national debt of 68.3% of GDP. Next  year, the 
deficit is targeted at 1.1% of GDP, while the national debt is forecast to decline to 65.2%. 
Although the economy is small and highly dependent on foreign trade, resource flexibility and 
ongoing structural change strengthened its ability to adjust to external shocks, so that Malta 
emerged from the crisis with strong economic fundamentals. 
The transformation in the exports profile of Malta, labour market developments, the modus 
operandi of the banking sector and the prudent management of public finances have been 
the  main  determinants  of  this resilience. The  post-EU  accession  period witnessed  a  sharp 
rise  in  export-oriented  services.  Liberalisation  of  various  sectors,  the  higher  availability  of 
better educated human resources and a targeted strategy to attract foreign direct investment 
opened new service sectors. 
The strong shift of the Maltese economy towards services could in fact explain the rising unit 
labour  costs  observed  in  the  past  decade.  The  service  sector  engages  higher  quality 
employees  and  is  less  capital  intensive  than  the  more  traditional  parts  of  the  economy. 
Although  this  could  increase  unit  labour  costs,  it  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  loss  of 
competitiveness. The labour content per unit of output is higher in the changed composition 
of output of the economy. 
The  resilience  of  the  Maltese  economy  can  also  be  attributed  to  its  banking  sector,  which 
operates  in  a  sound  and  liquid  framework  and  is  profitable.  The  prudent  business  model 
adopted by the core domestic banks is the backbone of our financial system’s resilience. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Finally,  the  prudent  management  of  public  finances,  and  the  stable  funding  of  Maltese 
government debt, have also contributed positively. Around 94% of local sovereign bonds are 
held by residents, largely with a buy-to-hold mentality. 
What are the challenges ahead of us? How to strengthen resilience further? 
Internationally, the risk of deflation has been the primary concern from a central banking and 
monetary policy perspective. In a low or negative inflation environment, consumption could 
be  postponed  in  the  expectation  of  further  price  reductions,  putting  pressure  on  firm 
revenues.  Given  the  downward  rigidity  in  wages,  firms  cannot  easily  adjust  through  lower 
wages  in  a  deflationary  environment.  So  a  deflationary  environment  could  lead  to  higher 
unemployment  and  stagnation.  Also,  low  inflation  increases  the  burden  of  servicing  debt. 
Indeed, with deflation the real interest rate starts rising. When nominal policy rates are close 
to the zero lower bound, higher real rates cannot be corrected by reductions in policy rates. 
The prolonged period of low inflation in the euro area since 2014 has prompted the ECB to 
introduce unconventional monetary policy measures (See Chart 6). 
Chart 6 – HICP inflation 
 These  complement  the  reductions  in  the  main  policy  rate  so  as  to  maintain  an 
accommodative  monetary  stance.  In  January  2015  the  ECB  announced  the  launch  of  the 
Asset Purchase Programme (APP), first encompassing ABS and covered bonds, and later 
extended to the purchase of sovereign bonds. 
At the euro area level, the ECB’s monetary policy strategy has gradually improved financial 
and credit conditions, as well as the ongoing economic recovery. 
The non-standard measures have resulted in higher equity and bond prices, higher liquidity 
and improved lending conditions. Since June 2014 the transmission of policy rates to lending 
rates  has  improved,  with  declines  in  lending  rates  becoming  more  pronounced  and  more 
widely  distributed  across  euro  area  countries.  The  bank  lending  survey  confirms  the 
improvements  in  broader  credit  conditions  since  the  introduction  of  the  APP.  As  a  result, 
credit to the private sector in the euro area has shown signs of recovery and registered a 
positive growth since May 2015, the first time in 36 months, as shown in Chart 7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Chart 7 – M3 and main counterparts 
 On  the  inflation  front,  however,  results  continue  to  disappoint  on  the  downside.  The 
harmonised index of consumer prices in the euro area is just 0.1% in October 2015, following 
a period of negative or close-to-zero inflation. On the other hand, the latest inflation rate for 
Malta, at 1.6%, is within reach of the ECB’s below but close to 2% target; it attests to the 
buoyancy of the economy. It also indicates that the APP has had positive effects on Malta’s 
economy.  The  main  transmission  channel  has  worked  through  the  exchange  rate.  The 
depreciation of the euro against other major currencies has kept inflation in Malta closer to 
the ECB target and it also boosted competitiveness on the exports side. Countries with high 
openness to trade with non-euro area countries have been more sensitive to the depreciation 
of  the  euro.  In  Malta  exports  of  goods  towards  non-euro  area  countries  represent  around 
72% of total goods exports and around 87% in the case of service exports. 
The wealth effect is another transmission channel of the APP that has been evident in Malta. 
The  Malta  Stock  Exchange  has  gained  32%  since  the  beginning  of  the  year,  while  the 
property  market  continued  to  perform  buoyantly.  A  higher  level  of  wealth  positively  affects 
consumption and general consumer confidence. 
On  other  fronts,  however,  Malta  can  position  itself  better  to  reap  more  benefits  from  this 
unprecedented  scenario  of  accommodative  monetary  policy,  particularly  in  the  area  of 
access  to  finance.  As  just  mentioned,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  enabled  significant 
reductions in lending rates across the euro area. Bank lending rates in Malta did go down but 
still remain higher than in other euro area countries, as shown in Chart 8. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 8 Bank lending rates and ECB rates 
 The transmission of central bank policy rates to retail bank rates is an essential condition for 
the monetary policy transmission mechanism. This is especially important in Malta where the 
predominant types of businesses are SMEs, which use banks as a main source of financing. 
In fact, although Malta outperformed the euro area on the main macroeconomic indicators, 
credit  to  the  non-financial  corporate  sector  has  remained  subdued,  although  this  partly 
reflects deleveraging in certain sectors, particularly in construction and real estate. 
Apart  from  the  impaired  transmission  of  ECB  policy  rates  to  retail  rates,  charges  and 
commissions  of  commercial  banks  are  found  to  be  relatively  high.  In  a  recent  report,  the 
Malta Competition and Consumer Affairs Authority made a number of recommendations to 
address issues primarily related to price transparency, barriers to expansion and consumer 
mobility  in  view  of  improving  competition  and  borrowing  costs for  SMEs.  Bank  charges  on 
SME  loans  and  charges  for  credit  transfers  need  to  be  revised  downwards  to  facilitate 
access to finance and also to encourage the use of electronic money, which would ultimately 
result in lower processing costs to banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Chart 9 – Credit growth to households and businesses 
 In keeping constant focus on maintaining competitiveness, the Government took a significant 
step  by  committing  itself  to  set  up  the  Malta  Development  Bank.  Preparatory  work  on  the 
establishment  of  the  Bank  is  well  advanced.  The  development  bank  will  strengthen  and 
diversify the local financial base and will contribute to economic growth by funding sectors 
and  projects  that  are  not  catered  for  by  commercial  banks  on  their  own.  It  will  provide 
attractive wholesale financing and risk sharing facilities. It will be a powerful tool to bring to 
realisation more economically feasible projects. 
The delay in tackling non-performing loans (NPL) on the bank’s books is another factor that 
puts a drag on credit growth and reflects a dimension of credit risk that should be resolved. 
An efficient judiciary system that deals with insolvency cases  in a timely and cost efficient 
manner facilitates credit risk management by bringing down the stock of NPLs. An improved 
corporate  insolvency  regime  facilitates  the  rehabilitation  of  viable  firms  and  speeds  up  the 
exit  of  non-viable  ones.  This  would  boost  banks’  profitability  as  a  result  of  reduced 
provisioning needs, while it would also generate gain of output for the real economy arising 
from more efficient allocation of resources. The authorities have launched a comprehensive 
review of the judicial system, which is expected to result in a reform that would benefit the 
banking sector and the overall economy. 
As I said earlier, the APP has had some positive effects on our economy. However, we need 
to be vigilant to identify any arising risks from liquidity flows. Accordingly, the Central Bank of 
Malta,  through  its  participation  with  the  Malta  Financial  Services  Authority  on  the  Joint 
Financial Stability Board, is monitoring credit developments for any undue credit growth that 
could potentially lead to the formation of asset bubbles. Should it be required, we will take 
offsetting  macro-prudential  measures  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and  maintain  the 
resilience of the financial sector. 
Given the limited depth of our capital market, the APP has somewhat tightened investment 
options  for  the  Maltese  investor.  In  this  context  we  need  to  diversify  our  capital  market 
further,  with  securities  that  are  sufficiently  backed  by  assets,  such  that  the  integrity  of  our 
capital market and the stability of our investors’ base remain intact. 
During  the  Governing  Council  meeting  held  in  Malta  last  October,  President  Mario  Draghi 
stated that “Monetary policy should not be the only game in town”, indicating that monetary 
policy  could  not  solve  the  euro  zone’s  economic  problems  alone,  and  that  “…all  countries 
should strive for growth-friendly fiscal policies”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  the  current  state  of  affairs,  an  efficient  budgetary  policy  must  be  built  around  structural 
reforms,  fiscal  responsibility  and  productive  public  investment.  With  the  Maltese  economy 
operating close to its potential output, it is the appropriate time to create fiscal buffers that 
could act as a cushion against any future need. 
Conclusion 
The  single  currency  has  proved  to  be  a  challenge  to  various  countries  in  the  euro  area. 
Instead  of  exploiting  the  opportunities  offered  by  the  single  market,  some  Member  States 
have  been  impacted  by  the  fixed  nominal  exchange  rate  and  their  inability  to  correct 
macroeconomic imbalances through internal adjustment. This made them more vulnerable in 
times of crisis. One fundamental lesson to be learnt is that, with a fixed exchange rate, it is of 
utmost  importance  that  the  rest  of  the  economy  is  as  flexible  as  possible  to  correct 
imbalances. 
In this regard, the Maltese economy has been nimble enough to adapt to the new realities of 
the single currency. Yet, the challenges that lie ahead will require further structural changes 
that increase flexibility and strengthen economic fundamentals. To this end, Government has 
identified  health  and  education  as  new  sectors  with  growth  potential  that  could  be 
transformed  into  exportable  services.  Malta  has  the  ability  to  develop  a  regional  cluster  in 
these areas, attracting students and patients from the region and beyond. This year we have 
seen  a  significant  correction  in  the  exchange  rate,  which  is  expected  to  exert  a  positive 
influence on economic growth in the year ahead. 
There are other major elements that add to Malta’s positive outlook. In addition to being an 
efficient  and  profitable  international  business  location,  Malta  is  a  meeting  point  of  cultures 
and languages at the centre of the Mediterranean. There is, therefore, potential for further 
development of economic activities that exploit our location, our strengths in doing business 
from  Malta  that  add  value  to  current  activities,  such  as,  for  example,  developing  further 
cultural niches in the tourism sector so as to maintain a vibrant and evolving economy. 
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
