   Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Bank of Uganda’s 50th Anniversary 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Launch of the Golden Jubilee Commemoration, Kampala, 7 April 2016. 
 The Deputy Governor, Dr. Louis Kasekende,  
Members of the Board of Directors,  
The Uganda Mission Chief of the IMF Resident in Washington  
The Resident Representative of the IMF in Uganda, Ms. Clara Mira,  
The Programme Director GIZ, Dr. Dirk Steinwand  
Senior Management of the Bank of Uganda  
The Chairman and Executive Director, Uganda Bankers’ Association  
Members of the Press,  
Staff of the Bank,  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I  welcome  you  all  to  the  official  launch  of  the  activities  to  mark  the  Bank  of  Uganda’s 
50th Anniversary. The Bank was established on August 15, 1966.  
The  theme  for  the  commemoration  of  the  Bank’s  Golden  Jubilee  is  Promoting  Financial 
Stability.  
The milestone of the Golden Jubilee is significant not just for the central bank, but for the whole 
country.  The  Central  Bank  is  a  symbol  of  national  economic  sovereignty.  It  replaced  the 
colonial monetary management of the East African Currency Board that had been set up in 
1919 by the British Secretary of State for the Colonies.  
In looking back, we recall the opening of a branch of the National and Grindlays Bank at 
Entebbe in 1906. This was the first commercial bank in Uganda and it played the role of banker 
to the Government from 1913 until 1966 when Bank of Uganda opened and assumed that 
function.  
We also remember the establishment of the Uganda Credit and Savings Bank in 1950, which 
later became Uganda Commercial Bank in 1965.  
Evolving along with the financial system, the Bank of Uganda’s roles have grown to respond 
to the dynamic demands of a developing economy in an increasingly globalized world.  
After a period of severe economic difficulties in the 1970s and 1980s, the Bank played a key 
role in restoring macroeconomic stability in the 1990s; and in rectifying financial distress in the 
banking industry. Since the turn of the millennium, the Bank has strengthened bank regulation 
and supervision, and modernised its monetary policy framework, which is now one of the most 
advanced on the continent.  
Along  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic  Development,  the  Bank  has 
pioneered the economic reforms and provided the economic management, which underlies 
the sustained growth of our economy over the last 25 years or so.  
The Golden Jubilee commemoration presents an opportunity to learn lessons from the past 
and to look forward to, and prepare to face the challenges of the future.  
At the core of the Bank’s statutory mandate is monetary policy and financial regulation. In the 
coming decades, our monetary policy will continue to prioritise, above all else, the control of 
inflation.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   This is because low and stable inflation is a precondition for mobilising high levels of savings 
and  investment  and  for  efficient  resource  allocation,  which  are  essential  for  sustained 
economic growth.  
Along with other central banks around the world, the Bank of Uganda prioritises the control of 
inflation because it is the only institution within the country, which has the tools to do this, 
through its monetary policy.  
For  most  of  the  last  25  years  Uganda  has  enjoyed  relatively  low  inflation,  averaging 
approximately 6 percent per annum.  
That achievement would not have been possible had the Bank not put inflation at the forefront 
of its monetary policy objectives.  
Bank regulation and supervision must constantly evolve to meet new challenges arising from 
the structure and technology of the financial services industry.  
In  the  coming  decades,  the  financial  services  industry  will  be  transformed  by  information 
technology. This has already started to happen with the advent of mobile money.  
It is also likely that cross border banking will become even more important than it is today, 
especially  where  institutional  arrangements  such  as  the  East  African  Common  Market 
enable services to be traded freely across borders.  
The priority objectives of our bank supervision will remain the protection of depositors and the 
preservation of financial system stability.  
A key challenge for the Bank will be to ensure that the introduction of new financial products 
and new ways of delivering financial products, which will be made possible by technological 
innovations and which offer immense benefits to customers, can be achieved in a manner that 
is consistent with our key prudential objectives.  
In  addition,  the  increasing  importance  of  cross  border  banking  means  that  effective  bank 
supervision in Uganda will not be possible without close collaboration with our counterparts in 
other countries.  
Economic integration in East Africa is vital for Uganda’s long term prospects for development. 
The  East  African  Community  (EAC)  Partner  States  have  a  three-phase  programme  for 
economic  integration  in  the  region,  which  involves:  first,  the  Customs  Union;  second,  the 
Common Market; and, third, the Monetary Union. The Bank has been an active participant in 
the preparations for EAC Monetary Union under the Monetary Affairs Committee of the 
regional central banks.  
Monetary Union will be very challenging to implement effectively, and we must study and 
heed the lessons to be learned from the difficulties faced by other monetary unions, such as 
the European Monetary Union.  
During  this  Golden  Jubilee  year,  the  Bank  will  organise  a  range  of  public  events  both  to 
enhance public understanding of its role and to encourage public debate about this role and 
the challenges the Bank will face in the future.  
The range of public information engagements and events include:  
1.  
A Golden Jubilee Edition of the annual Joseph Mubiru Memorial Lecture in August 
2016.  
Exhibitions  and  Town  Hall  Meetings  in  our  regional  Branches  and  Currency 
Centres starting in May 2016;  
The publication of a Souvenir handbook about BoU Milestones;  
A national essay competition on savings for primary school pupils starting in the 
second term;  
2.  
3.  
4.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5. 
 
A televised BoU University Challenge on Financial Stability featuring participants 
from 30 universities in August 2016;  
A Charity Walk aimed at raising funds for supporting maternal and child health; and  
A tree planting campaign at our Branches and Currency Centres.  
6.  
7.  
I invite you all to accommodate the scheduled events and activities in your calendars so that 
we mark the Bank’s 50th Anniversary together.  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  officially  launch  the  commemoration  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda 
Golden Jubilee.  
Thank you for listening to me.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
