  Ravi Menon: MAS’ Annual Report 2015/16 
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
MAS’ Annual Report 2015/16 Media Conference, Singapore, 25 July 2016. 
Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ annual report media conference. 
 Economic growth 
The global economy is headed for another year of lacklustre growth. Recovery in the 
advanced economies is hesitant and uneven. Economic activity is slowing in the emerging 
market economies. The IMF has just released its latest projection for global GDP growth in 
2016 – at 3.1%. This is the same as last year. 
MAS  is  closely  watching  these  developments,  especially  three  factors  that  are  key  to  the 
growth outcomes this year: one, Brexit and its implications; two, the shape of the recovery in 
the US economy; and three, slowdown in the Chinese economy. 
The UK referendum vote to exit the EU will have an impact along several dimensions: 
first,  on  financial  markets  and  possible  consequences  for  financial  stability;  two,  on 
investment and GDP growth in the UK, with potential spill-overs to the EU and beyond; and 
three, on political and social developments, and what they mean for globalisation. 
Brexit’s  impact  has  been  most  keenly  felt  so  far  in  the  financial  markets.  This  is  to  be 
expected as prices need to adjust to reflect the new reality of a UK that is outside the EU. So, 
exchange rates, bond yields, and equity prices have all seen sharp movements as markets 
search for a new equilibrium. Uncertainty prevails over exactly when and how Brexit will take 
place; we can expect recurrent bouts of market volatility in the months ahead. Central banks 
across  the  world  have  said  they  will  do  what  it  takes  to  safeguard  financial  stability  and 
maintain smooth functioning of their markets. We expect the global financial system to stay 
resilient, given ample liquidity and the generally stronger balance sheets of banks. 
But  the  UK  economy  is  expected  to  take  a  hit  and  there  will  be  some  fallout  on  the  EU. 
Uncertainty, especially over the terms of the UK’s exit from the EU and its future access to 
EU markets, will weigh on business confidence and investment spending. Growth in the EU 
will be weighed down by Brexit, on account of its significant trade and financial linkages with 
the UK. This in turn is likely to have a small dampening effect on global growth. 
The  political  and  social  implications  of  Brexit  could  have  more  significant  economic 
consequences over the medium to long term. But it is too early to tell what these implications 
might  be.  There  are  several  key  elections  taking  place  in  Europe  next  year.  They  will 
determine the ability of governments to maintain support for structural reforms as well as for 
the European project. Destabilisation of politics in Europe could impact global markets and 
global growth. 
The  US  is  expected  to  stay  on  a  moderate  expansion  path.  The  consensus  growth 
forecast for 2016 is 1.9%. The economy is more or less at full employment, consumption has 
rebounded, and household income growth has recovered to near pre-crisis rates. 
The problem with the US recovery, at least from the perspective of Singapore and the region, 
is not its pace of growth but its composition. US GDP growth is not generating as much trade 
as previously, with persistent weaknesses in business investment, including in IT. This has 
implications  for  export  growth  in  Asia  and  in  Singapore.  US  consumption  generates  only 
around two-thirds the import demand that US investment does. So for Asia and Singapore, 
we need to see a recovery in US investment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
China’s growth should slow but we do not expect a “hard landing”. The official target of 
6.5% is quite attainable on the back of fiscal stimulus and continued credit expansion. In fact, 
the risk is not of too low a growth rate but a growth rate that is achieved by adding to the 
underlying vulnerabilities in the Chinese economy: high and rising levels of corporate debt, 
industrial over-capacity and deteriorating asset quality in the banking system. 
Changes in the composition of China’s growth will continue to have an impact on Asia and 
Singapore. The rebalancing of demand away from investment and towards consumption has 
weighed on the region’s exports of commodities and capital goods. But over time, there are 
opportunities for countries which re-orientate the structure of their exports to tap on China’s 
burgeoning demand for consumer goods and services. With growth at nearly 10% p.a. over 
the  past  decade,  China’s  imports  of  consumption  goods  have  expanded  twice  as  fast  as 
intermediate goods. 
Singapore’s economic growth remains sluggish.  Real GDP growth  came  in  at  0.8%  in 
the second quarter on a quarter-on-quarter, seasonally adjusted annualised basis. Growth in 
the first half of 2016 has averaged 2.2% in year-on-year terms. 
The economy’s performance in the second half of 2016 will not be too different from 
the first half. But there will be some month-to-month volatility in economic activity and the 
composition of growth will shift somewhat. 
The  trade-related  cluster  is  showing  tentative  signs  of  stabilisation  with  improvement  in 
certain segments. 
• 
The  electronics  industry,  which  recorded  positive  sequential  growth  in  April  and 
May, shows tentative signs of a patchy recovery. 
The wholesale and sea transport sectors have benefitted from buoyant oil trade. 
• 
The modern services cluster, which has been a key pillar of growth in the last few years, will 
see its contribution fall significantly in 2016. 
• 
Financial services, which had grown much faster than the rest of the economy in the 
last four years, will see growth much closer to the overall economy. 
Professional services – like architectural and engineering services– which are more 
exposed to the UK and EU, will experience slower growth. 
Info-communication services will see a moderation in growth but will be supported 
by demand for productivity-enhancing IT solutions in a restructuring economy. 
  The  domestic  services  cluster  will  continue  to  see  modest  growth.  Healthcare,  education, 
and  public  infrastructure  construction  will  be  the  better  performing  segments.  The  retail 
sector is likely to remain weak for the rest of the year, weighed down by sluggish consumer 
and business sentiments. 
The forecast  of GDP growth  in  2016  is  1.0–3.0%. The  Ministry  of Trade  and  Industry  and 
MAS are reviewing this range. 
Inflation 
Inflation, which has been low for long, is on a modest ascent. 
Core  inflation,  which  excludes  accommodation  costs  and  private  road  transport  costs,  is 
expected  to  rise  gradually  over  the  course  of  this  year.  Core  Inflation  bottomed-out  in  the 
fourth quarter last year and picked up to 0.6% in Jan-May 2016. The drag from oil-related 
items  will  continue  to  diminish.  The  disinflationary  effects  of  some  budgetary  and  other 
one-off measures will dissipate. The pace of increase in inflation will be restrained, however, 
by  benign  external  price  pressures,  reduced  tightness  in  the  labour  market,  and  a  more 
muted pass-through of business costs to consumer prices. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  For  2016,  core  inflation  will  likely  average  around  1.0%  and  trend  towards  its  historical 
average of close to 2.0% over the course of 2017. 
Likewise, headline inflation is expected to climb out of negative territory and move towards 
1.0% next year. CPI-All Items inflation fell to −0.9% in the first five months of this year, as a 
result of declines in housing rentals and car prices. Headline inflation has been negative for 
quite  some  time,  but  could  turn  positive  towards  the  later  part  of  this  year,  barring  large 
shocks to global oil prices or an unexpected decline in COE premiums. 
Our forecast for 2016 remains unchanged for CPI-All Items inflation at −1.0 to 0%. Headline 
inflation is expected to converge towards its historical average over the next couple of years. 
Monetary policy 
The progressive easing of monetary policy since January last year has been in line 
with weak underlying inflationary pressures. MAS has taken measured steps to reduce 
the  slope  of  the  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  band  over  the  past  18  months.  This  has 
been validated by accumulating evidence of weakening inflationary pressures. 
In  April  2016,  MAS  moved  to  a  zero  percent  rate  of  appreciation  for  the  Singapore  dollar 
nominal effective exchange rate policy band. 
The current stance of monetary policy remains appropriate for overall macroeconomic 
conditions  in  2016.  MAS  is  monitoring  global  developments  closely.  Unless  there  is  a 
marked deterioration in the global economy or significant shift to the inflation outlook, there is 
no  need  to  change  the  monetary  policy  stance.  The  current  stance  will  help  ensure  price 
stability in the medium term. 
Notwithstanding  recent  volatility  in  exchange  rates,  the  nominal  effective  exchange 
rate of the Singapore dollar remains within the policy band. MAS’ exchange rate policy 
framework  is  sufficiently flexible  to  accommodate  such  heightened  volatility  in  international 
financial  markets.  MAS  stands  ready  to  curb  excessive  volatility  in  the  trade-weighted 
Singapore dollar. 
Macroprudential policy – car loans and property loans 
While  monetary  policy  is  focused  on  overall  price  stability,  macroprudential  policies  target 
specific  areas  to  promote  economic  and  financial  stability.  The  two  key  macroprudential 
measures taken in recent years relate to the property market and car market. In the property 
market,  MAS  has  implemented  prudential  limits  on  loan-to-value,  loan  tenure,  and  debt 
service  ratios  while  the  Ministry  of  Finance  has  implemented  stamp  duties  on  buyers  and 
sellers.  This  collection  of  measures  is  the  so-called  property  cooling  measures.  In  the  car 
market, MAS has implemented limits on loan-to-value and loan tenure. 
MAS eased the limits on car financing in May this year. But it is not time yet to ease 
the  property  cooling  measures.  The  considerations  and  circumstances  in  the  two 
markets are quite different. 
The restrictions on car financing were imposed in 2013 – at a stringent level – primarily to 
restrain the strong demand for cars and COEs, and consequential pressures on inflation. The 
objective  of  curbing  inflationary  pressures  has  been  achieved.  The  contribution  of  private 
road transport (excluding petrol) to headline inflation has eased from +1.3% points in 2011–
2012 to –0.5% point in the first quarter of this year 2016. MAS therefore reset the car loan 
restrictions in May this year at a level that would continue to promote financial prudence and 
support the move towards a car-lite society over the long term. 
The  property  cooling  measures,  while  also  aimed  at  reining  in  inflationary  pressures  and 
promoting financial prudence, had the additional aim of promoting a stable and sustainable 
property  market.  The  contribution  of  accommodation  costs  to  inflation  has  come  down 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  significantly.  Household  balance  sheets  have  started  to  strengthen,  with  annual  growth  in 
household debt moderating to 1.7% in the first quarter of this year, down from about 8.0% 
over  the  last  five  years.  The  property  market  has  also  been  stabilising  over  the  last  two 
years, with prices moderating from their peak in the third quarter of 2013. 
But  there  is  still  some  way  to  go,  to  entrench  the  gains  in  stabilising  the  property 
market  and  restoring  household  debt  sustainability.  Property  prices  have  thus  far 
adjusted  only  modestly  after  a  strong  run-up  that  exceeded  income  growth.  Prices  have 
moderated by a cumulative 9.4% from their peak in the third quarter of 2013. But they had 
gone up by 60% between 2009 and 2013 when nominal incomes had increased by only 30% 
during the same period. The risk of a renewed surge in property prices is not trivial given that 
interest rates are likely to remain low and global investors continue to search for yield. And 
while the growth in household debt has eased considerably, it will take time for household 
balance sheets to strengthen and become more resilient to interest rate and income shocks. 
MAS, MOF, and Ministry of National Development will continue to keep a close watch over 
developments in the property market. 
Mas’ financial performance 
MAS’ profit and loss position in the financial year 2015–16 (FY2015/16) showed a profit of 
$0.2billion. In the financial year 2014–15 (FY2014/15), MAS recorded a profit of $0.3 billion. 
Holding  the  S$  exchange  rate  constant  to  strip  out  currency  translation  effects,  foreign 
investment  gains  amounted  to  S$5.2  billion  in  FY2015/16,  compared  to  S$10.4  billion  in 
FY2014/15. The lower foreign investment gains reflected the decline in global equity markets 
in FY2015/16. 
The financial centre: robust and resilient 
Singapore’s financial centre has grown handsomely in recent years and is today regarded as 
one  of  the  top  five  centres  in  the  world.  MAS’  role  is  to  work  closely  with  the  industry  to 
ensure  that  Singapore’s  financial  centre  is  robust  and  resilient;  clean  and  trusted;  and 
dynamic and purposeful. 
Let me speak briefly on each of these dimensions. 
Our banks and the financial sector remain robust and resilient despite the challenging 
global economic conditions. 
The banking system’s ratio of non-performing loans (NPLs) was 1.7% in the first quarter,, up 
from  1.3%  a  year  ago.  Exposures  to  regional  economies  and  the  oil  and  gas  industries, 
which  are  experiencing  slowdowns,  have  contributed  to  this  rise  in  NPLs.  This  is  to  be 
expected: when economic conditions weaken, it is only natural that NPLs will rise. What is 
important is that the NPL ratio remains low and banks are resilient against any rise in NPLs. 
The banking system in Singapore is well-placed to ride the current soft patch in economic 
conditions. 
• 
First, banks in Singapore are well provisioned against potential losses. The banking 
system has set aside provisions to cover more than 100% of its NPLs. 
Second,  the  major  banks  in  Singapore  have  sufficient  liquid  assets  to  meet 
continuous cash outflows over a 30-day period of high stress. 
Third,  MAS’  annual  industry-wide  stress  tests  indicate  that  the  banking  system 
would  remain  resilient  under  very  severe  stress  scenarios.  Banks  incorporated  in 
Singapore have healthy capital buffers that are able to absorb the losses that are 
likely to occur under these severe scenarios. Banks in Singapore are also able to 
meet liquidity and funding needs under these extreme scenarios. 
  4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The financial centre: clean and trusted 
The  growth  of  our  financial  centre  has  been  underpinned  by  Singapore’s  reputation  as  a 
clean and trusted jurisdiction. 
Upholding high standards of integrity in the financial industry is an absolute priority 
for MAS. There can be no compromise on this. 
This  means  having  an  effective  regime  against  financial  misconduct  and  misdemeanours, 
and money laundering and terrorism financing. 
These  threats  have  escalated  in  recent  years  as  our  financial  centre  grew  in  scale, 
sophistication, and connectedness with the rest of the world. 
Take  financial  misconduct.  You  would  recall  the  widespread  manipulation  of  interest  rate 
benchmarks by errant traders across the world’s major financial centres in the aftermath of 
the financial crisis. And it happened here too. MAS reviewed the controls of all 19 rate-setting 
banks in Singapore and took firm supervisory actions against them, including requiring them 
to place additional reserves  with  MAS, which imposed a financial cost. We worked closely 
with the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) to strengthen governance and conduct in 
the process for setting benchmark rates. 
And more recently in the limelight, the scourge of international money laundering. 
Combating money laundering and illicit financing is a national effort. In 2014, a multi-
agency team under the leadership of MAS, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs, published a National Risk Assessment report on the money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks faced by Singapore in both the financial and non-financial sectors. The report 
found that, like other major international financial and business centres, Singapore faced a 
high inherent risk of being used as a conduit for illicit funds. The many agencies worked with 
their  respective  sectors  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  anti-money  laundering  and 
countering financing of terrorism – AML/CFT for short. 
The financial sector is particularly vulnerable to money laundering and illicit financing 
risks. This vulnerability  is part of our karma as an international financial centre. Billions of 
dollars flow every day through hundreds of financial institutions (FIs) in Singapore. And given 
our  prominence  and  growth  as  a  wealth  management  centre,  that  vulnerability  is  even 
greater. 
The ongoing probe into financial transactions related to 1MDB is a stark reminder to 
us that the risks are real. It would not be proper for me to say anything about the ongoing 
investigations beyond the joint statement issued last week. It would also not be proper for me 
to  comment  on  any  specific  institution  beyond  MAS’  statement  last  week  because  the 
supervisory examinations are still ongoing and we have to be fair to the institutions. The two 
statements last week are unprecedented. We have already said a lot more publicly than we 
usually do when investigations and reviews have not been completed yet. 
Instead, I want to focus today on what the findings imply for our financial sector. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  recent  findings  have  made  a  dent  in  our  reputation  as  a 
clean and trusted financial centre. 
MAS is disappointed with the lapses in AML/CFT controls and breaches of AML/CFT 
regulations that we have picked up in our FIs. 
I  am  told  that  money  laundering  is  growing  more  sophisticated  in  nature  and  is  carefully 
designed  to  avoid  detection;  that  these  incidents  happen  in  every  financial  centre  and  the 
large and rising frequency in which fines are imposed in other jurisdictions show we are not 
alone in facing this challenge; and that the rules and practices here are already very strict 
and on par with global standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  This may all be true but they cannot be an excuse for what has taken place. What happened 
is  simply  unacceptable.  We  may  not  be  any  worse  than  other  jurisdictions.  But  that  is  no 
consolation. We have not met the high standards we have set for ourselves. 
AML/CFT is like cyber security. Those who seek to abuse our financial system are getting 
smarter and more sophisticated. That cannot be a reason for failing to detect and deter them. 
As the threat grows, so must the effectiveness of our risk management. 
MAS is determined to fix the problem, working together with the industry. We need to 
draw  lessons  from  the  failings  we  have  observed  in  the  FIs  and  see  how  we  can  further 
bolster our AML/CFT regime. We will work hard with the industry to ensure that Singapore 
offers neither safe haven nor safe passage for tainted money from anywhere. Let me share 
our preliminary thoughts. 
Our AML/CFT regime comprises four key prongs: 
• 
• 
one a robust legal and regulatory framework that sets the rules; 
two, active supervision of FIs to check for compliance with the rules and adequacy 
of controls; 
three, strict enforcement to punish non-compliance; and 
four, good cross-border cooperation. 
• 
• 
First, regulation. AML/CFT rules in the financial sector are strict. It is mandatory for all 
FIs to perform proper due diligence to know their customers. FIs are required to assess the 
risks and perform enhanced due diligence where the risks are higher. FIs are also required to 
monitor  transactions  on  an  on-going  basis  so  as  to  identify  and  report  any  suspicious 
activities. 
Given that our AML/CFT rules are in line with international standards, it is not readily 
apparent that we need more new rules. The problem in all the instances we have picked 
up has been a failure to comply with the rules and poor judgement. 
Second, supervision. MAS has stepped up AML/CFT supervision in recent years and 
FIs are devoting more resources to managing money laundering risks. Through onsite 
inspections,  we  assess  if  the  AML/CFT  policies  and  procedures  set  out  by  the  FIs  are 
adequate and adhered to on the ground. The frequency of MAS inspections has increased 
six-fold in recent years. In the three-year period from the second quarter of 2010 to the first 
quarter of 2013, MAS conducted a total of 108 onsite inspections of FIs; between 2013 and 
2016, 608 inspections were conducted. MAS requires FIs to promptly address all deficiencies 
identified in the course of these inspections. 
But we can do better. MAS will further sharpen its supervision of AML/CFT controls in 
the  industry.  We  are  establishing  a  dedicated  AML  Department  to  consolidate  existing 
supervisory resources and take a more targeted approach to combat money laundering and 
illicit financing risks, as we announced earlier. We will conduct more intrusive inspections of 
FIs identified as facing higher risks. We will increase our engagements with the industry to 
share  perspectives  on  emerging  risks  and  typologies,  as  well  as  best  practices  on  how  to 
mitigate them. 
Third,  enforcement.  In  recent  years,  MAS  has  been  stepping  up  its  enforcement 
actions against FIs that breach our AML/CFT regulations. In the last three years, MAS 
has imposed financial penalties on 27 FIs for AML/CFT offences. In a couple of cases, where 
ineffective  management  oversight  resulted  in  inadequate  implementation  of  AML/CFT 
controls, we have asked the senior management to be replaced. In the last six years, MAS 
has revoked the licenses of 15 money changers and remittance agents for serious AML/CFT 
breaches. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
But here too, we can do better. MAS will further strengthen its enforcement capability 
to  conduct  rigorous  investigations  and  to  take  swift  and  dissuasive  actions  against 
errant  FIs.  We  will  take  stronger  regulatory  actions  against  those  FIs  whose  AML/CFT 
practices fall short of the expected standards. And we will make public our sanctions against 
persistently or egregiously errant FIs. Our closure of BSI Bank shows that we will not hesitate 
to take the most punitive actions where warranted. We are centralising all our enforcement 
functions  across  MAS  in  a  new  Enforcement  Department.  The  new  department  will  be 
responsible  for  not  just  AML/CFT  offences  but  all  other  breaches  of  regulations  and  rules 
administered by MAS, including market conduct offences under the Securities and Futures 
Act. We are using data analytics to enhance market surveillance, to help us identify potential 
market misconduct and investigate specific offences. For example, we are exploring the use 
of  machine  learning  algorithms  to  identify  manipulative  trading  behaviour  in  the  capital 
markets or to detect patterns across suspicious money laundering transactions. 
Finally,  good  cross-border  cooperation  with  our  foreign  counterparts.  Money 
laundering and terrorist financing is often cross-border in nature. Hence we have established 
effective channels to facilitate international co-operation and exchange of information. This 
will continue to be an important part of our overall AML/CFT regime. 
Enhancing Singapore’s reputation as a clean and trusted financial centre must be a 
collaborative effort by all stakeholders. It is neither realistic nor desirable to expect MAS 
to police every single transaction or activity in our financial markets. The responsibility lies 
with every FI to instil high standards of risk management and proper conduct at all levels. 
Boards  and  senior  management  in  particular  must  send  a  clear  signal  that  profits  do  not 
come before values and ethics. There can be no room for flexibility in ethical standards. 
Our financial centre must continue to be built on a bedrock of trust and integrity. 
The financial centre: dynamic and purposeful 
Next, building a financial centre that is dynamic and purposeful. 
The financial  sector grew  by  5.3%  last  year,  compared to  overall  GDP  growth  of  2.0%.  In 
fact,  since  the  recovery  from  the  global  financial  crisis,  financial  sector  growth  has 
consistently  outpaced  that  of  the  overall  economy.  But  this  year,  financial  services  and 
overall economy growth will be closer. 
Notwithstanding  the  slowdown  in  growth,  the  financial  sector  has  continued  to  build  on  its 
strengths – strengthening infrastructure, deepening markets, and enhancing connectivity. Let 
me highlight some of the new initiatives we are embarking on. 
In  asset  management,  we  are  building  depth  and  breadth.  The  asset  management 
industry  continued  to  grow  well  last  year,  with  assets  under  management  posting  a  9% 
increase  to  reach  S$2.6  trillion.  Singapore  will  introduce  a  new  corporate  and  regulatory 
framework  to  encourage  fund  domiciliation  in  Singapore  and  build  up  fund  administration 
capabilities. MAS is working closely with the private equity/venture capital (PE/VC) industry 
to  see  how  we  can  enhance  financing  for  growth-stage  companies,  both  local  and  from 
around the region. PE/VC financing has been increasing at a compound annual growth rate 
of 30% over the last 5 years. 
In the Renminbi (RMB) market, we are expanding two-way flows between China and 
Singapore.  Besides  Suzhou  and  Tianjin,  Singapore  has  established  cross-border  RMB 
initiatives  with  the  rapidly  growing  city  of  Chongqing.  Corporates  in  Chongqing  that  issue 
RMB bonds in Singapore can fully repatriate the proceeds raised for infrastructure and other 
development projects in western China. We are witnessing a healthy volume of transactions 
now. 
In  foreign  exchange  trading,  we  are  working  on  electronification  of  the  market. 
Digitisation,  competition,  and  consolidation  are  rapidly  transforming  the  global  foreign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  exchange  (FX)  landscape.  MAS’  focus  is  to  position  Singapore  as  Asia’s  e-trading  hub  to 
build on our FX centre, which is already the largest in Asia. We are working with FIs and FX 
trading platforms to build relevant infrastructure such as matching and pricing engines that 
will anchor liquidity in our marketplace. 
In  infrastructure  finance,  the  focus  now  is  on  enabling  capital  recycling.  MAS  is 
currently working with industry to unlock more investment flows into infrastructure via capital 
markets.  This  includes  developing  an  infrastructure  debt  takeout  facility  to  facilitate  the 
transfer  of  infrastructure  debt  from  banks  to  institutional  investors.  A  group  of  banks  and 
investors has agreed to conduct a “proof of concept” pilot transaction in September this year. 
In  the  promotion  of  FinTech,  MAS  has  been  updating  its  regulatory  framework  to 
ensure  that  it  remains  conducive  to  innovation  while  providing  the  necessary 
safeguards. We  have  proposed  a  regulatory  sandbox  for  FIs  and  non-financial  players  to 
experiment  with  FinTech  solutions  while  limiting  the  consequences  of  product  failure.  We 
have issued guidelines to enable start-ups and SMEs to more easily access securities-based 
crowd-funding.  We  will  soon  be  issuing  new  guidelines  which  will  provide  clarity  for  FIs 
leveraging on cloud services to fulfil business and operational needs. 
Finally, the financial sector continues to create good jobs and build relevant skills. 
Last  year,  the  financial  services  sector  created  a  net  total  of  4,500  jobs.  There  is  a 
compositional  shift  towards  front  office  and  higher  value-added  jobs.  Demand  for  talent  is 
strong in sectors such as asset and wealth management, corporate banking, and insurance. 
Demand is also strong in compliance roles, and technology related fields like cyber security 
and application development. But there is consolidation in back office jobs, such as roles in 
lower-skilled IT infrastructure management, operations, and support. 
Under the national SkillsFuture programme, MAS introduced new initiatives last year to help 
finance  professionals  deepen  their  expertise  and  acquire  new  cross-functional  capabilities. 
The Financial Sector Tripartite Committee, which MAS co-chairs with NTUC, has set up the 
Financial Industry Career Advisory Centre (FiCAC) to offer advice to finance professionals 
transiting  into  new  jobs  within  the  industry.  Since  its  launch  in  April  2016,  more  than  600 
finance professionals have tapped on FiCAC services. 
For  Singaporeans  aged  40  years  and  above,  MAS  has  increased  to  90%  the  subsidy  it 
provides on finance-related training schemes. MAS has increased the number of Financial 
Sector SkillsFuture Study Awards and Finance Scholarships, to help deepen Singaporeans’ 
skillsets in key growth areas. In 2016, about 100 such awards and scholarships were offered. 
They  were  given  to  individuals  to  pursue  specialist  courses  in  risk  and  compliance,  data 
analytics, cyber security, investment management and corporate banking. 
Conclusion 
Let me wrap up. 
Across all areas of MAS’ work, a common theme has been to be alert to both challenge and 
opportunity.  Global  economic  developments  –  ranging  from  Brexit  to  the  shift  in  global 
demand  and  trade  patterns-  present  both  upsides  and  downsides.  There  are  risks  to  be 
managed but also opportunities to be seized. 
The same duality applies to MAS’ approach to the financial sector. In the face of risks to the 
stability  or  reputation  of  the  financial  sector,  MAS  is  a  “no-  nonsense”  regulator.  But  MAS 
also works closely with the industry in a spirit of partnership to create a conducive business 
environment  for  them  to  operate  in  and  grow  Singapore  as  a  dynamic  and  purposeful 
international financial centre. 
This approach is quite unique to Singapore and it has served us well. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
