  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Of directors and supply of talent 
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Launch of FIDE Forum Directors Register “Of Directors and 
Supply of Talent”, Kuala Lumpur, 1 April 2016. 
 Today  marks  an  important  step  forward  for  board  talent  management  among  financial 
institutions in Malaysia. The Directors Register will be launched this morning to address the 
financial  sector’s  need  for  a  reliable  supply  of  qualified  individuals  to  meet  the  growing 
demand for high-calibre directors. 
Financial institutions play a critical role in the economy, intermediating funds to support the 
real  economy.  Because  of  the  criticality  of  the  role,  financial  institutions  must  be  led  by 
directors who possess the necessary skills, experience and integrity to spearhead financial 
institutions  in  a  competent  and  effective  manner.  Identifying,  developing  and  retaining 
directors of high calibre are no easy task. We need to design a solution to achieve it. The 
Directors Register is therefore a timely initiative as this acts as a solution to expand the pool 
of potential directors for boards of financial institutions. 
internal  control  environment,  and  periodically  reviewing  whether 
Demand imperatives 
Being  a  director  of  a  financial  institution  is  highly  demanding.  The  last  financial  crisis  has 
shown the failure of board oversight in managing the affairs of financial institutions. Unbridled 
risks-taking, misaligned, incentives structures and failures in overall governance were just a 
few of the shortcomings that almost brought the global financial system to a standstill. Public 
perception and trusts for bankers were severely dented. Bankers became a figure of ridicule. 
We should not let this happen in Malaysia. 
Both the law and the expectations of the central bank on directors’ role and responsibilities 
are  very  clear.  Directors  are  responsible  for  ensuring  the  conformance  of  senior 
management  to  the  strategies  and  policies  set  by  the  board.  They  are  also  ultimately 
accountable for the financial institution’s compliance with relevant laws and regulations. This 
includes overseeing the implementation of the financial  institution’s governance framework 
and 
these  remain 
appropriate  in  the  light  of  changes  to  the  size,  nature  and  complexity  of  the  institution’s 
operations.  In  addition  to  ensuring  conformance,  directors  are  also  expected  to  drive 
performance  through  their  oversight  involvement  in  shaping  the  long-term  direction  of  the 
institution, anticipating strategic challenges and mentoring senior management. 
Directors  have  to  achieve  this  while  confronting  international  and  domestic  developments 
that  are  fundamentally  changing  the  landscape  in  which  Malaysian  financial  institutions 
operate. 
The  global  economic  outlook  remains  uncertain,  with  cyclical  and  structural  weaknesses 
persisting  in  the  advanced  economies,  more  moderate  growth  in  China  and  continued 
volatility  in  the  global  financial  markets.  For  the  last  two  decades,  Malaysia  has  been 
becoming more integrated with the regional and global economy. The recent conclusion of 
the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  and  Trans-Pacific  Partnership  Agreement,  if 
properly sequence and implemented, provide further opportunities for Malaysian companies 
to  expand  abroad.  But  expansion  beyond  our  shores  poses  new  challenges  as  financial 
institutions  will  navigate  unfamiliar  territory.  The  operational  environment  will  be  different. 
The  business  model  will  require  remodelling.  Board  members  are  therefore  expected  to 
familiarise themselves with the economic, financial and social environment of foreign markets 
if they are to be effective and successful. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Along  with higher expectations, there has also been a noticeable increase in the absolute 
demand  for  financial  institution  directors  in  Malaysia.  Since  a  decade  ago,  the  number  of 
directors in the Malaysian financial sector has increased significantly. This can be attributed 
to several factors. One reason is the increase in the number of financial institutions arising 
from  the  establishment  of  new  Islamic  banking  and  takaful  entities  within  existing  banking 
and 
institutions  have  also  progressively 
strengthened the composition of their boards. This was largely driven by the need to bring 
more diverse perspectives and skills to the board to meet the growing demands placed on it, 
and to better prepare for board succession. 
In  the  process,  we  also  saw  independent  directors  forming  a  majority  on  boards  of  more 
financial  institutions,  including  some  of  the  largest  domestic  financial  institutions  in  the 
country.  It  is  important  to  emphasise  that  this  growing  demand  has  not  been  just  about 
numbers; it is more importantly about the quality of talent that boards must have to perform 
their role effectively. 
insurance  groups.  Besides 
financial 
that, 
FIDE Forum and ICILF – working together to increase their impact and influence 
It  is  against  this  backdrop  of  growing  demand  that  FIDE  Forum  has  stepped  in  to  offer 
financial  institutions  a  platform  to  connect  with  potential  directors  from  both  within  and 
outside  Malaysia.  The  Directors  Register  achieves  this  in  two  ways.  Firstly,  by  identifying 
board-ready individuals who already have the necessary skills, knowledge and experience. 
And secondly, by initiating into the talent pool individuals who have the calibre to serve on 
financial institution boards, but require development in certain areas, such as those specific 
to  the  banking  or  insurance  industry.  By  significantly  widening  the  supply  sources,  this 
initiative  is  in  many  ways  a  game-changing  initiative  to  strengthen  the  talent  pipeline  for 
financial institution boards. 
The  Directors  Register  complements  the  education  programmes  that  have  already  been 
introduced for financial institution directors under ICLIF. The FIDE programme has become a 
standard bearer for exceptional directors’ education with its deep dive into the nuts and bolts 
of  practical  governance,  its  link  to  supervisory  expectations,  and  a  delivery  approach  that 
effectively combines the use of exceptional faculty and the rich experience, knowledge and 
insights of the participants. 
To  date,  more  than  600  directors  from  financial  institutions,  including  directors  from  the 
regional offices of both foreign and domestic financial institutions, have attended the FIDE 
programme. This has had a visible impact that in bringing about important positive changes 
in how boards function and interact with senior management. 
Both FIDE Forum and ICLIF are uniquely positioned to advance corporate governance in the 
financial  sector.  After  all,  they  bring  together  those  who  represent  the  ultimate  governing 
body  of  financial  institutions,  with  great  responsibilities  and  accountability.  Such  an 
opportunity  must  be  capitalised  and  not  wasted.  FIDE  Forum  and  ICLIF  should  therefore 
complement  each  other  and  avoid  duplication.  There  are  significant  benefits  to  be  gained 
from an effective partnership where resources can be channelled to increase the collective 
impact of programmes and initiatives by the two organisations. In my own engagements with 
the industry, over the years, coordination and cooperation among financial institutions can 
become  game  changers  for  the  industry.  In  this  respect,  we  should  fully  appreciate  the 
distinctive purpose of ICLIF and the FIDE Forum and how they coordinate with each other 
within the space of directors’ development. With close coordination and cooperation we can 
avoid  the  redundancies and  wastage  and  realise  the synergistic  benefits from  the  alliance 
between the two organisation. 
Being a director of a financial institution will demand a lot from the individual. It is a position 
of trust where integrity is the norm. It should be, given the critical role of financial institutions 
in any economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
As a network of financial institution directors, FIDE Forum provides a valuable resource for 
directors as they navigate the heavy responsibilities that come with the position. FIDE Forum 
should continuously raise the bar on director performance by advocating best practices and 
providing support to its members in helping solve real problems confronting boards today. It 
should  be  a  respected  voice  on  important  issues  of  corporate  governance,  an  epitome  of 
best practices of corporate Malaysia. Most importantly, it should build an enduring legacy for 
future  leaders  of  financial  institutions  by  representing  within  its  collective  membership  the 
highest  standards  of  integrity,  professional  conduct  and  intellectual  integrity.  Indeed,  FIDE 
Forum’s  success  must  surely  be  measured  not  only  by  how  well  it  serves  its  current 
membership, but also by how it expands its reach and influence to attract new leaders of the 
highest  calibre  to  the  financial  industry.  In  short,  being  a  director  of  a  financial  institution 
signifies the embodiment of a person’s self-evident integrity and professionalism. 
In  this  endeavour,  FIDE  Forum  and  ICLIF  need  to  work  collaboratively  and  exploit  the 
synergies between them. FIDE Forum should leverage on the expertise that has been built 
within ICLIF in the design and delivery of high quality leadership programs. Similarly, ICLIF 
should continuously seek to understand the current and future concerns of directors through 
FIDE  Forum,  and  reflect  on  how  its  role  in  education  can  help  address  those  concerns. 
These  are  mutually  reinforcing  perspectives.  The  Directors  Register  is  a  good  example  of 
this. 
Where development needs are identified through FIDE Forum’s screening process, it should 
be able to refer candidates to the existing director education programmes provided by ICLIF, 
or  work  with  ICLIF  to  develop  new  ones  to  respond  to  an  unmet  need.  To  my  mind,  this 
clarity  of  role  and  purpose  will  significantly  enhance  the  potential  impact  and  influence  of 
FIDE Forum and ICLIF, to the overall betterment of the industry. 
As members of FIDE Forum, directors have a critical role to play in setting its priorities and in 
driving future initiatives to ensure that FIDE Forum remains relevant and continues to add 
value.  In  this  respect,  members  should  be  active  in  giving  their  views,  including  providing 
inputs to concept members, engage in propagating the common interest of the industry and 
enhancing the good image of the sector. 
Conclusion 
The Malaysian financial sector has taken important strides to strengthen boards, in particular 
through the ongoing education and increase in supply of top-quality directors. The success of 
ICLIF’s FIDE Programme and the industry-led initiatives by FIDE Forum in pushing frontiers 
in  developing,  sourcing  and  attracting  board-level  talent  would  very  much  depend  on  the 
collective efforts of all. It is from this perspective that the FIDE Forum should be commended 
for initiating this effort. I encourage the industry to continue to use FIDE Forum as a platform 
for promoting board-level talent management and through it, to build an effective partnership 
with ICLIF as the centre of excellence for directors’ education in the financial sector. 
Moving forward, we all have a role to play to ensure that boards of financial institutions in 
Malaysia continue to be served by high-calibre directors who will guide our institutions on a 
path of sustainable growth in the service of the economy. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
