  Peter Praet: Interview in La Repubblica 
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in  La  Repubblica,  conducted  by  Mr  Ferdinando  Giugliano  and  Ms  Tonia  Mastrobuoni  on 
15 March 2016 and published on 18 March 2016. 
 Can you explain why you took such a big package of measures last Thursday? 
You  have  to  put  these  decisions  in  the  context  of  heightened  risks  to  our  price  stability 
objective. External shocks, mainly originating from emerging markets, high market volatility 
and the crucial need to avoid second-round effects warranted a strong and comprehensive 
package to counteract these adverse forces. 
We don’t have a gloomy assessment of the economy, domestic conditions have improved, 
financial conditions have clearly improved. But it is still very fragile, and external shocks can 
easily  trigger  a  vicious  circle,  with  further  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  We  wanted  to 
ensure that this did not happen, in line with our mandate. It was decided by the vast majority 
in  the  Governing  Council,  that  we  had  to  act  very  forcefully  to  ensure  an  even  more 
accommodative monetary policy stance. 
What can be said about the composition of the measures? We discussed the pros and cons 
of the different measures. On the negative deposit rate: it is clear that it served us very well 
in the past, it has been quite efficient in easing financial conditions, including the exchange 
rate,  as  a  natural  by-product  of  differences  in  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  the  major 
currency  areas.  As  we  proceeded  on  the  path  of  negative  interest  rates  on  our  deposit 
facility, it was also clear we had to look at the impact on the profitability of the banks. Banks 
are very important for the monetary transmission mechanism, so you have to look at what is 
the  impact  of  the  package  on  the  banking  sector.  Against  this  background,  we  decided  in 
favour of a package which still made use of changes in the ECB interest rates but increased 
the weight of measures aimed at credit easing. 
Since  the  markets  had  already  anticipated  three  cuts  in  the  deposit  rate  this  year  many 
money  markets  traders  had  to  turn  their  positions.  However,  with  a  little  bit  more  time  to 
scrutinize and digest the complex package, markets and analysts finally tuned again. 
Were you surprised by the strength of the market reaction? 
I expected that the short end was going to be repriced but that the rest of the package would 
dominate. Looking through some volatility, what we have got at the end makes sense from 
an economic point of view. Basically, we had a substantial impact on credit markets, which is 
good  as  financial  conditions  were  worsening  and  credit  spreads  were  going  up.  What 
dominated was very much the TLTRO and the broadening to corporate bonds of the asset 
purchases. 
In  terms  of  other  asset  prices,  I  believe  markets  are  very  conscious  already  that  the 
monetary  policy  courses  of  the  major  world  currency  areas  remain  quite  on  different 
trajectories  as  they  reflect  fundamentally  different  domestic  underlying  conditions.  As  we 
have said few times in the past, the fact that there are significant and increasing differences 
in  the  monetary  policy  cycle  between  major  advanced  economies  will  become  ever  more 
evident in the near future. 
But do you think the market is right to believe there will not be more cuts? 
In the Introductory Statement we said very clearly that we “expect the key ECB interest rates 
to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon 
of our net asset purchases. 
So you haven’t reached the lower bound? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
No,  we  haven’t.  As  other  central  banks  have  demonstrated,  we  have  not  reached  the 
physical  lower  bound.  This  re-composition  of  the  tool-box  does  not  mean  that  we  have 
thrown  away  any  of  our  tools.  If  new  negative  shocks  should  worsen  the  outlook  or  if 
financing conditions should not adjust in the direction and to the extent that is necessary to 
boost the economy and inflation, a rate reduction remains in our armoury. 
On  corporate  bonds  purchases:  would  this  instrument  be  accessible  for  companies 
like, let’s say, Volkswagen? 
Yes, as long as they have investment grade. You have corporate bonds in other sectors too, 
such as utilities, insurance, telecommunications, energy. 
Don’t you think you are entering the dangerous territory of choosing who to distribute 
money to? For example, you may end up favoring larger companies. 
Normally what you do is that you give liquidity to the bank in exchange of collateral. Here, 
you take a direct exposure. The other point is, you want to avoid influencing relative prices. 
We asked the  committees  to  work  on  the  specific  definition  of the  bonds  we  will  buy. We 
could buy something that is close to the index, but excluding banks, so that we avoid price 
distortions  in  the  corporate  bond  market.  The  important  point  is  that  if  the  price  goes  up 
because you are buying non-financial corporations, there will be search for other bonds by 
the markets participants so they will rebalance the portfolio with other bonds that are not in 
our portfolio. So the initial effect of our purchases will spread further and the market can still 
function. 
Can we put it like this: in countries like Germany and France with big companies with 
high  ratings,  you  are  helping  with  corporate  bond  purchases,  and  in  countries  like 
Spain or Italy, with less access to this type of measure, you will help via the TLTRO? 
It is true that in some jurisdictions you do not have many corporate bonds. But as I just said: 
the initial effect of our purchases will spread to other assets and other markets. So there will 
be  a  reinvestment  of  the  liquidity.  Those  having  sold  corporate  bonds  will  rebalance  by 
buying other things. Some people will question the need for such a measure. They are right 
in saying that the situation is not dramatic, but I would stress that it is still fragile. Yes, we can 
see that the situation is improving, as, for example, unemployment is coming down. But we 
have not reached the “escape velocity” yet where the rocket is not bound by gravity anymore. 
On  the  TLTRO,  some  say  it  is  not  going  to  make  much  difference,  because  the 
problem is the demand, not the supply of credit. 
As shown by our Bank Lending Survey, credit demand is picking up and you also see from 
actual bank credit growth that the numbers are improving. So we now give a push for these 
developments to proceed and maybe to accelerate. Do not overlook the following: In the last 
tranches of the TLTRO I you could borrow for less and less time, as the loans had all the 
same maturity, that is September 2018, in an environment where the rates were falling. This 
time it’s different: in one year you can still borrow for four years at the conditions prevailing at 
that time. And, banks can benefit from a negative rate as low as our deposit facility rate if 
they  meet  the  thresholds  for  credit  growth.  All  this  is  quite  bold.  It  will  certainly  facilitate 
cheaper funding of banks by replacing more expensive funding instruments by our TLTRO II. 
Don’t  you 
the 
accommodative stance of the ECB is lacks some analysis on some wrong business 
models, for example the one of the Sparkassen? 
What we experience in the banking sector is difficult and we have to be very attentive to that, 
but it is also true that the banks have to rethink their activities fundamentally. I mention here 
digitalization, which is a very big challenge for the banks. It has the potential to change the 
business model fundamentally. The interest rate is not a favourable factor, but it is one of the 
factors. And as long as you have a positive impact on the economy from negative rates, you 
have better growth, fewer NPLs, so we have seen positive factors for banks. The problem for 
in  Germany  about  how  harmful 
the  discussion 
think 
that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
banks is not 2016, it is the medium term, if the situation becomes persistent and the business 
model is not adjusted, then profitability becomes a major issue. 
The staff projections don’t include the impact of the new measures. What will be the 
impact on inflation and growth of the package? 
The measures we took should bring us close to the 2 per cent target at the end of 2018. But 
don’t forget, the measures we take like the APP are supposed to remain in place as long as 
inflation  has  not  reached  a  sustainable  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation.  It  must  be 
sustainable. We are not yet there. In the forward guidance we said: we expect the interest 
rates to be low or lower for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net 
asset purchases, which currently have an horizon to at least March 2017. 
Can I ask you about what’s left in the toolbox? Could we see “helicopter drops”? 
There has been a lot of skepticism recently about monetary policy, not only in delivering but 
in saying “your toolbox is empty”. We say, “no it’s not true”. There are many things you can 
do. The question is what is appropriate, and at what time. I think for the time being we have 
what we have, and it is not appropriate to discuss the next set of measures. 
But in principle the ECB could print cheques and send them to people? 
Yes, all central banks can do it. You can issue currency and you distribute it to people. That’s 
helicopter money. Helicopter money is giving to the people part of the net present value of 
your future seigniorage, the profit you make on the future banknotes. The question is, if and 
when is it opportune to make recourse to that sort of instrument which is really an extreme 
sort of instrument. 
There are other things you can theoretically do. There are several examples in the literature. 
So when we say we haven’t reached the limit of the toolbox, I think that’s true. 
In  Germany,  the  biggest  economy  in  Europe,  there  is  a  very  distortive  discussion 
about the ECB. Aren’t you worried that this discussion is very dangerous to maintain 
trust within the eurozone? 
I think the responsibilities for the problems we have are collective. I think everyone has to 
look from the point of view of the other. Don’t forget, a lot of excess German savings went to 
Spain, to the Spanish banking system. I don’t deny that the problem in creditor countries gets 
worse in some respects the lower we cut the deposit rate. It is true we are looking at this, and 
it is true that when we decided some recomposition of our toolbox, we took that into account. 
But, fundamentally, the issue is not so much the negative rates, the main issue is mistrust in 
the  willingness  of  the  more  indebted  countries  to  really  seize  this  opportunity  to  forcefully 
address the problems. This is much more what drives the German view. 
Italy is often accused of not doing enough to solve its structural problems. What are 
the changes that could really unlock growth in Italy? 
The  real  question  is  “what  drives  prosperity?”  I  think  prosperity  is  linked  to  education, 
productivity, the rule of law, property rights and all these things, certainly not monetary policy. 
In  Italy  productivity  really  started  to  stop  growing  in  the  early  1990s.  I  think  this  is  a 
fundamental reflection for the country. Some key questions like the efficiency of the judicial 
system,  the  labour  market  reforms,  liberalizations  in  services,  have  in  all  or  in  part  been 
tackled.  But  I  think  the  agenda  remains  unfortunately  significant.  To  give  you  just  a  few 
examples,  I  have  been  worried  by  the  insufficient  spreading  of  ICT  technology.  Business 
investment  is  recovering  everywhere,  because  demand  is  recovering  so  investment  is 
following, but one of the weaker investment performances is in Italy. I think the minister of 
finance and the government are well aware of what the priorities are, of what needs to be 
done. 
One  thing  you  haven’t  mentioned  is  fiscal  policy.  In  Rome  one  often  hears  the 
argument that Italy should be allowed to expand fiscal policy more to really help the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
recovery. One also hears that the European fiscal rules are not fit for purpose. How do 
you respond to that? 
Experience tells that there is always a reason to postpone fiscal savings and that fiscal policy 
is often procyclical. 
So  the  only  appropriate  response  to  these  experiences  is  having  suitable  fiscal  rules  and 
following  them  over  the  full  cycle.  Yes,  there  is  the  risk  of  doing  the  wrong  things.  For 
example,  in  2011,  not  necessarily  mentioning  Italy  but  focusing  on  the  European  level, 
consolidation  was  necessary.  However,  the  composition  could  have  been  more  growth 
friendly.  Instead  of  raising  taxes,  spending  could  have  been  cut,  and  instead  of  cutting 
investment in infrastructure, government consumption growth could have been reduced. And 
particularly  in  the  current  juncture,  investment  should  not  be  penalized  but  encouraged  in 
countries like Italy. 
Fiscal consolidation is always a lot about composition, about timing. Successful consolidation 
could involve pension reforms, which spread consolidation through the years. In this respect, 
in the past Italy went a long way to improve fiscal sustainability through its pension reform. 
I know in Italy there is a discussion over a coordinated tax reduction. What I see is that fiscal 
policy  was  slightly  expansionary  last  year  and  will  be  this  year.  Well-designed  structural 
reform packages, which entail short-term costs and have a clear impact on growth potential, 
are taken into account by the Commission and they may affect temporarily the adjustment 
toward the achievement of fiscal objectives. But of course the lower fiscal adjustment has to 
be  commensurate  to  the  beneficial  impact  of  reforms  on  the  growth  potential  and  the 
sustainability of public finances. 
Do you think there should be a haircut on Greek debt? 
If you look at the wealth improvement of Greece in terms of disposable income, before the 
crisis it was spectacular and then it went the other way very quickly. So it was basically on 
shaky  grounds,  a  large  current  account  deficit,  it  borrowed  money,  so  at  some  point  it 
corrected. All this makes you  very cautious to say  we just do this or that and support the 
recovery  in  the  absence  of  a  very  convincing  programme  of  reforms.  Greece  was  the 
extreme  case,  the  demonstration  that  the  monetary  union  was  unprepared  to  deal  with  a 
financial  cycle  correction,  especially  in  some  countries.  Fortunately,  new  institutions  have 
been  put  in  place,  such  as  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism. But we are not there yet, the banking union is 
not a real banking union yet. 
Who is stopping the third pillar of the banking union? 
It is always the same problem. All will accept it, if they can trust the other members of this 
mutualized system to address what they think are risks. 
Do you accept the argument that one needs to find ways to limit risks in the banking 
sector? 
Yes, but the question is how you define that. That’s where the differences are. The single 
deposit guarantee has rarely been called and only for very small institutions. There is plenty 
of  bail-inable  assets  before  you  reach  small  deposits.  This  deposit  guarantee  for  me  is 
something which distracts. We should do it. We could take the risk of having this guarantee. 
A common deposit insurance would help, but it’s more important to allow a European bank to 
be able to operate in the euro area as a single entity. 
Even this small deposit guarantee scheme is a big political problem for Germany. 
I think personally you should announce an objective and a roadmap. We have a roadmap for 
the deposit guarantee scheme, but it is very far away. We have to spell out on paper what we 
consider  as  required  conditions  before  you  can  mutualise  in,  for  example,  5  years.  That 
would create a new environment for banking. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
But the Germans have a roadmap: they say government bonds must not be risk-free 
and that they want a common bankruptcy law. These are very difficult conditions. 
As for sovereign debt, we have learnt from the crisis that it is not risk-free, that is clear. On 
the  other  hand,  sovereign  debt  plays  an  important  role  in  our  economy,  in  the  financial 
sector.  So  one  needs  a  very  thorough  reflection  on  this.  That’s  why  the  sustainability  of 
public finances is key. That’s why one can’t just say “let’s lower taxes and the economy will 
follow and we will self-finance the tax cut”. I think one needs to be careful as sovereign debt 
is a key pillar of our financial system. 
A final question on Brexit. Do you have any contingency plans in place at the ECB? 
Brexit is part of this tendency for some to say that independent nations can do it better than 
collective solutions. I am confident that the voters will understand that national solutions are 
worse, that we have to reinforce Europe and not the opposite. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
