  Jerome H Powell: Trends in fixed-income markets 
Testimony  by  Mr  Jerome  H  Powell,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Securities,  Insurance,  and  Investment,  and 
Subcommittee on Economic Policy, Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US 
Senate, Washington DC, 14 April 2016. 
 Chairmen  Crapo  and  Heller,  Ranking  Members  Warner  and  Warren,  other  subcommittee 
members, I would like to thank you for inviting me to testify today on trends in fixed-income 
markets. Because these markets perform important functions in our economy, it is imperative 
that we understand the significant changes they are currently undergoing. As I will discuss, a 
number of factors have been driving these changes.  
Some market participants have expressed concerns about low liquidity across fixed-income 
markets,  although  many  recent  studies  have  found  it  difficult  to  identify  such  a  broad 
reduction. It may be that liquidity has deteriorated only in certain market segments. It may 
also be that, even if liquidity is adequate in normal conditions, it has become more fragile, or 
prone to disappearing under stress. 
The  sharp  swing  in  Treasury  prices  that  took  place  on  October  15,  2014,  led  the  Federal 
Reserve  Board,  in  conjunction  with  the  Treasury  Department,  the  Commodity  Futures 
Trading  Commission,  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  and  the  Securities  and 
Exchange  Commission,  to  create  a  Joint  Staff  Report  and  to  host  a  conference  on  the 
structure of Treasury markets at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) in October 
2015.1 The staff of the four agencies and the FRBNY compiled transactions data across both 
Treasury  cash  and  futures  markets  and  analyzed  the  factors  that  could  have  caused  the 
rapid  rise  and  subsequent  reversal  in  Treasury  prices  in  such  a  short  span  of  time.  This 
analysis did not find a single factor that caused the sharp swing in prices. 
As  had  already  occurred  in  equity  markets,  advances  in  computing  and  communications 
technologies have allowed proprietary trading firms (PTFs, also often called high-frequency 
trading firms) to capture a majority of the interdealer market in Treasuries. As a consequence 
of these changes, trading in Treasury markets now moves at extreme speed. It may be that 
these  changes  have  also  led  to  greater  liquidity  risk,  or  sudden  declines  in  liquidity. 
Researchers  at  the  FRBNY  have  shown  that  spikes  in  volatility  and  sudden  declines  in 
liquidity  have  become  more  frequent  in  both  Treasury  and  equity  markets.2  There  is  also 
evidence that liquidity shifts more rapidly and hence is less predictable in these markets.3 In 
contrast, researchers have not found evidence of these behaviors in corporate bond markets, 
where traditional dealers still intermediate most trades and there is much less high-frequency 
trading.4  
                                                
1   See Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on  October 15, 2014 (PDF),  U.S.  Department  of  the 
Treasury,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  U.S. 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  U.S.  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission,  July  13,  2015,  and 
Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015) (PDF) 
, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October 20, 2015. 
2   See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt, Has Liquidity Risk in the Treasury 
and Equity Markets Increased? 
, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015. 
3   See  Dobrislav  Dobrev  and  Ernst  Schaumburg,  The  Liquidity  Mirage 
October 9, 2015. 
,  Liberty  Street  Economics  (blog), 
4   See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Or Shachar, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt, Has Liquidity Risk in the 
Corporate Bond Market Increased? 
, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 6, 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Apart  from  such  episodes  of  sudden  volatility,  questions  about  whether  liquidity  in  fixed-
income  markets  has  broadly  deteriorated  are  difficult  to  answer  definitively.  In  exploring 
these  topics,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  Treasury  and  corporate  bond  markets, 
which have different characteristics. 
In Treasury markets, traditional measures of liquidity, such as bid-ask spreads, have been 
fairly  stable  in  recent  years.5  But  the  changing  market  structure  has  also  meant  smaller 
average  trade  sizes,6  and  participants  now  must  break  up  their  larger  trades  and  employ 
complicated  strategies  in  order  to  avoid  moving  prices.  Accurately  measuring  the  effect  of 
trading  on  prices,  perhaps  the  most  fundamental  gauge  of  market  liquidity,  can  be  quite 
difficult  in  such  an  environment.7  There  are  also  differences  between  on-the-run  Treasury 
securities, the securities that were most recently issued and that are the most liquid, and off-
the-run Treasury securities. However, observable measures such as the spread between on- 
and off-the-run Treasury securities do not show any trend change in liquidity between the two 
market segments since the financial crisis. 
In  corporate  bond  markets,  estimated  bid-ask  spreads  have  declined,  indicating  that,  if 
anything,  liquidity  may  have  improved.8  However,  given  the  nature  of  the  corporate  bond 
market,  these  estimates  are  based  on  transactions  rather  than  on  direct  observations  of 
quotes  to  buy  or  sell  these  bonds.  What  we  can  directly  observe  is  that  trade  sizes  and 
turnover have declined in the most actively traded corporate bonds as they have in Treasury 
markets.9 And although observable measures of overall liquidity in corporate bond markets 
appear  good,  there  is  some  evidence  that  liquidity  has  deteriorated  for  the  lowest-rated 
bonds.10 Trading in these less liquid segments may rely heavily on intermediation by dealers, 
and dealers have scaled back their capital commitments and inventories in corporate bonds 
since the financial crisis.11  
Immediately after the financial crisis, dealers began to move away from a principal model of 
market making, whereby they would facilitate trades using their own inventories and assume 
some risk, toward an agency model. Many point to post-crisis regulation as a key factor in 
this  process.  One  area  in  particular  where  market  participants  point  to  the  impact  of 
regulation is Treasury repo markets. At the 2015 conference, participants noted that required 
spreads  on Treasury  repo  trades  have  widened  significantly  since  the  crisis  and  attributed 
some of this increase to regulation.12  
But post-crisis regulations have also greatly strengthened the major banks and made another 
financial crisis far less likely. Evidence also indicates that certain regulations have increased 
Deteriorated? 
Ibid. 
                                                
5   See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt, Has U.S. Treasury Market Liquidity 
, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 17, 2015. 
6  
7   See  for  example,  Terrence  Hendershott,  Charles  M.  Jones,  and  Albert  J.  Menkveld,  "Implementation 
Shortfall  with  Transitory  Price  Effects  (PDF) 
,"  in  High  Frequency  Trading;  New  Realities  for  Trades, 
Markets and Regulators, David Easley, Marcos López de Prado, and Maureen O'Hara (editors), Risk Books 
(London: 2013). 
8   See Bruce Mizrach, "Analysis of Corporate Bond Liquidity (PDF) 
," Financial Industry Regulatory Authority 
(FINRA), Office of the Chief Economist Research Note, December 2015. 
Ibid 
9  
10   See  Tobias  Adrian,  Michael  Fleming,  Erik  Vogt,  and  Zachary  Wojtowicz,  Further  Analysis  of  Corporate 
Bond Market Liquidity 
, Liberty Street Economics (blog), February 10, 2016. 
11   See  Hendrik  Bessembinder,  Stacey  E.  Jacobsen,  William  F.  Maxwell,  and  Kumar  Venkataraman,  Capital 
Commitment and Illiquidity in Corporate Bonds, Social Science Research Network (SSRN), March 21, 2016. 
12   Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015) (PDF) 
, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  liquidity;  for  example,  the  mandate  that  more  standardized  derivatives  be  traded  on 
organized exchanges or platforms appears to have improved market functioning.13 My view is 
that these regulations are new, and we should be willing to adjust them as we learn. That 
said, we should also recognize that some reduction in market liquidity is a cost worth paying 
in helping to make the overall financial system significantly safer. 
It  is  important,  however,  not  to  overemphasize  any  effects  of  regulation.  Banks  have 
independently recalibrated their own approaches to risk and scaled back their market-making 
activities. Dealers significantly reduced their fixed-income portfolios beginning in 2009, well 
ahead of most post-crisis changes in regulation.14  
Corporate  debt  issuance  has  been  at  record  levels  in  recent  years.  With  dealer  balance 
sheets shrinking, buy-side investors now bear greater liquidity risk. It is important that mutual 
funds and other investors in fixed-income securities continue to take measures to understand 
and manage these risks. In addition, we should distinguish between systemic risk and market 
risk. The risks to investors generally represent market risk and do not appear to pose risks to 
the financial system as a whole. The movement of these risks away from the nation's most 
systemically important financial institutions is one of many reasons that they are far stronger 
and more resilient than before the crisis. 
Markets are adapting to this new environment. Where there is an unmet demand for liquidity, 
new  market  makers  are  emerging  to  meet  that  demand.  For  example,  some  PTFs  are 
seeking  entry  to  dealer-to-customer  platforms  for  Treasury  trading.  Seven  new  electronic 
trading venues entered the market for corporate and municipal bonds over the last two years, 
and several more are preparing to launch this year.15 While there is no guarantee of success 
for these entrants, markets will continue to evolve. Thus, it is too early to judge the ultimate 
impact of factors affecting fixed-income liquidity. 
One thing that will help in this judgment is better data. At the 2015 conference, many market 
participants  expressed  a  desire for more  publicly  available  data  on  Treasury  markets. It  is 
striking that so little data is available--even to regulators--on trading in our nation's Treasury 
market.  It  took  considerable  effort  to  gather  detailed  trade  data  for  just  the  single  day  of 
October  15,  2014,  in  writing the  Joint  Staff  Report. The  Board  has  been  supportive  of  the 
Treasury  Department's  current  Request  for  Information  (RFI),  which  will  be  concluding  on 
April  22.  The  RFI  will  provide  information  on  this  issue,  as  we  reassess  the  adequacy  of 
public  information  and  of  the  data  available  to  the  official  sector  for  its  own  monitoring  of 
these markets. 
Thank you. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have. 
                                                
13   See Evangelos Benos, Richard Payne, and Michalis Vasios, Centralized trading, transparency and interest 
, Bank of 
rate swap market liquidity: evidence from the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act (PDF) 
England, Staff Working Paper No. 580, January 15, 2016. 
14   See Tobias Adrian, Michael Fleming, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt, What's Driving Dealer Balance Sheet 
Stagnation? 
, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 21, 2015. 
15   See SIFMA Electronic Bond Trading Report: US Corporate and Municipal Securities (PDF) 
Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), February 17, 2016. 
, Securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
