   Bostjan Jazbec: Rethinking monetary-fiscal policy coordination 
Opening remarks by Mr Bostjan Jazbec, Governor of Bank of Slovenia, at the BoS-IMF High 
Level Seminar on Rethinking Monetary-Fiscal Policy Coordination, Portorož, 19 May 2016. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  high-level  seminar  on  “Rethinking 
Monetary-Fiscal  Policy  Coordination”  organized  jointly  by  the  Bank  of  Slovenia  and 
International Monetary Fund. It is a great honour to have a very distinguished gathering of 
central bank governors, senior officials of governments and international institutions, leading 
academics and practitioners to discuss a very critical issue that occupies the minds of policy 
makers in the euro area and elsewhere.  
The objective of the seminar is to explore current thinking on the roles and coordination of 
monetary  and  fiscal  policies.  The  presentations  and  discussion  will  focus  on  three  main 
themes: (1) the principles and practical experience in the coordination of monetary and fiscal 
policies; (2) fiscal policy implementation in the EU institutional framework and implications for 
monetary policy; and (3) conducting monetary policy when fiscal space is limited. I will now 
briefly touch on these themes in general terms.  
Policy  makers  in  the  euro  area  face  considerable  challenges  in  fostering  sustained  strong 
growth, price stability and financial stability. Following the onset of the global financial crisis, 
economic recovery has been slow and growth remains lackluster. Inflation is much below the 
medium-term  objective  of  lower  than,  but  close  to  2  percent.  For  some  time  now,  inflation 
continually  has  been  weaker  than  expected  and  market-based  measures  of  inflation 
expectations stand at their historical lows. Therefore, monetary policy has become increasingly 
accommodative relying on several non-standard measures and negative interest rate policy.  
There is broad agreement that in the current setting there are limits to the scope of monetary 
policy  actions  and  their  effectiveness  for  lifting  the  Eurozone’s  economy.  Concerns  are 
mounting that the outlook may be one of a prolonged period of low inflation and low interest 
rates, which can adversely affect both the real and financial sectors. Therefore, many of us 
have emphasized on numerous occasions that “monetary policy cannot be the only game in 
town”. Strong sustainable growth, price stability and financial stability will require a coherent, 
integrated policy strategy that also includes fiscal and structural policies.  
The  message  on  the  importance  of  fiscal  policy  supporting  monetary  policy  is  founded  on 
historical precedence. In 1936, prescribing the way out of the Great Depression, Keynes wrote:  
“It seems unlikely that the influence of [monetary] policy on the rate of interest will 
be  sufficient  by  itself.  I  conceive,  therefore,  that  a  somewhat  comprehensive 
socialization of investment will prove the only means of securing an approximation 
to full employment.”  
These words are very relevant at the current juncture as well.  
The  ECB  has  emphasized  that  fiscal  policies  should  support  the  economic  recovery  while 
remaining  in  full  compliance  with  the  EU’s  fiscal  rules.  Otherwise,  credibility  in  the  fiscal 
framework cannot be maintained. A critical question, therefore, is whether the prevailing rules 
could be barriers to achieving the desired coordination of monetary and fiscal policies.  
There are two key prerequisites for obtaining effective fiscal support to monetary policy within 
the Stability and Growth Pact rules. Governments must have adequate fiscal space and fiscal 
policy must ensure the sustainability of public finances. In both respects, there appears to be 
little room for a meaningful fiscal expansion within the existing rules. There is broad agreement 
that  the  fiscal  framework  has  failed  to  ensure  long-term  sustainability  while  avoiding  pro-
cyclical fiscal behavior. Countries did not build up sufficient fiscal space during the pre-crisis 
expansionary period and fiscal space narrowed following the onset of the financial crisis. Public 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   debt increased sharply during the crisis years and the policy focus turned to an austerity mode 
when market pressures heightened. Most of the Eurozone countries still face long-term fiscal 
sustainability issues and are expected to keep their fiscal consolidation effort, in terms of the 
cyclically-adjusted  deficit,  ongoing.  In  2016,  only  four  countries  –  namely,  Germany, 
Luxembourg, Cyprus, and Estonia – have fiscal space for additional discretionary measures 
according to the Stability and Growth Pact rules.  
What then is the way forward? It has been emphasized on many occasions that for countries 
without fiscal space, fiscal policy can still support demand by altering the composition of the 
budget. In particular, they point out that consideration should be given to cutting distortionary 
taxes  and  unproductive  expenditure  and  increasing  investments  that  improve  total  factor 
productivity over the medium term. Investment and structural reforms that increase the growth 
potential of the economy create fiscal space by raising future government revenues. It should 
be noted that some of these measures will require political resolve and social support as they 
are likely to affect social entitlements. Some analysts have remarked that these measures will 
not have much impact in the short term.  
Should there be a re-thinking of the monetary policy framework? In a recent blog in April 2016, 
Bernanke has argued that:  
under  certain  extreme  circumstances  –  [such  as]  sharply  deficient  aggregate 
demand, exhausted monetary policy, and unwillingness of [fiscal authorities] to use 
debt-financed fiscal policies –  [money-financed fiscal programs, colloquially known 
as helicopter drops] may be the best available alternative” and that “it would be 
premature to rule them out”.  
Earlier in this vein, in 2003, Bernanke had recommended that Japan fight deflation through an 
expansionary fiscal policy financed by permanent purchases of government debt by the central 
bank. The permanency of central bank purchases of public debt rules out that the new debt 
will  ever  be  placed  on  the  market,  thereby  eliminating  Ricardian  equivalence  effects  and 
preventing new public debt accumulation.  
However, an essential aspect of money-financed fiscal programs is that it involves revocation 
or  suspension  of  central  bank  independence.  Precisely  for  this  reason  and  because 
governance of money-financed fiscal programs is inherently difficult (since it creates perverse 
incentives for legislators to facilitate tax cuts or spending when such actions no longer make 
macroeconomic  sense),  this  option  is  not  something  that  central  banks  in  general  are 
discussing or even considering.  
In the euro area, the principle of central bank independence is one of the cornerstones of the 
economic policy constitution enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty. A fundamental expectation is 
that  monetary-fiscal  policy  coordination  will  be  achieved  with  different  institutions  acting 
independently  within  their  mandates.  To  preserve  this  framework,  the  focus  should  be  on 
improving the governance structure so as to ensure that the euro area does not gradually slide 
into a regime of fiscal dominance. Within the constraint of its given mandate, the ECB has 
moved towards improving the policy mix through the expansion of its balance sheet aimed at 
stimulating economic activity.  
It is my sincere hope that the seminar will provide a useful springboard for moving forward with 
bolder policy actions and reforms that will help put the Eurozone on a path of strong sustained 
growth and price stability.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
