  William C Dudley: Supervising large, complex financial institutions –
defining objectives and measuring effectiveness 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Conference  on  “Supervising  Large,  Complex 
Financial  Institutions:  Defining  Objectives  and  Measuring  Effectiveness”,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, New York City, 18 March 2016. 
 Welcome. It is great to see all of you here today to discuss the objectives and measurement 
of supervision for large, complex financial institutions. 
Nearly eight years have passed since the financial crisis hit, pushing the financial system and 
the U.S. economy to the brink, and leaving scars that are still evident today. The hardships of 
the financial crisis are unfortunately still open wounds for too many people, especially those 
who lost their jobs, homes or businesses, or those who struggled with the sharp fall in value 
of their homes and with staying current on their debts and bills. Understanding what  went 
wrong and how to avoid severe financial crises in the future is, I am sure, an issue foremost 
in  the  minds  of  all  the  distinguished  speakers  here  today,  and  I  am  no  exception.  Before 
continuing,  let  me  indicate  that  what  I  have  to  say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not 
necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System.1  
A  central  part  of  the  financial  crisis  was  the  failure  or  near-failure  of  many  large  financial 
institutions – both institutions that were supervised by the Federal Reserve and many that 
were  not  –  which  constrained  their  ability  to  play  their  crucial  role  in  supplying  credit  and 
financial  services  to  businesses  and  consumers.  In  the  wake  of  the  crisis,  considerable 
attention  has  been  devoted  to  the  role  that  supervisors  –  including  those  here  at  the 
New York  Fed  –  played  in  this  meltdown.  But  much  of  this  discussion  has  taken  place 
without  a  broad  understanding  of  what  supervisors  actually  do  –  the  scope,  breadth,  and 
limits  of  their  activities  and  authorities.  Within  the  official  sector,  we  make  a  distinction 
between regulation – the rules governing what financial institutions must and must not do, 
and supervision – which involves monitoring, oversight and enforcing compliance with law, 
regulation  and  supervisory  expectations  for  firms’  governance,  internal  processes  and 
controls, and financial condition. This distinction between regulation and supervision is often 
not well-understood, and thus their complementary roles are not always fully appreciated. 
Addressing  this  distinction,  as  we  see  it,  is  one  important  motivation  for  this  conference. 
Through the papers presented today and the discussions by noted academic researchers, 
policymakers and senior supervisors from the U.S. and overseas, we hope to broaden the 
understanding of the role and objectives of supervision. The goal is to spur conversation and 
new  research  on  what  supervision  should  be  trying  to  achieve  and  the  best  means  for 
achieving those ends. Just as important, we want to generate ideas for how to better assess 
the effectiveness of supervisory activities. In a world of limited resources, how do we deploy 
our  people  and  technology  in  the  most  effective  way  to  limit  disruption  and  distress  at 
individual  firms  and  to  the  financial  system,  while  still  fostering  an  efficient  and  innovative 
financial system? 
In  considering  these  questions,  a  good  starting  point  is  to  understand  more  fully  what 
supervisors do and how they do it in the current environment. The papers that are being 
presented  here  today  are  largely  aimed  at  achieving  this  goal.  As  described  in  the  first 
paper  –  “Supervising  Large,  Complex  Financial  Institutions:  What  do  Supervisors  Do?”  – 
bank  supervision  has  long  been  an  integral  component  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
                                                
1   Beverly Hirtle, David Lucca and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
responsibilities. At a broad level, Federal Reserve supervision of large financial institutions is 
guided by two key objectives: “enhancing the resiliency of a firm to lower the probability of its 
failure  or  inability  to  serve  as  a  financial  intermediary  [and]  reducing  the  impact  on  the 
financial  system  and  the  broader  economy  in  the  event  of  a  firm’s  failure  or  material 
weakness.”2 In addressing these objectives, bank supervisors enforce laws and regulations, 
but there is much more to supervision than just enforcement. The activities and practices at 
large, complex financial organizations are simply too intricate and evolve too quickly to be 
fully described ex ante in regulation. Banking supervision works in concert with regulation as 
the more flexible element of banking policy. Supervisory policy and standards can, and do, 
evolve over time to reflect the evolution in practice in the banking industry and in financial 
markets. 
Overall,  supervisors  are  guided  by  the  mandate  to  identify  any  practices  or  conditions  at 
supervised  firms  that  are  a  threat  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  those  firms  –  and,  of 
course,  to  ensure  that  the  firms  take  all  necessary  steps  to  promptly  remediate  any  such 
conditions.  Critically,  the  definition  of  what  constitutes  “safe  and  sound”  is  not  hard-coded 
into regulation, but is guided by the information and analysis done by supervisors and other 
Federal  Reserve  staff,  such  as  economists,  attorneys  and  market  analysts.  Supervisory 
expectations and standards are expressed through public guidance such as Supervision and 
Regulation Letters (SR Letters), publicly-posted examination manuals and other guidance. 
On  a  day-to-day  basis,  banking  supervisors  collect  information  on  financial  institutions 
through  examinations  and  analysis.  Examiners  look  at  key  aspects  of  a  supervised  firm’s 
businesses  and  risk  management  functions.  They  use  this  information  to  assess  the 
adequacy  of  the  firm’s  systems  and  processes  for  identifying,  measuring,  monitoring  and 
controlling risks at the firm and in the financial sector more generally. That said, the ultimate 
responsibility  for  risk  identification  and  risk  management  remains  with  the  supervised 
institution.  The  Federal  Reserve’s  role  is  to  ensure  that  the  institution  has  the  necessary 
strong processes in place to achieve this objective. As risks emerge, supervisors intervene, 
within  the  realms  of  their  safety  and  soundness  mandates,  to  require  that  banks  take 
corrective actions as necessary. Supervision can reduce the chance that a financial firm fails, 
but it can never provide a guarantee against failure. 
Supervisory policies have undergone important changes over the past few years, especially 
in  the  context  of  the  largest  financial  institutions.  Banking  supervision  no  longer  focuses 
solely  on  the  safety  and  soundness  of  individual  institutions  –  so-called  micro-prudential 
supervision – but now also focuses on the implications for financial stability more generally. 
The evolving supervisory framework has resulted in a number of organizational changes in 
the way supervision is conducted at the New York Fed and in the Federal Reserve System 
more broadly. A very important change in the Federal Reserve System is that supervision of 
the  largest,  most  systemically  important  financial  institutions  are  now  coordinated  across 
districts  through  the  Large  Institution  Supervision  Coordinating  Committee  (LISCC).  The 
LISCC is a System-wide committee, chaired by the director of the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve’s Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, and composed of senior 
officers at the Board and Reserve Banks. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve has instituted three major horizontal evaluations, which are 
a  key  element  of  the  new  enhanced  supervisory  framework  for  large  banking  companies. 
These  horizontal  evaluations,  which  focus  on  capital  adequacy,  liquidity  resiliency  and 
preparedness for recovery and resolution, examine practices and conditions across a group 
of  firms  simultaneously,  enabling  supervisors  to  develop  peer  perspectives  about  best 
practices and approaches. These programs involve a consistent and systematic assessment 
                                                
2   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  “Consolidated  Supervision  Framework  for  Large 
2012. 
Institutions.”  Supervision 
12–17.  December 
Financial 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/srletters/sr1217.htm. 
and  Regulation 
Letter 
17, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
of the financial strength and operational resiliency of the largest and most complex financial 
institutions,  addressing  both  micro-prudential  safety-and-soundness  supervisory  goals  and 
broader macro-prudential financial stability objectives. 
Specifically,  in  the  Comprehensive  Capital  Analysis  and  Review  (CCAR),  which  applies  to 
firms with at least $50 billion  in total assets, Federal Reserve supervisors assess whether 
bank  holding  companies  have  sufficient  capital  to  continue  operations  through  times  of 
economic  and  financial  stress,  and  whether  they  have  robust,  forward-looking  capital-
planning  processes  that  take  into  account  whatever  unique  risks  they  might  face.  By 
including  forward-looking  elements,  the  CCAR  complements  the  enhanced  Basel  capital 
requirements now being implemented in the United States. In addition, the Comprehensive 
Liquidity  Analysis  and  Review  (CLAR),  which  applies  to  LISCC  firms,  reviews  the  liquidity 
positions and liquidity risk management of large, complex banking organizations, including 
internal stress-testing practices. Finally, the Federal Reserve does an annual evaluation of 
the  LISCC  firms’  options  to  support  recovery  and  progress  in  removing  impediments  to 
orderly resolution in the Supervisory Assessment of Recovery and Resolution Preparedness 
(SRP). 
While these evaluations form the core of the supervisory program for large, complex banking 
companies, they are far from the only important activities pursued by supervisors. Day-to-day 
oversight  of  individual  firms  is  a  critical  complement  to  these  cross-firm,  horizontal 
evaluations.  There  are  three  key  channels  that  generate  insight  on  firms:  1)  continuous 
monitoring through meetings with bank senior management, business line management, risk 
managers,  auditors  and  others;  2)  review  and  analysis  of 
internal  reports;  and 
3) independent  analysis  by  supervisory 
insights  guide  supervisory 
assessments and supervisory actions for individual institutions, as well as contributing to the 
assessments made as part of CCAR, CLAR and other horizontal exercises. 
We have come a long way since the financial crisis, and the financial sector today is much 
more resilient as a result of the evolving supervisory framework. However, more work still lies 
ahead. A key challenge in assessing the effectiveness of supervision is that much of what 
supervisors  do,  by  necessity,  is  confidential.  This  reliance  on  confidential  information  and 
confidential actions can make supervision seem mysterious to outsiders, which complicates 
the evaluation of what policies may be effective or ineffective. For example, if a bank fails, is 
this  evidence  of  poor  supervision,  or  instead  evidence  that  even  good  supervision  can’t 
prevent all bank failures? Improving our ability to do this diagnosis is critical. I am confident 
that today’s panels and paper discussions will help us move forward in this direction. 
Thank you for participating in this conference. 
 
teams.  These 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
