   S S Mundra: Financial inclusion in India – the journey so far and the way 
ahead 
Address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the BRICS 
Workshop on Financial Inclusion, Mumbai, 19 September 2016. 
 Shri  Santhosh  Kumar  Gangwarji,  Honorable  Minister  of  State  for  Finance,  Government  of 
India;  Shri  Ashwani  Kumar,  Chairman,  IBA  &  CMD,  Dena  Bank;  Shri  Rajiv  Rishi,  Deputy 
Chairman, IBA & CMD, Central Bank of India; Dr. Madnesh Kumar Mishra, JS(DFS) & Mission 
Director-Financial Inclusion, GOI; delegates to the Workshop; ladies and gentleman! At the 
outset, I would like to compliment Department of Financial services, GOI and IBA for organizing 
this workshop on Financial Inclusion under the BRICS Forum. It is indeed a pleasure for me to 
speak to you from this Forum today. 
2. Financial Inclusion is a much cherished policy objective for us in India and our economic 
policy has always been driven by an underlying intent of a sustainable and inclusive growth. 
Although I would not dwell at length about the virtues of financial inclusion before this learned 
audience, I would still like to draw reference to a profound ILO Declaration of Philadelphia 
(1944) which states that “Poverty anywhere is a threat to prosperity everywhere.” The policy 
makers in India too i.e. Government of India and the RBI, had an early realisation about the 
implications of poverty for financial stability and have endeavored to ensure that poverty is 
tackled in all its manifestations and that the benefits of economic growth reaches the poor and 
excluded sections of the society. 
3. I wish to use this Forum to brief you on our journey towards the goal of universal financial 
inclusion in India, the challenges encountered and the way forward. But before, I get into the 
subject proper; let me for the benefit of our international participants, state our definition of 
Financial Inclusion. 
“Financial Inclusion is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products and 
services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups such as 
weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  in  particular  at  an  affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and 
transparent manner by mainstream institutional players”. 
Role of RBI in financial inclusion 
4. As I said earlier, RBI has been pursuing the goal of financial inclusion for a long time. RBI’s 
financial inclusion efforts can be traced back to the 1960s when the focus was on channelizing 
of credit to the neglected sectors of the economy and weaker sections of the population. While 
the Government of India nationalized the banking operations of few commercial banks in two 
tranches in 1969 and 1980; RBI also took initiatives like laying down priority sector lending 
requirements for banks, Lead Bank Scheme, establishment of Regional Rural Banks (RRBs-
1975–76), Service Area Approach (1989), Self-Help Group-Bank Linkage Programme (1989–
90), setting up of Local Area Banks etc., all aimed at making available benefits of banking 
services to the masses. 
5. Although these measures resulted in impressive gains in enhancing the outreach of banking 
services and extent of credit to the population, there were certain structural challenges which 
impeded the progress of financial inclusion. On the supply side, absence of technology was a 
major  impediment  as  it  restricted  expansion  of  banking  services  to  far-flung  areas  of  the 
country comprising of 600 thousand plus villages. In the absence of technology, developing a 
cost-effective delivery model also remained a challenge. 
6. Since 2006, RBI has adopted a planned and structured approach to address the issues of 
financial inclusion. RBI’s approach has been to focus both on the demand as well as on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   supply side. This has in a large way been possible due to the availability of technology and its 
gradual adoption within the banking processes. Let me elaborate on some of these measures 
and consequent achievements. 
7. Institutionalization of the framework of Banking Correspondents (BCs) has been a major 
step towards enhancing access of banking services. RBI advocated a combination of “Brick 
and Mortar” structure with “Mouse and Click” technology for extending financial inclusion in 
geographically dispersed areas. 
8. On the regulatory side, the banks were mandated to open at least 25 per cent of their new 
branches  in  unbanked  rural  centers.  Taking  into  account  the  difficulties  encountered  by 
common people in meeting the “Know Your Customer (KYC)” requirements for opening bank 
accounts,  several  measures  were  taken.  For  example,  RBI  allowed  banks  to  accept  self-
certification for opening of basic service bank accounts. RBI has encouraged banks to open 
Aadhaar1  Enabled  Bank  Accounts  by  linking  Aadhaar  numbers  of  individuals,  wherever 
available, with the Basic Savings Bank Accounts opened for them, so that their credit histories 
can also be built up over time.  
9. Co-terminus with the above efforts, RBI also encouraged banks to adopt a structured and 
planned  approach  to  financial  inclusion  with  commitment  at  the  highest  levels  through 
preparation of Board-approved Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first two phases of 
FIPs implemented over 2010–13 and 2013–16 were interspersed with the implementation of 
PMJDY by the Government of India during 2014–15, whereby the supply side efforts received 
an extra push. 
Snapshot of progress 
10. Let me quote some numbers. 
i)  
The  number  of  banking  outlets  in  villages  went  up  from  67,694  in  March  2010  to 
5,86,307  in  March  2016  after  RBI  permitted  appointment  of  BCs  and  laid  out  a 
roadmap for spreading banking services in rural India through a mix of bank branches 
and BC outlets. In addition, the number of urban locations covered through BCs has 
also surged from 447 in March 2010 to 1,02,552 in March 2016. 
The Basic Savings Bank Deposit Accounts (BSBDAs) have gone up from 73 million 
in March 2010 to 469 million as on March 31, 2016. Under the PMJDY alone, until 
June 1, 2016t, 220 mn accounts have been opened with an approximate balance of 
Rs. 384 bn. 
There were 47.31 million small farm sector credit accounts and 11.3 million small non-
farm sector credit accounts with an outstanding of Rs. 5130.7 billion and Rs. 1493.3 
billion outstanding respectively as on March 31, 2016. The number of small farm and 
non-farm sector credit accounts stood at 24.3 million and 1.4 mn respectively in March 
2010. 
The total number of transactions in BC-ICT accounts which were around 26 million 
during 2010–11 have increased to 826.81 million as on March 31, 2016. 
ii)  
iii)  
iv)  
11. For most other countries these numbers may appear overwhelming, however, we still have 
a  long  way  to  go  here  in  India  and  we  are  extremely  mindful  of  that.  There  are  plenty  of 
challenges  –  low  volume  of  transactions  in  the  basic  bank  accounts,  inactive  BC  outlets, 
inaccessibility,  poor  connectivity  etc.  Last  year,  RBI  had  set  up  an  Expert  Committee  on 
Medium Term Path for Financial Inclusion under ED (Deepak Mohanty) which was tasked to 
                                                
1   Aadhaar is a unique identifier for all individuals in the country. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   draw  up  a  medium  term  and  long  term  roadmap  for  FI.  The  committee  has  made  about 
80 actionable recommendations which are being pursued by RBI. 
12.  Following  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  Financial  Inclusion  landscape,  a  need  was  felt  for 
convergence of the FI efforts of various stakeholders. Accordingly, RBI has reconstituted the 
high-level inter-institutional Financial Inclusion Advisory Committee (FIAC) for undertaking a 
continuous review of the policies on FI; monitoring of the progress in Financial Inclusion and 
the  financial  literacy;  evaluation  of  its  impact  through  conduct  of  study/surveys  and  for 
preparation of a National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. 
Other recent measures 
New banking entities permitted in the financial inclusion space 
13. RBI has granted in-principle approval to some entities to set up differentiated banks namely 
“Small Finance Banks” (SFBs) and “Payments Banks” to further the cause of financial inclusion 
in  the  country. Other  than  serving  as  vehicles for savings,  SFBs  and  Payments  banks  are 
expected to enhance the supply of credit to small business units, small and marginal farmers, 
micro and small industries and other entities in the unorganized sector and enable provisions 
for cost-efficient remittance services in a secured technology driven environment respectively. 
Role of payment system in promoting financial inclusion 
14. Considering the strong linkage between financial inclusion and the payment systems, RBI 
has taken several steps. Some of these include encouraging use of Mobile Banking, pre-paid 
instruments in the form of digital wallets and mobile wallets, operationalization of the Aadhaar 
Bridge Payment System (ABPS) and Aadhaar-Enabled Payment system (AEPS) etc. 
Increasing brick and mortar presence 
15. While there is considerable improvement in access of banking services through a mix of 
physical and virtual mode, it is believed that there should be a fair balance between the number 
of BCs and brick and mortar branches for better alignment of the inclusion efforts. Accordingly, 
it is mandated to open physical bank branches in all villages above a population of 5000 in a 
phased manner. We feel this would also enable banks to not only provide quality financial 
services but also timely support to their BC network. 
Creation of BC registry and certification 
16. The BC Model is a critical lynchpin of our Financial Inclusion initiative. We believe that to 
support the BC structure, a vital first step is developing a BC Registry. This would not only 
ensure greater oversight on the functioning of BCs but would also provide more confidence to 
the end customers. A scheme for graded certification/ training programme for BCs is also being 
introduced  to  enable  the  BCs  with  a  good  track  record  and  advanced  training  to  handle 
complex tasks that are beyond deposits and remittances. 
Financial inclusion Plans for banks (2016–19) 
17. To sustain the momentum of achieving the financial inclusion objectives by setting FIP 
targets  for  banks,  the  third  phase  of  Financial  Inclusion  Plans  for  the  next  three  years  
2016–19 has been initiated. Under the third phase, the focus is on more granular monitoring 
of the progress made by banks under FIPs at district level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Demand side interventions 
18. Having spoken about the progress and some recent measures taken by RBI on supply 
side,  let  me  talk  about  an  equally  important,  but  less  focussed,  demand  side  aspects  of 
Financial Inclusion. As I mentioned earlier, banks have opened about 440 million accounts 
under the push from RBI and the PMJDY and hence, it is right time to focus on the demand 
side which is to focus on enhancing capabilities so that the individual is in a position to not 
merely avail the offered services, but is also capable of demanding preferred products and 
services  suitable  to  her  need/choice.  Our  belief  is  that  unless  the  demand  side  measures 
adequately supplement the supply side measures, the goal of financial inclusion would remain 
the proverbial “wild goose chase”. 
Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) / rural self employment training institutes  
19.  Banks  in  India  have  been  mandated  to  set  up  FLCs  for  extending  financial  literacy. 
Currently, about 1380 FLCs across India are functional which adopt a tailored approach to 
conduct of camps. Special focus is given on people newly inducted into the banking system. 
Besides this, tailored camps are conducted for five different target groups i.e. farmers, small 
entrepreneurs,  SHGs,  School  students  and  senior  citizens.  Going  forward,  given  the 
challenges of skewed distribution of existing FLCs in a few states, limited outreach and to have 
an exclusive focus on financial literacy at the ground level, we are encouraging banks to set 
up CFLs (Centres for Financial Literacy) at the block level on a pilot basis in a few states. 
20. The Rural Self Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) have been set up by various banks 
all over the country at the district level. The key objective of RSETI is “Short term training and 
long term hand holding with assistance to credit linkage for trainees”. 
Direct benefit transfer and Aadhaar seeding of accounts 
21. An important driver for enhancing the demand side of financial inclusion is Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT). It has the potential to be game changer. If entitlements under various state 
sponsored schemes starts directly flowing into the bank accounts of individuals under DBT 
mode, it can act as a catalyst to encourage saving habit leading to build up of investment and 
seed capital for availing productive credit. 
Let me now come to the way forward. 
Way forward 
22. I feel in order to motivate and nudge consumers to begin seeking formal financial services, 
there is need to focus on what I have named 3 Ps- Products, Processes and People. Let me 
elaborate. 
a)  
Suitable Products. The traditional approach of “take it or leave it” is not going to work 
for the  people  who  are  new  to  the financial  system.  Many  of  them  do  not  have  a 
continuous income stream. Their incomes are generally seasonal and hence erratic. 
Also, many have only a meagre amount to save and their needs are widely different 
from those of regular consumers. All these necessitate a customer centric product 
design  taking  into  consideration  the  lifecycle  needs  of  customers  at  every  stage. 
Simultaneously, it is also important to prevent mis-selling of financial products to 
the newly inducted customers without due consideration around suitability. I have also 
noticed overzealousness in few quarters to provide credit to the new entrants to the 
fold of the financial sector. It is important to ensure that this overzealousness does 
not result in over-indebtedness. We must be mindful of the fact that these individuals 
have entered the formal financial system after a lot of pushing and prodding and it 
would  be  difficult  to  bring  them  back  into  the  formal  financial  sector,  if  they  leave 
feeling cheated/dejected. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 b)  
c)  
  
Transparent Processes. Another area of concern is transparency in the processes. 
By transparency, I mean an objective communication about the products, procedures, 
documentation  and  other  necessary  formalities  to  be  completed  while  making  a 
financial transaction. Transparent processes result in greater trust and confidence in 
the financial system. 
Committed People. Both the suitable products, and the transparent processes need 
to be complemented by committed people who are willing to listen keenly, empathize 
with the consumers and willing to walk that little extra to welcome the customers into 
the formal financial system. 
The 3x3x3matrix 
23. I believe once the above 3 Ps are in place, a focus on 3x3x3 matrix would be important 
for enhancing financial capability of individuals and for achieving financial inclusion. The 3x3x3 
matrix refers to three sections of the society which need a greater focus, pitching of products 
based on three kinds of surpluses that people generate and the three types of institutions that 
have a central role to play. 
The three section approach – improving credit absorption capacity 
24.  Firstly,  in  India,  when  we  talk  of  inclusive  growth,  there  are  three  sections  that  would 
warrant special focus. i) the small and marginal farmers, share croppers, ii) micro and small 
industries and iii) the low salary earners in the unorganized sectors. Collectively, this section 
makes  a  significant  part  of  the  population  that  needs  enhancement  in  their  financial 
capabilities. Also, these sections are extremely important contributors to the country’s GDP 
and labour force. 
25. The credit absorption capacity of the farmers can be enhanced through consolidation of 
fragmented landholdings by ushering in land reforms or through pooling of land holdings in an 
SHG format. Efforts to enhance the credit absorption capacity must also be supplemented 
through financial literacy and vocational training initiatives, comprehensive insurance cover 
against failure of crop & innovative practices in farming. Farmers also need to be sensitized 
about the concept of financing against warehouse receipts to avoid distress sale of produce at 
low prices. 
26. Enhancing financial capability of mainly the micro and small entrepreneurs from amongst 
the larger MSME fold would help these entrepreneurs to move away from the informal to the 
formal sources of finance. Micro and small entities are typically enterprises with little or no 
credit  histories  and  with  inadequate  expertise  in  preparing  financial  statements  etc.  They 
would,  hence,  need  to  be  served  with  relevant  products  and  at  low  cost  by  employing 
innovative credit scoring models. 
27.  There  is  also  a  pressing  need  to  scale  up  the  skills  of  the  low  salary  earners  in  the 
unorganized sector through training inputs. Integrating the skill development initiatives with 
secondary  and  intermediate  level  education  would  address  the challenge  of  low  education 
levels and also provide school dropouts with employability skills. Dearth of formal vocational 
education, high school dropout rates, inadequate skill training capacity, negative perception 
towards skilling, lack of industry ready skills even in professional courses, continue to stand 
out as some of the major causes of poor skill levels in the workforce. It is heartening to note 
Government’s commitment in encouraging entrepreneurship in the country through the new 
national skill development mission. 
The three surpluses approach – suitability in products and services 
Let us now look at what I call as 3 surpluses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   28. The first group is the one that generates adequate surpluses. These people should be 
sensitized  about  different  avenues  to  invest  so as  to reach their financial  goals  with  ease. 
These may include investing in the capital market through shares, mutual funds, gold bonds 
etc. The second category of people generate meagre surpluses. They are the people who will 
be most suited for products like recurring deposits, SIPs etc. The third category comprises of 
people who have recently come into the financial system, who live on subsistence income and 
do not generate any meaningful surpluses. Our role as far as this group is to encourage them 
to use the basic bouquet of financial products like BSBDA for daily transactions as well as 
introduce them to electronic remittance channels. Similarly, customised basic term insurance 
and  pension  products  currently  being  made  available  to  this  target  Group  under  the 
Government of India initiatives can also go a long way in providing them some financial security 
in the longer term. 
The three Institutions approach – endless opportunities 
29. The first category of institutions is whom I would call “Existing & Included”. It refers to the 
banks which have traditionally been leaders in bringing people in the formal financial system. 
These “included” institutions must look to deliver on the promise of ensuring the 3 Ps. Under 
the second category are institutions whom I refer to as “Existing, but not included” in the FI 
Grand Plan in a structured way. They are financial Intermediaries like NBFCs and MFIs that 
have  a  good  last  mile  reach  and  should  be  leveraged  upon.  The  third  type  is  of  the  new 
institutions that will start operations soon. Three SFBs have already started their operations. 
Seven other entities hold in-principle approvals. We believe that they will be able to bring in 
technology backed innovative last mile practices to serve their customers. The bottom-line is 
that a coherent approach must be worked out so that the relative strengths of the three types 
of institutions can be leveraged upon. 
Conclusion 
30. The vision for Financial Inclusion as envisaged by the Committee on Medium Term Path 
to Financial Inclusion is that by 2021, empowered by formal finance, over 90 per cent of the 
hitherto  underserved  sections  of  society  would  become  active  stakeholders  in  economic 
progress. This is very much possible but it would require focussed efforts both on the supply 
side  as  well  as  on  the  demand  side.  There  is  a  strong  business  case  in  catering  to  the 
underserved  sections  of  the society, given  the  vast  developments  in  the frontiers  of  digital 
technology. 
31. In conclusion, I would say that the cherished goal of universal Financial Inclusion can be 
achieved only through synergistic efforts between the mainstream financial entities and fringe 
players like rural co-operatives, NBFCs, MFIs, credit societies, NGOs ,etc. All of them have to 
play  a  complementary  role  in  championing the cause  of financial  inclusion. Time  is  ripe  to 
weave a financial inclusion tapestry where all these institutions can fit in a manner which brings 
about  their  contribution  in  the  most  efficient  manner.  This  is  where  the  efforts  of  the 
Government and RBI are currently focussed. I hope we can draw some useful lessons from 
the  experiences  of  other  countries  within  the  BRICS  Forum  and  build  upon  them  as  we 
continue our journey towards attainment of universal financial inclusion. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
