  Boštjan Jazbec: The bail-in tool and the challenges to its smooth 
implementation 
Address  given  by  Mr  Boštjan  Jazbec,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Slovenia  at  the  Executive 
Seminar on Banking Resolution, Florence, on 14 July 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to be invited to talk on banking resolution to this distinguished gathering of 
bank  regulators,  supervisors,  central  bank  officials,  bankers,  and  academics.  The  timing 
could not be more opportune. 
Banking  resolution  can  be  a  messy  business.  Last  week,  criminal  police  from  the  Special 
Prosecutor’s  Office  raided  the  Bank  of  Slovenia  and  seized  documents  and  information 
related  to  banking  resolution  measures  undertaken  by  the  Bank  of  Slovenia  and  the 
government in December 2013. The main focus of the investigation is the decision taken at 
that time to use bail-in of subordinated instruments as one of the tools of banking resolution. 
In 2014, the Slovenian Association of Small Shareholders filed several court cases against 
the Bank of Slovenia and local banks, claiming that the subordinated instruments in rescued 
banks should not have been erased. One of the cases has gone all the way to the European 
Court  of  Justice  after  Slovenia’s  Constitutional  Court  referred  it  to  the  EU  tribunal  for 
clarification. A ruling of the European Court on this case is expected early next week. The 
court ruling may have serious ramifications for the efforts under way to establish an effective 
Banking Union in Europe. 
Considerable momentum has developed in favor of bail-in centered banking resolution. As 
Andrew Gracie of the Bank of England has noted in a recent speech, a bail-in transaction is 
at  the  heart  of  all  the  resolution  plans  drawn  up  in  the  Crisis  Management  Groups.  In 
addition, the European Banking Authority (EBA) has set standards on Minimum Requirement 
for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL) that banks should have to ensure adequate 
loss absorbing capacity. The Slovene experience brings out the sensitivity of the bail-in tool 
and  the  challenges  to  its  smooth  implementation.  It  would  be  important  for  the  resolution 
authorities to address these challenges upfront and find answers for them. 
A  key  requirement  would  be  to  make  bail-in  legally  enforceable  by  introducing  all  the 
necessary legislation, thereby minimizing the possibility of litigation. An important associated 
step is clear communication. Investors and shareholders will need to understand the risks to 
which they are exposed by holding subordinated instruments, and holders should have clarity 
on the order in which they would incur losses. However, it is doubtful if the ambiguities in the 
resolution framework can  be fully  eliminated.  A major  challenge  with  every  resolution  is to 
decide  when  to  trigger  resolution  measures  and  what  process  of  resolution  to  use.  The 
criteria for bank resolution are relatively vague and there are no mechanical formulas that tell 
us  exactly  whether  a  bank  needs  to  be  resolved.  Resolution  frameworks  (including  the 
BRRD) typically do not define trigger thresholds and specify solutions. 
 Let  me  now  turn  briefly  to  the  developments  in  the  banking  sector  in  Slovenia  during  the 
financial crisis and the specifics of resolution measures undertaken in December 2013. 
The  business  models  of  Slovene  banks  before  the  financial  crisis  were  based  on  heavy 
funding on international financial market and aggressive lending to increase or retain market 
share. As a result, the onset of the global financial crisis hit Slovene banks particularly hard. 
The availability of foreign funding of Slovene banks shrank and funding costs increased. The 
resulting liquidity crunch put a strain on corporate operations and an increasing number of 
firms resorted to delayed or non-settlement of ﬁnancial liabilities to banks. As the quality of 
their  loan  portfolios  deteriorated,  banks  were  faced  with  higher  loan  impairment  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  the  banking  system,  a  comprehensive  review  of 
provisioning  charges  and  a  decline  in  capital  adequacy  relative  to  the  requirements.  Bank 
profitability  began  a  downward  slide  and  moved  into  negative  territory  in  2010.  All  the 
common bank profit indicators remained negative till 2014. 
Matters came to a head in the second quarter of 2013 following the international bail-out of 
the  European  Commission  (EC),  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  and 
Cyprus  by 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF).  The  contagion  spread  to  Slovenia.  Slovenia’s 
sovereign long-term debt was downgraded and the availability and cost of funding for banks 
on wholesale markets came under further pressure. With the recognition that an international 
bailout was looming for Slovenia as well in the absence of urgent measures to rescue and 
restructure 
the  banking  system 
encompassing  an  asset  quality  review  and  stress  tests  was  initiated  in  August  2013.  The 
review was conducted by four consulting firms under the supervision of a steering committee 
comprising representatives of the Bank of Slovenia and Ministry of Finance and observers 
from the European Commission (DG EcFin and DG Comp), European Central Bank and the 
European Banking Authority. 
The  resolution  measures  undertaken  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of  the  review  included: 
capital increases in three major banks with state aid and in five small banks via money from 
private  investors;  transfer  of  non-performing  claims  to  a  special  bank  asset  management 
company;  bail-in  of  subordinated  instruments;  and  reorganization  of  activities  to  core 
business with the aim of improving governance structure and risk management. In addition, 
two small banks were put in the process of an orderly wind-down involving asset divestment 
and  phasing  out  of  portfolios  and  activities  over  a  three-year  period.  The  total  cost  of  the 
rehabilitation  of  the  banking  system  is  estimated  at  around  8  to  10  percent  of  GDP.  The 
share of bail-in instruments in the total cost is close to 2 percent of GDP. 
 What can be said about the banking resolution process in Slovenia? 
Like elsewhere in Europe, Slovenia did not have an effective banking resolution framework 
during the crisis period. Response to the deteriorating health of the banks during the crisis 
period  was  delayed,  thereby  increasing  capital risk  and  the  need for  additional  capital. On 
occasions,  in  state-owned  banks  funding  guarantees  were  provided  by  the  government  in 
lieu of actual capital. 
At the time of the banking resolution in Slovenia in December 2013, the BRRD was not in 
effect and the decision on the establishment of a Single Resolution Mechanism was being 
finalized. Still, the EC, ECB, and EBA did exercise considerable influence on the resolution 
package. The national resolution authority and the three European institutions did not always 
agree on the preliminary findings of the review. This gap had to be closed before the final 
package could be crafted, since DG Comp is mandated with assessing the viability and the 
restructuring plans of banks to which state aid is granted. It is therefore ironical that the Bank 
of Slovenia is being investigated for alleged mishandling of data and inaccurate calculations 
and the European Court is to issue a ruling on a case referred to it. 
The  legislation  on  many  aspects  of  the  resolution  package,  including  the  bail-in  on 
subordinated instruments, were in existence but were not consolidated. However, it would be 
wrong to construe that holders of subordinated instruments did not know the risks that they 
were exposed to. 
 What are the challenges looking ahead? 
The world of Slovene banks is changing on account of institutional and regulatory changes 
and  the  prevailing  macroeconomic  environment.  In  November  2014,  the  European  Central 
Bank  assumed  responsibility  under  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  for  supervising 
8 banks in Slovenia accounting for more than two-thirds of the market share. The supervisory 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  culture will change under the new regime. The ECB will also inspect the business models of 
banks. It is reasonable to expect that under the new supervisory regime the ECB will trigger 
any decision on the need for banking resolution. Thereafter the decision to place a bank in 
resolution  would  involve  the  SSM  Board,  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  possibly  the  SSM 
Mediation Panel and the Board of the SRM. I apologize to those institutions that I forgot to 
mention.  Given  the  high  political  sensitivity  of  the  elements  to  be  included  in  a  resolution 
scheme,  it  is  hard  to  contemplate  how  a  binding  decision  on  banking  resolution  could  be 
reached over a weekend. 
In addition, prudential rules have been established for European banks that require putting in 
place  by  specific  dates  new  requirements  on,  among  other  things,  quality  and  quantity  of 
capital (in the form of several layers of capital buffers), liquidity, leverage, and counterparty 
risk. Building up capital buffers and meeting the Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and 
Eligible  Liabilities  (MREL)  will  be  challenging  in  an  environment  of  low  bank  profitability. If 
only for this reason, harmonization and transparency of resolution standards would help. 
To conclude, I will finish with the same thought that I started my speech. Banking resolution 
is a messy business. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
