   Sabine Lautenschläger: Navigating uncertainty – governance, risk 
management and leveraged finance 
Speech  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, 
at  the  17th  Annual  Risk  Management  Convention  by  the  Global  Association  of  Risk 
Professionals, New York City, 1 March 2016. 
  Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today, as it gives me a welcome opportunity to exchange ideas 
on  risks  and  risk  management  with  high-ranking  risk  managers.  Discussing  topics  of  risk 
management is doubtless necessary given the current macroeconomic environment. 
In  2008, the financial  crisis  turned  the Great  Moderation  into  the  Great Recession. Today, 
almost eight years later, we still live in challenging times. The Great Recession has now turned 
into the Great Uncertainty. Quite recently, financial markets experienced another flare-up of 
that uncertainty. Share prices of European banks, for instance, have been extremely volatile. 
On some days, we saw prices rise or fall in double digits. 
Regarding the causes, it seems that markets were driven by a broad set of worries relating to 
three different areas: 
• 
first, the state of the global economy, including weak growth and weak investment, 
uncertainty with regard to China and emerging markets, as well as worries about the 
impact of low oil prices on the financial sector; 
second, the new regulatory environment, including the concrete implementation of the 
new bail-in regime established by the Bank Resolution and Recovery Directive; 
and third, some idiosyncratic issues that caused broader concerns. 
• 
When you listen to some observers, you might get the impression that 2008 is not far away 
these days. Personally, I would rather argue that it is reasonably far away. In terms of capital 
ratios as a measure of the resilience of banks, it is actually a couple of percentage points away 
– since 2008, banks in the euro area have increased their Tier 1 capital ratios from 8.4% to 
13.7%. 
After all, it is not just a matter of the amount of capital held by the banks. It is also a question 
of capital quality. And that, too, improved dramatically as a result of regulatory reforms in 2010. 
Euro area banks focus on Common Equity Tier 1 or CET1, the highest quality of capital. The 
average fully-loaded CET1 ratio of all banks directly supervised by the ECB stood at 12% at 
the  end  of  last  year  and  will  have  moved  beyond  this  mark  as  we  speak,  pending  annual 
results. 
In addition, the euro area addressed risks in banks’ balance sheets with an unprecedented 
project in 2014 – the comprehensive assessment. Not only did that exercise lead to a common 
definition  of  non-performing  loans  for  the  first  time,  it  also  led  to  a  significant  increase  in 
provisioning. 
Altogether, the banking system is much more resilient today than it was in 2008 – not least 
thanks to an improved regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Still, in more general terms, we cannot deny the existence of risks. This is particularly true for 
the  financial  market,  whose  core  function  is  to  allocate  risks.  Each  and  every  financial 
institution must therefore cope with risks. Alas, this is more difficult than it sounds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Acknowledging risks – there is no such thing as a free lunch 
For a start, there are those risks that cannot be foreseen, the famous black swans. Such risks 
cannot be managed in any meaningful way. In fact, the only option is to increase resilience. 
For banks, the universal buffer against all kinds of unexpected shocks is capital. And, on the 
capital front, much has been done over the past few years. As I already mentioned, banks 
around the world have increased their capital ratios since 2008. In terms of capital, banks in 
Europe are therefore much better prepared for those risks that cannot yet be foreseen. 
But then there are those risks that can be foreseen – they can be measured and managed. It 
is these risks that are particularly relevant for risk management in banks, following an economic 
dictum that has been attributed to several people over the years, including an author of science 
fiction novels and an American General. 
The  general  was  Leonard  Porter  Ayres,  who  also  worked  as  a  statistician  and  economist. 
When asked by a group of reporters to impart some words of wisdom gathered from his long 
years of economic study, Ayres replied: “It is an immutable economic fact that there is no such 
thing as a free lunch.” I am pretty sure that everyone in this room has used that phrase at least 
once. 
Translated into the language of finance, it reads: whoever wants to make a profit has to take a 
risk.  The  returns,  however,  are  mostly  generated  right  away,  whereas  the  risk  might  only 
materialise in the future. 
This is where good risk management comes into play. Banks and the entire banking system 
have indeed become much more resilient to shocks. Nevertheless, good risk management is 
still necessary. It should enrich decision-making by providing a medium and long-term view, 
and it should highlight the downside to every upside. 
In a way, risk managers have to be the spoilsports. The same is, of course, true for banking 
supervisors. One of the tasks of banking supervisors is to ask questions when things are going 
well, and to intervene when they are not. 
Therefore,  risk  managers,  as  well  as  banking  supervisors,  explicitly  advocate  a  forward-
looking, risk-based approach. And this is what European banking supervision is doing. Our 
main tool towards that end is the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process, SREP for short. 
In  this  process,  we  conduct  a  risk  assessment  for  each  institution,  not  only  evaluating  its 
current  and  future  risk  levels,  but  also  its  risk  controls.  We  review  the  internal  processes 
followed by institutions in order to determine the appropriate capital and liquidity levels. And 
we consider the risk an institution poses to the financial system. 
Finally, we apply a method to quantify capital and liquidity needs, based on the results of our 
risk analysis. As a result, we might require institutions to hold capital and liquidity buffers over 
and above regulatory requirements. 
This  institution-specific  view  is  supplemented  by  a  horizontal  analysis  of  risks,  which  also 
considers  system-wide  risks,  such  as those  arising from global  imbalances,  excessive  risk 
concentrations in certain sectors or declining standards in business deals. The objective is to 
obtain a broader picture of the risk situation in the banking sector and to evaluate key market 
developments. Together, the institution-specific view and the horizontal analysis can provide 
us with a sound understanding of risks in the entire banking sector. 
So for risk managers as well as for banking supervisors, it is important to take a medium to 
long-term perspective, anticipate potential problems and act when necessary. Let me now give 
you  an  example  of  that  approach,  one  which  illustrates  how  important  it  is  to  identify  and 
manage  risks  before  they  become  so  big  that  they  can  hardly  be  managed  at  all.  And  it 
illustrates the potential of risk managers to act as spoilsports in the short term, while preserving 
the sustainability  of  business models  in the  long  term. I  am referring  to  leveraged finance, 
which comprises instruments such as high-yield bonds and leveraged loans. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Assessing risks – the issue of leveraged finance 
The market for leveraged finance is certainly a market with potential – with potential that other 
markets can only dream of. After contracting sharply during the financial crisis, it has expanded 
rapidly  in  recent  years,  not  least  driven  by  a  search  for  yield  against  the  backdrop  of  a 
prolonged period of very low interest rates. According to a study by Crédit Suisse, the global 
market for leveraged finance grew by almost 42% between 2011 and 2014. Banks in the euro 
area  followed  that  trend  –  between  2012  and  2014,  they  increased  their  exposures  to 
leveraged loans by 16%. 
Do I worry about leveraged finance in the euro area? By comparison, the share of euro area 
banks in the global market for leveraged finance remains limited. In 2014, banks in the euro 
area accounted for no more than about 15% of all leveraged loans that were arranged at the 
global  level.  At  the  same  time,  leveraged  finance  accounts  for  just  1%  of  their  assets. 
Nevertheless, akin to efforts in the United States, European banking supervision decided to 
look closely at these exposures – taking a forward-looking and pre-emptive approach. 
The growth of the market indeed seems to be driven by a search for yield. And on the face of 
it,  leveraged  finance  does  provide  comparatively  high  yields.  In  2014,  leveraged-finance 
products generated more than €5 billion of net revenues for European banks. In particular, 
leveraged finance offers an opportunity to increase fee incomes. Accordingly, the volume of 
underwritten transactions has increased by 35% since 2012, whereas the volume of deals that 
banks hold in their own books has only increased by 16%. It would appear that banks are doing 
it for the fees. 
Still,  other  factors  besides  a  search  for  yield  are  driving  the  market  for  leveraged  finance: 
corporate refinancing schedules, for instance. In 2014, about 52% of transactions took place 
in order to renew or refinance previous deals. Also, greater confidence among investors might 
play a role. Rating agencies, banks and investment funds have communicated profusely on 
low default rates and the general attractiveness of the market for leveraged finance. 
However, the border between confidence and overconfidence is hard to define. Therefore, the 
question is: should we keep an eye on leveraged finance? My answer as a supervisor is: yes, 
we should. 
Leveraged finance is certainly not a major supervisory concern at the moment, but the recent 
development of the relevant market exemplifies the need for good risk governance, a well-
defined  and  closely  monitored  framework  for  risk  appetite  and  highly  assertive  risk 
management. 
Search for yield has intensified competition in the market for leveraged finance. The result is 
that the terms for borrowers have become more favourable – ultimately, that increases the 
risks for the lender. 
We as supervisors take a close look at the credit quality of borrowers as measured by their 
level of leverage. Lending to highly leveraged counterparts may entail significant risks. And in 
the euro area, we observe that the leverage of corporate borrowers has increased. In 2014, 
35% of transactions arranged by significant institutions actually refinanced borrowers at an 
increased level of leverage. 
Moreover, we as supervisors are not always impressed by the quality of loan contracts. Some 
loans contain only limited obligations for borrowers, for instance with regard to payment terms. 
Particularly when refinancing or renewing commitments, banks might be inclined to accept the 
removal of covenants in order to preserve existing commercial relationships. 
We  as  supervisors  also  care  about  returns.  Banks  are  taking  on  risks;  but  do  they  gain 
adequate  returns?  Well,  over  the  entire  credit  cycle,  they  may  not  necessarily  earn  more 
returns because there are other factors at play. Today, fierce competition is one of the factors 
that depress returns despite the increase in risks; it might prompt some banks to reduce fees 
in  order  to  increase  their  market  share.  And  tomorrow,  the  credit  cycle  might  reverse  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   default  rates  surge.  Such  a  scenario  ultimately  raises  the  issue  of  default-recognition 
methodologies. 
And last but not least, there is also the reputational perspective. By acting as underwriters in 
leveraged-finance deals, banks also distribute a certain amount of exposure. In 2014, around 
€50 billion of  leveraged-loan  exposures  were  distributed.  Nevertheless,  from  a  reputational 
perspective and to avoid potential mis-selling practices, the quality of the distributed assets is 
of the essence. And currently, 21% of exposures retained by banks are covenant-lite, against 
74% of those that they distribute. 
To sum up: banks appear to be increasing their exposure to the growing market for leveraged 
finance. The leverage levels of borrowers are increasing, while constraints on loan contracts 
are being removed. As I said earlier on, there is no such thing as a free lunch, and ultimately, 
it is the task of risk managers to ensure that the price is adequate – risk and return have to 
remain  in  balance.  Among  other  things,  this  requires  forward-looking  risk  assessments, 
conservative  collateral  valuations,  continuous  monitoring  of  the  borrower’s  risk  profile,  and 
rapid reactions to changing circumstances. 
Addressing risks – risk management and banking supervision 
The market environment I just described undoubtedly calls for effective risk management in 
order to curb potential excess. However, with regard to leveraged finance, risk managers find 
it difficult to appropriately and effectively play their role in a market environment characterised 
by fierce competition. More specifically, there are three areas where we are currently pushing 
for improvement. 
First,  with  regard  to  procedure,  historical  credit  norms  are  beginning  to  weaken  and  more 
market-friendly structures have been adopted – I already mentioned the covenant-lite issue. 
In that regard, the thorniest aspect is the credit approval process. The speed of credit approval 
has become a cornerstone of competitiveness in the market for leveraged finance. In order to 
increase  their  market  share,  banks  have  significantly  shortened  their  internal  validation 
process. 
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many deals are presented by the borrowers as “take it or 
leave it”. In some cases, potential borrowers requested approval within 48 hours. To me, it 
seems rather challenging to properly understand a deal within 48 hours – both for the front 
office as well as for risk management. 
Second,  with  regard  to  limits,  risk  managers  need  to  be  alert  regarding  a  shift  towards 
structures that support an expanding business. Most banks have limits in place with regard to 
exposures  held  on  their  own  books.  However,  these  limits  have  sometimes  been  shifted 
upwards  to  accommodate  business  needs  and  the  prospect  of  rewarding  transactions; the 
underwriting limit, for instance, has on average increased by 49% between 2012 and 2014. In 
such  circumstances,  risk  managers  should  ensure  that  stress  tests  adequately  reflect  the 
higher  limits.  In  any  case,  from  a  supervisor’s  perspective,  large  underwriters  could  be 
expected to avoid too much fluctuation in their limits. 
Third, with regard to stress testing, all banks should conduct dedicated stress tests for their 
leveraged  finance  portfolios  –  I  mentioned  that  before.  Such  stress  tests  are  helpful  in 
identifying the consequences of downturns in the markets. Therefore, as part of our planned 
supervisory actions, stress-testing frameworks will be strengthened, particularly with regard to 
the underwriting pipeline. 
To sum up: the European market for leveraged finance has grown, and European banks have 
increased their exposure to it. We as supervisors are closely monitoring these developments. 
But we go beyond mere observation; we are also acting, combining individual and SSM-wide 
actions.  First,  we  will  address  potential  weaknesses  at  the  level  of  individual  institutions. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second, we are thinking about issuing relevant guidelines in order to define a common set of 
expectations for the entire banking sector. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to end with another quote from Leonard Porter Ayres. In September 1930, he said: 
“Now arises the emotion of fear. Things were brighter looking than they were. Now they look 
darker than they are.” 
To me, that quote perfectly describes the psychology of markets – or rather the psychology of 
human beings who constantly sway between being overly optimistic and overly pessimistic. 
Risk managers and supervisors have to fight that impulse. We have to see things as they are, 
and  not  as  we  wish  or  fear  them  to  be.  That  requires  self-control,  independence  and  far-
sightedness. And to be effective, it requires a voice that is heard. 
Having  said  that,  do  I  see  leveraged  finance  as  the  major  risk  for  the  European  banking 
system? I do not see it as the biggest risk, but I see a certain danger that market players see 
things a tad brighter than they are. So it is up to me as a supervisor and up to you as risk 
managers to counterbalance this view. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
