  Jorgovanka Tabaković: Strategic analysis of Serbia’s position and 
perspectives of recovery 
Speech  by  Dr  Jorgovanka  Tabaković,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the 
Kopaonik Business Forum 2016 “Catching up and convergence with leading trends: how to 
fix up the main fractures of the system”, organized by the Serbian Economists Association 
and the Association of Corporate Directors of Serbia, Kopaonik, 8 March 2016. 
 Esteemed  members  of  the  diplomatic  corps,  members  of  the  Government,  fellow 
economists, businessmen, ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  extend  special  greetings,  and  I  shall  presently  explain  why,  to  Prime  Minister 
Mr Vučić and the representative of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Mr Vladimir 
Kostić. Two years ago at this gathering I spoke of temporariness and of divisions, the two 
long-standing drawbacks of the Serbian people identified long ago by Isidora Sekulić. And 
look at us today – Mr Šoškić is moderating this panel, I am at the speaker’s stand, many of 
my  fellow  economists,  at  one  time  in  government,  yet  at  other  in  opposition,  we  are  all 
gathered here. It is so because we are on the right path to overcome the divisions between 
us and to ensure continuity for the Serbian people, as Mr Vladimir Kostić phrased it in his first 
TV  appearance  that  I  had  the  opportunity  to  watch.  “When  young  people  are  leaving“,  I 
apologise for imprecise quoting, “I feel sorry not because they are leaving, but because they 
burn bridges behind them”. Since everything we do, we do it for the sake of the people, for 
the people and with the people, our first task is to help the person who is prepared to make 
unpopular political moves and to gather us all, to give credit to everyone who deserves it, 
without a touch of conceit, a credit for even the slightest contribution to the wellbeing of us all 
and the Serbian people whom we represent, in whatever office we may hold. 
I am very honoured to be participating in our work today, now, and at this particular place. 
Traditionally, these annual gatherings give us an opportunity to analyse what was achieved 
thus far and to listen to new ideas on how we can attain our common objective, that magic 
word – sustainable economic growth. This time last year we all hoped that measures which 
at  that  moment  had  been  in  place  for  a few  months  only,  would  be  successful  and  would 
trigger  an  irreversible  economic  recovery.  Today  we  can  say,  with  great  satisfaction,  that 
numerous  results  have  been  achieved  over  the  last  year,  outperforming  even  the  most 
optimistic expectations in some areas. It is precisely these successes that cause the public to 
put  the  manner  of  policy  implementation  into  the  focus  of  attention  and  to  call  for  re-
examination of solutions and identification of potential weaknesses. 
Placing in the foreground the importance of the Kopaonik Business Forum and its mission, 
as a gathering of all of us who have the leverage and wish to contribute to the adoption of 
best solutions, I believe this is the right occasion to compare where we were a few years ago 
to where we stand today. 
First, I would like to highlight what is very important for sustainable growth, as also pointed 
out  by  Mr  Vlahović  –  the  fact  that  we  switched  to  a  different  growth  model.  And  maybe  I 
could  finish  my  speech  by  an  illustration  of  that  change.  As  of  2013  exports  have  grown 
much faster than  imports,  thus  driving  down  the  goods  and  services  deficit  from  17.4% to 
10% of GDP. Not less importantly, the current account deficit is by around 2.5 times lower, 
i.e.  reduced  from  11.6%  to  4.8%  of  GDP.  In  the  same  period  gross  FX  reserves  declined 
from RSD 10.9 bln at end-2012 to RSD 10.4 bln at end-2015. At the same time, FX reserves 
– usually referred to as NBS FX reserves, and in fact FX reserves of the Republic of Serbia, 
increased from EUR 6.6 bln in late 2012 to EUR 8.4 bln in late 2015. And if anyone asks: 
“What  is  the  price  paid  for  the  stability?”,  I  will  reply  as  follows:  it  was  paid  by  gross  FX 
reserves, reduced by EUR 500 mln only. These were actually the foreign currency reserves 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of banks, as well as funds under the unsuccessfully initiated and uncompleted arrangement 
with the IMF from 2011. So in fact, the stability was achieved through an increase in net FX 
reserves of the NBS, i.e. of the Republic of Serbia. 
When  we  speak  of  spending  the  FX  reserves,  it  often  brings  to  mind  the  topic  which  is 
favourite among many – these being interventions in the FX market. In this regard, allow me 
to say that the 2010–2012 period was marked by pronounced volatility of the dinar, although 
the NBS intervened by selling EUR 3.7 bln net cumulatively over three years. Since 2013 to 
date, EUR 1.4 bln net have been sold in interventions, at significantly weaker daily volatility 
of the dinar exchange rate against the euro, with special attention paid to movements in the 
FX market and the spillover of effects from international markets. By responding in a timely 
fashion, the NBS aims to mitigate short-term and temporary shocks affecting exchange rate 
volatility, while being mindful of the need to rationally spend FX reserves. I believe this is also 
underpinned  by  the  data  that  we  put  forward  –  EUR  3.7  bln  (for  the  same  period)  versus 
EUR  1.4  bln  in  interventions,  net.  It  is  noteworthy  that  –  unlike  in  the  earlier  times,  the 
achieved and maintained relative stability of the exchange rate is an important pillar for the 
improvement of the business and investment climate. Thus, last year as well, the NBS was 
carefully  monitoring  and  assessing  the  magnitude  of  external  shocks,  responding  when 
necessary  in  order  to  cushion  these  shocks  at  home.  Depending  on  the  direction  and 
intensity of pressures, we intervened in the FX market on both sides – as both the buyer and 
the seller of foreign currency. Having bought EUR 970 mln and sold EUR 450 mln in 2015, 
we ended the year with FX reserves of the NBS and of the Republic of Serbia bolstered by 
more than half a billion euros. 
The stability of the national currency is also conducive to a higher degree of dinarisation of 
the financial system, which is a common objective of us all. Economic policy makers have 
long been advocating a greater use of the dinar, but the growth in dinar deposits and dinar 
lending  to  households  has  been  particularly  noticeable  only  lately.  It  may  sound  little  to 
some, but if we say that dinar savings are 2.6 times higher today compared to end-2012, this 
result  is  no  longer  so  negligible.  The  share  of  dinar  in  total  savings  is  still  not  high,  but  it 
climbed from 1.9% to 4.3%. More than two thirds of new household loans (67.5%) in 2015 
were  extended  in  dinars.  We  are  happy  to  see  that  the  achieved  price  stability  and  the 
relative stability of the exchange rate have encouraged dinarisation, but we know it is a long 
ride yet. We have embarked on it, and that is what counts. The example of the dinarisation 
makes it clear that models, causality and predictions are not tied up in a methodological knot 
that cannot be untangled, and that the results are sure to follow from a firm commitment to 
that  objective.  The  results  are  guaranteed  by  committed  work  in  line  with  that  and  similar 
goals,  which  gradually  restores  confidence  in  the  system  and  the  domestic  currency.  That 
what the language amounts to a nation is what domestic currency amounts to its economy. 
Those  of  you  who  closely  monitor  the  work  and  results  achieved  by  the  NBS  will  only  be 
reminded, while for others this will be news – inflation in Serbia has been low and stable at 
around 2% for three years now. It averaged 1.9% in 2015. This period is sufficiently long to 
give us grounds to conclude that, in terms of price stability, Serbia has become comparable 
to other European countries, and that we have at the same time managed to avoid deflation. 
We expect inflation in the coming period to remain low and stable, which will continue to be 
the result of a balanced monetary policy and its coordination with fiscal policy measures. And 
this  is  why  the  general  public  has  been  so  interested  in  the  coordination  of  the  monetary 
policy with the executive branch of government, with clearly demarcated responsibilities. The 
professional  public  also  can  and  must  make  a  contribution  by  choosing  not  to  identify  the 
superiors and subordinates, the victors and the vanquished, but rather by proposing the best 
solutions  for  our  coordinated  activities.  The  credibility  of  our  monetary  policy  is  also 
confirmed by low inflationary expectations, both in the financial sector and the real economy. 
Such  expectations  confirm  that  these  sectors,  which  most  reliably  identify  the  outlook  for 
investments in Serbia, are the sectors which contribute the most to the accelerated recovery 
of economic activity and higher employment. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  addition  to  contributing  to  Serbia’s  recovery  based  on  the  achieved  and  preserved 
monetary and financial stability, the NBS paved the way for a strong decline in interest rates 
on dinar loans. Owing to the results in terms of inflation, we began the cycle of policy rate 
cuts  in  May  2013.  Since  then,  the  key  policy  rate  was  reduced  16  times  by  a  total  of  7.5 
percentage  points,  to  4.25%,  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime.  In  2015, 
monetary policy was substantially eased, including the cuts in the required reserve ratio, all 
of which was first and above all permitted by the excellent fiscal policy results. 
How did this reflect on dinar interest rates and lending activity? In the period from September 
2013 to January 2016, banks cut interest rates on dinar corporate loans by 11.7 percentage 
points,  to  5.9%.  Interest  rates  on  dinar  household  loans  were  lowered  by  7.9  percentage 
points on average, to 12.1%. Overall, interest rates on dinar loans were more than halved 
relative to September 2013. You will agree this is neither a small nor a negligible amount. 
Interest  rates  on  euro  loans  were  also  reduced  in  the  same  period  –  by  2.9  percentage 
points,  to  4.2%  in  January,  which  is  linked  in  part  to  the  ECB’s  accommodative  monetary 
policy,  but  also  to  the  reduction  in  Serbia’s  risk  premium.  This  cleared  the  way  for  the 
recovery in lending activity and the expected growth in economic activity. 
We are aware that we cannot change external circumstances. Geopolitical tensions, volatile 
movements  in  the  global  commodity  and  financial  markets,  unpredictable  capital  flows, 
weaker  prospects  of  global  recovery  illustrate  the  existence  of  uncertainties.  Our  joint 
strategic  response  must  and  can  come  through  our  will  and  determination  to  steadfastly 
complete the not so easy reforms that we have undertaken. This will undoubtedly accelerate 
economic growth and further reduce Serbia’s exposure to external challenges. 
Serbia’s improved growth prospects have been confirmed by world-known rating agencies, 
international financial institutions, but what is more important, by the behaviour of domestic 
and foreign investors. In the last year, investments gave a strong positive contribution to the 
achieved  economic  recovery.  In  financial  terms,  it  was  the  inflow  of  FDIs  that  gave  an 
additional contribution, besides higher disposable income made available by lower costs of 
borrowing and lower price of energy products. What I would like to underscore is the rise in 
newly approved investment loans. In 2015, net FDI inflow in Serbia rose by 45.6% from 2014 
and came at EUR 1.8 bln, their highest level in the last four years. Consequently, in 2015 
Serbia managed to use the net FDI inflow to more than fully cover its current account deficit 
which equalled EUR 1.6 billion. All this speaks of improvement in the quality of sources of 
funding, of improvement in the manner of final consumption of disposable assets, now used 
for investment rather than for consumption. 
Finally, I believe that the results we have achieved so far allow us to reaffirm yet again the 
NBS’s commitment to actively contributing to economic recovery, higher employment and the 
standard  of  living  in  the  period  ahead,  while  at  the  same  time  safeguarding  price  and 
financial stability. The results speak for themselves. We expect them to be acknowledged, 
just as we expect that all of you, people of influence, resolve and knowledge will help our 
nation to overcome that feature of temporariness, of not being persistent in either financial 
reforms or in its presence on the world political scene. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
