   François Villeroy de Galhau: Card payments in Europe – latest trends 
and challenges 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Bank of 
France  conference  “Card  payments  in  Europe  –  latest  trends  and  challenges”,  Paris, 
18 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, Dear Yves Mersch, Dear Mario Nava,  
First and foremost, on behalf of Banque de France, I would like to warmly welcome you all in 
Paris. I am delighted to open this conference dedicated to card payments in Europe. A large 
number  of  European  actors  involved  in  the  card  payments  market  are  represented  today, 
including regulatory authorities and market players, and I have no doubt that the debates that 
are going to take place will give us a valuable insight on the latest trends and the challenges 
they bring with them. Before leaving the floor to our speakers and panelists, I would simply like 
to share with you a few thoughts on two of those challenges, one addressed to the supply side 
of the card payments market and one to the regulatory community.  
I.  
First challenge: the sustainability of the dominance gained by cards as 
payment instruments. Will the most used payment instrument in Europe 
continue to rise or will it fall?  
Over the last decade, payment cards have steadily consolidated their dominance as the most 
used non-cash payment instruments in France and Europe. In 2014, payment cards were used 
for  more  than  47  billion  transactions  in  the  European  Union,  that  is  to  say  a  level  almost 
identical to the overall combined number of transactions involving credit transfers and direct 
debits, respectively the second and third most used payment instruments. In France, payment 
cards were used in more than 50% of all non-cash payments transactions, amounting to nearly 
9.5 billion operations in 2014, compared to only 3 billion transactions in 2001. The specificity 
of card payments is that they occur for transactions of a relatively small amount (47€ in average 
in France), making it the strongest alternative to cash for proximity payments.  
This situation is the result of years of efforts made by market stakeholders to build a secure, 
efficient and convenient payment instrument. The French community was at the forefront of 
such  evolution  with  the  early  adoption  in  1992 of  chip for payment  cards,  which  has  been 
followed by the introduction and the subsequent widespread adoption of the EMV standard. 
This latter evolution has been the cornerstone of the uptake of payment cards by allowing fast 
and  secure  transactions  through  Europe.  This  predominance  of  payment  cards  may 
nonetheless  be  at  stake  nowadays,  with  the  conjunction  of  three  main  trends  that  have  a 
disruptive effect on the market: new solutions, new behaviors and players, new regulations.  
First, innovative payment solutions based on SEPA schemes are very likely to emerge. One 
prime example of this possible groundswell is the preparation, under the impulse of the Euro 
Retail payments Board (ERPB), of a pan-European instant payments scheme by the European 
Payments  Council  (EPC),  based  on  the  existing  SEPA  Credit  transfer  scheme.  This  new 
scheme, which should be finalized by the end of 2016 and operational before the end of 2017, 
will  serve  the  development  of further  innovative  products,  especially  via  smart  devices, for 
proximity  and  mobile  payments.  This  is  a  relevant  example  of  how  the  harmonisation  and 
standardization  work  done  in  the  context  of  the  so-called  “SEPA  1.0.”  for  legacy  payment 
instruments (direct debit and credit transfer) may serve as a basis for market players to develop 
new innovative real time and paperless payment solutions, what I would call “SEPA 2.0.”.  
Secondly, we observe the emergence of new payment behaviors and new market players, 
in relation with further technological innovations. This is mostly led by the rising prominence of 
e-commerce, which has fundamentally changed payment usages in the last few years. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   search for a payment instrument adapted to these evolutions has first led to a wider usage of 
payment  cards,  beyond  proximity  transactions. These  Card-not-present  payments  over  the 
internet now account in France for nearly 7.5% of all card based-transactions in volume, and 
for  11.6%  of  the  overall  value  of  these  transactions.  Nevertheless,  new  technologies  are 
gaining traction, by capitalizing on devices such as smartphones and tablets and allowing to 
get rid of “plastic” payment cards through virtual wallets. These general changes, which are 
already affecting traditional actors, are reinforced by the introduction of new players, either the 
much  talked  about  “GAFA”  (Google,  Apple,  Facebook  and  Amazon)  or  the  smaller  actors 
concentrating on niche payment services, that capitalize on these new technologies to enter 
the payment cards market. To be fair, this move “out of plastic” is a bit slower than forecasted 
some years ago: but it shall probably accelerate.  
Lastly, in Europe, the third trend that is also deeply influencing the payment cards market is 
the current regulatory renovation that is taking place, notably through the implementation of 
the new Interchange fees regulation for card based-transactions, which was passed in April 
2015. This new regulation sets, amongst other measures, maximum caps for interchange fees, 
0.2%  for  debit  card  and  0.3%  for  credit  card  transactions,  and  the  obligation  to  separate 
payment card schemes and processing entities. In doing so, this new regulation might stand 
as an additional game changer for traditional actors.  
Such a context will no doubt incentivize traditional suppliers of payment cards solutions to find 
new  sources  of  revenue,  building  on  added-value  services  on  top  of  sole  payments,  and 
possibly revising the way payments are made and processed to keep their lead in the retail 
payments market.  
II.  
The second challenge I would like to comment briefly is: what role for public 
authorities, and especially for central banks?  
The trends I just mentioned require public authorities, especially central banks, to reflect on 
their  role  to  ensure  that  retail  payments  changes  underway  support  economic  growth  and 
consumer confidence.  
The first way central banks can help bring about such an outcome is through their 
1)  
catalyst role, by fostering due cooperation and coordination between stakeholders in areas 
where it is needed. This role needs to be played both at national and European levels.  
In that perspective, the new Euro Retail Payments Board (ERPB) should play a pivotal role in 
Europe, by gathering -under the aegis of the ECB and the NCBs of the Eurosystem- actors 
from  the  supply  side  and  the  demand  side  to  facilitate  the  development  of  an  integrated, 
innovative and competitive market for retail payments in euro. Works on card payments have 
already  been  carried  out  by  the  ERPB,  especially  focusing  on  the  next  phases  of 
standardization, to pave the way for further action by market stakeholders at European level.  
Nonetheless, these initiatives have to be complemented at the national level to be effective. 
This is one reason why a national strategy for retail payment systems has been elaborated by 
the stakeholders in France last October and endorsed by the Minister of Finance. One of the 
main axis of the strategy aims at facilitating the use of cards for proximity payments through 
the modernization of card terminals and infrastructures which will boost the development of 
contactless payments, as a secure and efficient alternative to cash for everyday transactions. 
The National Payments Committee, which will take over from the National SEPA Committee 
shortly, will, similarly to the ERPB at the European level, involve all stakeholders under the 
aegis of Banque de France to foster the necessary dialogue for an effective implementation of 
the national strategy and feed the ERPB with input from the French community.  
In addition to their catalyst role, central banks through their oversight function should 
2)  
aim at ensuring that competition between market participants does not translate into a race to 
the bottom, but rather translate into a race to the top in terms of security, by setting high level 
objectives and by overseeing that they are complied with. Indeed, while innovation is a promise 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   and a vector for economic growth, it is also a door open to new threats for the very security of 
payments and public confidence in those. Changes in the customers’ usages generate new 
risks that may not be fully and comprehensively mitigated at the present time. I will only recall 
that  Card-not-present  payments,  though  accounting  for  “only”  a  little  less  than  12%  of  the 
overall value of card-based transactions in France, represent more than two-third of the overall 
value of fraudulent card-based transactions. European figures are similar. Next generations 
solutions may begin to emerge to protect payments thanks to the works of the industry –I am 
thinking about the recent launch of dynamic cryptograms for example, as well as the use of 
biometrics–, but they also require time and action by the regulators.  
In this context, the adoption of the reviewed Payment Services Directive in December 2015 
represents  a  major  achievement.  This  Directive  will  considerably  reinforce  the  security  of 
payments and related services by setting in hard law and at the European level the obligation 
to use strong customer authentication for electronic payment transactions or payment account 
access. This Directive also extends the scope of the European regulatory framework to new 
activities such as payment initiation or account information services. In this respect, it is a 
duty  for  public  authorities  to  ensure  level  playing  field  between  all  market  players, 
traditional  actors  or  newcomers,  through  an  overarching  key  principle:  regulate 
according to the risk profile of the service, not according to the nature or status of the 
provider.  
Banque  de  France  has  been,  amongst  European  public  authorities,  a  trailblazer  on  these 
security issues since the creation of the Observatory for Payment Card Security in 2001. This 
institution, chaired by the Governor of Banque de France since its inception, has anticipated 
and addressed through its works many of the challenges raised by new technologies, such as 
the security of remote or contactless payments or the use of biometrics as an authentication 
tool.  Nonetheless,  in  the  current  context  of  dramatic  transformation  of  the  retail  payments 
market, it seems useful to consider adjusting the Observatory. Accordingly, the scope of the 
Observatory is expected to be extended in the next few months in order to encompass all non-
cash payments instruments, beyond cards, and provide transversal recommendations better 
suited to the needs of the market.  
To  conclude,  I  wish  you  fruitful  and  vivid  discussions  on  all  of  these  aspects,  hoping  this 
conference will provide us a with a comprehensive overview of the latest trends and challenges 
that lie ahead of card payments in Europe, as well as with some of the different solutions that 
may be envisioned at the moment. I now let the floor to our keynote speakers Mr. Yves Mersch, 
Executive  Board  Member  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  Mr.  Mario  Nava,  Director for 
Regulation and prudential supervision of financial institutions of the European Commission, 
who will give us their perspective on the payment cards market at the European level.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
