 Mario Draghi: Interview in Bild 
 Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in Bild, conducted 
by  Mr  Kai  Diekmann,  Mr  Nikolaus  Blome  and  Mr  Daniel  Biskup  on  25  April  2016  and 
published on 28 April 2016. 
 BILD: Mr Draghi, when you became President of the European Central Bank (ECB) just 
over four years ago, the Germans were scared that, as an Italian, you would create too 
much inflation. Now, even an Italian is unable to generate sufficient inflation. What is 
going wrong? 
Mario  Draghi  (laughs):  Nothing.  People  in  Germany  can  rest  assured  that  their  ECB 
President  is  doing  everything  to  restore  inflation  to  the  right  level.  Our  mandate  is  price 
stability, which means inflation of just below 2%. 
BILD: In order to achieve that, you have cut interest rates to zero. German savings are 
melting away like butter in the sun. Don’t you care about that? 
Draghi:  We  are  well  aware  of  the  situation  for  savers.  And  it’s  not  only  in  Germany  that 
people have to face low interest rates. But interest rates are low because growth is low and 
inflation is too low. Think about the alternative: if we raised rates now, it would be bad for the 
economy  and  it  would  unleash  deflation,  unemployment  and  recession.  The  interest  on 
savings  comes  from  growth,  so  it  is  in  the  interests  of  savers  that  inflation  stabilises  and 
growth becomes more robust. Besides, many people benefit from low interest rates as they 
are  also  homebuyers,  taxpayers,  entrepreneurs  and  workers  whose  companies  are 
benefiting. 
BILD:  In  Germany  the  adverse  effects  are  predominant.  Making  provision  for 
retirement is becoming increasingly difficult… 
Draghi: Remember, what counts is what you earn on savings in real terms, i.e. interest minus 
inflation. This  is  higher today  than  it  was  on  average  in  the  1990s.  At that  time  you  might 
have  had  a  higher  interest  rate  on  your  Sparbuch  (savings  account),  but  we  often  had  an 
inflation rate that was higher still. So the interest looked good at first, but the real return was 
in fact much lower. Moreover, people can influence how much they get on their savings even 
in times of low interest rates. They don’t just have to keep the money in savings accounts but 
can invest in other ways. The Bundesbank has recently shown that the average return on all 
German household assets is close to 2%. 
BILD: So, are the German savers themselves to blame? 
Draghi: No. But there are alternatives when investing savings. In the United States savers 
had to face seven years of zero interest rates. The financial system – banks and insurers – 
nevertheless still worked. Money was invested in a variety of ways which in the end enabled 
a decent return. 
BILD: Of all people, German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, who has supported 
you for years, is now among your strongest critics, saying your policies are damaging 
savers and thereby strengthening populist parties. Does that get to you? 
Draghi: I don’t take anything personally in my job. A polite and constructive debate is actually 
welcome and helps us to explain our policies. 
BILD: Really? 
Draghi: Yes. But one thing is clear: the ECB obeys the law, not the politicians. Or, as one of 
my predecessors put it, it is normal for politicians to comment on our actions. But it would be 
abnormal if we listened to them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
BILD:  Does  such  criticism  from  the  Finance  Minister  or  from  the  German  Vice 
Chancellor threaten the independence of the ECB? 
Draghi:  No.  But  any  perception  that  the  ECB’s  independence  is  under  attack  can  unsettle 
businesses and consumers. They might then postpone investment and spending decisions 
that  would  be  good  for  jobs  and  growth.  That  might  force  the  central  bank  to  do  more  to 
achieve price stability. 
BILD: Has the strength of the criticism from Germany also got something to do with 
the  fact  that  you  are  an  Italian,  and  what  do  you  think  of  demands  that  the  next 
President of the ECB must be a German? 
Draghi: There is really nobody in the world who is interested in the fact that I am an Italian 
apart from the German media. And what difference would it make if a non-Italian were now in 
office? None at all. He or she would pursue the same course as we do now. All other large 
central banks in the world are pursuing similar policies. 
BILD: But it is precisely this policy of cheap money that is not working… 
Draghi: Wrong – our policy is working, but we must be patient; investor confidence has not 
yet  been  fully  restored.  For  two  years,  the  economy  in  the  euro  area  has  been  growing 
month by month, banks are lending and unemployment is steadily falling. Meanwhile, euro 
area  countries  are  now  able  to  buy  more  German  exports  again,  which,  for  German 
companies, is partly making up for the decline in trade with China. But it is a slow process 
because the crisis was more severe than anything we’d had since the Second World War. 
BILD: And when will interest rates rise again? 
Draghi:  It’s  quite  simple:  when  the  economy  is  growing  more  strongly  again  and  inflation 
rises closer to our objective. Low interest rates today will lead to higher rates tomorrow. 
BILD: Does the ECB’s policy of cheap money not make it far too easy for euro area 
countries  like  Italy  and  France,  for  example,  to  shirk  necessary  but  unpopular 
reforms? 
Draghi: No. The majority of governments are acting, albeit too slowly for my personal taste. 
All of them would be well advised to do more. But that is not primarily dependent on the ECB 
and its policies. Most countries started to implement reforms when the level of interest rates 
was already very low. Furthermore, reforms of judicial systems, electoral laws or labour laws, 
for  example,  don’t  have  much  to  do  with  interest  rates.  So  I  don’t  find  the  argument 
convincing  that  we  have  to  keep  up  the  pressure.  It  is  also  not  our  task.  It  would  not  be 
democratic for a central bank to dictate to elected governments what they have to do. 
BILD: Mr Draghi, in your first interview with BILD four years ago, we spoke a lot about 
Greece.  The  country  has  still  not  got  back  on  its  feet,  even  though  it  has  received 
hundreds of billions in emergency loans. When will the madness end? 
Draghi: Clearly, last year was an economic setback for Greece. Now everyone is aware that 
there can be no growth without reforms. And what the country and its people need above all 
is growth. Greece has implemented many reforms in the past few months and is committed 
to the path of reform. 
BILD: Is the euro a part of the solution for Greece, or a part of the problem? 
Draghi:  Greece’s  challenges  have  little  to  do  with  the  euro.  It  would  have  to  implement 
reforms in any case. In the euro area, Greece can do that with the support of its partners. But 
one thing must be clear: who belongs in the euro area and who does not is not for the ECB 
to decide. That is a matter for the Member States. 
BILD: They are now more fractious than ever. Is that the biggest danger for Europe? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Draghi: We are experiencing several crises which are all interconnected and reinforce each 
other. That makes it all the more important to resist every kind of nationalism or isolationism. 
Both are however on the rise. That worries me a lot. 
BILD: In the United Kingdom there will even soon be a vote on a complete withdrawal 
from the EU… 
Draghi: I cannot and do not wish to believe that the British would vote to leave, because we 
are stronger together. But if they do, it should be clear to them that they would lose all the 
benefits of the Single Market. 
BILD: If you had a spare wish for Chancellor Merkel, what would that be? 
Draghi: That she continues to fight for Europe. 
BILD: And one last question. The Bundestag has invited you again: will you go? 
Draghi: Of course. It will be my pleasure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
