   Ilmārs Rimšēvičs: Review of the Latvian economy and challenges for the 
future 
Introductory statement by Mr Ilmārs Rimšēvičs, Governor of the Bank of Latvia, at the press 
conference, Riga, 4 December 2015. 
 The charts can be found at the Bank of Latvia’s website. 
This is the moment where we look back on the past year and identify the tasks and challenges 
for the future. Many of us are making resolutions for the next year: to have healthier lifestyles 
or  learn  something  new.  But  it  is  also  a good  time  to  look  back  at  what  was  and  was  not 
accomplished this year. 
1.  
First, about the Eurosystem monetary policy decisions made yesterday in 
Frankfurt and their impact on Latvia. 
Yesterday, at the meeting of the Council of the European Central Bank, the current evaluation 
of and predictions for the economic situation of the euro area, the dynamic of gross domestic 
product and inflation as well as lending trends were all discussed. (chart) 
Analysis  by  economists  indicates  that  euro  area  growth  supported  by  monetary  policy 
measures is continuing this year. In the third quarter, the rate of GDP quarterly growth dropped 
slightly, yet it was by 0.3% higher than in the second quarter. External trade, which was slower 
than forecast earlier, impeded faster growth. That is by and large explained by the weaker 
growth prospects of such developing countries as China and Russia as well as others. (chart) 
Inflation in October increased to 0.1%, primarily on account of rising core inflation: the latter 
reached the highest level since August 2013. The rise in inflation was fostered by domestic 
demand and weakening of the euro exchange rate. (chart) 
Yesterday  the  Eurosystem  announced  the  latest  forecasts  for  the  euro  area  economic 
development. Overall, changes are small. According to those, the euro area GDP this year 
could increase by 1.5%, in 2016. gadā by 1.7% and in 2017 by 1.9%. Growth will continue to 
depend  on  private  consumption  and  investments,  yet  it  is  expected  that  export  growth  will 
diminish under the impact of a weaker external demand. Risks are related to the deterioration 
of the external environment. 
Inflation forecasts in the euro area have been adjusted slightly downward: in 2015, the total 
inflation of the euro area is expected at 0.1%, in 2016 it will rise by 1.0% and in 2017 by 1.6%. 
Domestic demand will continue to foster price rises, yet the direct and indirect effects of prices 
will impede returning the inflation indicator to the goal declared by the Eurosystem, i.e. under 
2%, but close to that figure. 
The extraordinary monetary policy measures implemented by Eurosystem continue to be an 
important factor stabilizing the euro area. The conditions for borrowing have become more 
favourable both for enterprises and households. The dynamic of loans granted in the euro area 
continues to improve, yet the speed of recovery is low. Therefore, at the 3 December meeting 
of the ECB council we decided on several measures: 
• 
• 
• 
to further reduce the overnight deposit facility interest rate to minus 0.30%; 
to extend the Expanded Asset Purchase Programme to the end of March 2017; 
to  reinvest the  principal  amounts  of  the  securities  purchased  within  the Expanded 
Asset Purchase Programme once their term of maturity has set in; 
to  include  amongst  the  purchasable  assets  also  secure,  investment  grade  debt 
securities emitted by local governments; 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  to continue to conduct refinancing operations with a set interest rate and full allotment 
at least to the end of the last reserve requirement period of 2017. 
  The decision taken by the ECB Council will mean even cheaper resources at the disposal of 
Latvian commercial banks, households and enterprises. I hope that this loan money will reach 
households and businesses without an additional surcharge. The costs of servicing the Latvian 
government debt will also continue to drop, which will mean additional savings – and it would 
be essential not to consume those but to direct them toward implementing structural reforms, 
thus increasing the country’s competitiveness. Instead of additional borrowing to make use of 
the low interest rates, it is important to reduce the public debt, which would have a positive 
impact on the budget as well. But I will turn to that in a little while. (chart) 
Latvijas Banka has continued with the Expanded Asset Purchase Programme by purchasing 
securities emitted by the government of Latvian and international organizations in the amount 
of  1.44  billion  euro  over  eight  months  of  this  year.  The  purchases  of  Latvian  government 
securities by Latvijas Banka and ECB had reached 630 million euro by the end of October. 
 2a.  
And now let’s turn to Latvian economic growth 
2.  
Analyses  by  sector  and  other  criteria  indicate  that  the  Latvian  economy  is  growing  in 
accordance  with  earlier  predictions  and  the  rate  of  this  growth  could  be  characterized  as 
moderate. Given the complicated situation in the external environment, such a result can be 
considered  as  satisfactory,  however,  taking  the  long  view  and  considering  the  aspect  of 
convergence of Latvian economy, this provides no cause for optimism. 
Historical data indicate that growth of the Latvian economy in the post-crisis period is becoming 
slower and it does not go unnoticed that we are facing problems of a structural nature. These 
represent increasing obstacles, including: 
– 
The  drop  in  competitiveness  of  goods  and  services  exporters  in  the  international 
markets, 
slowing of the growth of the local lending market, 
delaying reforms in education and healthcare, 
and finally, fiscal policy. 
Now about the most topical theme in Latvian economy – the principles for 
drafting the budget. 
At the beginning of September I was asked what mark I would give to the 2016 draft budget. 
At that time I said that the draft deserves an eight, given the timely manner in which the finance 
minister  and  prime  minister  managed  to  develop  and  move  along  the  draft  as  well  as  the 
determination of the government not to give in to the huge wave of expenditure demands by 
ministries, which would have washed away the prudent budget policy worked out with so much 
difficulty during the crisis years. I regret to say that I was too much of an optimist. Right now, 
the budget only deserves a “6”. First, in two months several measures were implemented that 
were a serious blow to the business environment and the confidence of entrepreneurs in the 
stability and sustainability of the tax system. Second, in the conditions where the risks of the 
external economic environment have increased but the Latvian economy is still posting positive 
growth, the forming of a fiscal risk reserve has been rejected and a number of new, unexpected 
expenditure items have appeared. Needless to say that (given the non-existence of the fiscal 
reserve), we are most concerned about the 80 million demand related to “airBaltic”. 
All the shortcomings notwithstanding, the 2016 budget has been adopted and we will have to 
live with it. So right now it is important to not lose time and review the budget drafting process, 
so that we could adopt the kind of budget for 2017 that would create a stable foundation for 
the development of Latvian economy in the future. Several principles should be observed in 
this work. (chart) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Number one, stability; number two, a budget without a deficit and, number three, a zero budget. 
First  of  all,  stability  is  essential  for  the  Latvian  business  environment,  for  attracting 
investments  and  for  resuming  lending.  The  proposal  of  auditing  the  tax  system  should  be 
supported, making clear once and for all, that once the taxation system is put in order, we are 
not going to manipulate it for at least one general election cycle. Thus a practice of a stable 
and transparent tax system would be established – a system that, instead of being changed 
every year, is maintained stable for at least four years. 
Second,  there  is  the  worrisome  tendency  of  the  last  twenty  years:  we  have  had  a  budget 
surplus for only one year; the rest of the time, we have lived on debt, increasing the external 
debt.  I  would  like  to  remind  you  of  a  simple  equation:  budget  deficit=greater  public 
debt=higher taxes. Living with a budget deficit, we enter a Catch-22 situation: the public debt 
is increasing and to service it greater funds are needed, but, to find these funds, taxes have to 
be raised. The raising of taxes has a negative influence on the business environment, it is an 
obstacle  to  investment  and  creates  uncertainty  about  the  future  both  for  businesses  and 
households, thus having a negative impact both on economic growth and the budget itself. 
We should finish with the business of spending state funds in amounts covering several 
months in December. It  has  become  common that  all  year  long there  is  a  surplus  in  the 
budget but then “suddenly” December arrives and state administration begins to spend money, 
which  means  that  we  end  the  year  with  substantial  deficit,  usually  higher  than  what  was 
planned at the beginning of the year. 
Third, 
– 
the promise should be kept of establishing a working group for zero budget, to which 
we are ready to delegate our experts; that is work that must be done independently 
of what is happening with the coalitions, governments etc. Any budget activity must 
be evaluated from the beginning – by evaluating the relevance of positions, instead 
of increasing the base for the next years without carefully evaluating the expenditure 
of previous years. In this work, there should be no red lines: the budget base should 
be evaluated in all ministries, including the priority ones, whose expenditure was not 
curtailed for 2016. There must be no vetos or taboos! 
The  current  lack  of  discipline  has  consequences  for  the  future  and  the  Fiscal 
Discipline Law and establishing fiscal discipline are an example. Regarding 2016, no 
prior  commitments  were  honoured,  which  means  that  for  2017,  a  greater  fiscal 
reserve will have to be formed. In view of the optimistic predictions, which have 
been included in the budget but which may have to be corrected – because of lower 
inflation, among other things – forming the fiscal reserve will be very important. 
Under the current circumstances, structural reforms in education and healthcare 
systems gain even more importance. It is my great hope that in 2016, serious reforms 
will take place in both of these areas, in order to improve Latvia’s competitiveness, 
and that measures will concurrently bet taken to explain to the population why such 
reforms are necessary and what positive effect they will have on our economy in the 
future. 
  Why am I discussing budget matters at this time? We are worried about the obvious fact that 
all possibilities for organizing the budget have been exhausted. It is said that Latvia can no 
longer sustain tax revenues at the level of 28% of GDP and that the budget is overall too small. 
Thus groundwork has been laid for the raising of taxes next year. Under such circumstances, 
the Latvian business environment would be seriously endangered and, with it, any successful 
economic development in the future. 
We have at least six months till the drafting of the next budget begins and I hope that the 
Ministry of Finance and the Government will launch a serious discussion for us to see what the 
Government is spending overall and whether the only way to improve the budget situation is 
to continue brutally raising the taxes. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
