  Andreas Dombret: International cooperation is the answer – shaping the 
regulatory and supervisory architecture 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at a reception to welcome Ms Jenny Kilp, Bundesbank representative in South 
Africa and financial attaché at the German embassy in Pretoria, Pretoria, 29 August 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you,  Ambassador  Streicher,  for  hosting  this  event  here  at  the  German  Embassy  in 
Pretoria. I am more than pleased that Governor Kganyago and Deputy Governor Mminele is 
here today. Thank you for your remarks, Governor. 
Deutsche Bundesbank today introduces, with Ms Jenny Kilp, its first representative to South 
Africa – and the African continent as a whole. The step marks the beginning of a frequent 
exchange of information on financial and monetary policy issues, the aim being to allow each 
country  to  better  understand  the  other’s  economic  and  financial  interests  and  to  facilitate 
cooperation in international fora. 
By expanding its representative network, the Bundesbank pursues the goal of being present 
in the main industrialised and emerging countries and of following developments in almost all 
G20 countries, either directly or indirectly. 
In this sense, South Africa has been something of a white spot on the Bundesbank’s map of 
representative  offices  and  representatives  at  German  embassies,  given  the  growing  role 
played  by  the  country  and  the  African  continent  at  large  in  international  economic  and 
financial policy. The Bundesbank recognises the economic importance and potential of the 
continent and of South Africa in particular by delegating Ms. Kilp to Pretoria. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  international  cooperation  is  the  answer  to  a  world  that  has  been 
growing  together  ever  closer  for  decades.  The  world  in  which  we  live  has  become  rather 
small. And in a small world, every policymaker in every country must be aware that his or her 
decisions can influence other countries as well. 
This holds especially true for financial sector: Financial markets in particular have become 
integrated to such a degree that a small distortion at one end of the world can quickly spread 
and affect the entire system. 
We  as  central  bankers  and  banking  supervisors  have  adapted  to  these  developments  by 
cooperatively  harmonising  regulation  and  supervisory  practices  across  the  globe,  step  by 
step. The evolvement of the Basel Accords since the mid-1970s is one of the most prominent 
outcomes of this process. 
In 2007, the financial crisis shook up financial markets and challenged governments, central 
banks  and  supervisory  authorities  worldwide.  And  from  the  beginning,  there  was  a  broad 
consensus  that  it  would  be  in  everyone’s  best  interest  not  only  to  preserve  but  indeed  to 
strengthen cooperation with each other. 
To do justice to the global dimension of the crisis as well as to the growing importance of 
emerging market economies, the task of formulating a strong and coordinated response to 
the crisis was elevated to the level of the G20. The Financial Stability Forum was superseded 
by  the  more  influential  Financial  Stability  Board,  which  also  had  a  much  broader 
membership.  The  Basel  Committee  broadened  its  membership  as  well,  inviting  countries 
from the G20 to join – among them South Africa. Meanwhile, central banks across the globe 
provided each other with swap lines to ensure a sufficient supply of liquidity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Since then, we have worked closely together to better understand what went wrong before 
and during the crisis, and to reform the regulatory and supervisory architecture accordingly. 
This has brought about yet another wave of changes to the environment we operate in. 
Certainly,  one  of  the  defining  changes  was  the  emergence  and  growing  importance  of 
macro-prudential  policy.  We  have  come  to  understand  that  monetary  policy  and  micro-
prudential  supervision  alone  are  not  sufficient  to  ensure  macroeconomic  financial  stability. 
The consequence is a whole new additional perspective on the financial system, and we are 
still  in  the  process  of  understanding  this  perspective,  determining  how  it  interacts  with  our 
other  tasks  as  supervisors  and  central  bankers,  and  how  to  best  utilise  the  new  macro-
prudential  toolset  at  hand.  Here,  we  can  learn  from  the  experience  of  emerging  market 
economies, some of which had been using macro-prudential tools long before the crisis of 
2007. 
Meanwhile,  the  micro-prudential  perspective  remains  as  relevant  as  ever.  Therefore,  we 
have comprehensively revised and extended the Basel Accord over the last couple of years. 
The greater part of the work has been done, and Basel III is already being implemented by 
regulators  across  the  globe.  However,  there  is  still  some  fine-tuning  left  to  do,  and  in  the 
Basel Committee I am working together with my colleague from the SARB to finalise Basel III 
by the end of this year. 
Looking at all of these developments we can say that – less than a decade after the crisis 
erupted  –  central  bankers  and  banking  supervisors  find  themselves  in  a  wholly  new 
landscape few of us would have imagined just a couple of years ago. 
And  while,  as  I  have  said,  we  are  still  in  the  process  of  fine-tuning  and  gradually 
implementing  the  new  framework  we  have  built,  we  have  to  grapple  with  very  specific 
challenges.  In  Europe,  the  markets  have  already  put  the  new  regulatory  and  supervisory 
architecture to the test. 
But even though we have not wholly overcome all our problems in Europe yet, the situation 
has  stabilised,  and  economic  performance  is  picking  up  as  well.  In  June,  the  Eurosystem 
macroeconomic staff projected that real GDP would grow by 1.6% this year and 1.7% in both 
2017  and  2018. This  would  mean  that  aggregate  economic capacity  utilisation  in  the  euro 
area as a whole may come close to normal levels by the end of the projection horizon. The 
recovery is mainly due to domestic demand, which is benefiting from low energy prices and 
the expansionary monetary policy. 
Then,  about two  months  ago,  yet  another challenge  arose: The  vote  of the  citizens  of  the 
United Kingdom to leave the European Union. Politically, this was a wake-up call for the EU. 
It’s  the first time  that  European  integration  has  hit  a  major  roadblock. The  EU  now  has  to 
determine how to react to the outcome of the referendum and win back the people that have 
become alienated from the process of European unification. 
But let me return to the economic perspective. The immediate financial market reaction to the 
British  vote  was  strong  but  remained  orderly.  Even  though  the  decision  obviously  took 
market  participants  by  surprise,  both  financial  institutions  and  central  banks  were  well 
prepared. Supervisors had asked banks to prepare for market volatility, and thanks to stricter 
capital and liquidity regulation Eurozone banks are in better shape today than at the start of 
the financial crisis. Central banks’ immediate commitment to provide liquidity certainly helped 
to calm the markets. 
The  question  that  concerns  us  now  is  what  impact  the  referendum  will  have  on  future 
economic performance in Europe. It is a question of great relevance to South Africa as well. 
The UK is the largest source country of foreign direct investment (FDI) in South Africa and 
the third-largest destination of outward FDI from South Africa. There are also sizable trade 
linkages,  as  the  Eurozone  together  with  the  UK  account  for  19%  of  South  Africa’s  goods 
exports. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With the Brexit vote, one of the downside risks to economic growth projections for the euro 
area and the UK has materialised. Early indicators and model estimations suggest that the 
impact  will  be  largely  focused  on  the  UK  itself,  while  the  euro  area  will  be  affected  only 
moderately. 
But  we  shouldn’t  jump to  conclusions  at  this  stage. It’s still  too  early  to assess the  overall 
impact  on  the  economic  outlook,  as  there  are  currently  insufficient  post-referendum  data 
available.  Furthermore,  the  impact  depends  considerably  on  the  outcome  of  negotiations 
between the UK and the EU regarding future formal relations. In my opinion, neither party 
has anything to gain by re-erecting barriers. It is essential that we maintain the cooperative 
culture we have built up over so many years. 
Ladies and gentlemen, international cooperation always starts at the personal level. This is 
where our representative in South Africa comes into play. Her task is to build networks, to 
share  information  and  ideas,  to  explain  the  Bundesbank’s  positions  and  to  facilitate 
cooperation. 
Tonight, I would like to take the opportunity to welcome Ms Jenny Kilp. Ms Kilp graduated 
from Liebig University in Giessen with a Diploma in Economics, and after gathering several 
years of experience in the academic world, joined the Deutsche Bundesbank in 2004. Since 
then,  Ms  Kilp  has  been  an  expert  in  the  Bundesbank’s  Directorate  General  Financial 
Stability, where she was in charge of policy issues regarding the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF).  She  has  analysed  the  economic  situation  of  a  vast  number  of  countries  for  the 
Bundesbank and gained a sound overview of the problematic issues facing various parts of 
the world, also in terms of the spill-over effects of industrial countries’ policies on other parts 
of the world. Ms Kilp is already familiar with South Africa as she worked on a project here 
while  she  was  a  student.  Now  she  is  committed  to  moving  with  her  family  to  this  great 
country for at least two to three years. I value her openness, excellent specialist knowledge 
and ingenuity – all traits which will serve her well in her new post! Some of you have already 
met  her,  and  I  am  sure  that  she  will  be  a  great  first  Bundesbank  representative  to  South 
Africa. 
I wish Ms Kilp all the best and a good start for her new appointment! 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
