   Patrick Njoroge: Developing robust and sustainable strategies for 
microfinance in Kenya 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Patrick  Njoroge,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Microfinance Training  Course for  Policy  and  Development  2016,  organised  by  the  Alliance 
Forum Foundation, held at the Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 24 February 2016. 
 Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya, let me join my colleagues in welcoming you to this 
workshop  aimed  at  developing  a  strategy  to  enhance  financial  inclusion  in  the  COMESA 
region. The strategy will be underpinned by an enabling regulatory and supervisory framework 
for Microfinance Institutions. I understand that the strategy is based on the draft proceedings 
of Microfinance Training Course for Policy and Development, which was held in December 
2014 in Lusaka. At the outset, let me commend the COMESA Monetary Institute, the African 
Development Bank and the Alliance Forum Foundation, for the work done so far.  
Establishing a financially inclusive ecosystem that does not marginalize people on the basis of 
income or geographical location has become a policy concern for many countries in the world, 
including COMESA member countries. Financial inclusion has gained traction over the recent 
years as a priority area for policymakers and regulators within the financial services sector.  
The various initiatives that have been undertaken by different stakeholders, to enhance access 
and  usage  of  formal  financial  services,  have  led  to  a  significant  reduction  in  the  global 
population that is financially excluded. The Global Findex Report (2014), spearheaded by the 
World  Bank,  estimates  that  between  2011  and 2014,  the  number  of  adults  without  a  bank 
account dropped by 20 percent, to 2 billion. The enhanced access is attributed largely to a 
significant  growth  in  account  penetration  and  innovations  in  technology,  especially  mobile 
money and agency banking. However, it is time now to shift the focus away from access and 
towards quality breadth of services.  
In  Kenya,  the  outcomes  of  the  various  initiatives,  some  of  which  will  be  highlighted  in  this 
workshop, have been remarkable. Noteworthy progress includes, the increase in the banked 
population  from  24  percent  to  67  percent  between  2006  and  2013  as  highlighted  by  the 
FinAccess Surveys conducted by FSD Kenya between 2006 and 2013. A Geospatial Survey 
that was conducted in 2013 also estimates that 76.7 percent of the Kenyan population is within 
a 5km radius of a financial access point. However, despite the noticeable progress in recent 
years, 25 percent of the Kenyan population still remains unbanked.  
The existence of national strategies that promote financial inclusion are critical to enhancing 
access to a diverse range of financial products to the unbanked in Kenya, the mandate of the 
Government to enhance the deepening of financial markets by fostering access, efficiency and 
stability is captured under Kenya’s Vision 2030.  
The  Central  Bank’s  approach  to  achieving  its  role  under  Vision  2030,  is  centered  on  the 
promotion of an enabling legal and regulatory framework that fosters the development of a 
diverse range of financial service providers, while guaranteeing its dual mandate of financial 
stability and financial integrity. Central to this objective has been the licensing and regulation 
of microfinance banks. The first microfinance bank in Kenya was licensed in May, 2009. This 
paved the way for 11 other microfinance banks which have been licenced to date.  
The 12 licenced microfinance banks have made a significant contribution to financial inclusion 
in Kenya. This is evidenced by the number of active deposit and loan accounts as at December 
2015  which  was  931,585  and  342,481  respectively.  In  value  terms,  this  represented 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Ksh.40.5 billion in deposits and Ksh.46.9 billion in advances. Further, Microfinance Banks had 
a footprint of 109 branches and 1,154 agents as at December 2015.  
While  commendable  achievements  have  been  made  in  the  past  6  years,  the  microfinance 
sector in Kenya still has considerable opportunities and challenges that institutions need to 
tackle in order to realize their full potential. Key amongst these challenges include the high 
cost of credit, inadequate products and services, and weak consumer protection frameworks.  
Microfinance institutions must be willing to make a difference if the full benefits of microfinance 
and financial inclusion are to be realized. Microfinance institutions must be prepared to employ 
innovative delivery channels to reduce their operational costs, and thereby enhance their reach 
and efficiency. An essential element in this process is recognizing the characteristics of the 
customers of these institutions and tailoring lending mechanisms to meet their situations.  
Policymakers,  on  their  part,  should  support  the  development  of  appropriate  support 
infrastructure to facilitate the last mile delivery of suitable financial services. Therefore, the 
development  of  proportionate,  risk-based,  regulations  by  policymakers  is  critical  to 
guaranteeing the development of a dynamic, robust and sustainable microfinance framework 
for a country.  
The starting point towards this collaborative structure is a consultative process to developing 
a  forward-looking  framework  for  regulation  and  supervision  of  microfinance  institutions. 
Developing  laws  and  regulations  that  facilitate  financial  inclusion  and  the  involvement  of 
diverse  institutions  in  the  microfinance  sector  will  go  a  long  way  to  enhance  provision  of 
diversified microfinance services in a sustainable basis for the economically active poor and 
low income households.  
As I conclude, my expectation is that the ideas to be presented and discussed over the next 
few days will form the basis for development of robust and sustainable national strategies for 
microfinance. I hope that by the end of this workshop, you will have come up with a Model 
COMESA  Strategy for Microfinance  Regulation  and  Supervision  that  will  enhance financial 
inclusion in the region.  
Such  a  model  strategy  will  not  only  provide  a  yardstick  for  microfinance  regulation  and 
supervision  but  will  also  go  a  long  way  in  the  harmonization  and  convergence  of  these 
practices, and ultimately contribute to monetary integration in the COMESA region. You have 
an opportunity to share experiences and assess a range of novel policy interventions that allow 
the unlocking of the benefits of financial services innovations.  
I wish you fruitful deliberations over the next few days and I look forward to the outcomes of 
your deliberations.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
