   Jorgovanka Tabaković: Taking knowledge to a higher level in Serbia 
Speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, on the occasion 
of Signing of the Memorandum of Cooperation between the National Bank of Serbia and the 
Faculty of Economics in Belgrade, Belgrade, 27 January 2016. 
 Dear colleagues, esteemed Mr. Boričić, esteemed members of the press, 
Allow me at the beginning to answer four simple questions. 
Why  is  this  Memorandum  signed  today  by  Mr.  Boričić,  as  the  Dean  of  the  Faculty  of 
Economics, and myself, as the Governor? Because, by definition, it is the top manager's task 
to  be  in  command  of  the  future,  finance  and  human  resources.  This  is  and  has  been  the 
responsibility of the head of an institution. 
Why are we signing this Memorandum today, three and a half years into my term in office? 
Because all informal channels, personalities, letters of reference have so far turned out to be 
an insufficient guarantee that we would get the best people. Yes, some came and have stayed, 
but  there  are  also many  who  came  and  left.  Many  of  those for  whom  the  NBS  was  just a 
stepping stone, a training ground, and, in the worst-case scenario for this country, a reference 
for a future elsewhere, outside Serbia. After signing this Memorandum, we will have a chance 
to select “the best of the best” and ensure they stay with the National Bank of Serbia. 
How did the Memorandum come about? It was at the initiative of the young people from the 
Faculty of Economics who are here with us today. They knocked on our doors introducing 
themselves as the Team for Serbia. The team. And for me, this was the key word. Because, 
the solution lies not in genius individuals, but in the genius of a team of individuals. A team 
with a leader – yes, a team at the top – no, and this is why we are here today and why we are 
signing this Memorandum. This meeting is motivated by the basic needs of men: to learn, to 
progress and to create. 
And why do we need each other – the Faculty of Economics in Belgrade and the National Bank 
of Serbia? Because there is no alternative to knowledge. And because in order to add value 
and  improve  by  practice,  you  must  have  something  of  value  to  start  with.  During  summer 
practice  in the  NBS,  students  are given  a  chance  to  improve  on the qualities  they  already 
demonstrated  during  studies.  In  our  institution,  they  become  part  of  the  team.  We,  at  the 
National Bank, teach young people to remain human. To keep their personality and always 
know the difference between submissiveness and respect for the hierarchy. They are taught 
to accept orders, to carry them out, to be superior, to be subordinate, but also that no authority 
comes without responsibility. That being loyal to a profession, vocation, institution, individual 
is as important as having knowledge, that there is a Hippocratic Oath for each profession, 
known as professional ethics. That it is initiative and hard work that will make us valued and 
appreciated by our co-workers, and that no one is irreplaceable. 
The National Bank of Serbia has become a pillar of economic stability, our ideas have been 
successfully implemented and defended many times, and that is why we wish to share our 
knowledge and experience with our young colleagues. But the doors of our institution remain 
open for all ideas which create new possibilities, for new objectives that shift horizons. It is only 
in this way that we will be ready to tackle new challenges. 
The National Bank of Serbia continues to organize summer practice for students of the final 
year of first- and second-degree studies, and by signing this Memorandum today, on this day 
of spirituality and education when we are celebrating Saint Sava, the enlightener of the Serbian 
people, we are ensuring the continuity and quality of this practice and cooperation, while taking 
it to a higher level. One could say that the signing of the Memorandum on this particular day is 
just  a  coincidence,  but  I  say  that  this  is  a  blessing  and  a  destiny  that  we  are  shaping  for 
ourselves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Thank you for your attention. I now give the floor to Professor Boričić. 
  2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
