   Benoît Cœuré and Ashley Alder: Further strengthening the resilience of 
financial plumbing 
Op-ed by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures 
(CPMI) and Mr Ashley Alder, Chair of the Board of the International Organization of Securities 
Commissions (IOSCO), published in the Financial Times under the title “Systemic derivatives 
reforms require greater vigilance”, 16 August 2016. 
 When Group of 20 leaders gather in China next month, an item for discussion will be how to 
further strengthen the resilience of some important “fixtures” in the plumbing of the financial 
system.  
In the lead-up to the G20 summit, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and 
the International Organization of Securities Commissions have published two reports that shed 
light on the system’s current ability to recover from shocks and provide suggestions on valves 
or taps that need to be tightened or replaced. 
Before the financial  crisis,  clearing  and  settlement  of  over-the-counter  derivatives,  such  as 
credit default swaps, was a byzantine mess of bilateral obligations with poor risk management 
and no genuine transparency on exposures for either participants or authorities.  
As  mandated  by  the  G20  in  2009,  most  OTC  derivatives  trades  now  pass  through  a  go-
between, a so-called central counter party (CCP), or clearing house, for example LCH, Eurex 
Clearing and CME Group. It becomes the buyer to every seller and the seller to every buyer, 
reducing the risk to individual banks or asset managers, providing clarity on exposures, and 
optimising the amount of collateral to be posted against them. 
Although some argue that increased use of CCPs amounts to “putting all your eggs in one 
basket”  and  that  they  have  become  the  new  “risk  monsters”  of  the  financial  system,  the 
situation that prevailed pre-crisis was manifestly more risky, complex and opaque.  
We saw this with the failure of Lehman Brothers. The issue is not whether CCPs concentrate 
risks (they do) but how well they manage their risks, including risks they pose to others, and 
the extent to which they are a source of strength during market stress. 
Our  joint  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  published  in  2012  set  out  risk 
management guidelines to promote robust CCPs and other “fixtures” such as payment and 
settlement systems and central securities depositories.  
We are now working to make sure that the principles are not only adhered to around the world 
but also applied in an even manner to level the playing field. We are providing more detailed 
guidance based on industry feedback, lessons learned and emerging best practices. 
These “twin” reports are the latest manifestations of this work. The first one assesses how a 
global sample of CCPs have put the principles into practice. Our analysis shows that CCPs 
have made important and meaningful progress in applying the principles, but also identifies a 
number of gaps and shortcomings.  
These include – in some cases – insufficient planning when a member firm defaults on its 
obligations, inadequate procedures to maintain minimum financial resources at all times, and 
deficiencies in testing liquidity stresses. All CCPs should review the lessons in the report in 
light  of  their  own  operations  and  risk  management  practices.  Any  shortcomings  should  be 
addressed urgently. 
The second seeks industry feedback on more detailed guidance on how CCPs can further 
boost  their  defences  against  shocks  such  as  liquidity  shortfalls  or  member  defaults.  This 
guidance includes clearer expectations on the rigour of credit and liquidity stress tests used in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   determining  the  level  of  financial  resources  that  a  CCP  should  maintain  and  on  a  CCP’s 
contribution of its own resources to cover losses arising from a member default. 
Importantly,  the  reports  complement  our  other  efforts  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure 
supporting global financial markets, such as how to better protect these key fixtures against 
cyber risk. This includes a goal of having critical services back up within two hours of a major 
cyber attack. We have confidence in the industry’s ability, over time, to meet this ambitious 
requirement  in  a  similar  way  that  it  was  able  to  achieve  the  same  objective  for  physical 
disruptions. 
We,  along  with  the  other  stakeholders,  are  working  to  build  a  stronger  and  more  robust 
plumbing system for the global financial markets. It is clear to us that the risk of default cannot 
be eliminated from the global financial system – to do so would imply unsustainable costs and 
severely restrict or even prevent businesses from using derivatives to manage commercial and 
financial uncertainty.  
So the aim is to limit the potential systemic risks arising from any default as much as possible 
by encouraging central clearing and then applying a robust but proportionate approach to back 
up financial buffers and risk control.  
The industry has made great strides in improving the risk management of CCPs over the years, 
but more work remains. As Mark Twain once said: “Put all your eggs in the one basket and – 
watch that basket!” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
