  Yannis Stournaras: Present situation and proposals to move forward 
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Conference 
organized by the Hellenic Observatory of the London School of Economics on “Getting Policy 
Knowledge Into Government”, London, 19 May 2016. 
 Before I begin my presentation I would like to congratulate the Hellenic Observatory at the 
LSE,  Professor  Kevin  Featherstone  and  his  colleagues,  for  twenty  years  of  valuable 
contribution  to  a  better  understanding  of  economic  and  social  realities  in  Greece.  The 
lectures,  publications  and  research  work  of  the  Observatory  allowed  us  to  look  at  Greece 
through  the  lens  of  an  outside,  independent  observer,  detached  from  our  everyday 
entanglements.  On  this  happy  occasion  of  your  20th  anniversary  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
Hellenic Observatory for that contribution and wish you many more years of creative activity. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
The  speakers  who  took the floor  in  the  preceding  panels  have  covered  the  European  and 
Greek  experiences,  giving  us  powerful  insights  into  the  respective  patterns  and  methods 
used.  All  discussions  converged  in  the  assessment  that,  if  governments  recognize, 
accommodate  and  internalize  outside  knowledge  and  technical  expertise,  the  efficiency  of 
policy making mechanism, as well as the quality of the decisions should be greatly improved. 
This  leads  directly  to  the  conclusion  that,  in  order  to move  forward,  we  must  improve  and 
enrich this fruitful relationship, removing existing obstacles. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Allow me now to share with you some general thoughts on the subject, based on the Greek 
experience.  I  will  begin  by  describing  briefly  the  nature  and  the  characteristics  of  outside 
knowledge. Then I will focus on the supply and sources of knowledge and particularly on the 
dual position of the Bank of Greece. Finally, I will outline the attitude of Greek governments 
vis  a  vis  external  knowledge  and  their  willingness  to  use  it  as  an  input  into  their  decision 
making, concluding with some remarks on the formative factors shaping this attitude. 
Outside knowledge – technical expertise 
I  understand  outside  knowledge  and  expertise  as  knowledge  developed  outside  the 
Government policy mechanisms. In the long – run one can rightfully advocate that outside 
knowledge is the cornerstone of economic policies, which are based on theories developed 
outside  politics,  in  the  field  of  science.  But,  as  we  are  not  here  to  discuss  the  perennial 
question of the relationship of science and politics, I must confine the analysis to the short 
and  medium  run.  In  this  time-frame,  outside  knowledge  should  be  seen  firstly  as  public 
knowledge,  i.e.  as  the  existing  corpus  of  research  results,  publications,  criticisms  and 
proposals coming from a variety of sources but sharing a common element: they are relevant 
and potentially useful in the formulation of present-day economic policies. 
The basic characteristics of public knowledge is that it is a free good, available not only to 
governments  but  to  the  society  at  large.  In  that  respect,  it  is  an  important  factor  shaping 
attitudes,  ideas  and  conceptions  that  can  legitimize  or  reject  economic  policies.  External 
expertise on the other hand refers to the total of skills and technical abilities that are available 
on demand. 
The supply of outside knowledge 
In Greece, as in other European countries, the supply of outside knowledge and expertise 
comes from universities, individual academics, commercial banks, think-tanks and business 
associations. KEPE, the Centre of Planning and Economic Research, may also be included 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in the list, although institutionally is part of public administration. All of them publish studies 
on  topical  issues,  regular  reports  on  the  state  of  the  economy,  policy  recommendations, 
forecasts and evaluations of current policies. 
The  Bank  of  Greece  is  an  independent  institution  with  specific  tasks  and  responsibilities, 
which  include  safeguarding  financial  stability  and  implementing  monetary  policy.  It  is 
therefore an indispensable part of the policy making apparatus and its technical expertise on 
these  issues  should  be  considered  as  internal  to  the  formation  and  implementation  of 
economic policy. The institutional importance of the Bank of Greece is clearly demonstrated 
by  the  fact  that  all  Memorandi  of  the  crisis  bear  two  signatures:  that  of  the  Minister  of 
Finance, alongside with the Governor’s of the Bank of Greece. 
In the same context, according to its mandate, the Bank of Greece should assist and support 
general  economic  policy  on  condition  that  the  Bank’s  primary  goal  of  safeguarding  price 
stability  is  not  jeopardized.  It fulfils  this role,  acting  as  an  outside  source  of knowledge  on 
general  economic  policy  issues.  This  is  done  mainly  through  its  regular  and  extraordinary 
publications and/or public interventions including: 
• 
• 
the Governor’s Annual Report on the state of the economy; 
the  biannual  Monetary  Policy  Report,  submitted  to  the  Greek  Parliament  and  the 
Cabinet; 
testimonies by the Governor before the Greek Parliament; 
articles, speeches, statements and interviews of the Governor; 
periodical publications; 
studies on economic policy relevant issues; 
press releases, which provide information and communicate the Bank’s position on 
topical issues. 
 All these activities communicate to the public the Bank’s stance on economic issues, which is 
the  outcome  of  collective  work  carried  out  by  all  departments,  particularly  the  Economic 
Analysis and Research Department, and endorsed by the Bank’s decision-making bodies. 
In the years of the crisis the Bank of Greece saw a need to enhance its public discourse and 
increase the frequency of interventions, with a view to: 
– 
warn about major risks which although clearly looming, had not been realized by the 
general public and were ignored by the governments. 
raise  awareness  of  the  complexity  of  the  situation  and  the  need  to  change  the 
course  of the  economy,  thus  contributing  to  the  formulation  of  policies  for  a  more 
effective management of the crisis. 
 The Bank of Greece’s public discourse has been enriched with new elements since the Bank 
has sought to strengthen its role as an advisor to society, communicating directly with the 
public,  which  in  that  period  was  inundated  with  conflicting  and  inaccurate  information  and 
signals that often resulted in confusion and higher uncertainty. Through its statements and its 
participation in the public debate, the Bank of Greece has aimed to present the true facts in a 
comprehensible  manner,  dispel  misconceptions  and  misunderstandings  and  provide  all 
citizens with reliable and timely information on the available options and implications thereof. 
It  should  be  noted  that  most  central  banks  undertook  similar  changes  regarding  their 
communication  policies,  which  –  in  response  to  the  conditions  of  the  crisis  –  have  shifted 
away from the traditional communication model whereby their discourse was addressed to a 
close circle of experts and was often cryptic. 
To sum up, I am convinced that Greece has an abundant supply of public knowledge that 
can  benefit  our  country.  Non-domestic  knowledge  should  also  be  added,  as  it  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  communicated to the public by numerous reports, studies, analyses, proposals and forecasts 
for Greece published by international organisations, think-tanks and research bodies. Thus, 
one can safely assume that Greek governments have at their disposal a bulk of knowledge 
that  can  be  evaluated  and  used  –  if  it  is  considered  to  be  helpful  –  in  the  formulation  of 
economic policies. 
The demand side 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  demand  side,  i.e.  governments’  willingness  to  recognize  the 
usefulness  of  outside  knowledge,  particularly  public  knowledge  as  I  have  described  it. 
Experience  shows  that  governments  are  reluctant  in  general,  with  perhaps  one  exception, 
the  Simitis  government,  who  I  am  happy  to  see  here  tonight,  to  exploit  public  knowledge, 
even if the proposals and recommendations are potentially relevant and useful. A revealing 
example  is  the  prolegomena  of  the  present  crisis:  Many  years  before  2008,  many 
independent observers, among them the Bank of Greece, had been warning that the Greek 
economy was vulnerable and if the large public and external deficits were not restrained, a 
severe  crisis  was  unavoidable.  They  had  also  put  forward  concrete  policy  proposals  and 
structural reforms that – if adopted – could have changed the course of events. The warnings 
however were not heeded and successive governments continued borrowing and spending, 
bringing the economy to the edge of disaster when the international crisis broke out. 
In  general,  governments  in  Greece  are  reluctant  to  accept  outside  expertise  and  they 
perceive the available supply with distrust. The reasons behind this attitude lie in the fierce 
partisanship  of  Greek  politics.  The  political  system  is  based  on  confrontation  that  breeds 
strong  distrust  for  the  “other”,  leaving  no  ground  for  independent  voices.  The  term 
“technocrat”  carries  derogative  connotations  and  it  is  definitely  considered  inferior  to  the 
“political”. Independent proposals and/or technical expertise are not judged on their merits, 
but  on  their  perceived  position  in  the  political  spectrum.  The  preference  for  “political” 
decisions,  as  opposed  to  “technocratic”,  is  ever  present  in  Greek  politics  and  reflects  an 
ideological system that gives precedence to the “political”, over all other considerations. 
This is clearly indicated by the methods Greek governments recognize the need for external 
knowledge and use it in their policy planning. 
The first method is by hiring individual experts as advisors and consultants to the Ministers. 
The  fact  however  that  all  of  them  leave  their  positions  together  with  the  Government  that 
hired them reveals a basic problem. 
A relevant case is the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, which is the body of 
economic experts in the Ministry of Finance that participates vigorously in the formulation of 
economic policies. The Chairman of the Council is usually a prominent economist, but the 
person  changes  with  every  change  of  government.  I  would  say  also  with  ministers  of  the 
same  government.  Panos  Tsakloglou  can  confirm  that.  When  I  left,  the  Minister  who 
succeeded  me,  changed  Panos  as  well.  The  position  is  termed  political,  meaning  that 
academic excellence is not the sole criterion for the choice of the Head. Another example of 
this  practice  is  the  appointment  of  university  professors  as  Ministers  or  in  other  high 
positions.  Governments  in  this  case  do  want  the  input  from  outside,  i.e.  the  professors’ 
knowledge, on the condition that this knowledge is politicized. 
A second method Governments use in order to acquire expertise from external sources is by 
setting up extra parliamentary committees of experts to study and suggest policy guidelines 
on  major  issues.  The  participants  are  practitioners,  academics,  representatives  of  various 
social groups or individuals with a proven knowledge of the subject. Issues that committees 
of this kind dealt with in the past have been, among others: the social security system, fiscal 
policy  and  tax  reforms,  the  system  of  national  statistics,  policies  for  growth.  The  Spraos 
reports was a famous example. The work of the committees ended up with detailed reports, 
extensive analysis of the facts and concrete policy recommendations. These reports, besides 
summing  up  the  existing  knowledge  on  the  subject,  reflected  the  interchange  of  different 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ideas and the consensus of the participants on what was feasible and desirable at the time. 
In that sense they constituted an ideal starting point for policy decisions that could be easily 
legitimized  by  the  broad,  non-partisan  character  of the  committees. Governments  however 
have missed that opportunity too. The findings of the committees, after going through a maze 
of political considerations, were eventually forgotten. It was again politics that won the upper 
hand. 
A  third  way  governments  internalize  extraneous  expertise  in  decision  making  is  to 
commission consultant firms, think tanks, university centers and/or individual academics to 
carry out research projects on specific, mostly technical issues. The terms and conditions of 
such a project are set by the relevant authority and the selection of the candidates is done 
according  to  the  provisions  of  the  European  and  Greek  law.  There  is  no  quantitative 
evidence to show to what extent this practice is used and the findings of these projects are 
not published. It seems however that undertakings of this kind are not rare and that they are 
often part of a larger project financed by European funds. This revealed demand indicates 
that  public  authorities  recognize  the  need  for  external  expertise  and  resort  to  it  in  an 
institutional framework. 
In the years of the crisis the importance of external expertise became paramount. Economic 
policies had to adapt to the directions specified by the agreements with the EU, the ECB and 
the  IMF,  and  technical  expertise  was  urgently  needed  to  deal  with  new  problems.  Under 
these conditions the bulk of technical assistance came from outside, non-domestic sources 
(IMF,  ECB,  EU)  as  an  indispensable,  mandatory  input  in  the  formulation  of  economic 
policies. In Greece, the new situation had no visible effects on the way governments evaluate 
and  use  external  knowledge.  The  response  to  the  great  challenge  of  radical  reforms  was 
planned  in-house,  with  help  from  non-domestic  consultants.  Moreover,  political  criteria 
continued to weigh down on policy decisions, contrary to the obvious need of non-partisan 
solutions. I argue (from personal experience) that in the rare occasions when political criteria 
were set aside and decisions were supported by strong technocratic knowledge, the outcome 
has been positive and the policies successful. 
To conclude: There are two main reasons behind the distrust of outside knowledge: First, the 
overriding importance given to the “political” as opposed to the “technocratic”. Second, the 
partisan nature of Greek political life that polarizes opinions, minimizes the middle ground, 
excludes consensus and degrades expertise, unless it is partisan. As long as these attitudes 
persist, outside knowledge will have a marginal role in the formulation of policy decisions. 
And I am really very sorry to notice tonight that Nikos Theocarakis’ speech before mine was 
such an example of partisan politics, since I used to be a Finance minister in the government 
that he described as almost colonial in his partisan speech. He failed though to admit that the 
“brave” negotiations that he and Yanis Varoufakis led, which led to the change of the name 
of the Troika to institutions and removed the Troika from the ministries to the Hilton, had also 
a  cost.  If  we  assume  that  what  he  described  were  benefits,  the  cost  of  course  was 
€86 billion: That was the third memorandum and the capital controls that have been imposed 
after €45 billion of deposit outflows. And these capital controls have been imposed in order to 
safeguard  financial  stability  following  the  “brave”  negotiations  of  Mr.  Theocarakis  and 
Mr. Varoufakis. I am sorry to say that, but I had the obligation to put the record straight. 
I  believe  however  that  even  deeply  embedded  beliefs  can  change  under  the  pressure  of 
extraordinary conditions and that the traumatic experience of the last several years will help 
changing attitudes of the past. We have already witnessed a gradual convergence of political 
forces  on  the  necessary  policies  to  overcome  the  crisis  and  the  sterile  confrontations 
between  anti-memorandum  and  pro-memorandum  supporters  to  fade  out.  It  is  therefore 
reasonable  to  assume  that,  in  the  future,  policies  will  be  increasingly  based  on  facts  and 
knowledge and less on preconceptions and ideas. 
The long negotiations of successive Greek governments with the European partners and the 
IMF, in the years of the crisis, have left us a valuable legacy: analysis of the facts, technical 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  expertise and accurate forecasts are indispensable and cannot be substituted by political will. 
I hope that this paradigm will not be forgotten, and governments in the future will see more 
clearly the need for and the advantages of independent, outside knowledge and expertise. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
