   Már Guðmundsson: Iceland’s recovery – facts, myths, and the lessons 
learned 
Speech by Mr Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at the Official 
Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) City Lecture, London, 28 January 2016. 
 Accompanying figures can be found at the end of the speech. 
Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to begin by thanking OMFIF for giving me the opportunity to speak to you here 
today in the City of London about Iceland’s recovery. This is interesting for me because, for 
better and worse, the UK and Iceland deeply shared some aspects of the financial crisis, and 
because the City of London has for decades been Iceland’s international financial centre. But 
it also gives me great pleasure to see so many in the audience who have in various ways 
helped Iceland over the years. 
Today I will focus on the recovery from the crisis and the current challenges, including the task 
of lifting capital controls. But the recovery cannot be understood without an understanding of 
the nature of the negative shocks that hit Iceland during the crisis. 
It is well known that Iceland was the first advanced country to experience a full-scale banking 
crisis  in  autumn  2008,  when  its  three  big  cross-border  banks  failed.  It  was  also  the  first 
advanced  country  to  go  on  an  IMF  programme  during  the  Great  Financial  Crisis.  What  is 
somewhat less well known is that at that point, Iceland was already on its way into a recession 
after an unsustainable boom and serious overheating during 2005–2007 and a currency crisis 
in  the  first  half  of  2008.  The  banking  collapse  and  the  associated  wealth  loss  and  further 
currency  depreciation  made  the  recession  significantly  worse,  of  course,  as  did  the  global 
recession that began in the fourth quarter of 2008. 
In  autumn  2008,  two  separate  but  interrelated  sub-stories  of  the  recent  Icelandic  saga 
converged in a tragic grand finale. 
The first story was related to Iceland’s boom-bust cycle and problems with macroeconomic 
management in small, open, and financially integrated economies. This is a story that has 
played out many times around the globe, and many of its elements have been seen before in 
Iceland.  It  might  have  been  somewhat  more  extreme  this  time  around,  but  it  wasn’t 
fundamentally different. All the usual suspects were present, including strong capital inflows 
fuelling a credit and asset price boom that subsequently turned into a bubble at the same time 
as the economy overheated and an unsustainable external position developed, as could be 
seen in a double-digit current account deficit. And macroeconomic and prudential policies were 
not up to the task. Quite the contrary: there was a policy conflict between monetary policy and 
the  demand  levers  pulled  by  the  Government,  and  the  risks  inherent  in  capital  flows,  FX 
balance sheets, and credit and asset price booms were left under-regulated and insufficiently 
supervised. 
The second story was the rise and fall of three cross-border banks operating on the basis of 
EU legislation (the European “passport”). This story was much more unique, as it was part of 
the first banking crisis in Europe since the EU single market was formed in the early 1990s. 
This  framework,  along  with  the  prevailing  conditions  in  international  financial  markets  that 
provided  for  ample  and  cheap  credit,  facilitated  the  cross-border  expansion  of  the  newly 
privatised  Icelandic  banks.  In  less  than  five  years,  from  the  end  of  2003  to  mid-2008,  the 
combined balance sheet of these banks went from under two times GDP to almost ten times 
GDP, topping other small European countries with international financial centres, as can be 
seen on Figure 1: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Towards the end, around two-thirds of the combined balance sheet of the three cross-border 
banks  was  denominated  in  foreign  currency.  On  the  liabilities  side,  the  share  of  FX-
denominated debt was actually higher, as can be seen on the right side of the slide, with almost 
half of the financing in the form of FX deposits and other short-term FX financing. The FX part 
of the balance sheet therefore had a significant maturity mismatch. However, there was a very 
limited safety net of the type we have in a national setting, in the form of liquidity provision and 
lender of last resort (LOLR) to back it up. It was an accident waiting to happen, and happen it 
did, with a vengeance, at the peak of the international financial crisis in autumn 2008, when 
there was a wholesale run on the FX financing of internationally active banks. After having 
done a post mortem on the failed banks, we now know, however, that they also had other 
ailments that would probably have done them in at a later stage, although the process might 
have been somewhat less disorderly. 
The combination of the macroeconomic imbalances, an unsustainable banking system, and 
the  full  eruption  of  the  Great  Financial  Crisis  meant  that  Iceland  faced  unprecedented 
challenges  in  2008.  The  financing  of  the  current  account  deficit  became  impossible  when 
Iceland  experienced  a  full-scale  sudden-stop  currency  crisis  early  in  the  year,  when  the 
currency plummeted by 26%. Then, in the first week of October, almost 90% of the banking 
sector  failed.  This  resulted  in  a  further  26%  depreciation  of  the  currency.  Although  the 
depreciation  would  later  contribute  to  the  recovery,  at  that  point  it  exacerbated  the  crisis 
through negative balance sheet effects on a private sector that was heavily indebted in foreign 
currency, both directly and indirectly, through price indexation. The outlook was bleak indeed, 
and many expected that the sovereign would be forced to default on its obligations. 
That outcome was avoided, and the economy has performed better than seemed likely that 
dismal autumn. Part of the reason is the nature of the shocks. The macroeconomic adjustment 
and rebalancing was unavoidable and was facilitated over time by the real depreciation of the 
currency. The shocks disproportionally affected overblown sectors (banking and construction), 
whereas most of the export base remained intact. Much of the impact of the banking collapse 
hit  countries  other  than  Iceland.  Another  important  reason  was  the  policy  responses  that 
mitigated the recession and promoted recovery. Let me now turn to those. 
The policy responses took two main forms: crisis management during the collapse of the banks 
and the economic programme developed by the Icelandic authorities in co-operation with the 
IMF. 
From at least early 2008, the Icelandic authorities were aware of potential foreign currency 
liquidity problems at the banks and took action by trying to negotiate swap lines and tap foreign 
capital  markets  –  in  both  cases,  with  limited  success.  Given  the  lack  of  international  co-
operation, the Icelandic authorities were forced to consider radical solutions when the banks 
failed. Although they were not necessarily articulated in full at the time, these solutions entailed 
several goals: to preserve a functioning domestic payment system, ring-fence the state in the 
case of bank failures, limit the socialisation of private sector losses, and create the conditions 
for rebuilding a domestic banking system. 
The adopted solution was embedded in the so-called Emergency Act, which was passed by 
Parliament  on  6  October  2008.  The  Emergency  Act  saved  the  domestic  operations  of  the 
banking system by creating new banks, which involved carving domestic assets and liabilities 
out  of the  old, failing  banks. The  rest  –  and  the  much  larger  part  –  went  into  a resolution 
process. 
In order to reverse the ongoing run on domestic deposits, a declaration was made that all 
deposits in Iceland were safe. This did not include deposits in foreign branches, as Iceland did 
not have the necessary access to FX to make such an implicit guarantee credible. All deposits 
in Icelandic-headquartered banks were, however, given priority over other unsecured claims, 
including those in foreign branches. This decision was a key to the outcome that deposit claims 
from the foreign branches have now been paid in full from recoveries of the old banks’ estates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In international discussion, a number of myths have developed about this process. There have 
been  claims  that  Iceland  allowed  its  banking  system  to  collapse,  with  what  now  seem 
reasonable results, and that others should consider doing the same. The fact is that Iceland 
kept the domestic part of its banking system running throughout, and at significant expense; 
otherwise, the consequences would have been dire. Some have claimed that the banks were 
nationalised. They were not. 
The failed private banks are private companies in winding-up proceedings governed by law. 
The Government fully recapitalised one of the new banks. The other two have been private 
banks  owned  primarily  by  the  estates  of  the  old  banks.  Others  have  claimed  that  Iceland 
defaulted and got away with it. The opposite is true. The credit of the sovereign was preserved, 
and all debt obligations have been paid in full and on time. 
On the whole, these measures were successful, which mitigated the effect of the banks’ failure 
on  the  economy.  The  domestic  payment  system  functioned  more  or  less  seamlessly 
throughout,  and  there  was  continuous  access  to  deposits  and  basic  banking  services  in 
Iceland. 
The economic programme with the IMF was initiated in November 2008. It had three key goals: 
stabilisation  of  the  exchange  rate,  fiscal  sustainability,  and  reconstruction  of  the  financial 
sector. Financing amounted to USD 4.4 bn. with 1.4 bn. coming from the IMF and the rest from 
bilateral loans from the Nordic countries and Poland. Despite some initial delays due to the 
bilateral dispute on deposit guarantees, which I will not discuss here, the programme was very 
successful, and all three goals were reached. The programme ended in August 2011. The 
Nordic bilateral loans were prepaid in 2012–2015, and the IMF facility and the Polish loan were 
prepaid in autumn 2015. 
Comprehensive  capital  controls  were  an  important  element  in  the  programme,  but  their 
rationale was to help to stabilise the exchange rate after the currency had fallen more than 
50% in 2008, where foreign króna positions – a legacy of carry trade and capital inflows – 
amounted to around 40% of GDP, and where a large fiscal deficit that had to be financed in 
the domestic market had developed. In this situation, the capital controls gave monetary policy 
more  scope  to  focus  on  the  domestic  economy,  as  is  demonstrated  in  Figure  4,  which 
compares developments in short-term real interest rates during and after the currency and 
banking crises in Korea in 1997 and Iceland in 2008. In Korea there is a clear spike in real 
rates at the time of the crisis, as interest rates were used to stabilise the exchange rate whereas 
this spike is missing in the case of Iceland. 
The  economic  programme  with  the  IMF  included  a  medium-term  fiscal  consolidation  plan. 
Automatic  stabilisers  were  allowed  to  work  fully  during  the  contraction  of  2009,  however, 
resulting  in  a  significant  public  sector  deficit,  as  can  been  seen  from  Figure  4.  The  fiscal 
consolidation that commenced in 2010 arrested the rise in the headline deficit relative to GDP 
and then reduced it once the economy began to recover. In international comparison, the fiscal 
effort was sizeable, as can be seen on Figure 5. But it did not derail the recovery that began 
around  mid-2010  and  was  key  to  restoring  confidence  and  paving  the  way  for  Iceland´s 
renewed market access. It helped that monetary policy could be relaxed over the course of 
2010,  as  the  closure  of  loopholes  in  the  capital  controls  in  late  2009  helped  stabilise  the 
exchange rate. 
The recession was driven partly by the unavoidable adjustment of imbalances that required a 
lower level of domestic demand and a shift in its composition, and partly by the negative shocks 
that deepened the recession further. The recession was indeed deep, as Iceland lost just over 
11% of output during the recession that ended in Q1/2010 and unemployment peaked at 8% 
in Q4/2010. The shift in the composition of demand was even more dramatic, as is witnessed 
by the swing in the current account from a deficit 17% of GDP in 2008 to a surplus of 8% in 
2009. To a significant degree, this was induced by a drop in the real exchange rate amounting 
to 44% from the pre-crisis peak to the November 2008 trough. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
The recovery began as previous imbalances were corrected and the economy found its bottom 
in the underlying strength of its traditional export sectors, the non-traded goods sector took 
advantage of the low real exchange rate, and the stabilisation of the economy and later real 
wage gains rekindled consumption. And then we have had the phenomenal growth in tourism 
in  the  recent  years,  which  seems  to  be  due  to  much  more  than  the  historically  low  real 
exchange rate. 
These  figures  show  developments  in  GDP  and  employment  during  the  recession  and 
subsequent recovery in Iceland, with predictions extending into 2017 for GDP and 2016 for 
employment. For comparison, it shows the median and the 1st-3rd quartiles of the distribution 
of these variables for 30 other European countries, with Ireland and the UK highlighted. It 
shows that Iceland’s recession was significantly deeper than the median in Europe, and the 
same goes for Ireland, although to a lesser degree. Both countries have been doing better 
than  average  during  the  recovery,  especially  lately  and  in  the  forecasts.  By  this  measure, 
Iceland seems to have levelled with the UK in terms of the level of GDP compared to before 
the crisis, and Ireland is surpassing both. But developments in employment are significantly 
more favourable both in Iceland and the UK. The flexible exchange rate probably plays a role 
here, but the price is weak productivity growth. 
Iceland has now been recovering for about six years and has now surpassed its pre-crisis peak 
output level and has more than absorbed the slack in the economy, as can be seen in the 
unemployment rate, which has fallen to just over 3½% in seasonally adjusted terms. Unlike 
the pre-crisis peak, however, the current level of output is associated with a relatively well-
balanced economy, both internally and externally, although there concerns about tensions in 
the labour market and a growing positive output gap. Inflation has now been below the 2½% 
target for almost two years despite strong wage increases, as international developments and 
the appreciation of the króna have so far counterbalanced those. The current account surplus 
has remained sizeable. 
So  is  Iceland  out  of the  woods?  Not  quite. The financial  crisis  casts  a long  shadow.  Both 
household and corporate debt levels have declined significantly relative to income, through 
debt restructuring and income growth. The household debt-to-income ratio is back to around 
the 2005 level, and the corporate debt-to-GDP ratio is at its lowest since mid-2004. But there 
are  significant  pockets  of  financial  fragility,  with  some  of  the  households  that  bought  and 
borrowed at the peak of the market still facing very heavy debt service burdens. And even 
though gross public debt is now on a declining path relative to GDP, at 70% it is still high in 
historical terms. 
The biggest legacy problem, though, is the comprehensive capital controls. During the early 
stages of the crisis, the controls were helpful in stabilising the economy and providing the 
shelter needed to repair balance sheets and rebalance the economy. But over time  – and 
increasingly, as the economy and the rest of the world recover – they become obstacles to 
economic growth. 
However, there have been major hindrances to speedy removal of capital controls, due to the 
legacy balance of payments problem reflected in huge króna positions indirectly or directly 
owned by foreign residents. These take two forms. 
The  first  and  more  important  were  the  domestic  assets  of  the  old  banks  in  winding-up 
proceedings. The problem here is that most of the claims on these banks are foreign but their 
net domestic assets amount to 25% of GDP. When considering the complication this creates 
for Iceland, you should bear in mind that it is partly because the resolution of the third-largest 
bankruptcy in the history of mankind is taking place in one of the smallest countries in Europe 
and is intertwined with its balance of payments and international investment position. 
The second is the so-called offshore krónur owned by foreign residents. These currently total 
14½%  of  GDP,  after  having  been  more  than  halved  through  auctions,  bilateral  deals  and 
nominal GDP growth since capital controls were introduced. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
Therefore, potential capital outflows amounting to almost 40% of GDP might have sought a 
speedy  exit  if  capital  controls  had  been  lifted  overnight.  This  would  have  had  serious 
consequences for economic and financial stability in Iceland. This was not going to be allowed 
to happen and, as a matter of fact, the population has been promised solutions entailing no 
negative effect on the exchange rate. 
A  co-operative  solution  vis-à-vis  the  failed  bank’s  estates  that  allows  them  to  go  into 
composition and pay out to creditors by fulfilling so-called stability criteria has been decided 
and is being implemented. Had that not been forthcoming, we would have had to impose a 
one-off stability tax of around 31% to deal with the externality, as we could no longer hold the 
Icelandic nation hostage to the situation. 
The  stability  criteria  are  these:  the  estates  pay  stability  contributions  by  transferring  a 
significant part of their króna assets to the government, lengthen the maturity of current FX 
financing of domestic banks, repay government and central bank support and debt. Taken 
together, these measures fully mitigate the potential negative balance of payments effect from 
unwinding the estates. 
We are currently working on a solution regarding offshore krónur that would fulfil the same 
criteria regarding the exchange rate and make it possible for us to move to the third and final 
stage of lifting capital controls, which is vis-à-vis domestic residents. The difference is that this 
time around we are putting part of our own FX reserves on the table to facilitate the solution. It 
will be offered in an auction, along with long-term euro and ISK bonds. The aim is to release 
and tether the offshore overhang so we do not have to worry about it when we lift the controls 
on domestic resident’s outflows. For that final step, we need a solid external position, a resilient 
financial  sector,  and  sizeable  FX reserves  that are to  a  significant  degree  not financed  by 
foreign borrowing – all of which we have or are on the way to securing. This is why we bought 
FX in the market for an unprecedented 12½% of GDP last year and have continued on the 
same path this year. 
Before lifting capital controls on  domestic residents, we will  have to finalise the  necessary 
adaption of monetary policy and financial stability frameworks to the potentially rough seas of 
unrestricted capital movements. For monetary policy, it means what we call IT+, where IT is 
coupled with a managed float, supported by macroprudential policies and possibly on-and-off 
capital flow management tools to deal with excessive inflows related to carry trade that greatly 
complicate the conduct of monetary policy, as indeed happened in Iceland last summer and 
autumn. For financial stability, it means putting the finishing touches on the implementation of 
prudential rules on FX liquidity and financing of banks that would greatly curtail their ability to 
build oversized FX balance sheets with rollover risk. This would be part of our current policy to 
have predominantly domestic-oriented banks as long as global and regional frameworks make 
cross-border banking in small countries with their own currency unsafe. 
Let me finally and very briefly mention some of the lessons learned. We can expand on those 
and other topics during the Q&A session if you wish. 
It  is  too  risky  to  headquarter  big  international  banks  in  small  countries  unless  a  credible 
multilateral financial safety net is available. 
The framework for cross-border banking in the EU was and is deeply flawed. A full banking 
union will take care of that, but not for EEA countries outside the Eurozone, due to potential 
FX risks on bank’s balance sheets. 
A flexible exchange rate can be both part of the problem and the solution. 
Capital controls in some form are here to stay as part of the toolbox, but comprehensive capital 
controls should not be imposed lightly. 
There  are  limits  to  independent  monetary  policy  in  small,  open,  and  financially  integrated 
economies, even if the exchange rate is flexible. 
Let me finish here and I look forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  6 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
