  Carlos da Silva Costa: From Banking Union to Financial Union – 
overcoming current challenges 
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  seminar 
“Banking  Union:  The  new  frontier  of  financial  regulation  in  the  European  Union”,  Lisbon, 
25 January 2016. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Portugal’s website: Slides (PDF). 
Banking Union – Where do we stand? 
Where we came from: from the Single Market to the Banking Union 
Underlying the Banking Union are two steps that are almost causally linked. 
The Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was established in 1999 in response to the need 
for  exchange  rate  stability,  to  protect  the  orderly  functioning  and  integrity  of  the  single 
market. The establishment of a single currency and the adoption of a single monetary policy, 
managed by a European Central Bank, resulted from the practical impossibility of reconciling 
the  free  movement  of  capital  with  national  monetary  policies  and  exchange  rate  stability 
under  the  European  Monetary  System. The  European  Monetary  System  was  incompatible 
with both the openness of economies within a single market and the existence of national 
monetary policies. Indeed, even when monetary policies were aligned, the lack of confidence 
over this trilemma could give rise to exchange rate fluctuations. This inconsistency led to the 
1992–93  exchange  rate  crisis,  when  the  magnitude  of  fluctuations  made  it  necessary  to 
widen the fluctuation bands, which had a direct impact on intra-EU trade flows. 
Following the onset of the international financial crisis in 2007–08, the limitations to the EMU 
institutional framework became clear. The mechanisms in place – particularly, the Stability 
and Growth Pact and the single monetary policy  –  were unable to prevent the build-up of 
major imbalances across the euro area countries. Such imbalances resulted from excessive 
indebtedness of various institutional sectors in several countries and divergent developments 
in their competitive positions, amid particularly favourable market conditions, which did not 
properly reflect the sovereignty of national economic policies. 
The divergence in competitive positions was exacerbated most notably by: (i) the lack of both 
cooperation  mechanisms  to  monitor  wage  developments  under  the  EMU  and  price-setting 
mechanisms against a background of low inflation rates, and (ii) some disregard for the build-
up of external deficits in several countries, which could have been due to the lower severity 
of external account imbalances in economic unions at a later stage of integration. 
When these imbalances became apparent, the change in the markets’ risk perception led to 
financial  fragmentation  in  the  euro  area,  which  affected  not  only  the  most  vulnerable 
economies via  an inability  to  access  external  financing,  but  also  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism itself, and, consequently, the EMU. 
The fragilities brought to light by the EMU framework made its deepening inevitable, which 
over the past few years has resulted in: 
• 
The strengthening  of fiscal  discipline  mechanisms,  with  the  adoption  of  the  Fiscal 
Compact, the Six-Pack and the Two-Pack, and the establishment of the European 
Semester as an annual cycle for policy coordination in the EU; 
The establishment of mechanisms to prevent the build-up of imbalances impacting 
on  the  competitive  position  of  euro  area  countries  (the  so-called  Macroeconomic 
Imbalances Procedure); 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The creation of a Banking Union, with the purpose of breaking the bank-sovereign 
nexus, which was behind the severity of the euro area crisis; 
The  establishment  of  a  common  mechanism  for  last-resort  lending  subject  to 
conditionality (European Stability Mechanism). 
 Where we stand: a Banking Union under construction 
Today,  we  stand  on  undeniably  stronger  ground  than  we  did  before  the  onset  of  the 
international financial crisis, but which is still insufficient to break the bank-sovereign nexus 
and safeguard the existence of a genuine European financial market. 
The remaining shortcomings result mostly from three factors: 
First, the Banking Union, which is composed of three pillars, is still institutionally incomplete. 
We have: 
• 
A Single Supervisory Mechanism, which has been the single supervisory authority 
since November 2014; 
A  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  invested  with  resolution  authority  powers  since 
1 January  2016,  but  still  subject  to  the  limited  funding  capacity  of  the  European 
Resolution Fund; 
The  intention,  agreed  but  yet  to  be  implemented,  to  establish  a  common  deposit 
guarantee scheme. 
  Second, Europe lacks as yet a network of large banks established across all territories, as 
country-based  banking  systems  are  still  predominant.  Institutions  tend  to  have  a  limited 
presence at EU level, while having systemic importance in the territory where their business 
is concentrated. This stands in contrast to what is seen, for instance, in the United States, 
where large banks with reach across the country coexist with small local banks, which are 
not systemic in nature. 
In  the  current  framework  of  a  banking  union  still  under  construction,  national  authorities 
continue to be responsible for national financial stability, i.e. they continue to be responsible 
–  and  therefore  accountable  –  for  the  safeguarding  of  depositors’  confidence  and  the 
financing of the economy in their own countries. Nonetheless, they have neither the powers 
nor the instruments to deal with the impact of decisions in terms of supervision, resolution 
and implementation of competition rules, which are taken at European level and significantly 
restrict the options available to national authorities. This limitation of powers and instruments, 
however,  is  not  perceived  by  the  common  citizen,  given  that  national  authorities  –  with 
responsibility for national financial stability – continue to be the most visible decision maker 
and  communicator.  The  depositors’  incomplete  reading  of  the  decision-making  process 
inevitably  weakens  confidence  in  the  conduct  of  financial  policy  and  in  the  system  itself. 
Therefore,  European  restrictions  on  national  authorities’  action,  in  a  context  where  risk-
sharing  at  European  level  is  not  complete,  not  only  hinder  the  safeguarding  of  financial 
stability, but also heighten the underlying risks, affecting agents’ confidence in the financial 
system. 
Third, in Europe, multiple entities define and implement sectoral policies with material impact 
on  financial  system  developments,  especially  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (and  the 
Governing  Council), 
the 
implementation  of  regulations  and  competition  rules,  the  European  Commission.  These 
entities are focused on their respective mandates and, in spite of the evident spillovers, their 
action is not appropriately coordinated or framed within an overall view of sectoral policy for 
the financial system. 
In  effect,  both  regulation  and  its  discretionary  component,  i.e.  the  practice  of  supervision, 
resolution  and 
the  enforcement  of  competition  rules,  have  sectoral  and  national 
the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and,  with 
regard 
to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
consequences.  These  tend  to  be  more  relevant  the  lower  the  coordination  is  among  the 
different authorities and the further away the decision centre is from the territory affected by 
the  decisions.  Such  difficulties  are  further  hindered  by  the  absence  of  decision-making 
mechanisms  at  European  level  which  may  ensure  the  agility,  swiftness  and  confidentiality 
indispensable for an effective banking resolution function. 
The current situation poses significant challenges that require urgent reflection and action at 
European level; otherwise, the growing negative perception regarding the European project 
may deteriorate further. 
The  asymmetry  between  powers  and  accountability  and  the  limited  vision  arising from  the 
fragmentation of responsibilities and the absence of a consistent sectoral policy at European 
level  give  rise  to  perverse  incentives.  If  these  are  not  adjusted  in  due  time,  they  may 
jeopardise  the  sustainability  of  the  Banking  Union  itself  and  the  objectives  underlying  its 
creation. 
Where we are going: from the Banking Union to the Capital Markets Union 
The  Banking  Union  is  a  necessary  but  insufficient  condition  to  ensure  the  existence  of  a 
single European financial system, efficiently channelling savings to investment opportunities 
within the European Union territory. 
Given that financing in Europe is dominated by the banking system, it must be ensured that 
banks are granted the possibility of securitising their credits and placing those securities with 
institutional investors. On the one hand, this would allow European banks torelease funds to 
finance new investment and to have alternative sources of funding in the capital market; on 
the  other  hand,  insurers  and  pension  funds,  which  currently  invest  in  long-term  securities 
issued outside Europe, would have the opportunity to invest in European securities. 
The development of a European securitization market is hindered by the fragmentation of the 
fiscal  and  regulatory  frameworks  (capital  markets,  insolvency,  etc.)  prevailing  in  Europe. 
Although  the  harmonisation  of  national  frameworks  within  a  reasonable  time  frame  is  not 
realistic, it would be advantageous, in particular for smaller countries, to develop an opt-in 
European scheme that would make it possible to overcome the identified barriers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
