   Kuben Naidoo: Monetary policy in South Africa 
Address by Mr Kuben Naidoo, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
FEDUSA Leadership and Collective Bargaining Conference, Muldersdrift, 19 February 2016. 
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to thank the Federation of Unions of South Africa (FEDUSA) for the opportunity to 
address the delegates of its annual Leadership and Collective Bargaining Conference. I am 
honoured to be part of a programme with such an illustrious group of speakers and panellists. 
This  year’s  theme,  ‘Decent  work  and  decent  life  for  all’,  is  particularly  relevant  when  one 
considers the challenging economic backdrop in South Africa and in many other developing 
countries. It is wonderful to be able to debate the broad set of pertinent issues that are outlined 
in this programme. I believe that we can tackle South Africa’s economic challenges through 
open dialogue and engagement across all spheres of our society. 
Today, I will address one specific economic challenge: that of monetary policy formulation. I 
will frame the monetary policy debate with an assessment of the global and local economy 
before concluding with some remarks on the upcoming round of wage bargaining.  
Global prospects 
The world economy is once again experiencing a period of slowing growth, only this time the 
key areas of weakness are found in the emerging markets. Some argue that eight years after 
the onset of the global financial crisis we are still not out of it yet. What started off as a sub-
prime crisis in the United States became a crisis for the global financial system, morphing into 
a government debt crisis in Europe and now, potentially, a crisis for the emerging markets. 
The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  estimates  that  global  economic  growth  slowed  to 
3,1 per cent last year, down from 3,4 per cent in 2014. This was driven by a considerable 
slowdown in emerging market growth to a six-year low of 4 per cent from 4,6 per cent in 2014. 
Meanwhile,  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  growth  in  advanced  economies  increased 
marginally to 1,9 per cent last year. 
The  slower  pace  of  economic  expansion  in  China  played  a  major  role  in  the  weaker 
performance  of  emerging  market  economies  last  year.  Emerging  market  growth  was 
constrained through the channels of slower export growth into China, lower commodity prices, 
currency  weakness,  and  financial  market  volatility.  These  factors,  along  with  domestic 
challenges, saw emerging market economies like Brazil and Russia suffer recessions in 2015. 
Looking  ahead,  the  IMF  expects  a  modest  rebound  in  emerging  market  growth  this  year. 
However, it warns that the risks to this outlook are skewed to the downside due to geopolitical 
uncertainties, China’s shifting growth model, and the possibility of escalating financial market 
volatility. 
Advanced economies continued on a path of recovery last year, albeit at a mixed pace. The 
US  and  the  UK  appear  to  be  leading  the  recovery,  while  Japan  and  the  euro  area  find 
themselves in an earlier phase of their economic upswings. The ongoing improvement in US 
economic  activity  and  employment  prompted  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed)  to  lift  the 
benchmark US interest rate last December for the first time in nine years. The Fed is expected 
to continue on a gradual path of interest rate normalization over the medium term. As public- 
and private-sector borrowing costs in many parts of the world are referenced off US interest 
rates,  a  rising  US  policy  rate  threatens  to  push  up  the  cost  of  capital  globally.  A  second 
symptom of the impending US hiking cycle is that it has seen the dollar strengthen substantially 
against most other currencies since mid-2014. This has been driven by a flow of capital into 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   the US and, to some extent, out of emerging markets. Meanwhile, in Europe and Japan, central 
banks are aggressively easing policy in an attempt to fight off deflation and low growth. 
Global economic growth has persistently disappointed since the financial crisis hit in 2009. 
This  is  due,  in  part, to  high  levels  of  indebtedness,  excess  capacity  as well  as  weak fixed 
investment  growth  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  However,  these  challenges  are  being 
exacerbated  by  longer-term  trends  such  as  falling  productivity  growth,  the  technological 
displacement of jobs, and a downshift in global trade. 
While these trends present both opportunities and challenges, it appears as if emerging market 
economies  are  most  at  risk  in  the  current  environment,  especially  from  an  employment 
perspective. In an increasingly globalized world, it is important for South Africa to improve its 
competitiveness so that we can grow our export base and avoid increased import penetration. 
Domestic prospects 
Let us turn now to an examination of the domestic economy. 
As Governor Kganyago pointed out in the statement of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) 
last month, GDP growth is expected to come in at only 0,9 per cent this year. If the forecasts 
of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) are correct, economic growth in 2016 will be the 
weakest in seven years. 
South Africa, like other commodity-exporting nations, is facing a terms-of-trade shock as a 
result of the persistent decline in commodity prices since 2011. This has been exacerbated by 
periods of protracted labour unrest and electricity supply shortages. More recently, the severe 
drought conditions have begun to weigh on activity in the agricultural sector. At an aggregate 
level, corporate profit growth in the third quarter of 2015 (known as the gross operating surplus) 
was  at  its  lowest  level  on  record  at  0,3  per  cent  year-on-year.  This  was  due  to  declining 
profitability in agriculture, mining, and manufacturing. Pressure on corporate income suggests 
that investment, consumption, and hiring by the private sector will be muted in 2016. SARB’s 
leading indicator of economic activity has declined on a year-on-year basis for the past 12 
months. This supports our view that the risks to the growth outlook are skewed to the downside. 
Meanwhile, the inflation outlook has also deteriorated. After averaging 4,6 per cent in 2015, 
inflation is expected to accelerate to 6,8 per cent in 2016 and 7 per cent in 2017. The elevated 
inflation trajectory is largely as a result of multiple supply-side shocks which are expected to 
feed into consumer prices over the forecast horizon. These include a sharp depreciation of the 
exchange rate, a spike in domestic maize prices, and above-inflation electricity tariff increases. 
The domestic drought conditions have forced South Africa to import maize, which means that 
the depreciated exchange rate is now a determinant of the local maize price. As a result of this 
double whammy, food inflation is expected to reach 11 per cent this year. Even the sharp drop 
in the international oil price is unlikely to provide much reprieve to consumers as the rand’s 
depreciation means that petrol prices are likely to be slightly higher this year than in 2015. 
Persistent weakness in the South African economy poses very real risks to employment and 
investment  growth  over  the  longer  term.  Ultimately,  this  means  that  the  collective  gains  in 
prosperity which we as a nation have achieved are at risk of being eroded. 
Monetary policy 
Against  this  difficult  economic  backdrop,  the  Reserve  Bank  must  continue  to  execute  its 
mandate of protecting the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable 
economic  growth.  Protecting  the  value  of  the  currency  means  that  we  aim  to  maintain  its 
purchasing power. The purchasing power of the rand is influenced by inflation. As inflation 
rises, one is able to purchase fewer goods for a given number of rands. Therefore, we aim to 
protect the purchasing power of the currency by attempting to keep inflation low. We have an 
inflation target range of 3–6 per cent, which informs our policymaking.The Reserve Bank is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   also responsible for regulating parts of the financial sector. Regulation of this nature helps to 
reduce  the  risk  of  financial  crises,  which  over  the  long  run  is  likely  to  result  in  improved 
economic  performance. Furthermore, financial  regulation  can  promote fairness  as financial 
sector stress tends to weigh disproportionately on the most vulnerable in our society. 
While protecting the value of the currency is, of itself, an important objective, it also serves a 
greater  overarching  purpose:  that  of  providing  a  stable  foundation  for  sustained  economic 
growth. This is because most economic activity takes place on the basis of trust in the value 
of a currency, not just today, but also in the future. People are far more likely to save for the 
future if they are confident that the purchasing power of their savings will at least be maintained 
over time. Similarly, companies are more likely to enter into long-term contracts with each other 
if they are confident that inflation will not materially reduce the value of the contract once the 
job  is  completed.  By  providing  stakeholders  with  a  credible  inflation  target  range  and  a 
commitment  to  maintain  inflation  within  that  target  range,  we  are  making  the  business 
environment more predictable and ultimately more efficient over the long run. This is an indirect 
benefit of a sound monetary policy framework. 
To put it differently, a large body of literature shows that monetary policy can directly affect 
economic growth and employment only in the short run. For example, if the Reserve Bank 
maintains an interest rate that is artificially low, we may be able to temporarily boost GDP 
growth and employment. However, this will come at the cost of rising inflation and significant 
uncertainty about future inflation outcomes. Over time, this uncertainty may result in inflation 
expectations rising, which can lead to an inflation spiral as wage demands and price increases 
continuously rise to match future inflation expectations. The cost of bringing inflation back into 
the target range once inflation expectations have become dislodged is high. It would require 
aggressive policy action in a short space of time. As such, the temporary benefits associated 
with an overly accommodative monetary policy would be quickly eroded and replaced by a 
more  difficult  and  uncertain  operating  environment  for  business  and  consumers.  It  would, 
therefore, be short-sighted of the Reserve Bank to overlook inflation and consider only short-
term economic growth in its decision making. 
Instead, what we try to do is balance the need for stable economic growth and low levels of 
inflation. We are cognizant that the current interest rate hiking cycle will have a short-term 
detrimental impact on the economy. However, the cycle thus far has been gradual and shallow 
by  historical  standards. This measured  approach  to  monetary  policy  tightening reflects  the 
difficult balancing act that we currently face. 
The Reserve Bank operates within a flexible inflation-targeting framework, which allows us a 
degree of discretion in responding to inflation target breaches. If we expect a breach to be 
temporary or to be caused by an external shock, we may opt to look through such an event. 
An external shock could be a once-off food price increase or a depreciation of the exchange 
rate. In the case of such a shock, we may look past the first-round impact and act only if we 
see evidence of second-round effects (that this, if the shock feeds through more broadly into 
inflation). For example, in both 2012 and 2013 inflation briefly breached the 6 per cent level. 
The breaches were temporary, so we were able to look through them and leave interest rates 
on hold at that time. 
The inflation outlook has unfortunately deteriorated since then, which has called for higher 
interest rates. Last month, the MPC opted to lift the repurchase rate, or repo rate, by 50 basis 
points. This was due to a revised inflation forecast, which sees headline inflation remaining 
above the 3–6 per cent target range throughout the forecast period. Our inflation forecast was 
revised higher in January due to the multiple supply-side shocks that I referred to earlier. While 
we are able to tolerate a single external shock for a limited period of time, we cannot tolerate 
multiple simultaneous shocks that are likely to keep inflation elevated for two years. Shocks of 
this nature raise the risk that inflation expectations for the coming years will recalibrate to a 
significantly higher level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Our monetary policy response going forward will depend largely on how surveyed and implied 
inflation expectations play out over the course of this year. We use the Bureau for Economic 
Research survey of inflation expectations among trade unions, financial analysts, and business 
people as a guide. But a crucial indicator of implied inflation expectations is the level of actual 
wage settlements in the economy. Wage settlements that are above inflation and productivity 
growth threaten to undermine employment and pose a significant upside risk to the inflation 
outlook. Settlements of this nature may force the Reserve Bank to adopt a tighter monetary 
policy stance in order to curtail their second-round inflation impact. 
I  would  like  to  emphasise  that  monetary  policy  is  only  one  aspect  of  our  country’s 
macroeconomic policies. The aim of monetary policy is not to drive growth directly, but rather 
to contribute towards a stable macroeconomic environment. Growth can and must be raised 
through better education; sound public institutions; healthy relationships between government, 
business and labour; and a legal and policy environment that provides incentives for long-term 
investment and employment growth. While we encourage these policies, they fall outside of 
the direct mandate of the Reserve Bank. We call on all in society to pull together in support of 
these economic reforms as they will boost confidence in our economy and facilitate longer-
term prosperity. 
Concluding remarks 
We are acutely aware of the high levels of inequality in our country and the need for the fair 
sharing of profits between the owners of labour and capital. I would therefore appeal to all 
stakeholders in the upcoming round of wage bargaining to take a view on what is good not 
only for existing workers today, but also for society at large over the longer term.  
In conclusion, I would like to thank FEDUSA, in particular General Secretary Mr Dennis George 
and President Mr Koos Bezuidenhout, for the healthy relationship that we have had over many 
years. FEDUSA has always been willing and able to engage in robust and at times difficult 
discussions with the Bank on our policies, our work, and our approaches to fighting inflation. 
As Mahatma Gandhi once said: “Honest differences are often a healthy sign of progress.” We 
look  forward  to  ongoing  engagement  in  these  difficult  times.  South  Africa’s  problems  are 
complex and can only be solved by honest dialogue between all parties who are committed to 
making South Africa a better place. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
