   Jon Cunliffe: Remarks at the Alastair Ross Goobey Memorial 
Lecture 
Speech  by  Sir  Jon  Cunliffe,  Deputy  Governor  for  Financial  Stability  of  the  Bank  of 
England, at the Alastair Ross Goobey Memorial Lecture, London, 26 April 2016. 
 I was very pleased to be asked to give this memorial lecture today. I worked with Alastair 
when  I  was  at  the  Treasury.  Long  before  the  “age  of  the  asset  manager”  he  was  a 
colossal figure who had a major impact, not just on his own industry, but on the corporate 
world as a whole.  
Ideas  and  practices  that  we  now  think  of  as  standard  corporate governance  would, I 
suspect, never have been adopted without his advocacy and without his willingness to 
press the interests of those millions of people whose assets he managed.  
And he knew about booms and busts. His dissection, in his book Bricks and Mortals, of 
the anatomy of the UK property boom and bust of the late 80s and early 90s is a lesson 
to those who are today concerned with financial stability in the UK. 
Alastair died in early 2008, after Northern Rock but before the global financial crisis really 
got underway. The ending of Bricks and Mortals is prophetic. It was written in 1992, just 
before we began the long upswing in the financial cycle that ended with a bang in 2007: 
“Whenever the recovery starts, there will be new participants, who will be 
less constrained by the experience of this recession than those who lived 
through it. They will repeat many of the mistakes of the 1980s, as many of 
the companies repeated the mistakes of the 1970s. The market will then be 
driven to levels which will prove unsustainable.”  
He  was  writing,  of  course,  about  the  UK  property  market  rather  than  the  sub-prime 
market in the US or over-leveraged international investment banks. But I doubt he would 
have been that surprised; the subject of Bricks and Mortals is but one example of the 
self-reinforcing dynamics of powerful financial cycles which, if left unchecked, often end 
in tears, not just for investors but for the economy as a whole. 
I  hope  also  that  he  would  have  thought  the  changes  to  the  Bank  of  England’s 
responsibilities  following  the  crisis  –  and  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee  (FPC)  in  particular  –  were  a  major  step  forward  in  how  we  manage  and 
mitigate the risks of the financial cycle.   
I want to talk a little today about the FPC’s role and how the Committee sees the current 
conjuncture in terms of risks to financial stability. I will focus on the UK property sector. 
That  is  not  simply  because  today’s  lecture  is  supported  by  the  Investment  Property 
Forum  and  the  Cambridge  University  Land  Society.  Property-related  debt  –  for 
residential and commercial real estate purposes – makes up around 60% of private non-
financial sector debt in the UK.  
And, of course, the counterpart of that is that domestic property-related loans make up 
around 55% of the domestic loans of the UK banking sector; 76% when financial sector 
loans  are  excluded.1  Moreover,  the  evidence  is  pretty  clear  from  history,  and  across 
                                                
1   Non-bank lenders are also an important source of finance, providing 15% of all property-related loans 
according to Bank staff estimates.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   countries, that there is a strong and special link between booms in property-related debt 
and financial crises in a way that is much less true for other assets like equities.2 
I want also to reflect a little today on the health of banks in the UK. Since last summer, 
and particularly since the turn of the year, investors have written down the value of banks 
in  advanced  economies.  Does  this  signal  concerns  about  banks’  resilience  and 
robustness? Or about their returns? 
The Financial Policy Committee 
The FPC is charged with identifying risks and taking action to protect the resilience of 
the UK financial system. In essence this means two things.  
First, we need to be confident that the regulatory framework in the UK addresses the 
risks  not  just  of  individual  financial  firms,  important  though  that  is,  but  also  the  risks 
inherent  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  On  that  front  we  are  well  advanced  in 
implementing in the UK a programme of reforms to regulation that is unprecedented in 
scope and effect.  
To  give  some  examples  of  reforms  and  progress:  capital  requirements  for  globally 
systemic banks have increased ten-fold; and since the crisis, major UK banks’ leverage 
has roughly halved; they have cut the share of total funding accounted for by short-term 
wholesale funding from nearly 30% in 2007 to 10%; reduced trading assets by a third 
and cut inter-bank exposures by two thirds.  
Second, we need to address, through time, the risks that build up in the financial cycle. 
Financial cycles – the build-up of credit and risk driven largely by the dynamics of the 
financial system and its interaction with the economy – are generally longer than the 
“economic” or “business” cycle. The upswing of the financial cycle in Bricks and Mortals 
lasted  from  around  1980  until  the  early  1990s.  The  last  cycle  was  longer  and  more 
powerful.  
The FPC needs to identify, assess and mitigate risks building up over the cycle both in 
the financial system and in the economy as a whole. Or to put it in the terms of Alastair’s 
warning, to make sure that as memories fade, confidence returns and the dynamics of 
the financial cycle become more powerful we do not simply make the same mistakes 
again. 
The current conjuncture 
The FPC’s current assessment of the financial cycle is that following a subdued and low-
risk period of post-crisis repair to bank, household and corporate balance sheets, we 
have now entered a more standard period of risk and credit growth.  
The stock of private non-financial credit, economy wide, is around 140% of GDP. As I 
said earlier, the bulk of this is property-related debt. It is growing at broadly the same 
rate as nominal GDP. In contrast, in the 10 years before the crisis it grew annually at 
around twice the rate of GDP reaching 177% of GDP in 2009.  
The stock of household debt relative to income is 135%, down from 155% pre-crisis. In 
1992, when Bricks and Mortals was published, it was only 100%.  
Debt servicing ratios, however, are not stretched at the moment because interest rates 
are very low – the household debt service ratio is now at 2001 levels of around 8%. But 
                                                
2   For example, Jorda et al (2015) show that a housing bubble combined with a build-up of credit before a 
recession has more than twice as large an impact on GDP per-capita compared with an equity bubble.   
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the composition is very different: in 2001 the stock of debt was half the current level and 
the interest rate twice the current level. 
There are good reasons why the sustainable level of household debt may have risen 
over  the  past  30  years.3   But the  current  level  is  still  relatively  high  by  historical  and 
international  standards  and  is  something  that,  in  my  view,  the  FPC  needs  to  keep 
carefully in mind when thinking of financial stability.  
Hotspots 
Within this current overall picture of the UK being at the beginning of a period of standard 
risks, credit growing gently at a similar rate to nominal GDP, and asset prices supported 
by  low  long-term  interest rates, there  are  some hotter  spots  in  property markets  and 
elsewhere, such as consumer lending.4  I will focus on property markets.  
Buy-to-let 
First and foremost, within the residential property market, lending for buy-to-let has been 
growing strongly for a number of years. The stock of buy-to-let mortgage lending has 
grown at an annual average rate of 6% since 2008. It rose by 11.5% in the year to 2015 
Q4, while the stock of lending to owner occupiers was unchanged. Buy-to-let mortgages 
now account for 17%, by value, of the total stock of secured lending.  
Lending for buy-to-let has clearly been profitable. At around the start of 2016, lenders 
were planning to grow their gross buy-to-let lending by, on average, almost 20% per 
annum  over  the  next  two  years,  with  some  challenger  banks  and  smaller  building 
societies planning to grow their buy-to-let books at a much faster rate. 
A good rule of thumb for financial stability is that when some form of credit is growing 
fast  one  needs  to  look  very  carefully  at  whether  lenders’  underwriting  standards  are 
slipping and at what is happening to the distribution of borrowers’ indebtedness. 
The Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) conducted a review of lending for buy-to-let 
mortgages  and  concluded  that  there  was  indeed  some  evidence  of  loosening 
underwriting standards and a possibility that this might increase. As a result, the PRA 
Board  has  issued  a  Supervisory  Statement  to  clarify  expectations  for  underwriting 
standards in the market. The statement includes guidelines for testing the affordability of 
interest payments and a minimum stressed interest rate for use in lenders’ affordability 
tests.  
There  are  also  substantial  tax  changes  affecting  the  buy  to  let  market.  The  FPC’s 
expectation is that the Government’s changes in stamp duty and mortgage interest tax 
relief for buy-to-let, together with the PRA’s actions, will probably dampen the growth of 
buy-to-let  lending.  Mortgaged  buy-to-let  accounts  for  only  around  10%  of  all  housing 
transactions for house purchase so the impact on the housing market as a whole may 
not be great. 
But market dynamics are difficult to predict and given the uncertainty around the impact 
of the tax and supervisory changes, the FPC decided to wait and see how the market 
reacted  before  considering  whether  to  take  action  on  buy-to-let.  The  Committee 
continues to watch the buy-to-let market closely. 
                                                
3   For further details, see Cunliffe (2016). 
4   See Bank of England (2016a). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Lending to owner-occupiers 
Second,  lending  to  owner-occupiers  at  high  loan-to-income  (LTI)  ratios  remains 
significant. The FPC took action in 2014 to counter the risks arising from an increase in 
the tail  of  overly-indebted  households. Its  concern  was  that  an  increase  in the tail of 
overly-indebted  households  posed  a  threat  because  such  households  cut  back 
consumption very sharply in a downturn.5 Transactions, house price inflation and the 
proportion of high LTI mortgages all cooled down following the FPC’s actions and other 
factors  at  the  time  like  the  introduction  of  the  Mortgage  Market  Review.  All  of  these 
variables have since bounced back. Prices and mortgage approvals for house purchase 
are growing at an annual rate of 7.5% and 19% respectively.6 And nearly 15% of new 
mortgages extended in Q4 had LTI ratios just below the FPC’s threshold of 4.5 – almost 
double the proportion in 2008/9.  
Commercial real estate 
The third property-related area the FPC has been looking at closely is commercial real 
estate  (CRE).  Many  countries  have  experienced  repeated  booms  and  busts  in 
commercial property and the UK is certainly no exception. 
Over the past 100 years, the UK has experienced five CRE cycles and similar cycles 
have been seen in a range of developed economies. At the end of the 1980s CRE boom 
documented by Alastair, prices fell by over a third and 25 banks failed or were closed 
down.7 And, more recently, 9% of the UK banks’ pre-crisis stock of CRE lending was 
written off between 2008 and 2014 compared to 0.4% for mortgage lending. Over the 
past two years, commercial property prices have risen strongly by 18%. Up to the second 
half of last year, the market seemed to be “simmering” if not “bubbling”. 
Unlike in previous cycles, however, a much greater proportion of CRE activity has been 
financed by equity investors, in large part overseas investors, rather than by UK bank 
lending. The share of equity finance in UK CRE transactions in 2015 is estimated at 
around 55%, compared to around 30% in 2007 and a peak of around 80% in 2010. So 
the direct risks to major UK banks from this sector are not as high as one might assume.  
The fact that there is less UK leverage in the sector does not mean however that a sharp 
correction in CRE prices poses no financial stability risks. Property is an important source 
of collateral for UK corporates, SMEs in particular. A sharp drop in CRE values could 
constrain their access to credit. Recent research by Bank staff found that a one pound 
rise in the value of a company’s property is associated with around a five to ten pence 
rise in investment.8 More broadly, Bank staff estimate that around a quarter of business 
investment is related to commercial property. 
In this context, it is encouraging to see that the industry itself is taking forward a set of 
recommendations,  set  out  in  the  cross-industry  report  on  the  “Vision  for  Real  Estate 
Finance in the UK”, for reducing risks to financial stability from the CRE market. The 
                                                
5   For evidence on the link between household indebtedness and the severity of recessions, see Cunliffe 
(2016) and references therein.    
6   Mortgage approvals for house purchase may have been inflated by some borrowers bringing forward 
purchases ahead of changes to Stamp Duty Land Tax levied on additional properties, which took effect 
from 1 April 2016.  
7   See Benford and Burrows (2013).  Other countries also experienced CRE booms in the 1980s, most 
notably Japan. The case of the Mitsui Real Estate Company gives a sense of the euphoria that surrounds 
such booms. It paid $625 million for the Exxon Building in New York even though the initial asking price 
had been $310 million; Mitsui wanted to get in the Guinness Book of World Records for paying the highest 
price ever for an office building (Kindleberger and Aliber (2005)). 
8    See Bahaj, Foulis and Pinter (forthcoming). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   report included, among others, recommendations to build a database of each UK CRE 
loan  and  its  collateral,  as  well  as  using  long-term  valuation  measures  for  risk 
management purposes. The Bank is very supportive of these initiatives – and is working 
with industry to take them forward.9 
The UK CRE market has shown marked signs of easing in 2015 H2 and 2016 Q1. The 
annual growth of UK CRE prices weakened to 6% in March and CRE prices fell by 0.6% 
between February and March, the first monthly fall since 2013. And the amount, by value, 
of  secondary  market  transactions  fell  by  around  40%  in  Q1  relative  to  Q4  and  60% 
relative to a year ago. The CRE market seems to have gone into a deep freeze ahead 
of the EU referendum. 
The FPC, of course, also assesses risks that originate outside the UK financial system 
but can, if they crystallise, damage its stability. The Committee has also identified risks 
around the current global macroeconomic conjuncture and around emerging markets. 
And there are concerns about potential risks in some sectors of financial markets where 
there has been substantial investment in asset classes in which liquidity may be limited.  
And the FPC assessed the risks around the EU referendum to be the most significant 
near-term domestic risk to financial stability.  
There will always be risks to UK financial stability from outside the UK financial system. 
The point I want to emphasise today, however, is how important UK property markets 
and property-related lending have been and will continue to be for UK financial stability. 
I would expect the FPC’s attention to risks around property to increase as the credit cycle 
becomes more established. 
Banks and property lending 
I want now to look at stability from the banking end of the telescope. As I have said, 
property-related lending is the largest component of UK banks’ domestic loans. Mortgage 
lending, in particular, is the single largest asset class on UK banks’ balance sheets. 
This  was  not  always  the  case.  Until  the  1980s,  short-term  loans  to  non-financial 
businesses constituted the majority of UK banks’ loans. Looking back further, fewer than 
10% of banks’ loans to businesses at the start of the twentieth century had a contractual 
term greater than a year – loans were mainly used for working capital or to support cash 
flows rather than to finance long-term assets.10  
Banks  acted  in  line  with  the  advice  in  George  Rae’s  celebrated  banking  textbook, 
published in 1885: 
“As  a  banker,  you  are  a  dealer  in  money,  or  in  securities  readily 
exchangeable  for  money,  and  building-land  does  not  come  within  this 
category.  It  is  practically  inconvertible  into  money  on  rational  terms,  and 
ought therefore to have no place amongst a banker’s assets.”11  
It is clear that, now more than ever, the returns and resilience of the banking system are 
intimately tied to property markets. Is banks’ unwillingness to follow George Rae’s advice 
responsible for their current subdued market values? 
Banks: a crisis of resilience or returns? 
UK banks currently have an average price to book ratio of around 0.7 compared to an 
average of two in 2006. In other words, investors seem to be assuming that, looking 
                                                
9   http://www.ipf.org.uk/asset/0D24F055-38E6-419F-8E117665F4F47854/ 
10   See Knott et al (2014).  
11   See Rae (1885). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   forward, banks will destroy value. This is not the sign of a vibrant banking system ably 
supporting the real economy. The last time price to book ratios were this low was in the 
euro-area crisis in 2011/12 and before that in the global financial crisis in 2008. In those 
cases, particularly the latter, the fall in banks’ price to book ratios reflected concerns 
about their resilience and indeed their solvency  – that is, whether they had sufficient 
capital to back the riskiness of their assets. Low price to book ratios were accompanied 
by very high debt spreads on bank debt for the same reason. 
This time round, banks’ low price to book ratios are accompanied by relatively low debt 
spreads.12 In the main, they probably do not reflect concerns about banks’ resilience, 
which has improved significantly since the crisis.  
The FPC and PRA Board, in 2014 and 2015, subjected the UK banking system to severe 
but  plausible  hypothetical  stress  tests.  The  2014  test  was  centered  on  a  sharp 
contraction in UK economic activity – in the test house prices fell by 35% and CRE prices 
fell by 30%. The 2015 test featured a global slowdown emanating from weak growth in 
emerging-market economies. The results of both tests showed that, on the whole, UK 
banks  would  be  able  to  withstand  these  scenarios  and  continue  lending  to  the  real 
economy. Therefore, the current low price to book ratios probably reflect concerns about 
banks’  future  prospects.  That  is,  whether  they  can  make  adequate  returns  to  satisfy 
shareholders’ expectations.   
The most obvious reason for the difference between banks’ returns on the one hand and 
shareholders’ expectations on the other is the disappointing returns that UK banks have 
made in recent years. Average return on equity for UK banks fell from around 17% in 
2006 to 2% in 2015. But there may be another reason, on the other side of the equation. 
Shareholders’  expectations  may  not  yet  have  adjusted  to  the  change  in  the  risk  and 
return profile that banks now represent. 
I  want  to  look  in  a  little  detail  at  both  the  question  of  disappointing  returns  and  the 
question of unrealistic expectations. 
Banks’ returns 
First, what is behind the disappointing returns? It is not lending on residential property. 
Our latest estimates of the return on equity of bank mortgage books seem to be around 
20%, on average, beaten only by overdrafts and asset and motor finance.13 Indeed, UK 
banks’  underlying  return  on  equity  on  retail  lending  overall  is  currently  around  20%. 
Margins on the flow of UK retail business for the large UK banks are currently lower than 
margins  on  the  stock  because  new  mortgages  are  being  written  at  a  lower  average 
interest rate than average back-book mortgage rates. So return on equity on new lending 
is lower. 
Some of this is probably due to the fact that with low interest rates and high employment, 
impairment charges are at a very low rate by historical standards – impairment charges 
as a proportion of total loans are now back to pre-crisis levels. 
Of course, underlying returns only tell you part of the story. When one adds in the cost 
of misconduct, including for PPI, that banks have paid and are likely to pay on past retail 
                                                
12   Banks’ current price to book ratio would be associated with CDS spreads of over double their current 
level if the relationship between banks’ price to book ratios and CDS spreads between 2008 and 2013 
still held. 
13   Estimates of return on equity on individual business lines should be treated as indicative for a number of 
reasons, for example, not all banks calculate return on equity by business activity, definitions of business 
activities can vary across banks and some banks find it difficult to attribute equity to individual divisions 
or products.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   lending activities, and other costs, the overall returns drop markedly. But even adjusted 
for conduct and other costs, returns on retail lending still seem to be around 10%. 
Cost  of  equity  is  the  relevant  comparator  for  return  on  equity.  For  large  UK  and 
international  retail  and  commercial  banks  it  is  estimated  to  be  around  9%.  So  retail 
lending does not seem to be the source of the problem.  
Nor, on the surface, does corporate lending. Estimates of return on equity on SME and 
corporate lending are around 8% to 9%, which is roughly around the cost of equity for 
these activities, though it’s hard to say with absolute precision.  
Investment  banking,  however,  is  a  different  story;  return  on  equity  in  the  investment 
banking parts of UK banks is around 5%. It was 20% in 2010. Returns at European and 
US investment banks have followed a similar trend although the decline has not been as 
steep as for UK banks.  
Overcapacity, excess costs, removal of the implicit Too-Big-To-Fail government subsidy, 
tighter capital regulations and restructuring costs are all contributing to reduced returns 
on  equity  in  investment  banking.  Large  parts  of  investment  banking  are  not  meeting 
required returns which are estimated to be in the region of 11% overall for a sample of 
UK and international banks. Parts of investment banking are therefore not economically 
profitable.  
Banks have made good progress on restructuring their overall balance sheet – they have 
cut funded assets by nearly £1 trillion since the end of 2010 – but they will probably need 
to shrink parts of their investment banking businesses or boost returns, for example, by 
increasing prices or cutting costs. Variable remuneration has fallen in absolute terms in 
investment banking and other parts of banks but that has been offset by an increase in 
fixed remuneration. Staff cost to income ratios for banks as a whole are similar to pre-
crisis levels or if anything a little higher. Banks’ staff costs have not fallen anywhere near 
as much as shareholder returns.  
Conduct  costs  have  also  depressed  returns  in  investment  banking  as  well  as  retail 
banking. Indeed, looking forward, concerns about future conduct risks, generally, may 
also be clouding investors’ perceptions of banks’ prospects. The scale and uncertainty 
around  conduct  losses  is  notable.  UK  banks’  overall  misconduct  costs  have  totalled 
nearly £50 billion to date – they have exceeded £10 billion per annum in each of the past 
four years. This uncertainty, one hopes, should fall over time. 
Investors’ expected returns 
Turning to the other part of the price to book equation, expected returns, the reforms to 
the  prudential  regulation  of  banks  since  the  crisis  and,  in  particular,  to  the  level  and 
quality of capital required from banks has reduced the risk to investors. That reduction in 
risk should, all else equal, be reflected in the return investors demand. There are signs 
that  investors  have,  albeit  slowly,  started  to  lower the returns they  demand  to  reflect 
lower risks. Banks have cut their medium-term pre-tax return on equity targets by about 
3.5 percentage points on average since 2009 – from around 15% to around 11.5%.  
This is welcome and necessary. Some of the reduction probably reflects lower risk-free 
rates.  But  some  reflects  the  significant  increase  in  banks’  resilience.  There  may, 
however, be factors that are still inflating required returns beyond the levels merited by 
risk.  I  want  to  briefly  mention  two  possible  factors  that  may  be  affecting  investors’ 
perceptions of risks and hence of the returns necessary to compensate for them. 
First, there may be a collective action problem on the part of asset managers. Around 
half  to  two-thirds  of  the  shares  of  the  largest  UK  banks  are  owned  by  institutional 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   investors  and  managed  in-house  or  by  asset  managers.14  These  tend  to  operate  to 
common benchmarks and are subject to rigorous peer comparison. Asset managers, 
particularly  those managing  assets  on  behalf  of  institutional  investors that  have fixed 
liabilities, are currently under great pressure to find returns in a low return environment. 
Before the crisis, banks made high double-digit returns on equity boosted by very high 
leverage. There may well be a reluctance among managers of institutional money and 
investment funds to be the first to drop required returns. This could account for some of 
the stickiness that we have seen in banks’ return on equity targets. 
The behaviour of institutional investors may also explain the so-called “low risk” anomaly. 
In theory, lower risk ought to be matched by lower returns. But some research suggests 
that this may not be a simple relationship. The “low risk anomaly”, under which lower risk 
stocks generate no lower – and in some cases higher – returns than higher risk stocks 
has been identified for banks. A number of possible explanations have been provided as 
to  why  this  apparent  arbitrage  opportunity  exists,  including  preferences  by  fund 
managers for “high-beta”, i.e. risky, assets to try to beat peers and attract inflows, or 
because  there  is  insufficient  risk  adjustment  when  assessing  asset  managers’ 
performance.15 
The second factor that may be affecting perceptions of risks is regulatory clarity. The 
crisis stimulated an unprecedented programme of reform of the prudential regulation of 
banks. Most of the main components of that reform are now being implemented. Some 
important elements remain, however, including in relation to the capital framework for 
banks.  
Uncertainty  around  the  future  end  point  for  bank  capital  could  be  affecting  investors’ 
assessments of the returns required from banks. The official sector needs to give as 
much clarity as possible about the overall end point of the capital framework. For the UK, 
the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee has done that, setting out in December 
last  year  its  view  of  the  overall  capital  framework.16  Internationally,  the  Group  of 
Governors and Heads of Supervision has said that it does not expect the completion of 
the remaining elements of the risk-weighted capital framework to increase significantly 
overall capital requirements.17   
Closing the gap 
Taking  all  this  together,  there  is  clearly  at  present  a  wide  gap  between  banks’ 
disappointing returns on the one side and investors’ expectations on the other. This is 
reflected  in  current  price  to  book  ratios.  This  gap  may  need  to  be  closed  from  both 
directions.  
It is, however, clearly not the case that all banking is unprofitable or un-investable. The 
health of UK retail banking is almost certainly being masked by conduct costs, current 
and  expected,  and  by  outdated  and  costly  business  models  that  need  restructuring, 
especially  in  relation to  investment  banking.  But the returns  expected  by  investors  in 
banks  may  well  be  sticky  and  have  further  to  fall  to  come  into  line  with  risk.  The 
authorities may be able to assist this by giving greater clarity on the end point of the 
regulatory structure. 
                                                
14   This figure excludes RBS which is majority-owned by the UK government. 
15   See Baker and Wurgler (2013). 
16   See Bank of England (2015). 
17   See BIS (2016). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   On this last point, the stickiness in investors’ required returns may be part of a more 
general adjustment to a lower interest rate environment. We are unable to measure them 
directly, but there is some evidence that despite the very low market rates we are now 
seeing across the yield curve, hurdle rates for corporate investment – namely, the rate 
of return required by corporates on new investment – have not reflected lower risk-free 
rates but rather have been sticky and remained near pre-crisis levels. The Bank is doing 
more work on this.  
A  recent  Bank  of  England  Discussion  Paper  looking  at  measures  of  finance  for 
productive investment cites data on hurdle rates as a material data gap in assessing the 
availability  of  finance  for  productive  investment.18  The  Bank  plans  to  use  its  Agency 
network to run a survey of hurdle rates later this year. 
Conclusion 
What would Alastair have made of the issues I have raised today? He knew well the risks 
that property markets can pose to stability. I hope he would be reassured by the creation 
in the UK of the Financial Policy Committee within the Bank of England which is now 
specifically charged with managing these systemic risks. The Committee is monitoring 
property markets closely. It has already taken action and would not hesitate to do so 
again if it is needed to protect financial stability.  
Alastair was also a champion of investor activism. I think investors have a role to play in 
restoring  the  economic  profitability  of  banks,  both  by  encouraging  business  model 
restructuring and monitoring risks and perhaps by lowering their expectations a little as 
well. But investors are only one part of the story. Banks need to work with the authorities 
to implement fully the reforms that have been agreed to boost their resilience. And banks’ 
management need to maintain their restructuring momentum. The business model for 
banks in the UK may look very different in the future than it did before the crisis. I think it 
is  clear  that,  in  the  new  framework,  it  is  possible  for  banks  both  to  lend  to  the  real 
economy and to make adequate returns.  
Thank you. 
References 
Bahaj, S, Foulis, A and Pinter, G “The Residential Collateral Channel”, by, Bank of 
England Staff Working Paper, forthcoming. 
Baker, M  and  Wurgler,  J  (2013)  “Do  Strict  Capital  Requirements  Raise  the  Cost  of 
Capital?  Banking  Regulation  and  the  Low  Risk  Anomaly”,  NBER  Working  Paper, 
No.19018. 
Bank  of  England  (2015)  “The  framework  of  capital  requirements  for  UK  banks”, 
Supplement to the December 2015 Financial Stability Report.  
Bank of England (2016a) Financial Policy Committee statement from its policy meeting, 
23  March  2016,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/ 
Pages/fpc/default.aspx. 
Bank  of  England  (2016b)  “Understanding  and  measuring  finance  for  productive 
investment – A Discussion Paper”.  
Benford, J and Burrows, O (2013) “Commercial property and financial stability”, Bank 
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Q2. 
                                                
18   See Bank of England (2016b).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  its 
by 
release, 
available 
endorsed 
body”,  Press 
 
BIS (2016) “Revised market risk framework and work programme for Basel Committee 
is 
at: 
governing 
http://www.bis.org/press/p160111.htm. 
Cunliffe, J (2016) “Credit: Can trees grow to the sky?” speech given at British Property 
Federation Annual Residential Investment Conference, London. 
Goobey, A R (1992) Bricks & Mortals: the story of the 1980s property boom – and slump 
– and those who made it, Century Business. 
Jordà,  O,  Schularick,  M  and  Taylor  A  M  (2015)  “Leveraged  bubbles”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, vol.76, pages S1–S20. 
Kindleberger, C P and Aliber, R Z (2005) Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of 
Financial Crises’, John Wiley & Sons. 
Knott, S, Richardson, P, Rismanchi, K and Sen K (2014) “Understanding the fair value 
of banks’ loans”, Bank of England Financial Stability Paper 31.  
Rae, G (1885) The country banker: his clients, cares, and work from an experience of 
forty years, Jon Murray. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
