   Hiroshi Nakaso: Monetary policy and structural reforms 
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society in 
New York, New York City, 12 February 2016. 
Accompanying slides can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have this opportunity to give a presentation at the Japan Society. 
Looking  back  at  my  central  banking  career,  which  has  been  devoted  to  dealing  with  the 
economic and financial problems that have unfolded since the burst of Japan’s asset bubble 
more than two decades ago, I have become more and more determined to overcome deflation. 
At the same time, I am aware, more than ever, of the importance of raising Japan’s growth 
potential, and this is the topic that I would like to talk about today. Raising the growth potential 
is an issue that, I believe, is of relevance not only for Japan but also for other industrialized 
nations, since Japan’s experience of decelerating trend growth is a potential precursor of things 
to come elsewhere. In fact, Japan’s experience provides a good case study of the issues that 
need to be tackled. In the following presentation, I would like to talk about how to address the 
challenge of low trend growth, paying particular attention to the relationship between demand 
stimulus and supply-side reforms. I will then try to assess how much progress Japan has made 
so far. 
Slower trend growth 
Let me start with a brief overview of Japan’s growth prospects.  
Japan has continued to struggle with slower trend growth. The Bank of Japan estimates that 
Japan’s potential growth rate has fallen to as low as 1/2 percent or even slightly lower. Given 
such a low potential growth rate, even a small negative shock or simply statistical noise can 
tip  Japan’s  measured  GDP  growth  rate  into  negative  territory.  Trend  growth  can  be 
decomposed into growth in labor input and growth in labor productivity, and as is well known, 
both factors are responsible for the decline in Japan’s slowing growth trend (Slide 1). 
Will this trend continue? If so, what can be done? To give you a sense of the challenge, let me 
show  you some calculations how the 2 percent growth which the Japanese government is 
aiming  at  can  be  achieved.  The  table  shows  two  alternative  scenarios  based  on  different 
assumptions regarding labor participation (Slide 2). The first is the status quo scenario, where 
things  remain  unchanged.  The  other  is  the  optimistic  scenario,  which  is  based  on  two 
assumptions: First, it is assumed that the female labor participation rate in Japan rises to the 
level observed in Sweden. Second, it is assumed that all healthy elderly will continue working 
irrespective  of  the  retirement  age.  For  instance,  reflecting  Japan’s  rising  life  expectancy, 
60 percent of 80 to 84 year olds in Japan say that they are healthy enough to go about their 
daily lives. We assume that all of these elderly continue to work. Setting aside how realistic 
they are, these assumptions mean that the labor force can be expected to increase by about 
1/2 percent per year. However, as shown in the slide, to achieve 2 percent GDP growth, labor 
productivity still needs to rise by about 1 1/2 percent per year. That being said, in the status 
quo scenario, labor input shrinks by almost one percent per year, so that labor productivity 
would have to grow by a hefty 3 percent to achieve the 2 percent GDP growth target. 
The productivity growth of 1 1/2 percent required in the optimistic scenario would still be high 
both from a historical and international perspective, but it may not be unachievable. Economic 
theory  suggests  that the  key  drivers  of growth  are  productivity  catch-up and  growth  at the 
technological frontier. There is no doubt that a number of Japanese manufacturers are at the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   global  technology  frontier,  but  there  remains  ample  room  for  catch-up  in  many  industries, 
particularly in the non-manufacturing sector. For example, it is often said that Japanese firms, 
especially in the non-manufacturing sector, lag behind their foreign counterparts in the use of 
information technology, primarily due to underinvestment in this area and a shortage of related 
expertise.1 As a result, Japan’s productivity level is about 35 percent below that of the United 
States, which is often assumed to represent the world technology frontier (Slide 3). 
During their course of economic development, countries tend to enjoy rapid growth during the 
period of technological catch-up. Japan had largely gone through this phase by the 1980s, so 
productivity growth decelerated thereafter, as seen in Slide 1. That being said, as seen in the 
right panel of Slide 3, in the period between 2000 and 2014 Japan still enjoyed one of the 
highest  productivity  growth  rates  among  the  G7  countries,  probably  because  there  still 
remained some room for catch-up.  
In  any  case,  this  back-of-the-envelope  calculation  underscores  the  importance  of  labor 
productivity in raising the growth potential. Particularly in an economy like Japan’s, with its 
demographic constraints, policies should have a clear focus on raising productivity growth.  
Secular stagnation hypothesis 
What does this slower trend growth mean for central bankers?  
First, slower trend growth, other things being equal, implies a smaller output gap (Slide 4). This 
is simple arithmetic: changes in the output gap equal changes in real GDP minus changes in 
potential output. At the height of the 1997–98 financial crisis in Japan, it was thought that Japan 
might fall into a deflationary spiral like that experienced by the United States during the Great 
Depression in the 1930s. However, in the wake of the 1997–98 crisis, even at its worst, Japan’s 
CPI deflation rate did not substantially exceed one percent.2 With the benefit of hindsight, the 
output gap was smaller than we had envisaged due to a decline in the potential growth rate. 
In fact, although I am afraid I may confuse you, the story actually is a bit more complicated 
than I have just described. I will later argue that slower trend growth may worsen the output 
gap, as other things may not be equal. 
The  second  corollary  of  slower  trend  growth  for  central  bankers  is  that  it  implies  a  lower 
equilibrium real interest rate or natural rate of interest (Slide 5). The equilibrium real interest 
rate is the real interest rate that would prevail at full employment and inflation at the targeted 
level, and thus provides a reference point for the policy interest rate. Economic theory suggests 
that slower trend growth leads to a lower equilibrium real interest rate. Presented with a lower 
equilibrium interest rate, a central bank, unless it faces the zero lower bound, needs to cut its 
policy rate if it wants to maintain monetary stimulus at the prevailing level.  
Recently, the decline in the equilibrium interest rate has been a hotly debated topic not only in 
Japan but also in other industrial economies including here in the United States. The debate 
was, as you probably know, initiated by Larry Summers, who put forward the secular stagnation 
hypothesis.3  The  focus  of  the  discussion  among  scholars,  policy  makers,  and  market 
commentators is (a) whether the lower equilibrium interest rate is a permanent phenomenon; 
                                                
1   K.  Fukao,  T.  Miyagawa,  H.  K.  Pyo,  and  K.  H.  Rhee  (2012),  “Estimates  of  Total  Factor  Productivity,  the 
Contribution of ICT, and Resource Reallocation Effects in Japan and Korea,” in M. Mas and R. Stehrer (eds.), 
Industrial Productivity in Europe: Growth and Crisis, Edward Elgar Publishing. 
2   As I have argued previously, Japan fell into a deflationary equilibrium with mild but persistent deflation due to a 
combination of a decline in inflation expectations and in the natural rate of interest. See H. Nakaso (2014), “The 
Conquest of Japanese Deflation: Interim Report,” Remarks at the Athens Symposium “Banking Union, Monetary 
Policy and Economic Growth.” 
3   L. H. Summers (2014), “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” 
Business Economics, Vol. 49(2), pp. 65–73. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   (b) what its causes are – slower trend growth undoubtedly is one important factor, but there 
may be other explanations such as a change in saving-investment preferences; and (c) how 
to cope with the lower equilibrium interest rate, given that nominal policy interest rates have 
already hit the zero lower bound in many advanced economies.4 
Policy implications 
Due to time constraints, I will not cover all of these questions today. Instead, let me focus on 
possible policy measures under these circumstances. Linked to the second issue – the causes 
of a lower equilibrium interest rate – there is an ongoing debate regarding whether demand 
stimulus or supply-side reforms are more relevant to counter the possible secular stagnation.5 
On  the  one  hand,  those  who  attribute  the  lower  natural  rate  of  interest  to  excess  saving 
advocate more demand stimulus through monetary and/or fiscal policy. On the other hand, 
those who argue that potential growth has declined because of a deterioration in supply-side 
factors  tend  to  stress  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  including  deregulation  and 
educational reforms.  
My answer to what kind of policies are needed is that both monetary and fiscal policies and 
structural reforms are indispensable, which is in the spirit of the joint statement of the Bank of 
Japan  and  the  Japanese  government  issued  in  January  2013.  There  are  three  reasons 
underpinning my answer. 
First, from a practitioner’s point of view, we cannot wait for the day when the academic debate 
is settled. If both demand stimulus and supply-side reforms are potentially important, why not 
try both? We need to dispense all the medicine that might work for the patient. 
Second, if supply-side reforms incur short-term pain, at least part of that pain needs to be 
alleviated through demand measures. For instance, if labor market reforms temporarily raise 
the  unemployment  rate,  it  is  quite  sensible  to  stimulate  demand  to  smooth  the  transition 
through those reforms. 
Third, I think that from a theoretical perspective, the distinction between demand- and supply-
side measures is quite blurred. For example, supply-side reforms raise potential growth and 
reduce  uncertainty  about  the  future,  so  that  firms  and  households  spend  more  today  in 
anticipation of higher profits and incomes in the future, thus raising current demand. On the 
other  hand,  demand  stimulus  such  as  monetary  easing  raises  potential  output  through  an 
increase in the capital stock as well as labor input, thus affecting the supply side as well.6  
This difficulty in separating demand- and supply-side aspects also applies when examining the 
causes  of  the  decline  in  the  equilibrium  interest  rate.  For  example,  both  the  demand-  and 
supply-side  camps  argue  that  demography  –  lower  or  negative  population  growth  and 
population  aging  –  play  a  role  in  lowering  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  From  a  supply-side 
perspective,  a  decline  in  the  growth  rate  of  the  working-age  population  lowers  the  growth 
potential  of  the  economy  and  thus  the  natural  rate  of  interest.  On  the  other  hand,  from  a 
demand-side perspective, the aging of the population reduces the population share of younger 
                                                
4   My fellow central bankers have recently addressed these issues. See, for instance, A. Haldane (2015), “How 
Low Can You Go?,” Speech given at the Portadown Chamber of Commerce, and S. Fischer (2016), “Monetary 
Policy, Financial Stability, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Speech at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic 
Association. 
5   See L. Rachel and T. D. Smith (2015), “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate,” Bank of England Staff 
Working Paper, No. 571; O. Blanchard, E. Cerutti, and L. H. Summers (2015), “Inflation and Activity – Two 
Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications,” IMF Working Paper, WP/15/230; R. J. Gordon (2015), 
“Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105(5), pp. 54–59. 
6   This  point  has  been  highlighted  by  Fed  economists such as  D.  Reifschneider, W. Wascher,  and  D. Wilcox 
(2015),  “Aggregate  Supply  in  the  United  States:  Recent  Developments  and  Implications  for  the  Conduct  of 
Monetary Policy,” IMF Economic Review, Vol. 63, pp. 71–109. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   generations,  and  since  younger  generations  tend  to  borrow  more  heavily  than  older 
generations, a drop in their share results in a decline in the natural rate of interest through a 
decline in loan demand.7  
I sometimes feel that this difficulty to distinguish between supply- and demand-side factors 
goes beyond the issue at hand and may shake up conventional ways of thinking in other fields 
of economics such as the clear distinction between growth and business cycle models. Broadly 
speaking, business cycle models, which deal with how the output gap is determined, assume 
that trend growth is exogenously given. On the other hand, growth models, which examine the 
evolution of this trend growth, omit the output gap. This division of labor between standard 
models makes it difficult for economists to consider the interactions between the output gap 
and trend growth.8 
In any event, all these considerations lead to the conclusion that demand stimulus and supply-
side reforms are complements rather than substitutes. It is for this reason that I believe that 
monetary policy to overcome deflation and supply-side reforms to raise the growth potential 
must be pursued in tandem to bring Japan’s economy back on track towards sustained growth. 
I am a firm believer that, at this critical juncture, the Bank of Japan needs to provide support 
to the economy by pursuing its inflation targeting policy. Monetary policy needs to remain lax 
and  in  fact  is  lax.  This  is  illustrated  in  Slide  5,  which  shows  that,  under  quantitative  and 
qualitative monetary easing, the Bank of Japan is keeping the real interest rate well below the 
natural rate of interest.  
However, I also agree with former Chairman Bernanke that monetary policy is not a panacea.9 
In light of recent developments in growth theory and other fields, I do believe that institutions 
or systems matter. What is needed is an institutional framework that fosters innovation to push 
the technology frontier and raise productivity. Although I said that catching-up is still important 
for  Japan,  in  the  end  the  ultimate  engine  of  growth  is  innovation.  And  by  “institutional 
framework” here I mean not only economic institutions but also other aspects of society, such 
as the  legal system,  education,  and  so  on.10  Against this  background,  I  strongly  hope  and 
believe  that  the  Japanese  government  will  play  its  role  in  providing  such  a  framework  by 
continuing with structural reforms. 
Progress so far 
The question that naturally arises is how much progress Japan has made in addressing the 
challenges facing its economy. 
My short answer is that there is some progress but not enough. In fact, there is one area in 
which good progress has been made: raising the labor participation rates of young women and 
the elderly, which have increased to exceed the corresponding rates in the United States (Slide 
6). However, based mainly on the following three observations, I think that overall the glass 
remains half empty. All three observations – concerning potential growth, growth expectations, 
and wage growth – suggest that productivity growth is still not sufficiently high. 
                                                
7   See, for example, the overlapping generations model of G. B. Eggertsson and N. R. Mehrotra (2014), “A Model 
of Secular Stagnation,” NBER Working Paper No. 20574. 
8   A similar argument is made by J. Faust and E. M. Leeper (2015), “The Myth of Normal: The Bumpy Story of 
Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy,”  in Inflation  Dynamics and  Monetary  Policy,  2015 Jackson  Hole  Symposium: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Conference Proceedings. 
9   See, e.g., B. S. Bernanke (2012), “U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications,” Speech at a High-Level 
Seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan and the International Monetary Fund.  
10   D. Acemoglu and J. A. Robinson (2012), Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty, Crown 
Business; E. Moretti (2012), The New Geography of Jobs, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt; R. E. Litan (2011), Rules 
for Growth: Promoting Innovation and Growth Through Legal Reform, Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   First, potential growth has not sufficiently increased. As seen in Slide 5, the Bank of Japan 
estimates that potential growth remains around or slightly below 1/2 percent. It is well known 
that real-time estimates of the potential growth rate are fraught with great uncertainty and it is 
often only after a considerable time lag that we can recognize changes in potential growth. For 
example, assuming that Japan continues to follow a steady growth path, it is well possible that 
we may find in hindsight that Japan’s growth potential has actually already increased a bit, 
although I doubt that it has reached a level of 2 percent. 
Second, Japanese firms have continued to hoard huge savings. It is true that Japanese firms, 
backed by record profits, have recently started to increase fixed investment, which, according 
to our December Tankan Survey, will increase by about 8 1/2 percent this fiscal year. However, 
if we look at the saving-investment balance of the corporate sector, in April-September last 
year, saving continues to exceed investment by more than 15 trillion yen or about 6 1/2 percent 
of GDP, as shown in the left-hand panel of Slide 7. In contrast, until the early 1990s corporate 
investment used to exceed corporate saving.  
There may be a variety of reasons why Japanese firms keep saving. For instance, given the 
volatility  of  financial  markets  observed  in  recent  times,  firms  may  prefer  to  retain  liquidity 
against the backdrop of perceived higher uncertainty in the economy. They may also try to pile 
up cash as a precaution due to lingering memories of financial crises in the past. However, it 
seems to me that the main reason behind the large saving surplus is the fact that firms’ growth 
expectations have not sufficiently improved, as shown in the right-hand panel of Slide 7. The 
subdued growth expectations, in turn, will restrain productivity growth in the future as a result 
of insufficient capital deepening.  
Third,  nominal  wages  have  not  risen  fast  enough.  Recently,  nominal  wages  have  been 
increasing by about 1/2 percent on a year-on-year basis. This is a big change from the situation 
a couple of years ago, when nominal wages were declining at a rate of about 1 1/2 percent. 
However, wage increases are still failing to keep up with inflation and remain well below the 
Bank’s 2 percent inflation target. The sluggish increase in nominal wages is thought to reflect 
low productivity growth and the strong deflationary mindset, since, in the long run, nominal 
wage  growth  should  equal  productivity  growth  plus  inflation.  Again,  these  developments 
support the view that sustained improvements in productivity are necessary to maintain the 
economic growth momentum. 
In this  regard,  the  current spring  wage  negotiations,  or  “Shunto”  in  Japanese,  are  critically 
important. It is too early to tell the outcome at this stage and the picture is mixed. Since faster 
wage increases are indispensable for steady consumption growth and higher inflation, we are 
now carefully monitoring how the negotiations unfold. 
Recent monetary policy 
Structural reforms have been steadily moving forward, but it will take time until such reforms 
boost the potential growth rate. In a country where the natural rate of interest has declined, the 
central bank has to implement monetary policy based on the lower rate. As I explained earlier, 
monetary easing means achieving a real interest rate that is lower than the natural rate of 
interest. In pursuing monetary policy in Japan, the challenges resulting from the decline in the 
natural  interest  rate  had  been  compounded  by  the  increasing  difficulties  in  lowering  real 
interest rates. These difficulties reflected the fact that nominal interest rates at the shorter end 
of the yield curve had already been subject to significant downward pressure and were facing 
the zero lower bound, while inflation expectations had faded. 
In order to tackle this suboptimal situation, the Bank of Japan judged it necessary to lower the 
real interest rate by shoring up inflation expectations and at the same time seeking room for a 
further decline in nominal interest rates. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE), 
which the Bank of Japan launched in April 2013, provided a major breakthrough in these two 
dimensions. The main transmission mechanism that QQE envisages is twofold. The first is to 
convert people’s deflationary mindset and raise their inflation expectations though a strong 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   commitment  toward  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  The  second  is  to 
encourage nominal interest rates to decline further across the entire yield curve through large-
scale purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). Together, these two mechanisms 
have the effect of pushing real interest rates down further.  
QQE has produced its intended effects. The decline in real interest rates has stimulated private 
sector demand and has brought about record profits at firms and full employment in the labor 
market. Moreover, the underlying trend in inflation has been steadily improving. The annual 
rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and  energy  –  items  subject  to  large  price 
fluctuations – has remained positive for 27 consecutive months and recently climbed to 1.3 
percent. Looking ahead, the baseline scenario assumes that Japan’s economy is likely to be 
on a moderate expanding trend and the annual rate of change in the CPI is expected to revert 
to an uptrend toward the price stability target of 2 percent. 
The Bank of Japan recently took further actions to strengthen monetary easing by adding a 
negative  interest  rate  dimension  to QQE. The  decision  was  taken  against  the  backdrop of 
volatile  global  financial  markets  reflecting  the  further  slide  in  crude  oil  prices  and  growing 
uncertainty over the outlook for emerging and commodity-exporting economies. We judged 
that  there  was  an  increasing  risk  that  the  improvement  in  business  confidence  could  be 
undermined and the conversion of people’s deflationary mindset be delayed. Consequently, 
we were worried that this would negatively affect the underlying trend in inflation. In order to 
preempt the manifestation of this risk and maintain the momentum toward achieving the price 
stability target, we judged that it was necessary to further strengthen monetary easing at this 
juncture. 
In  introducing  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate,”  we  focused  on  two  points.  First,  the 
introduction of a negative interest rate is an additional element that leaves the basic framework 
of QQE intact. That is, the Bank will continue to push down the entire yield curve through large-
scale purchases of JGBs under QQE. In addition, it aims to create even more powerful easing 
effects by lowering the short end of the yield curve through the introduction of the negative 
interest rate policy (Slide 8). Thus, quantitative easing and the negative interest rate are not 
inconsistent but instead complement each other. 
In designing the policy, we benefitted a great deal from the wisdom and experiences of those 
central banks in Europe that have adopted a negative interest rate policy. Simply transplanting 
the policy, however, was out of the question, since Japan’s idiosyncratic circumstances need 
to be taken into account. Specifically, in Japan, reserves at the central bank are far larger than 
in Europe and under QQE will continue to increase at an annual pace of around 80 trillion yen. 
To address the concern that a negative interest rate might impose an excessive burden on 
financial institutions and have an adverse effect on the functioning of financial intermediation, 
we adopted a multiple-tier system so that a negative interest rate is applied only to the marginal 
increase in excess reserves (Slide 9). This is a unique feature of our policy framework. 
The second important aspect of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” is that it aims to provide 
scope for further monetary easing in terms of the “interest rate” dimension, in addition to the 
“quantity” and “quality” dimensions. If judged necessary, we are ready to take further actions 
in  terms  of  “quantity”  and  “quality,”  and  we  do  not  share  the  view  that  the  Bank’s  asset 
purchases are approaching their limit. To further supplement these tools, the new policy adds 
an  “interest  rate”  option  to  these  two  existing  options,  so  that  the  Bank  can  now  pursue 
additional monetary easing measures in terms of three dimensions: “quantity,” “quality,” and 
“a negative interest rate.” The new policy framework will provide significant reinforcement to 
complete our mission to overcome deflation.  
Our monetary policy initiatives will also contribute to shoring up the potential growth rate. The 
Bank aims at providing accommodative financial conditions and dispelling people’s persistent 
deflationary  mindset  by  pursuing  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate.”  We  believe  it  will 
contribute to creating a business environment that encourages firms to pursue more proactive 
investment strategies and make greater efforts to improve productivity. If all economic entities 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   fully take advantage of this extremely favorable environment, this should help to improve the 
potential growth rate. I fully expect this will happen. 
Concluding remarks 
Japan needs to raise the trend growth of the economy. This is necessary not only for the sake 
of the current generation but also to ensure that future generations can enjoy a decent life with 
a sense of hope and security. To that end, we need to utilize both demand- and supply-side 
measures to the greatest possible extent. Now that the Bank of Japan has taken monetary 
easing  one  step  further  at  the  end  of  last  month,  I  think  that  the  original  third  arrow  of 
Abenomics, the growth strategy, must also fly faster. The challenges ahead are formidable, 
but it is time now to deliver results, no matter how difficult the challenges are. I hope that by 
doing so Japan sets an example for other countries similarly facing a decline in trend growth. 
I will stop here. Thank you very much. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  8 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
      10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
