  Andreas Dombret: Supporting the global economy – a laudation to 
Hubert Temmeyer 
Welcoming  address  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Washington DC, 30 March 
2016. 
 Dear Mr. Temmeyer, 
dear Mr. Lipton, 
ladies and gentlemen, 
The last five years have passed rather fast, and I still remember the nomination of Mr Hubert 
Temmeyer as the Executive Director for Germany in early 2011. 
In these five years, many remarkable and often challenging topics have been dealt with in 
the Executive Board. This includes the wide-ranging Quota and Governance reforms which 
have accompanied Mr Temmeyers term as Executive Director from the beginning. 
Becoming  Executive  Director  shortly  after  the  decision  in  December  2010,  the  ratification 
process took about five years to be completed, somehow crowning Mr Temmeyers term in 
office.  Also,  I  think  of  the  latest  discussions  on  the  international  monetary  system,  the 
adequacy  of  the  global  financial  safety  net  architecture,  and  the  adequacy  of  the  Funds 
resources as highlights of Mr Temmeyers term. 
All  of  us  attach  great  importance  to  a  well-functioning  and  stable  international  monetary 
system. 
This,  in my  view,  depends first  of  all  on  providing the  proper  incentives for  all  “players” to 
pursue sound policies, and the IMF as the “guardian of the international monetary system” 
has  a  crucial  role  here.  Success  of  IMF  will  depend  on  foresight,  learning  and  self-critical 
attitude also in the future. 
The  IMF  is  at  the  core  of  the  global  financial  safety  net  (GFSN).  as  the  only  truly  global 
lender for countries in need. Given the importance of trust in and the credibility of the GFSN, 
we should be careful about the Fund’s characterization of the GFSN as “fragmented”. The 
wording suggests it to be “broken”, a view that we do not share. 
We see the GFSN as quite strong and not in need of repair or new coordination mechanism 
between the IMF and other elements of the GFSN, including swap arrangements by central 
banks. 
We  are  also  somewhat  more  cautious  towards  seeing  the  IMF  as  an  insurer  or  a  “fully 
comprehensive” financier for countries. 
Its monetary mandate, its unique financing structure, its preferred creditor status and its rich, 
but always limited resources provides it with strong “muscles” to fulfil its mandate, but sets 
also some limits. 
Germany  as  the  fourth  largest  shareholder  and  the  Bundesbank  value  the  IMF  as  a  very 
important international financial institution. We will continue our attentiveness to IMF policy 
and close cooperation. The Bundesbank provides the subscription payments for Germany’s 
quota increases, participates in the so-called “New Arrangements to Borrow” process and the 
financial  transaction  plan  and  stands  ready  for  Special  Drawing  Rights  exchanges  in  the 
context of the voluntary trading arrangements. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Moreover, the Bundesbank provided – under very specific circumstances – a very significant, 
temporary  bilateral  credit  line  in  2012,  and  prolonged  it  twice  to  its  maximum  maturity  in 
November 2016. 
The  Bundesbank  continues  to  stand  ready  to  cooperate  with  the  Fund  as  needed  and 
appropriate,  in  the  context  of  a  fair  global  burden  sharing  that  involves  all  major 
shareholders. At this stage, we see the IMF to be well equipped with resources. However, 
when the Fund demonstrates a clear need for additional resources to pursue its mandate, 
the Bundesbank will remain open minded for contributions. 
As  indicated,  the  term  in  office  of  Mr  Temmeyer  has  covered  many  interesting  and 
challenging topics, and I would like to thank Mr Temmeyer for his dedication and excellent 
work.  He  will  return  to  Germany  as  the  President  of  a  Regional  Office  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank in Leipzig, which leaves me to say: “welcome home”. 
Most of the issues mentioned fell also in the term of office of Dr Steffen Meyer who served as 
Alternate Executive Director since June 2011. It is my pleasure to welcome Mr Meyer as the 
new  Executive  Director for Germany.  His  strong  experience  in  the  Fund  and  before  in  the 
Ministry of Finance dealing with IMF issues allows us to “change horses at full speed” at the 
helm of the German Executive Directors office. 
It is also my pleasure to welcome Mr Klaus Merk as the new Alternate Executive Director for 
Germany.  Mr  Merk  has  lastly  served  as  the  head  of  the  Representative  Office  of  the 
Bundesbank in Tokyo and has used the last five months to familiarize himself more closely 
with IMF matters. 
Mr  Meyer,  Mr  Merk,  let  me  wish  both  of  you  all  the  best  and  good  luck  for  this  quite 
challenging and responsible position. 
I look forward to a close and trusting cooperation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
