   
Tharman Shanmugaratnam: The Gallery – promoting Singapore’s central 
bank role and mission 
Remarks by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, 
at the Opening of the MAS Gallery, Singapore, 16 February 2016. 
 ESM Goh Chok Tong 
Family members of Former Chairmen, Mr Hon Sui Sen and Dr Goh Keng Swee, and of former 
Managing Director Mr Lim Kim San 
Former Managing Directors, Mr Michael Wong Pak-Shong, Mr JY Pillay and Mr Lee Ek Tieng 
Current Board members 
Members of the MAS management and staff,  
and especially, MAS Pioneers 
Thank you to everyone for coming to the opening of our MAS Gallery.  
The Gallery is aimed at helping the public understand the mission of the MAS, and its role in 
promoting both growth and stability of the Singapore economy and financial system.  
The Gallery aims to help the public understand  
• 
how we keep inflation low over the long term through MAS’ policies in managing the 
exchange rate of the Singapore dollar, 
how  we  supervise  the  financial  sector  –  the  banking,  insurance  and  securities 
industries - to ensure confidence in our financial system, 
how we promote the development of a vibrant financial centre that serves a good part 
of Asia and in some respects the rest of the world, 
how  we  also  seek  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  serves  the  interests  of 
consumers, and how we try to help Singaporeans manage their finances well. 
   The MAS staff responsible for the Gallery have put a lot of thought into its design and content. 
But the Gallery will keep evolving, and we will want it to stay relevant to Singaporeans young 
and old. 
It  is  significant  too  that  we  are  opening  the  Gallery  in  2016,  when  we  commemorate  the 
45th anniversary  of the MAS.  If  we  think  about what  we  have  achieved  in these  45  years, 
what’s most precious is credibility. Credibility is the most precious asset that a central bank 
and a financial regulator can have.  
The MAS’ credibility was founded in its early years. I want to mention the leaders and staff who 
were involved in putting in placed these foundations of today’s credibility. Mr Hon Sui Sen in 
particular,  our  first  Chairman  (1971-1980),  Mr  Michael  Wong  Pak-Shong,  who  was  the 
Managing Director, and the staff at that time, including Mr Ng Kok Song, Mrs Ong-Ang Ai Boon, 
Mrs Elizabeth Sam. Together they built an organisation, bringing together no fewer than nine 
different  offices  and  functions  in  Government  at  the  time,  melding  them  together  in  one 
organisation.  
They also set the foundations for an international financial centre. Singapore was not a serious 
financial centre until then. Mr Hon Sui Sen and his team built the foundation for a financial 
centre that went beyond Singapore. In Mr Hon’s words, said back in 1972:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   “In Asia, Singapore now offers the best prospects for developing into a financial 
centre, if not for the whole of Asia, at least beyond the Southeast Asian or ASEAN 
region.” 
So  it  started  then,  and  continued  through  the  years  when  Dr  Goh  Keng  Swee  became 
Chairman (1980-85). But the most important development in this second phase, starting when 
Dr Goh led the MAS, was the re-orienting of our monetary policy to one centred on the S$ 
exchange rate. It was a novel policy at the time. We were one of the few central banks that 
managed  monetary  policy  by  focusing  exclusively  on  the  exchange  rate.  It  was  not 
conventional, but it has worked.  
Through that second phase in MAS’ evolution, with Dr Goh as Chairman and subsequently 
under Dr Richard Hu’s chairmanship (1985-1997), we built credibility in our exchange rate-
centred monetary policy. We also built credibility as a no-nonsense financial regulator. That 
was a very important second phase, in the 1980s and 1990s. 
The third phase began when PM Lee Hsien Loong, then DPM, took over as Chairman of 
MAS (1997–2004), and continued through the years when ESM Goh was Chairman (2004–
2011). It involved liberalising and opening up our financial sector to greater competition, and 
at the same time developing further resilience in the system.  
This seemed a contradiction in terms to many countries – liberalising and opening up but at 
the same time developing resilience in the financial centre. But we have achieved both. We 
have  managed  the  tension  between  liberalisation  and  developing  resilience.  I  think  we’ve 
managed it rather well. If you look at what happened during the Asian Financial Crisis and 
subsequently, the Global Financial Crisis, we have come out as one of the safest financial 
systems in the world. 
So that was an important third phase – liberalising and opening the financial centre but also 
developing further resilience.  
Our  credibility  today  rests  on  each  of these three major  phases  in  MAS’  development  and 
policies – from the foundational years, to the period when we reoriented monetary policy and 
then in the last phase, liberalising and developing further resilience of the financial centre. The 
credibility has added up over the years. 
I also want to say that MAS has become an organisation of excellence. This has particularly 
been due, in my opinion, to the organisational development efforts that began especially in the 
mid-1980s, when Mr JY Pillay came in as the Managing Director, followed in subsequent years 
by Mr Lee Ek Tieng.  
There was a great focus on organisational development from the mid-80s. It happened that 
both Mr Pillay and Mr Lee Ek Tieng were amongst the most senior leaders in the public sector. 
They  led  the  transformation  of  the  MAS  as  an  organisation  of  people.  We  developed  an 
organisation that provided strong careers for individuals and ensured they worked as teams. 
It’s been a very important effort, this organisational development.  
And  the  third  thing  I  want  to  mention  that  is  very  important  to  the  MAS  is  its  growth  of 
professional  expertise.  MAS  is  a  little  different  from  some  other  parts  of  the  government 
because  it  requires  greater  depth  of  expertise.  We  need  serious  specialists  –  people  who 
spend  years  developing  expertise  and  in  particular  fields  of  our  responsibility.  That  too  is 
behind our credibility, because you need some expertise to have credibility.  
Through the years we have developed outstanding professionals – Ng Kok Song, Mrs Foo-
Yap Siew Hong, who served us for 39 years, Ms Teo Swee Lian and many others. Our present 
Managing  Director,  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  is  another  example,  someone  who  grew  up  as  a 
professional within the organisation. We have to keep developing professional expertise in 
each of the areas that we engage in.  
When  you  add  it  all  up,  MAS  is  now  one  of the  best  regarded  central  banks  and financial 
regulators in the world. And it is because of our people. Our people are very well regarded 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   internationally and as an organisation we punch above our weight. That comes from years 
building up our organisation and building up our people.  
Finally I want to thank all the staff – our pioneers as well as current staff, in all the roles that 
you perform in, in various areas in MAS. Some of you have been through a few or even several 
departments in your career. I want to thank all of you for making MAS what it is today.  
I hope this Gallery is a testament to your work in building up an MAS that has credibility, at 
home in Singapore and all over the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
