  Patrick Njoroge: Establishing sustainable agricultural financing in 
Kenya, Tanzania and Malawi 
Remarks by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of the 
Executive Certificate in Agricultural Finance (ECAF) Capacity Building Programme, Nairobi, 
10 June 2016. 
 Honorable Cabinet Secretary, distinguished guests, Good morning! It is a great pleasure to 
speak  before  this  distinguished  group  today.  I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  the 
organizers and sponsors of this event, the Global Communities Partners for Good and the 
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya, let me join my colleagues in welcoming you to this 
event  whose  primary  objective  is  to  launch  a  new  and  unique  capacity  building  initiative 
targeting financial sector institutions in Kenya, Tanzania, and Malawi. I am informed that this 
training  programme,  aptly  called  the  Executive  Certificate  in  Agricultural  Finance  (ECAF), 
has been developed in response to the identified capacity gaps obtaining in majority of our 
lending institutions which has continued to constrain effective delivery of financial services to 
the agricultural sector. 
At the outset, let me commend the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), Global 
Communities Partners for Good, Kenya School of Monetary Studies, and Financial Access 
East Africa (FAEA) for seeking to continue building a critical mass of appropriately trained 
personnel with requisite knowledge and skills to  deliver lending services to the agricultural 
sector. 
Establishing a sustainable and borrower-friendly agricultural financing system with a capacity 
to infuse growth of various sizes of agribusinesses has continued to be elusive. This, in spite 
of  the  fact  that  agriculture  remains  the  single  most  critical  sector  in  the  majority  of  Sub-
Saharan communities. A number of both demand and supply side factors have been cited as 
contributing  to  the  worrying  scenario.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  this  programme,  seeks  to 
address a critical supply side factor which is under the control of lending institutions – i.e., 
strengthening the human resource capacity. 
According to estimates, demand for food will increase by 70 percent by 2050, and at least 
$80  billion  annually  in  investments  will  be  needed  to  meet  this  demand,  most  of  which  is 
expected to come from the private sector. Banking sectors especially in developing countries 
have continued to lend much smaller share of their loan portfolios to agriculture compared to 
agriculture’s share of GDP. This has constrained investment in agriculture by both farmers 
and agribusiness. It also demonstrates that the barrier to lending is not a lack of liquidity in 
the banking sectors, but rather a lack of willingness to expand lending to agriculture. 
It  is  noteworthy  that  various  global  initiatives  that  have  been  undertaken  by  different 
stakeholders,  to  reverse  the  worrying  trend  in  order  to  enhance  access  and  usage  of 
financial services for growth in the agricultural sector and these include: 
 
the  World  Bank  Group’s  Community  of  Practice  (CoP)  focusing  on  agricultural 
finance and insurance; 
AgriFin’s  initiative  of  GFADR,  a  multi-stakeholder  program  funded  by  the  Bill  & 
Melinda Gates Foundation; 
CGAP’s initiative on small holder finance which explores innovative approaches in 
the use of information and communication technologies (ICT) and IFC’s work with 
private sector banks and agribusinesses. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
I  am  happy  to  note  that  this  capacity  building  programme  we  are  launching  today  is  an 
intervention  seeking  to  further  address  the  nagging  human  resource  capacity  challenges 
characterizing our financial sector institutions in the area of agricultural lending. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  note  that  by  the  end  of  the  funding  phase  by  the  Global  Communities 
Partners  for  Good,  KSMS  and  its  partner  FAEA  will  have  trained  a  total  of  300  lending 
officers  consisting  of  140  from  Kenya,  100  from  Tanzania  and  60  from  Malawi.  It  is 
anticipated  that  with  an  appropriately  trained  workforce,  our  lending  institutions  should 
increase  their  lending  activities  to  this  key  and  critical  sector  of  our  economy.  We  at  the 
Central Bank of Kenya are excited by this unique opportunity to build the capacity of financial 
institutions to better serve the agriculture sector, a key economic driver for all three countries, 
and help stimulate the sector. 
With these few remarks, I wish to invite the Cabinet Secretary, Mr. Willy Bett to make a few 
remarks and launch this training programme. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
