   François Villeroy de Galhau: The role of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Global 
Interdependence  Center  –  Central  Banking  Series  “Inflation  expectations,  implications  and 
policy  response  in  a  new  paradigm for  commodities”,  Session  I  “Central  bankers  outlook”, 
Paris, 21 March 2016. 
 Since the financial crisis, central banks have been tested on several levels: their ability to 
keep  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  active;  their  ability  to  deliver  on  price 
stability; their ability to support the economy. Central banks in many jurisdictions have done a 
lot to reach their objectives. And their role has largely been hailed as positive in exiting the 
crisis.  But  faced  with  inflation  remaining  below  the  target,  commodity  markets  going 
persistently through bear territory and growth momentum losing steam, central banks’ action 
is now called into question: how effective is monetary policy and how effective can it be in the 
future? Aren’t central banks running out of ammo? Monetary policy faces challenges, that is 
true; but these challenges can be mitigated. Central banks have proven that they were ready 
to do their part; but my conviction is that they cannot remain the only game in town. Let me 
focus  my  remarks  today  on  the  case  of  the  euro  area.  Jeffrey  [Lacker,  President  of  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond] will certainly give you more insight into the US situation. 
I  would  first  like  to  elaborate  on  the  challenges  we  face  as  central  bankers,  then  on  our 
instruments and their effectiveness. 
Let me start with the challenges 
I.  
a)  
As  you  all  know,  the  Eurosystem’s  primary  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability, 
that  is  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to  2%  over  the  medium  term.  However  in  the  euro 
area, like in most advanced economies, inflation remains too low, despite the historically low 
interest rates: the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) indeed returned to negative 
territory, standing at –0.2% in February 2016, and underlying inflation, i.e. excluding energy 
and food, is only 0.7%. A certain number of factors are currently contributing to low inflation. 
Primarily,  the  euro  area  is  faced  with  deflationary  pressures  associated  with  a  series  of 
economic  shocks:  firstly,  the  fall  in  oil  prices,  as  well  as  the  overall  decline  in  commodity 
prices;  secondly,  the  slowdown  in  growth  in  emerging  economies  and  chiefly  China;  and, 
lastly, inadequate growth in the euro area with persistently high unemployment, which curbs 
wage rises and weakens demand and price growth. Moreover, structural factors, such as the 
ageing  population,  are  also  likely  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  “natural”  –  or 
“Wicksellian” – interest rate. This rate can be defined as the interest rate consistent with the 
full employment of the factors of production. In this case, in order to achieve the right balance 
between  savings  and  investment,  markets  rates  must  come  down  too.  In  normal  times, 
central  banks  cut  their  key  rates,  and  this  passes  through  to  the  yield  curve.  However,  in 
order to deal with the financial crisis, the ECB like other central banks have brought their key 
interest rates to very low levels, around zero. This means that our traditional monetary policy 
tools had to be supplemented by other instruments, known as non-standard instruments, in 
order to reach our prices stability objective. I will return to this point later. 
What  is  more  with  regard  to  the  challenges  we  currently  face,  these  deflationary 
b)  
pressures create the risk of an unanchoring of expectations, which would make it harder 
for  us  to  achieve  our  2%  target  again.  Indeed,  if  inflation  stayed  too  low  for  too  long, 
economic  agents  may  revise  downwards  their  inflation  expectations,  which  would  create 
second  round  effects.  Lower  inflation  expectations  influence  economic  agents’  price-  and 
wage-setting  behaviour,  which  in  turn  keeps  inflation  low.  It  can  even  raise  the  risk  of 
deflation, defined as a cumulative process of falling prices, including those of assets, or even 
wages and production, as the world economy experienced in the 1930s or Japan partially 
underwent in the 1990s. Such deflationary dynamics are not at play today. But this risk is the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   reason  why  our  inflation  target  is  symmetrical.  We  consider  too  low  inflation  to  be  just  as 
costly as too high inflation. And, therefore, it is more risky for central banks to act too late 
than too early. Since the start of the year, we have observed that market-based measures of 
inflation  expectations  have  fallen.  Nevertheless,  the  latest  forecasts  provided  by  the  ECB 
continue to point to a gradual rise in inflation over the coming years: 0.1% in 2016, 1.3% in 
2017 and 1.6% in 2018. 
c)  
Some argue that these challenges mean that the Eurosystem can no longer achieve 
its price stability mandate. I don’t think so. Current challenges do not call into question 
our  mandate,  but  they  change  the  way  in  which  we  fulfil  it.  Some  argue  that  the 
Eurosystem should rather change its objective. I don’t think so either. For the credibility of 
monetary  policy,  this  objective  must  be  maintained:  this  2%  target  is  a  medium-term 
“anchor”, at a time when there is so much volatility and short-termism affecting the economy. 
Most central banks in advanced economies share this medium-term 2% objective, including 
the United States and Japan. This has been the ECB’s objective since 2003, when it was 
proposed by the German former chief economist, Otmar Issing. 
This brings me to my second point: how effective is our monetary policy? 
II.  
a)  
Since  the  summer  of  2014,  we  have  implemented  a  series  of  non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  to  complement  cuts  to  key  interest  rates.  These  non-standard 
measures have produced tangible results. They have translated into a substantial easing 
in borrowing conditions for euro area companies. Since June 2014, the cost of borrowing for 
businesses has fallen by 80 basis points. Without non-standard measures, we estimate that 
we would have had to lower key rates by around 100 basis points in June 2014 to achieve a 
similar  effect  on  bank  interest  rates.  This  has  also  helped  to  stimulate  lending  to  the  real 
economy: in the euro area, outstanding loans to businesses have gone from a contraction of 
–2.5% in June 2014 to growth of 0.6% in January 2016. The impact is even more marked in 
France, where outstanding business lending grew by 4.8% year-on-year in the first month of 
2016 – the highest pace of growth in the euro area and, what’s more, with the lowest rates of 
interest.  Convergent  estimates  from  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  indicate  that,  all  other 
things being equal, the measures introduced since June 2014 should add 1 percentage point 
to  inflation  over  the  period  2015–2017,  with  a  similar  impact  on  growth.  In  France,  they 
helped to boost 2015 growth by 0.3 percentage point, and estimates from INSEE even put 
the  impact  slightly  higher  at  +0.4  pp. That  represents  about  80,000  additional  jobs for  the 
economy – although only structural reforms can generate lasting gains for a country’s growth 
and employment. To conclude on this estimate of effectiveness, the IMF – regarded as an 
objective judge of the relevance of economic policies – was unequivocal in its assessment at 
the last G20 meeting in Shanghai at the end of February, saying, “The ECB’s asset purchase 
programme  has  supported  the  recovery  by  improving  confidence  and  financial  conditions 
[and] monetary policy should remain accommodative”. 
b)  
has been introduced by the ECB sends out two clear messages: 
First, our decisions are guided by our mandate which is to bring inflation back towards our 
target of 2% over the medium term. We are firmly set on this objective, and we have a 
broad range of instruments with which to achieve it. In addition to interest rates, we are 
also  acting  both  on:  bank  credit  easing  with  the  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing  operations  (TLTRO  2);  and  on  market  financing  via  the  extended  QE  asset 
purchase programme, to 80 billion EUR per month including corporate bonds. On top of that, 
we are guaranteeing that we shall continue to do so for as long as necessary – via forward 
guidance. So, negative interest rates are only part of a much more comprehensive package. 
We think that they have been effective, but they naturally have their limits. Furthermore, the 
Governing  Council  gave  a  strong  signal  of  its  will  towards  an  internationally  cooperative 
attitude, as it decided not to opt for a tiering system exempting banks from negative rates. 
Why have we decided to do more on 10 March? The comprehensive package that 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Second message: our priority is to promote the financing of the real economy. The goal 
of TLTRO 2 is not, as some have claimed, to offset the impact of negative rates on banks. It 
is  to  encourage  banks  to  lend  to  corporations,  SMEs  and  households  alike;  similarly, 
extending the asset purchase programme to corporate bonds will be of particular benefit to 
large  French  corporations.  In  other  words,  we  are  securing  the  provision  of  credit  to 
businesses and households, and protecting it from tensions linked to market volatility. 
c)  
Now, what about the risks?  I talked earlier about the risks of doing nothing: we 
need to take action in order to bring inflation back up towards 2%. That said, we also need to 
keep a close eye out for any possible negative side-effects of our monetary policy, notably 
for financial stability. We are actively monitoring the financial cycle, including in France where 
the task falls to the High Council for Financial Stability set up in 2013. I took part in its 8th 
meeting at the Finance Ministry last week. For the time being, there are no signs of bubbles 
forming  in  our  main  financing  markets:  on  the  whole,  developments  in  the  equity  markets 
appear  in  line  with  corporate  profit  forecasts,  while  evolutions  in  bond  yields  also  seem 
consistent  with  the  outlook  for  inflation  and  growth.  Nor  are  there  any  signs  of  excessive 
credit growth in the financial system. Nevertheless, we remain vigilant over all aspects of the 
current macroeconomic and financial environment. Last week the High Council for Financial 
Stability  alerted  on  potential  risks  associated  with  commercial  real  estate,  especially:  “the 
sharp rise in demand by investors on certain market segments and a high level of prices, in 
particular office prices in the Paris area”. The HCSF’s assessment will be released for public 
consultation  in  the  coming  weeks.  We  are  ready,  when  needed,  to  take  action  with 
macroprudential measures, to prevent and mitigate any systemic risks that might arise. 
In sum, monetary policy is doing a great deal to counter weak inflation and support economic 
activity – it is our duty and we will continue to do so with steadfast resolve: we are consistent 
in  our  objective,  ready  to  act  with  the  right  instruments,  and  alert  to  any  possible  risks. 
However, I would like to stress again that “monetary policy cannot be the only game in town”. 
Other economic policies also have a crucial role to play. This is precisely what the members 
of the G20 reiterated in Shanghai on 27 February: “Monetary policies will continue to support 
economic  activity  and  ensure  price  stability,  consistent  with  central  banks’  mandates,  but 
monetary policy alone cannot lead to balanced growth”. Where there is sufficient margin to 
do so, fiscal policy must support demand – this is not currently the case in France, but it is in 
other countries in Europe. Moreover, structural reforms remain absolutely vital in France, to 
encourage  creations  of  jobs  and  of  businesses  and  thus  bring  the  economy  back  to  full 
potential.  At  European  level,  we  need  to  move  finally  towards  a  true  economic  union,  in 
addition  to  the  monetary  union  embodied  in  the  Eurosystem.  Only  by  optimising  the 
governance of the euro area can we optimise growth. The current extremely accommodative 
monetary policy stance creates the ideal conditions for carrying out much-needed reforms. It 
should not be used instead as an excuse for putting them off: Europe and France urgently 
need to make the most of this opportunity, right now. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
