  Haruhiko Kuroda: Overcoming deflation – theory and practice 
Speech by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at Keio University, Tokyo, 
20 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
It is a great honor to have the opportunity to speak to you today at the Faculty of Economics 
at Keio University. 
Founded  by  Yukichi  Fukuzawa  in  1858,  Keio  Gijuku  has  a  history  spanning  more  than 
150 years. The Faculty of Economics – the precursor of which, together with the Faculty of 
Letters  and  the  Faculty  of  Law,  was  one  of  the  three  original  faculties  of  Keio  University 
established in 1890 – is said to be the oldest economics faculty in Japan. Since then, it has 
not only been a leading force in economic scholarship in Japan in a wide range of research 
areas  but  has  also  turned  out  a  large  number  of  individuals  that  have  gone  on  to  play 
prominent roles in the world of politics, business, and finance. 
Since I have been given the opportunity to speak at such an academic venue, today I would 
like to talk about the implementation of so-called unconventional monetary policy and their 
link to developments in academic research, based on the Bank’s experience in implementing 
quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE). 
QQE with a negative interest rate 
I. 
Japan has struggled with deflation since the late 1990s, and in the process the need for more 
powerful  monetary  easing  gradually  became  evident.  The  Abe  administration  was 
inaugurated in December 2012 and launched its so-called “Abenomics” policies consisting of 
“three arrows,” and I assumed my role as Governor of the Bank of Japan in March 2013. In 
April,  at  the  first  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  after  I  became  Governor,  the  Bank  decided  to 
introduce QQE. 
QQE comprises two elements designed to break through the bounds to previous monetary 
policy  measures  (Chart  1).  The  first  element  consists  of  trying  to  drastically  convert  the 
deflationary mindset that had gained hold among people and to raise inflation expectations 
through the Bank’s strong commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time. The second element consists of exerting downward pressure not 
only  on  short-term  nominal  interest  rates  but  on  the  entire  yield  curve  through  massive 
purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). The consequence of these elements is 
that they make it possible to exert greater monetary easing effects on the real economy by 
substantially lowering real interest rates not only at the short end but also at the long end. 
Subsequently,  the  pace  of  monetary  expansion  was  accelerated  in  October  2014  both  in 
quantitative and qualitative terms and, in January this year, the policy was augmented in a 
third  dimension  by  adding  an  interest  rate  dimension  to  the  quantitative  and  qualitative 
dimensions through the introduction of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” (Chart 2). The 
introduction of a negative interest rate aims to exert further downward pressure on the entire 
yield curve by lowering the short end of the yield curve, coupled with massive purchases of 
JGBs.  This  could  be  called  “enhanced  QQE”  in  that  it  is  an  extension  of  previous  QQE 
policies and further enhances their effects. 
With regard to massive purchases of JGBs, the Bank initially conducted purchases such that 
the amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank would increase at an annual pace of about 
50 trillion yen, and in October 2014 this was accelerated to today’s pace of about 80 trillion 
yen. Since Japan’s nominal GDP is about 500 trillion yen, an annual increase of 80 trillion 
yen corresponds to about 16 percent of GDP (Chart 3). As a result of such purchases, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Bank of Japan’s balance sheet relative to nominal GDP increased from about 35 percent at 
end-March  2013  to  about  81  percent  at  end-March  this  year  and  will  continue  to  rise.  For 
comparison, following the three rounds of large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) in the United 
States, which now have ended, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet at end-March this year 
was equivalent to 25 percent of nominal GDP. I think this shows you just how massive the 
monetary easing conducted by the Bank of Japan is. 
for 
the  optimal  response 
The costs of deflation 
individual  economic  entities;  however, 
II. 
As  mentioned,  the  aim  of  QQE  is  to  overcome  the  prolonged  deflation  that  has  gripped 
Japan.  Even  if  this  deflation  has  been  mild,  the  fact  that  it  has  continued  for  more  than 
15 years means that its cumulative costs have been extremely large. Looked at in terms of 
the price level, an annual inflation rate of minus 0.3 percent over a period of 15 years implies 
that the price level will fall by around 5 percent, but an annual inflation rate of 2 percent over 
a period of 15 years means that the price level will rise by around 35 percent. Therefore, I 
think it is clear that even mild deflation, if it continues for a prolonged period, will have a large 
impact on the medium- to long-term decision-making of economic entities. 
The problem with persistent deflation is that it gives rise to a vicious cycle in which firms and 
households  –  since  they  expect  prices  to  fall  further  and  due  to  heightened  uncertainty  – 
postpone  various  expenditures,  which  further  prolongs  weak  growth  and  deflation.  Under 
such circumstances, with falling prices and heightened uncertainty, postponing expenditures 
may  be 
from  a 
macroeconomic  perspective,  it  is  a  typical  example  of the  “fallacy  of  composition,”  since  it 
results  in  prolonging  weak  growth  and  deflation.  Therefore,  to  overcome  deflation,  it  is 
absolutely  essential  to  drastically  convert  the  deflationary  mindset.  Moreover,  merely 
achieving a positive inflation rate is not sufficient; it is also necessary that a self-reinforcing 
cycle of strengthening economic activity gains traction with prices increasing moderately. 
During the period of deflation, Japan’s economy experienced a simultaneous downward shift 
and  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  (Chart  4).  If  the  average  inflation  rate  is  low,  the 
opportunity  costs  of  leaving  prices  unchanged are  also  low,  so  that  the frequency  of  price 
adjustments by firms is likely to fall. Macroeconomic theory suggests that such a decline in 
the frequency of price adjustments at the micro level is linked to a flattening of the Phillips 
curve at the macro level.1 
A  key  question  in  this  context,  I  think,  is  whether  the  flattening  of  the  Phillips  curve  or,  in 
other  words,  the  decrease  in  the  responsiveness  of  the  inflation  rate  to  economic 
fluctuations,  is  simply  the  result  of  changes  in  firms’  price-setting  behavior.  If  we  look  at 
Japan’s experience of prolonged deflation, the decline in the frequency of price adjustments 
can also be regarded as signaling a weakening in the metabolism of the economy, of which 
the postponement of expenditure activities by firms and households is only a symptom. If this 
is  the  case,  it  is  possible  that  the  change  in  the  shape  of  the  Phillips  curve  reflects  a 
deterioration  in  the  fundamentals  of  Japan’s  economy.  Of  course,  at  the  moment,  this  is 
nothing  more  than  a  hypothesis.  To  examine  this  hypothesis,  we  need  theoretical  and 
empirical studies taking the interaction of deflation and firms’ behavior into account, but to 
date  there  is  limited  amount  of  research  on  this  issue.  Moreover,  when  considering  the 
lessons from Japan’s  prolonged  deflation,  it  is  also  essential  to  deepen our  understanding 
with regard to the link between deflation and macroeconomic performance. 
                                                
1  Laurence  Ball,  N.  Gregory  Mankiw,  and  David  Romer,  “The  New  Keynesian  Economics  and  the  Output-
Inflation Trade-off,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1–65. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Formation of inflation expectations 
III. 
Earlier,  I  mentioned  that  QQE  consists  of  two  elements.  One  of  these  was  the  drastic 
conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset,  and  related  to  this,  I  would  like  to  consider  the 
formation of inflation expectations in more detail. 
When considering the formation of inflation expectations, theoretical and empirical research 
on  forward  guidance  under  zero  interest  rates  provides  useful  insights. With  many  central 
banks grappling with the zero lower bound on policy rates not only as a theoretical possibility 
but  as  a  problem  encountered  in  practice,  research  on  forward  guidance  has  made 
considerable  progress.2  Such  research  has  helped  to  elucidate  that,  even  in  a  situation 
where  the  zero  lower  bound  has  been  reached  and  it  is  not  possible  to  lower  policy  rates 
further, monetary easing effects can be achieved through forward guidance by committing to 
maintaining zero interest rates, which can be regarded as a mechanism to borrow monetary 
easing effects from the future (Chart 5). 
The first time this mechanism was employed in the actual conduct of monetary policy was 
with  the  introduction  of  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  commenced  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  in 
February 1999. At that time, the Bank committed itself to maintaining a zero interest rate until 
deflationary  concern  was  dispelled,  and  the  impact  of  that  policy  was  called  the  “policy 
duration effect.” Backed by growing theoretical research, similar policies were subsequently 
adopted by central banks of other major advanced economies and have recently come to be 
referred to as forward guidance. 
It is well known that in standard macroeconomic models, macroeconomic variables respond 
strongly  to  forward  guidance  by  the  central  bank,  giving  rise  to  substantial  policy  effects. 
Thus, from a theoretical perspective, a commitment to continuing with zero interest rates for 
a  prolonged  period  not  only  allows  borrowing  unlimited  monetary  easing  effects  from  the 
future, but such policy effects also materialize immediately. However, these predictions are 
at  odds  with  the  effects  actually  observed  in  practice  –  a  phenomenon  that  has  been 
described as the “forward guidance puzzle.”3 
When  considering  this  puzzle,  two  factors  are  important.  The  first  is  that  in  standard 
macroeconomic models, there are no limits to consumption smoothing over time due to the 
large  intertemporal  elasticity  of  substitution  and the  absence  of  borrowing  constraints. The 
second is that inflation expectations respond instantaneously to any change in policy. 
It is this latter point – the speed with which inflation expectations respond – that I would like 
to  focus  on  next.  In  theoretical  models  assuming  a  forward-looking  Phillips  curve,  inflation 
expectations respond instantaneously if the commitment regarding future monetary easing is 
credible. However, inflation expectations observed in practice are highly sticky and change 
only slowly. This means that in the actual formation of inflation expectations, the backward-
looking  component  determined  by  actual  inflation  rates  observed  in  the  past  plays  a  large 
role. Moreover, in standard theoretical models, it is assumed outright that the commitment to 
monetary easing is perfectly credible, which potentially gives rise to a discrepancy between 
such theoretical models and reality. 
If  we  consider  Japan’s  experience,  with  inflation  expectations  having  declined  in  the 
deflationary  period,  what  plays  an  extremely  important  role  in  the  process  of  overcoming 
deflation is to push inflation expectations back up to close to the target inflation rate and to 
re-anchor them there. How to do this, including how to deal with the impact of the backward-
looking component of inflation expectations, is a challenge that is not necessarily addressed 
                                                
2  Gauti Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 2003, pp. 139–211. 
3  Marco  Del  Negro,  Marc  Giannoni,  and  Christina  Patterson,  “The  Forward  Guidance  Puzzle,”  Staff  Reports 
574, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  by theory. Moreover, with not only the Bank of Japan but many other central banks around 
the world currently having nearly exhausted conventional monetary policy means – that is, 
lowering short-term interest rates – responding to deflationary pressures and firmly stabilizing 
inflation expectations at the desired level represents an unprecedentedly difficult challenge. 
In this sense, the formation of inflation expectations can be regarded as an “old new” issue of 
debate. 
Large-scale purchases of financial assets 
IV. 
Next,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  pushing  down  the  entire  yield  curve  through  massive  JGB 
purchases, which is another element of QQE. 
As  is  well  known,  although  the  market  operations  of  a  central  bank  –  by  exchanging 
monetary  base  for  government  bonds  –  are  transactions  in  financial  assets  that  are  not 
perfect  substitute,  they  should  be  neutral  with  regard  to  price  formation  if  arbitrage  in 
financial markets operates fully.4 However, if arbitrage in financial markets for some reason 
is imperfect, the market operations of the central bank will affect term premiums.5 Moreover, 
it is likely that such financial market imperfection will become more severe during times of 
financial crisis. 
In practice, if we look back at the response of central banks in the United States and Europe 
immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, we find that the most important issue was 
the stabilization of financial markets and the financial system, and central banks to this end 
provided large amounts of liquidity and intervened in financial markets that showed signs of 
malfunction.  Subsequently,  with  financial  markets  having  calmed  down  to  some  extent, 
central  banks  continued  with  large-scale  asset  purchases  with  the  aim  of  stabilizing  the 
macroeconomy  and  avoiding  deflation  by  pushing  down  various  premiums  in  financial 
markets. Furthermore, another important component of QQE, as mentioned earlier, was to 
raise inflation expectations by influencing forward-looking expectations formation. 
A  number  of  studies  employing  New  Keynesian  models  – 
type  of 
macroeconomic  models  employed  to  analyze  monetary  policy  issues  –  have  sought  to 
incorporate  various  kinds  of  financial  market  imperfections  to  examine  the  impact  of  such 
quantitative  easing.6  However,  I  think  that  to  date  it  is  not  sufficiently  clear  under  what 
circumstances and through which mechanisms quantitative easing is effective. In fact, former 
Fed Chairman Bernanke has quipped that “[t]he problem with QE is it works in practice, but it 
doesn’t  work  in  theory.”  Given  that  different  countries  and  regions  have  different  financial 
systems,  I  think  that  when  examining  the  impact  of  quantitative  easing  it  is  necessary  not 
only to focus on the financial markets in which large-scale asset purchases are conducted 
but  also  to  explicitly  take  into  account  such  differences,  for  example  in  the  transmission 
mechanisms in the financial systems. 
the  standard 
Monetary policy rules 
V. 
I  would  now  like  to  slightly  change  the  topic  and  consider  unconventional  monetary  policy 
and monetary policy rules. 
                                                
4  Neil  Wallace,  “A  Modigliani-Miller  Theorem  for  Open-Market  Operations,”  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 71, No. 3, 1981, pp. 267–274. 
5  Franco  Modigliani  and  Richard  Sutch,  “Innovations  in  Interest  Rate  Policy,”  American  Economic  Review, 
Vol. 56, No. 2, 1966, pp. 178–197. 
6  See, for example, Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Financial Intermediation and Credit Policy in Business 
Cycle  Analysis,”  in  Benjamin  Friedman  and  Michael  Woodford,  eds.,  Handbook  of  Monetary  Economics, 
Vol. 3A, 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  One  of  the  areas  in  which  there  has  been  considerable  progress  since  the  1990s  in 
theoretical and empirical research on monetary policy is research on policy rules, of which 
the  Taylor  rule  is  a  prime  example.7  Studies  in  this  area  highlight  the  importance  of 
systematically  setting  policy  rates  in  line  with  changes  in  the  macroeconomy  in  order  to 
maximize  monetary  policy  effects.  Put  differently,  they  indicate  that  in  order  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy, the important thing is not to cause unanticipated shocks, 
but to maintain consistent and predictable policy responses (Chart 6). 
These considerations regarding the conduct of monetary policy essentially also apply to the 
conduct  of  unconventional  policies.  This  means  that,  in  order  to  raise  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy, it is important to show in advance the policy options the central bank can 
use to address an exogenous shock to the economy large enough for interest rates to hit the 
zero lower bound. However, looking back at Japan’s experience since the late 1990s and the 
policy response in the United States and Europe following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, 
central banks essentially stumbled along in devising new policy measures to respond to the 
situation and problems facing them at the time. 
Since in practice the world is full of uncertainty, it is difficult to present policy options for all 
contingencies in advance. Moreover, because policy responses to unanticipated events are 
formulated  by  taking  not  only  financial  and  economic  circumstances  but  also  various 
structural  and  institutional  constraints  into  account,  they  tend  to  consist  of  a  complex 
package of policies. 
The  issue  of  what  kind  of  institutional  framework  should  be  built  in  order  to  achieve  an 
efficient  allocation  of  resources  in  circumstances  where  such  uncertainty  is  great  and  it  is 
necessary to deal with complex challenges falls into the arena of incomplete contract theory.8 
Research in this field has made rapid progress in recent years and the findings are applied in 
practice in a growing range of areas, such as firm organization, financial contracts, and legal 
systems. I think that, by employing the new understanding gained and considering a possible 
policy framework for comprehensive policy rules – including in response to crises – as well 
as  the  application  of  such  rules,  it  may  be  possible  to  expand  the  research  frontier  of 
monetary policy. 
Long-term equilibrium 
VI. 
While it is premature to talk about the timing of an exit from “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate” and how to go about it, I would finally like to take the valuable opportunity of speaking 
here  today  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  relationship  between  Japan’s  economy  and 
monetary policy once deflation has finally been overcome. 
Standard models analyzing monetary policy take the trend growth rate and the inflation rate 
in steady state as given and focus on economic fluctuations around the trend. The central 
interest  of  monetary  policy  analysis  employing  such  models  is  how  to  smooth  cyclical 
economic  fluctuations  and  to  stabilize  the  inflation  rate  near  the  target  level.  Standard 
macroeconomic models generally make simplifying assumptions: short-term models focusing 
on  business  cycles  take  the  potential  growth  rate  as  exogenously  given,  while  long-term 
economic  growth  models  examining  the  determinants  of  the  potential  growth  rate  ignore 
short-term economic fluctuations, since it is assumed that these are smoothed out over time 
and do not affect long-term economic growth. 
                                                
7  The pioneering study in this area is John B. Taylor, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-
Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39, 1993, pp. 195–214. 
8  A standard textbook in this field is Patrick Bolton and Mathias Dewatripont, Contract Theory, The MIT Press, 
2005. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Similar simplifying assumptions are made in the analysis of unconventional monetary policy. 
When  unconventional  monetary  policies  are  analyzed  using  standard 
theoretical 
macroeconomic models, it is assumed that even if there is a shock large enough for interest 
rates  to  hit  the  zero  lower  bound  the  economy  returns  to  its  steady  state  as  the  shock 
dissipates. In other words, such analyses of unconventional monetary policies examine how 
the impact of a large shock is smoothed out and absorbed over time. 
However,  if  there  is  a  downward  shift  in  the  steady  state  and  the  natural  rate  of  interest, 
which  reflects  long-term  growth  expectations,  shifts  down  permanently,  the  stimulative 
effects  of  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates  on  economic  activity  will  weaken  and  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  will  be  substantially  hampered.  Moreover,  if  there  is 
substantial uncertainty regarding the level of the natural rate of interest, this would make it 
difficult to assess the degree of monetary easing or tightening required and it would increase 
uncertainty  over  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  since  the  decline  in  the 
potential growth rate is likely to also lower expected permanent incomes, it will give rise to a 
negative income effect, which likely will exert downward pressure on economic activity. 
In  fact,  as  seen  in  the  “secular  stagnation”  debate  of  recent  years,  there  has  been  active 
debate in major advance economies regarding the possibility that, following the large shocks 
they have suffered, the steady state may have shifted downward due to a variety of factors.9 
Meanwhile,  whereas  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate  until  the  early  1990s  had  been  in  the 
range  of  3  to  4  percent,  it  subsequently  followed  a  downward  trend,  falling  to  around 
1 percent in the second half of the 1990s and further to a level below 0.5 percent after the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers (Chart 7). The natural rate of interest – that is, the interest rate 
at which the economy neither accelerates nor decelerates – is likely to also have followed a 
downward trend in line with the decline in the potential growth rate. 
In  this  sense,  the  relationship  between  uncertainty  surrounding  the  medium-  to  long-term 
steady state and the conduct of monetary policy can be said to be an issue faced not only by 
the Bank of Japan, but by all central banks. In order to consider this issue, it is necessary to 
devise  an  analytical  framework  that  takes  the  interaction  between  long-term  economic 
growth  and  short-term  business  cycle  fluctuations  into  account.  Doing  so  is  not  only  of 
practical importance but should also present an interesting research topic from an academic 
perspective. 
Conclusion 
Japan’s  experience  of  battling  with  mild  but  extremely  persistent  deflation  provides  a 
valuable case study both for academic research on unconventional monetary policy and for 
the practical conduct of monetary policy by central banks. By making use of this experience, 
we have made significant progress over the past decade and a half in academic research 
and the actual conduct of monetary policy. However, it is also true that, as I mentioned today, 
there  still  remain  gaps  between  the  two.  Going  forward,  I  am  sure  that  if  academia  and 
central  banks  continue  to  join forces  in  their  efforts,  this  will  produce  important  benefits  to 
both sides. 
Thank you. 
 
                                                 
9  Lawrence H. Summers, “Have we Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation? IMF Fourteenth Annual Research 
Conference  in  Honor  of  Stanley  Fischer,  Washington,  DC,”  IMF  Economic  Review,  Vol.  63,  No.  1,  2015, 
pp. 277–280. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    7 
  8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
