  Chris Salmon: Rebuilding trust through the “FX Global Code” – reasons 
for optimism 
Speech by Mr Chris Salmon, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at the 
ACI UK Square Mile Debate, London, 21 September 2016. 
 I  am  grateful  to  David  Edmunds,  Grigoria  Christodoulou,  Laurie  Roberts,  Tim  Taylor, Rebecca  Jackson,  Geoff 
Coppins and Jon Pyzer for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
Good evening, I am delighted to be here at the ACI UK’s Square Mile Debate. Tonight, my 
focus is the work underway to develop a single, global code of conduct for foreign exchange 
(FX). 
But before doing so I cannot not help but advertise the Bank’s latest product: the Churchill 
£5 note that we launched a week ago. It is a technological first for us, made out of polymer, 
and  “cleaner,  safer  and  stronger”  than  its  paper  predecessor.  But  our  unquestioned 
discretion to replace one version of a £5 note with another relies on a much older concept: 
trust,  trust  in  our  “promise  to  pay  the  bearer…”.  And  trust,  or  more  specifically,  rebuilding 
trust, is what is at the core of my main subject tonight, the FX global code of conduct (the 
“Code”). 
It is no secret that all has not been well in FX or FICC markets more generally. The nature 
and scope of misconduct that has come to light in recent years has significantly eroded trust 
in these markets – not only public trust, but also trust between market participants. 
The Fair and Effective Markets Review (2015)1 extensively documented the root causes of 
this  misconduct.  But  in  short,  structural  weaknesses,  ranging  from  poorly  designed 
infrastructure through to guidelines about  what constituted acceptable market practice that 
were  sometimes  poorly  understood,  presented  opportunities  for  misconduct  to  occur.  And 
“ethical drift”, whereby a poor culture that prioritised short-term financial gain above all else 
was  perpetuated  and  normalised,  meant  that  individuals  were  willing  to  exploit  these 
opportunities. 
All  of  these  features  were  present  in  the  various  episodes  of  FX  misconduct  which  have 
come  to  light.  Poor  infrastructure  was  clearly  an  issue  in  foreign  exchange  markets;  in 
particular the manipulation of the 4.00pm fix was facilitated by weaknesses in its design2. But, 
as demonstrated, for example by the misconduct associated with the handling of client stop-
loss orders, the breakdown in market practice norms was clearly very  important in the FX 
markets. 
The  wholesale  FX  market  is  one  of  the  most  complex  markets  in  the  world:  it  operates 
24 hours  a  day  across  multiple  centres.  Participants  are  diverse:  ranging  from  corporates 
looking to hedge their trade flows, through to principal trading firms seeking to capitalise on 
the  most  transitory  of  pricing  anomalies  and,  from  time  to  time,  central  banks  seeking  to 
affect  the  price  of  their  currency.  Some  of  these  users  access  the  market  directly;  others 
indirectly, for example through the sponsorship of their prime broker. Banks, acting as the 
key  intermediaries,  accept  market  risk  when  transacting  as  a  principal  with  some  clients 
while  providing  agency  services  for  others.  Orders  are  often  complex,  requiring  banks  to 
exercise  discretion  when  executing  them.  There  is  no  single  price  –  the  concept  of  ‘best 
execution’ does not sit as neatly as it does in  other markets. Nor is there a single trading 
venue, or even single method of trading, with banks and platforms competing for business. 
                                                
1 
2  http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/r_140930.pdf  –  Final  Report on  Foreign  Exchange  Benchmarks,  Financial Stability 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/femrjun15.pdf.  
Board, 30 September 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This combination of factors means that the information asymmetries and potential conflicts of 
interest  inherent  in  all  FICC  markets  are  also  acute  in  FX  markets. This  in  turn  creates  a 
particular premium on establishing commonly understood and accepted market standards to 
guide behaviour. 
The Global Code initiative launched in May 2015 by the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS) Governors, is designed to achieve this. The initiative will establish a single, global code 
of conduct for the wholesale FX market and has been tasked with developing mechanisms to 
promote greater adherence3. This initiative is now well advanced, with the Phase 1 material 
published in May 20164. The complete Code will be launched in London in May 2017. 
A sceptic might question the prospects for the success of this initiative. After all, this is not 
the first FX Code – it will supersede a number of existing regional FX Codes, some of which 
ended up gathering dust in market participants’ drawers. So, why will this Code work where 
others  have  failed?  In  a  market  where  information  asymmetries  have  been  exploited  for 
selfish motives – what good can a voluntary code of conduct really achieve? 
This is a good challenge, and in the end only time will tell if the Code initiative will succeed in 
minimising future incidents of misconduct. But I want to set out four reasons to be optimistic 
before discussing the steps that I think market participants will need to take individually and 
collectively  to  support  future  adherence,  which  is  fundamental  to  the  Code’s  ultimate 
success, and why I believe it is in their interests to take these steps. 
The first reason for optimism  – and perhaps the most important  – is the substance of the 
Code itself. It will directly address the complexity of the FX market I summarised earlier and, 
informed  by  the  misconduct  of  the  past,  provide  guidance  where  it  is  necessary.  For 
example,  the  interim  publication  established  the  important  principle  that  “where  the 
acceptance of an order grants the Principal executing the order some discretion, it should 
exercise this discretion reasonably, fairly and in such a way that is not designed or intended 
to disadvantage the Client”. And while acknowledging that pre-hedging may be a legitimate 
risk management tool it is clear that it should only be undertaken “in a manner that is not 
meant  to  disadvantage  the  client  or  disrupt  the  market”.  During  Phase  2  of  our  work 
programme we will deal with other areas, such as the provision and use of “last look” and 
time-stamping  that  were  highlighted  by  the  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review  as  areas 
where market practices in the FX market could be improved. 
And in doing so it strikes the right balance between setting out such high-level principles and 
providing concrete guidance. Let me illustrate this point summarising how Phase 1 dealt with 
the  vexed  issue  of  information  sharing.  The  May  2016  text  sets  out,  upfront,  a  broad, 
overarching  principle  – 
“Market  Participants  should  communicate  Market  Colour 
appropriately  and  without  compromising  Confidential  Information”.  And  it  then  sets  out  in 
detail,  how  this  principle  should  be  applied  to  different  types  of  information:  for  example, 
“Client groups, locations and strategies, should be referred to at a level of granularity that 
does not allow Market Participants to derive the underlying Confidential Information”. This will 
be  augmented  in  the final  Code  with  stylised  examples  to  demonstrate how  this  guidance 
can be applied to practical situations – examples of both effective and ineffective aggregation 
of information. 
Second, we are alive to the importance of keeping the Code up to date. From start to finish 
the Code will have been completed in just two years. A benefit of this compressed timeline is 
that the Code should be relevant for today’s market when published. And importantly we are 
committed to developing an appropriate review mechanism so that the Code stays up to date 
                                                
3  http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm   –  Guy  Debelle  of the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia  is chairing this  work,  with Simon 
Potter  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  leading  the  work  on  developing  the  Code  with  myself  leading  the 
adherence work. 
https://www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf. 
4 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 is 
the  Code 
the  process 
inclusive  and, 
 
 
and evolves as the market evolves. Further details will be announced next year, but the new 
Code will not be allowed to stagnate. 
Third, 
to  my  knowledge, 
for  developing 
unprecedented.  Its  development  is  very  much  a  partnership  between  public  and  private 
sectors, with broad-based, senior engagement from all types of key market participants. This 
should help get buy-in for the final product. The Code is for everyone in the FX market – it 
covers  the  buy-side,  sell-side,  non-bank  participants,  trading  platforms  and  other  market 
infrastructure  –  and  therefore  our  engagement  has  necessarily  been  as  diverse.  During 
Phase 2 we are further broadening our engagement to ensure that the voices of all different 
market  participants  are  heard  and  taken  account  of.  The  contributions  made  by  the  more 
than 40 members of the dedicated Market Participants Group (MPG) – chaired by David Puth 
from  CLS  –  and  on  which  current  ACI  President  Marshall  Bailey  also  sits  –  alongside the 
contributions of the regional FXC members have been invaluable, and involves hundreds of 
individuals devoting thousands of hours to the cause. 
Fourth, the Code is one of a suite of important initiatives which have launched in recent years 
to  improve  conduct  in  FICC  markets.  Initiatives  such  as  the  UK  Senior  Managers  and 
Certification Regime, soon to be extended beyond banks to all FCA authorised firms, will aim 
to  raise  standards  of  market  conduct  by  strengthening  the  accountabilities  of  senior 
management. This is particularly pertinent for FX given that London accounts for over a third 
of  global  FX  market  turnover.  Reforms  to  remuneration  structures  will  aim  to  reduce  the 
incentives to cheat for short-term profit. And in the UK the FICC Market Standards Board, 
created  as  a  direct  consequence  of  the  Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review,  has  been 
established  to  champion  good  conduct  across  the  whole  range  of  FICC  markets.  These 
initiatives, combined with a greater focus on conduct, create a supportive environment for the 
objectives of the Code5. 
These  four  factors  create  reasons  to  be  optimistic  about  the  prospects  for  the  Code.  But, 
they are not enough to ensure success. That will require consistent widespread adherence 
by  market  participants.  The  Code  will  only  rebuild  trust  if  it  is  actively  used  by  market 
participants  to  drive  a  market-wide  shift  in  culture  and  attitudes  –  one  that  embeds 
behavioural norms that are consistent with both the letter and spirit of the Code. 
This  type  of  cultural  shift  is  not  something  that  can  be  mandated. The  official  and  private 
sectors  will  work  together  to  achieve  this,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  change, 
fundamentally,  must  come  from  firms  themselves.  In  my  view  at  least,  it  is  in  market 
participants’ individual and collective interest to make that change. 
Individually, firms that assimilate the Code fully are likely to benefit, over time, from greater 
trust in the marketplace, a stronger reputation, and a higher long term franchise value. In a 
world  where  competition  for  market  share  remains  fierce,  winning  the  trust  of  your  clients 
matters financially. 
Collectively, if standards of behaviour throughout the market are higher, it is easier for any 
one  firm  to  maintain  its own  high  standards  and  avoid  getting  embroiled  in  a  “race  to  the 
bottom”;  all  firms  can  then  benefit  from  a  reduction  in  future  regulatory  and  legal  risk. 
Moreover, enduring adherence to the Code’s higher standards of behaviour will likely lead to 
improved functioning of the market as a whole: if widely followed, the Code should facilitate 
more effective and consistently appropriate information sharing than has been the case. An 
                                                
5  There  are  a  number  of  other  important  Codes  that  are  being  developed  in  the  UK,  specifically  such  as  the  Securities 
Lending, Repo and Money Markets Code which is currently being written by a market participant-led joint sub-committee of 
the  Bank’s  Money  Market  Liaison  Committee  (MMLC)  and  Securities  Lending  and  Repo  Committee  (SLRC);  and  the 
Precious Metals Code being produced by the LBMA.  These parallel initiatives will both benefit from and contribute to this 
supportive environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
efficient and effective market can make a positive impact on everyone’s bottom line – leading 
to better volumes, fewer disputes and better outcomes for all market participants. 
So the question for market participants is – how can you, collectively and individually, make 
use of the Code to realise these benefits? There are three key elements that need to be in 
place: First, the Code needs to be embedded in firms’ practices: training and education will 
be important here. Second, firms should have the right policies and procedures in place to 
ensure that they are able to monitor how successfully they have embedded the Code. The 
text of the Code itself provides some practical suggestions but ultimately firms will need to 
consider what the appropriate framework is for their business and level of activity in the FX 
market. Third, firms should be able to demonstrate publicly that their behaviour and practices 
in the FX market are in line with the Code’s principles. The widespread use of a common 
public attestation could be a powerful tool in this respect. It would provide a strong signal of a 
firm’s commitment to following good practices and help focus the mind of the firm’s senior 
management who would be asked to sign the attestation. 
Embedding, monitoring and demonstrating adherence requires concrete action. The central 
banks are leading the way, both by demonstrating their own commitment to the Code and by 
setting incentives for others to follow. BIS central banks have announced their intention to 
embed  the  finalised  Code  within  their  own  practices  –  with  the  expectation  that  their  FX 
counterparties will do likewise. We are also working towards establishing a link between a 
firm’s  formal  commitment  to  adhere  to  the  Code  and  membership  of  regional  FXCs  (the 
London FXJSC in our case). In this context, we have been developing an attestation form, 
which  could  be  adopted  more  widely,  and  could  be  viewed  as  a  public  good.  Given  the 
breadth of FXC membership – there are over 200 FXC members within the 8 major regional 
FXCs,  representing  the  buy-side,  sell-side,  infrastructure,  associations  and  others  –  the 
potential importance of this link should not be underestimated. 
Our actions as central banks, however, can only be a part of the broader picture. The market 
itself needs to consider how to engage with the Code both collectively and individually. The 
process has already started at a collective level. David Puth’s MPG has recently created a 
dedicated sub-group to consider market-based methods to support the Code. I am sure the 
MPG  group  will  reach  out  to  industry  associations,  like  the  ACI,  about  the  potential  to 
develop common education modules, provide training and seminars or facilitating workshops 
to deepen knowledge of the Code. We will share thinking about the use of attestations with 
the MPG team, and I am confident that they will identify a number of market-based initiatives 
to support adherence. One idea the group is exploring, which is not without challenges but 
could be developed through time, is the creation of an industry kite-mark, which firms would 
be awarded if their public attestation to the Code was buttressed by a threshold amount of 
independent assurance work. 
Individually,  firms,  and  particularly  senior  management,  should  start  considering  the  steps 
they will take to support the Code. Over and above questions about policies and procedures 
and training modules the key question senior management should be asking is how can they 
set a strong positive tone and ensure that their firm’s incentives and promotion policies are 
aligned with responsible engagement in the market and the long-term reputation of the firm? 
Part of this conversation will involve a discussion on how firms can monitor their adherence 
to  the  Code,  reward  good  behaviour  and  penalise  bad  behaviour.  In  the  UK,  senior 
managers may find it helpful to consider this work in conjunction with their responsibilities 
under the Senior Managers and Certification Regime. 
When the final Code is released in May 2017 it will no doubt be subject to much scrutiny. 
Sceptics will look for clear commitments from firms to adhere to the Code. Central banks are 
playing their part in catalysing those commitments, but what will really count is the response 
of market participants. Words alone will not be enough and I encourage you all to ensure you 
respond positively and quickly. The Code should not be seen as, and indeed it is not created 
to be, a tick-box exercise. The Code is not written primarily for compliance departments but 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
for all the FX market – including front, middle and back office and senior management who 
should want to adhere. It is a tool for rebuilding trust and standards. 
If the new Churchill £5 is “cleaner, safer and stronger” than its predecessor, then I hope the 
global  Code  initiative  will  lead  to  an  FX  market  that  is  “cleaner”  and  “safer”  for  its  users 
because it has a “stronger” impact on behaviours than its forefathers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
