  Ignazio Visco: The stability of the Italian banking system 
Speech by  Mr Ignazio  Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 22nd ASSIOM FOREX 
Congress, Turin, 30 January 2016. 
 Recent economic developments 
1. 
At the start of the year, the international economic outlook became more uncertain. In the 
advanced countries the recovery is continuing, but it appears less robust than was hoped for 
just a few months ago. In China, as in other emerging economies, growth has slowed amid 
heightened  fears  of  a  further  deceleration.  Weakening  demand  is  partly  responsible  for 
keeping the price of oil and other fuels at historically low levels and for reducing the prices of 
other commodities. 
In the euro area growth continues at a moderate pace, but inflation is struggling to return to a 
path  consistent  with  price  stability;  there  are  risks  of  second-round  effects from  consumer 
price developments to wages, and of a disanchoring of expectations. The Governing Council 
of  the  ECB  has  resolved  to  reconsider  its  monetary  policy  stance  in  March  when  new 
macroeconomic projections will be available; it reconfirmed that there are no limits on how far 
it is willing to deploy the instruments available within its mandate. 
Monetary policy is supporting euro-area economic activity and, by countering the deflationary 
effects of international developments, has been unwavering in the pursuit of its objective. It 
cannot, however, act in isolation; the risks to growth and financial stability must be addressed 
with the help of budgetary policy and by pressing ahead with ongoing reforms. 
In Italy the recovery is progressing at a comparable pace to that of the euro area. The boost 
from exports has weakened, as elsewhere in the euro area, but the contribution of domestic 
demand  has  strengthened,  thanks  to  rising  household  consumption  and  the  increase  in 
inventories;  the  recovery  in  investment  is  still  uneven,  reflecting  uncertainty  over  foreign 
demand. The rise in the number of those employed has continued, as has the shift towards 
more stable forms of employment, partly thanks to social contribution relief and new labour 
law provisions. 
In  the  final  months  of  last  year  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector  turned  upward  again; 
business  lending  has  stabilized,  with  some  fluctuations;  lending  to  households,  which  had 
already picked up, accelerated further and residential mortgage loans have been expanding 
since  the  summer.  The  average  cost  of  new  business  and  home  mortgage  loans  has 
dropped  further,  to  1.9  and  2.6  per  cent  respectively  in  November;  the  differential  with 
respect  to  the  euro-area  average  has  been  wiped  out for  business  loans  and  is  less than 
0.3 percentage points for new home loans. 
However, substantial differences remain between firms that are vulnerable and the – generally 
larger, mostly exporting – firms in sound financial shape. In November, bank credit expanded 
by 4.0 per cent on an annual basis in the manufacturing sector, was barely positive in the 
service sector  – partly owing to the contraction in lending to firms that provide real estate 
services – and remained negative for the construction sector. While loans to businesses with 
20  or  more  workers  rose,  those  to  smaller  firms  continued  to  decline.  The  difference  in 
borrowing  costs  for  loan  amounts  above  and  below  €1  million  is  1.5  percentage  points, 
0.4 points below the peak recorded during the crisis; at the start of 2008 it was 0.7 points. 
As we reported in our Economic Bulletin, Italy’s output could increase by around 1.5 per cent 
in  2016  and  in  2017.  This  scenario  assumes  that  domestic  demand,  and  especially 
investment,  will  continue  to  strengthen.  The  uncertainty  in  the  international  arena  and  its 
impact, at times chaotic and violent, on the financial markets pose evident risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
In recent weeks the stock markets have seen brusque movements, with bank stocks being 
especially  volatile,  particularly  those  of  certain  Italian  banks.  In  addition  to  uncertainties 
regarding  the  international  situation,  the  volatility  in  Italian  bank  stock  prices  reflects  the 
doubts and concerns that have arisen concerning asset quality, in part related to the alarmist 
interpretation of a simple request for information by the ECB. 
Tensions of this magnitude are not justified by the underlying conditions of Italian banks. As 
the  President  of  the  ECB  also  recently  stressed,  non-performing  loans  in  banks’  balance 
sheets  were  examined  as  part  of  the  comprehensive  assessment  performed  in  2014,  the 
necessary provisions were made, and there will be no new requests to increase them or to 
strengthen banks’ capital. The climate surrounding the resolution of four banks that had been 
placed under special administration has also contributed to the volatility. 
The resolution plan for four banks 
2. 
On 22 November of last year the Italian Government and the Bank of Italy applied the new 
rules approved by the Italian Parliament following its transposition of the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  to  resolve  the  crisis  at  Banca  delle  Marche,  Banca  Popolare 
dell’Etruria  e  del  Lazio,  Cassa  di  Risparmio  di  Ferrara  and  Cassa  di  Risparmio  di  Chieti. 
Together they held around 1 per cent of system-wide deposits. Contributing to the collapse of 
these banks, affected like all the others by the deterioration in loan quality due to the length 
and depth of the recession in Italy, were grave episodes of malfeasance. 
Detailed  information  on  the  handling  of  these  crises  and  on  the  supervisory  actions  that 
preceded  them  can  be  found  in  documents  now  available  on  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  website, 
which  follow  on  from  the  explanatory  note  published  on  20  December  regarding  the  bank 
rescue  decree.  Naturally  we  stand  ready  to  provide  any  further  information  should  this  be 
required by Parliament. 
In accordance with the law the decision to place a bank in special administration is taken 
only  in  the  event  of  very  substantial  losses  and  serious  irregularities  that  compromise  the 
bank’s  ability  to  meet  its  capital  requirements  and  threaten  its  very  stability,  or  when  it 
becomes clear that the management appointed by the shareholders are no longer capable of 
coming up with a credible plan for its restructuring. Before special administration is imposed, 
steps are taken that include, based on the circumstances, making changes to its governance 
structure,  preparing  new  business  plans,  adopting  capital  strengthening  measures  and 
selling off assets or business units. 
This sequencing was followed in all four cases, as in all the other bank crises that the Bank 
of Italy has handled (about 100 in the last 15 years), in a diligent and timely manner, and in 
accordance with the existing regulations. 
The  resolution  was  initiated,  in  the  absence  of alternative  market  solutions,  in  view  of  the 
irreversibility of the collapse and the emergence of unsustainable liquidity tensions. Despite 
the  best  efforts  of  the  special  administrators,  and  the  launch  of  negotiations  with  several 
potential counterparties, no concrete offers were forthcoming from investors indicating their 
willingness to assume the risks associated with the impaired assets, against a backdrop of 
worsening macroeconomic conditions and the new regulatory environment. 
Unlike  what  happened  in  the  past  it  was  not  possible  to  seek  financial  support  from  the 
Interbank  Deposit  Protection  Fund,  which,  although  it  draws  on  the  resources  of  the 
member  banks,  in  the  European  Commission’s  interpretation  is  tantamount  to  state  aid 
and  as  such  –  according  to  the  procedures  announced  and  followed  by  the  Commission 
since 2013, to which I will return shortly – can only be disbursed subject to burden sharing, 
i.e. by first imposing losses on shareholders and subordinated creditors. Discussions in this 
regard  between  the  Commission  and  the  Italian  government  have  been  lengthy  and 
painstaking. The document published on the website of the Ministry of Economy and Finance 
on 23 December sets out the issues in detail. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
A dispute at that point with the Commission, or indeed before the European Court of Justice, 
would not only have led to grave uncertainty for the stability of the system, with even more 
serious  consequences  for  the  banks  involved  and  for  investors  but,  under  the  current 
accounting rules, would also have required the banks concerned to set aside an amount to 
cover  the  cost  of  a  potentially  negative  outcome  with  risks  for  business  continuity. 
Intervention by the Fund would in any case have required authorization from the ECB, as the 
supervisory  authority,  which  in  turn  would  have  had  to  request  an  opinion  from  the 
Commission’s Directorate-General for Competition. 
Having  ascertained  the  absence  of  any  concrete  alternatives,  other  than  the  far  more 
traumatic  option  of  liquidating  the  four  banks,  the  Bank  of  Italy,  with  the  approval  of  the 
Ministry of Economy and Finance, implemented the new resolution procedure provided for by 
the  BRRD  immediately  upon  its  transposition  into  Italian  law  on  16  November  2015. 
Recourse to this procedure made it possible to use the new tools introduced, in particular the 
creation of four bridge banks and a company for managing the bad debts of the banks under 
resolution. This intervention guaranteed the continuity of the essential services provided by 
banks. 
The assessment of the losses and therefore of the resolution costs was made in accordance 
with  strict  European  rules  and  was  in  no  way  discretionary.  The  particularly  conservative 
estimate  of  bad  debts  is  in  keeping  with  the  provisions  of  the  BRRD  and  with  the 
interpretation of the rules on state aid adopted by the Commission during its talks with the 
Italian  government;  it roughly  corresponds to the  theoretical  average market  value  of  their 
immediate divestment. The costs were borne predominantly by the banking system through 
the  newly-established  Resolution  Fund,  but  also  by  holders  of  shares  and  subordinated 
bonds; there was no transfer of public resources. The heavy sacrifice made by shareholders 
and subordinated bondholders was inevitable given the new regulatory framework. Had this 
intervention  not  been  made,  a  compulsory  administrative  liquidation  would  have  eroded 
value and generated losses for holders of ordinary bonds and unsecured deposits; it would 
also have jeopardized regular banking activity, with widespread repercussions at local level. 
Thanks  to  the  new  capital  resources  and  the  good  quality  of  the  assets,  and  under  the 
guidance  of  the  completely  overhauled  governing  bodies,  the  bridge  banks  to  which  the 
businesses were transferred resumed lending to the local economies, as the banks in crisis 
had no longer been able to do so. The new banks had their bad debts written off and were 
recapitalized, thereby creating the conditions necessary to make them attractive to investors. 
In  approving  the  rescue  package,  the  European  Commission  requested  a  very  brief  time 
frame for the banks’ divestment. This procedure has begun over the last few days. 
Parliament  has  recently  approved  the  establishment  of  a  Solidarity  Fund  –  to  be  funded 
entirely by the banking system – to compensate investors holding subordinated bonds issued 
by the four banks under resolution; in the arbitration procedure, compensation is contingent 
on verification of whether banks have violated their obligations of due diligence, fairness and 
transparency  as  provided  for  by  the  Consolidated  Law  on  Finance.  The  procedures  and 
conditions  for  eligibility  shall  be  established  by  ministerial  decrees.  The  Bank  of  Italy  has 
assured the authorities involved of its complete cooperation. 
Based on the legislation in force, and in line with European law, the Bank of Italy does not 
exercise  control  over  the  issuance  of  bonds  or  other  bank  funding  instruments;  these 
decisions are adopted independently by banks in compliance with the limits and conditions 
provided for by law and by the supervisory authorities. 
Savings flow into the banking system in various ways. Bank deposits are the savings that are 
afforded the best protection on three levels: supervision of banks’ stability, now entrusted to 
the  EU’s  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  of  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  part;  the  rules  on 
transparency and fairness to which banks are subject for the opening and management of 
deposit  accounts,  to  be  complied  with  under  the  supervision  of  the  Bank  of  Italy;  and  the 
guarantee scheme, which protects deposits of up to €100,000 for each account holder. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Bank bonds and shares are investment instruments. As such, there is no guarantee that their 
value can be preserved, but in order to protect investors their placement must comply with 
the obligations, harmonized throughout Europe, of due diligence, fairness and transparency, 
and the risks and returns of each instrument must be correctly set out and fully understood. 
The  supervisory  authorities  are  unceasing  in  their  oversight  of  banks  in  financial  difficulty, 
though oftentimes the general public is not aware of this. In most cases their actions help to 
prevent  the  emergence  of  crises  and  thus  avoid  the  costs  involved  in  managing  and 
resolving  them.  No  supervisory  action  in  any  country  can  entirely  eliminate  the  risk  of 
banking crises, especially in times of deep recession. 
The new European legislation on banking crises 
3. 
The  legislation  on  banking  crises  has  two  potentially  conflicting  objectives:  maintaining 
financial  stability  –  which  leads  to  interventions  in  support  of  troubled  banks  to  avoid 
systemic  repercussions  –  and  preventing  banks  from  behaving  opportunistically  in  the 
expectation of public intervention. 
Following the global financial crisis, the prevailing position at international level has leaned 
towards  the  latter  objective,  far  more  so  than  in  the  past.  This  change  in  direction  has 
certainly been influenced by the massive public interventions for rescuing banks that have 
weighed heavily on the state finances of many countries, in some cases jeopardizing their 
stability. 
To reduce the likelihood and size of bank bail-outs to be borne by the taxpayers, rules have 
been drawn up that would allow the costs of a crisis to fall mainly on a bank’s creditors. At 
the  end  of  2015  the  Financial  Stability  Board  drafted  strict  requirements  on  total  loss 
absorbing capacity (TLAC) for global systemically important banks, focusing on subordinated 
instruments and envisaging their gradual entry into force by 2022. 
There  have  been  rapid,  sweeping  changes 
in  European 
In  2013  a 
Communication from the European Commission had provided for the immediate application 
of  a  new  burden-sharing  scheme  which,  in  the  event  of  a  bank  crisis,  imposed  losses  on 
shares and subordinated bonds as a prerequisite for public intervention. In 2014 the BRRD, 
approved by the Council and the European Parliament, extended that scheme, starting this 
year,  to  include  ordinary  bonds  and  deposits  of  over  €100,000  (bail-in);  among  the  latter, 
those held by households and small businesses receive preferential treatment. As part of the 
burden-sharing scheme and according to the resolution procedures defined by the BRRD, 
resolution measures were implemented last November for the four banks mentioned earlier. 
During  this  delicate  changeover  at  European  level,  insufficient  attention  was  given  to  the 
transition period. At the technical meetings that laid the ground for the BRRD, the Ministry of 
Economy  and  Finance  and  the  Bank  of  Italy  argued,  without  mustering  the  necessary 
support,  that  an  immediate  and,  more  importantly,  retroactive  enforcement  of  the  burden-
sharing mechanisms to 2015, and subsequently of the bail-in, could – in addition to a costlier 
and less plentiful supply of credit to the economy – have posed risks to financial stability also 
in relation to the treatment of creditors who had subscribed bank liabilities many years ago, 
at a time when the possibility of losing the original investment was very remote. Our views 
were expressed in the Bank of Italy’s official publications. A gradual, less abrupt transition 
would have been preferable. This would have enabled investors to be fully acquainted with 
the  new  rules  and  to  adapt  their  choices  to  the  new  regulatory  environment.  A  targeted 
approach, with the application of the bail-in to only those financial instruments with a specific 
contractual clause to that effect, and a sufficient transition phase, would have allowed banks 
to issue new liabilities subject to express bail-in conditions. Such an approach, particularly 
the  emphasis  on  subordinated  instruments,  would  have  been  more  in  keeping  with  that 
adopted by the Financial Stability Board in setting the TLAC requirements. 
legislation. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
A  clause  in  the  BRRD provides for  its review,  to  be  started  no  later  than June  2018. The 
opportunity  must  now  be  seized,  drawing  on  the  experience  gained  to  date,  to  align 
European legislation more closely with international standards. 
In Italy the share of household savings invested in bank bonds is considerably higher than 
the  euro-area  average.  This  is  largely due  to  how  these  bonds  were taxed  between  1996 
and  2011, which  made  after-tax  interest  on  bank  bonds  relative  to  medium-term  deposits 
much  more  attractive.  When  the  preferential  tax  treatment  ended,  the  bonds  were 
gradually  replaced  with deposits or asset management products as they came to maturity. 
Given the current term structure, if there were no new purchases, the stock of bonds held by 
households would be halved by the end of 2017 (from around €200 billion to €100 billion), 
and would fall below €20 billion in 2020. 
Under  the  new  BRRD  rules  and  with  the  launch  of  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM),  the  resolution  procedure  is  activated  when  there  is  a  public  interest  at  stake, 
particularly  if  it  is  necessary  to  preserve  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  In  all  other 
cases  of  evident  crisis,  the  only  option  is  to  wind  up  the  bank.  Among  the  initiatives  the 
Italian banking system must evaluate to limit the costs of a crisis for investors are voluntary 
intervention  mechanisms  –  in  addition  to  the  mandatory  deposit  guarantee  schemes  –  to 
which, in accordance with the European Commission’s stance, the rules on state aid would 
not  apply.  The  cost  of  participation  would  be  compensated  by  the  benefits  that  all 
intermediaries  would  reap,  thanks  to  increased  customer  confidence  and  greater  systemic 
stability. Banks should carefully weigh the advisability of such mechanisms. 
The situation of Italian banks 
4. 
Italian banks’ regulatory capital is much higher today than it was in the past. Since the end 
of  2008  the  highest-quality  capital  ratio  has  risen  on  average  from  7.1  to  12.3  per  cent. 
Contrary  to  what  happened  in  other  countries,  capital  strengthening  was  achieved 
without  weighing  on  the public finances. The limited support afforded to banks by the Italian 
State ultimately generated a net profit in the form of interest  and other remuneration. Other 
countries  instead  reported  substantial losses.  Italian  banks  increased  their  capital  despite 
the fact that the crisis had severely hampered their income capacity. 
With the cyclical turnaround, profitability has started to improve. In the first nine months of 
last  year annualized  ROE was about  5 per cent, against  3  per cent recorded in the same 
period of 2014. Loan loss provisions as a share of gross operating profit declined from 70 to 
57 per cent. 
Seven  years  of  crisis  have  inevitably  left  a  mark  in  terms  of  non-performing  loans.  Since 
2008  more  than  90,000  firms  have  been  declared  bankrupt  and  more  than  4  per  cent  of 
households have suffered a reduction in earnings owing to a family  member losing their job; 
industrial production is now over 20 per cent lower; almost one million fewer people are in 
employment.  This  has  affected  households’  and  firms’  ability  to  repay  bank  debt.  Non-
performing loans now amount to around €360 billion or 18 per cent of the total. More than 
half are recorded as bad debts and are subject to lengthy and onerous procedures to seek 
their  partial  recovery.  As  the  crisis  unfolded,  the  Bank  of  Italy acted  to  ensure  the  steady 
increase of NPL coverage ratios which now stand at 45 per cent, in line with the European 
average; for bad debts the coverage is around 60 per cent. Collateral held by banks against 
non-performing exposures amounts to approximately €160 billion. 
As the economic recovery proceeds, the flow of new bad debts is gradually decreasing. We 
expect the improvement to continue in the coming months. It will take time to clear the stock 
of bad debts,  whose  large  volume  depresses  market  assessments  of  banks,  makes  bank 
funding costlier, and generates high capital requirements. 
We have long advocated the need for measures designed not to alleviate individual banks in 
difficulty,  but  to  soften  the  impact  of  the  deep  and  protracted  recession  and  to  foster  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
development of a private market for non-performing debt where this struggles to emerge by 
itself. I referred to such measures two years ago before this same audience, noting the need 
to assess their compatibility  with  EU  legislation.  It  was  not,  however,  possible  to  proceed 
owing  to  the interpretation  given  to  the  rules  on  state  aid.  In  my  view  this  interpretation 
fails to take sufficient account of the gravity of the macroeconomic shock; at the same time it 
seeks to avoid, through state intervention,  preferential  treatment  in  one  jurisdiction  rather 
than  another,  an  undoubtedly  valid  objective  which  might  perhaps  have  been  assessed 
over a longer-term horizon than that beginning with the sovereign debt crisis. 
But  progress  on  other  fronts  has  and  can  still  be  made.  Last  summer  new  measures 
on  bankruptcy  and  foreclosure  proceedings  were  adopted  to  speed  up  credit  recovery. 
Although  we  still  need  time  to  appraise  the  results  in  full,  feedback  from  market 
operators  indicates  that  the  first  effects  are  beginning  to  be  seen.  Further  legislative 
provisions,  in  addition  to  those  already passed, could further cut credit recovery times: a 
thorough  review  of  bankruptcy legislation  with  a  view  to  creating  incentives  for  the  rapid 
settlement  of  disputes  and  to  removing  the  obstacles  that  hinder  or  delay  out-of-court 
settlement; new measures on how the courts are organized. When I addressed the Italian 
Banking Association last July, I underlined how a reduction of two years in credit recovery 
times  could  substantially decrease,  eventually even  by half,  bad  debts  as  a  share  of  the 
total. 
The  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  has  reached  an  agreement  with  the  European 
Commission  on  a  government  guarantee  scheme  for  senior  tranches  of  securitized  bad 
loans.  The  agreement  does  not  require  banks  to  make  further  provisions  and  marks  an 
important  step  toward the creation of a secondary market for non-performing loans, ending 
the uncertainty of the past few months. Easier access to resources to finance the purchase 
of  these  loans  enables  them  to  be  sold  more  rapidly  and  may  lead  to  a  non-negligible 
increase in their market value. Along with possible new measures to expedite credit recovery 
the scheme could help to consolidate the balance sheets of Italian banks and  improve their 
ability  to  finance  the  real  economy.  There  has  been  mixed  market  reaction  to  the 
announcement  of  the  agreement;  a  detailed  analysis  of  its  terms  and  effects  will improve 
its reception. 
Banks  must  step  up  their  intervention  in  this  area.  The  Bank  of  Italy will  soon  undertake  a 
statistical  survey  of  bad  debts,  designed  to  help  banks  to  do  more.  It  is  time  that  the 
management  of  non-performing  loans  be  given  resources  proportional  to  their  weight  on 
balance sheets, adopting a more business-oriented approach, bank size and operating model 
permitting. Failing this, their management should be outsourced to specialized operators, with 
gains in efficiency and effectiveness. 
Moreover,  the  share  of  non-performing  loans  (almost  one  third  of  the  total)  to  firms  in 
temporary  difficulty  but  with  sound  chances  of  making  a  turnaround,  especially  given  the 
strengthening  of  the  economic  recovery,  could  be  managed  better.  Proper  coordination  of 
the banks involved is essential, as is the intervention of corporate restructuring specialists. 
Another  fundamental  question  that  banks  cannot  ignore  concerns  the  need  to  keep 
costs down, stemming not  only from the prolonged period  of low  inflation  and  low interest 
rates,  which have  compressed  net  interest  income,  but  also  from  the  evolution  of  the 
financial  system  that  obliges  banks  to  increase  operational  efficiency,  especially  those 
which,  as  is  the  case  in  Italy,  are  focused  on  traditional  intermediation.  Technological 
developments call for changes to banks’ branch networks, which are still too numerous, and 
to  the  cost,  size  and  composition  of  staffing.  To  facilitate  the  implementation  of  these 
measures,  limiting  the  economic  and  social  costs,  traditional unemployment benefits could 
be complemented by the industry’s solidarity funds. 
The strength and nature of the measures aimed at recouping efficiency must be tailored to 
each  intermediary’s  needs.  Greater  efficiency  must  partly be  achieved  through  recent  and 
upcoming reforms  of corporate  governance. The  conversion  of  the  cooperative  or  popolari 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
banks  into  joint stock  companies,  in  addition  to  encouraging  more  effective  governance 
structures,  will  enable consolidation  dictated  not  by  the  reform  law  or  by  the  supervisory 
authorities  but  rather  by  market  forces.  This  process  could  involve  the  revamping  of  a 
small  number  of  intermediaries,  which  we  have been monitoring for some time, now also 
under European supervision. 
Mutual banks, a highly fragmented sector, are facing strong competitive pressures and have 
been  severely  affected  by  Italy’s  prolonged  economic  downturn.  The  need  for  greater 
consolidation, something we  have  long  called  for,  has  become  more  pressing.  The  reform 
being  finalized,  while  preserving  the  mutualistic  nature  of  these  banks,  will  strengthen 
systemic resilience and improve corporate governance. 
 Italy is emerging from a recession of exceptional duration and intensity, eclipsing the depression 
of  the  1930s.  The  crisis  has  put  severe  strain  on  firms  and  households,  and  has  caused  a 
spike  in bankruptcies and unemployment. Its impact on the banking system, which is rooted in 
the real economy, has  been  violent.  Though  shaken,  it  has  endured.  Now  that  the  indicators 
point  to  a  more  favourable  economic  outlook,  banks  must  put  themselves  in  a  position  to 
effectively counter future risks. 
Europe now has a common regulatory framework for bank crisis management. This provides 
for  a  vast  array  of  instruments,  some  borrowed  from  Italy,  others  new  to  us.  The  most 
radical innovation  is  the  obligation  for  holders  of  capital  and  debt  instruments  issued  by 
banks  to  bear  a  much  higher  proportion  of  the  costs  of  a  crisis  than  in  the  past.  The 
European Commission’s strict interpretation of this principle means it is no longer possible 
to  manage  a  crisis  by  resorting  to  the Interbank  Deposit  Protection  Fund  and  the  Mutual 
Banks  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund,  without sacrificing investors, as had traditionally been the 
case in Italy. 
On  the  one  hand  the  new  European  rules  on  banking  crises  require  that  investor 
awareness  be  raised,  as  we  have  repeatedly  said  in  recent  years;  on  the  other  the 
transparent  and  accurate  presentation  by  banks  of  investment  opportunities  must  be 
guaranteed.  The  implementation  of  burden  sharing  at  four  Italian  banks  has  been  a 
lesson:  warnings  alone,  however  often  they  are  repeated  and  included  in  specific 
brochures,  cannot  in  themselves  prevent  risks  to  reputation  and stability;  nor is  it  enough 
to tell the banks that capital instruments must only be sold to those who can fully evaluate 
their sometimes complex risk and return profiles. 
Additional 
into  account 
circumstances  where  conflicts  of  interest  may  be  more  pronounced,  such  as  the 
placement  with  retail  customers  of  complex  financial  instruments  by  the  issuing  bank. 
Discussions on this topic are ongoing  with  the  competent  authorities.  To  considerations 
regarding  bank  stability,  which  fall within the purview of the Bank of Italy, must be added 
the no less important ones related to market integrity and the fair treatment of investors, for 
which Consob is responsible. 
In  order  for  the  regulations  protecting  investors  to  be  fully  efficacious,  the  latter  must  be 
able  to  make  proper  use  of  the  information  they  are  given  and  to  make  wise  investment 
choices. 
Recent international surveys have demonstrated that public awareness of financial matters is 
particularly lacking in Italy. We must invest in educating people on the characteristics of the 
most common  financial  instruments,  on  fundamental  concepts  such  as  the  notion  that  a 
higher  return corresponds  to  a  higher  risk  and  that  the  failure  to  diversify  investments  is 
always  a  gamble.  For  years,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  supported  financial  education 
programmes  in  schools,  with  the  voluntary  cooperation  of  many  teachers,  and  it  is 
currently  seeking  to  coordinate  with  additional  private  and  public  initiatives.  But  financial 
education must involve everyone as a matter of priority. 
legislative  action  should  be  considered,  mainly 
take 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
The flow  of bad  debts,  which  swelled  during the crisis,  is  gradually ebbing. We must  now 
manage the legacy of the past. The guarantee scheme recently agreed with the European 
Commission  will  prove  useful  for  facilitating  the  divestment  of  bad  debts.  The  closing  of 
this chapter and a decisive reduction in uncertainty will allow the reactivation of this market. 
However, it must be clear that no reasonably conceivable measure can cancel at a stroke the 
stock  of  bad  debt.  Rather,  the  banking  system  must  tackle  it  with  determination,  in  a 
medium-term  horizon.  No  less important is the need to continue working on legislative and 
organizational procedures to improve and  streamline  the  credit  recovery,  by assessing the 
effects of the public measures already undertaken and, where necessary, implementing new 
ones. 
Italian banks are well capitalized, thanks also to the prudent and swift action taken by the 
Bank  of  Italy  and,  for  over  a  year  now,  to  European  supervision,  in  which  we  are  fully 
engaged.  The  stock  of  non-performing  loans  is  amply  covered  by  provisions  and 
guarantees. The current economic situation is favouring a recovery in profitability, for banks 
and non-financial firms alike. Now  is  the  time  to  address  and  decisively  reduce  structural 
costs,  and  to  lay the  foundation  for robust growth, to the benefit of banks themselves and of 
the economic system as a whole. 
Confidence  is  essential  to  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  At  a  time  in  which  the 
short-term  economic  outlook  remains  favourable,  but  uncertainty  and  market  volatility 
appear to be on the rise, the best way to strengthen stability is to aim to be unequivocal 
in  both  intent  and  deed.  It  is  an  objective  wholly  within  our  reach,  provided  all  actors 
play 
their  part:  banks,  supervisory  authorities,  Government.  The  Bank  of  Italy’s 
commitment can be counted on. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
