   William C Dudley: “US Economy in a Snapshot” 
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Economic Press Briefing on the US Economy in a Snapshot, 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 19 May 2016. 
 Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti, Robert Rich and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Welcome  to  our  Economic  Press  Briefing.  Today  we  are  going  to  introduce  you  to  a  data 
product that we have been making available to the public, U.S. Economy in a Snapshot. My 
role  is  to  put  this  product  in  the  broader  context  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee’s 
(FOMC) communication strategy about the economy and policy. My colleague Robert Rich will 
then walk you through the structure of the product and discuss excerpts from the May release. 
As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal 
Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 
Conventional  U.S. monetary  policy  is  conducted  by  targeting  the  level  of the federal funds 
rate—an overnight interest rate on bank reserves. Few participants in our economy have any 
direct  interaction  with  this  interest  rate.  How,  then,  is  controlling  this  interest  rate  such  an 
important part of setting monetary policy and steering an 18 trillion dollar economy toward the 
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price 
stability?  
This is the remarkable aspect of monetary policy. Just as a pebble dropped into a lake disturbs 
the water not just at the point of impact but ripples outward far from the origin, changes in the 
federal funds rate influence the prices of financial assets more broadly and this, in turn, affects 
the broader economy. An important insight of modern monetary theory is that this transmission 
of monetary policy to the broader economy through its many channels works best when the 
central bank is transparent about its goals, policy strategy and approach to implementing its 
strategy. In this case, market participants and households both understand and can anticipate 
actions by the central bank. By doing so, the transmission channels of monetary policy are 
enhanced. This places considerable importance on effective central bank communication. 
Recognizing this, the FOMC has undertaken many initiatives over the years to improve its 
communications with the public. These include providing clarification in terms of the goals of 
monetary  policy,  discussions  of  the  FOMC’s  broad  policy  strategy,  as  well  as  FOMC 
participants’ ongoing explanations of their views on monetary policy. As part of this effort, I 
provide a comprehensive update on my outlook for the economy and monetary policy several 
times during the year. Once a year we publish our staff’s judgmental economic forecast. We 
have also provided in the Liberty Street Economics blog discussions of an internal staff model-
based  economic  forecast.  In  addition,  we  now  regularly  release  our  real-time  forecast  of 
“current quarter” real GDP growth. All of these help the public to understand our assessment 
of economic conditions through the lenses of these different types of forecasts. 
When asked about the trajectory for the monetary policy stance, I always point out that it is 
data dependent. The FOMC calibrates the stance of monetary policy to best achieve our twin 
objectives  of price  stability  and maximum  sustainable  employment,  taking  into  account  our 
forecast for how the economy is evolving. This forecast reflects the ongoing flow of the data. 
Data releases that are close to our expectations have little additional impact on the forecast, 
while data releases that deviate significantly from our expectations can lead to more significant 
revisions of the forecast. It is, therefore, important for market participants and households to 
be able to follow the data along with the FOMC and to understand how we are likely to interpret 
and react to incoming data.  
While market analysts readily have access to economic and financial data, this access is not 
widely available to everyone. To help fill this information gap, for the past year we have been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   making available on our website a monthly publication called U.S. Economy in a Snapshot. 
This  publication  contains  a  set  of  key  data  charts  as  well  as  commentary  by  our  staff 
economists. The purpose is to provide interested readers easy access to clear and concise 
presentations of important economic information. The associated commentary provides some 
pertinent observations one might draw from the data.  
Our goal is to provide information that helps households and businesses follow the data along 
with the Fed. If people know more about how the economy is performing and how that is likely 
to influence our actions, this should make it easier for us to achieve our twin objectives.  
I will now turn it over to Rob to discuss the Snapshot in greater detail.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
