  Benoît Cœuré: Reforming financial sector benchmarks 
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central Bank, at the annual meeting of the Money Market Contact Group, Frankfurt am Main, 
27 September 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am pleased to be with you and very much appreciate having an opportunity to discuss with 
you issues of importance to the money market. 
There is a topic that in the last few years has drawn the attention of regulators, of legislators, 
of market participants but also of the general public, namely financial benchmarks. 
I  hardly  need  to  convince  any  of  you  of  the  relevance  of  benchmarks  such  as  EURIBOR, 
LIBOR  or  EONIA.  Indeed,  I  only  need  to quote the  European  Commission,  which  recently 
declared EURIBOR to be a “critical” benchmark in the light of the vast number of contracts 
which use it as a reference – more than €180 trillion of derivatives contracts and more than 
€1 trillion of retail mortgages. 
Indeed, benchmarks have over the years become an essential part of the infrastructure of 
our economy. They are indices that are used to determine the level of payment in a financial 
contract, whereby neither party to the contract has any control over their setting. Their value 
and  their  credibility  are  derived  from  the  fact  that  they  are  considered  impartial, 
representative,  and  therefore  fair.  If  the  impartiality  of  a  benchmark  is  compromised, 
confidence  in  any  contractual  relationship  based  on  that  benchmark  will  be,  as  a  result, 
seriously undermined. 
Therefore, following the scandals involving some of the biggest benchmarks, regulators and 
legislators, in coordination with private sector, identified market shortcomings and designed a 
framework that would guarantee the integrity of reference rates. 
And a lot has been achieved so far: 
1. 
The private sector has played an important role in improving the benchmark-setting 
process  by  designing  new  codes  of  conduct,  by  enhancing  transparency  and 
visibility, by launching private initiatives reflecting market needs, and by identifying 
alternative benchmarks. 
The public sector has contributed to this process as well. Since 2013 the FSB and 
the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  have  worked  to  reform 
benchmarks,  supporting  and  steering  the  efforts  of  private  market  participants  to 
define more robust and reliable benchmarks and related “best practices”. In addition, 
the public sector has adopted a dedicated regulation. 
2. 
As benchmarks are an important part of the global financial system and an essential tool in 
the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, they matter to the ECB as well. We have 
been  committed  to  improving  the  relevant  benchmarks  for  the  euro,  as  have  other  central 
banks in respect of their currencies. 
While the ECB has always stressed that financial benchmarks should be private initiatives 
tailored  to  private  needs,  we  have  also  helped  the  private  sector  by  shaping  some  of  the 
benchmark  reform  initiatives.  For  example,  we  have  been  following  closely  the  reform  of 
EURIBOR  from  a  quote-based  to  a  transaction-based  index.  Moreover,  together  with  the 
EURIBOR administrator, we launched a data collection back in 2013 to analyse the feasibility 
of transaction-based alternatives. And indeed it was this group, the Money Market Contact 
Group that was asked to participate to at least 100%. And you delivered. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The EURIBOR reform has now reached an important stage. The transition to the transaction-
based  methodology  is  foreseen  for  2017  and  the  administrator  is  planning  a  pre-live 
verification  exercise  to  ascertain the feasibility  of  the  proposed  methodology  under  current 
market conditions. For the pre-live verification – and eventually for the EURIBOR reform – to 
be a success, broad market representation has to be achieved. Therefore, not only should 
current panel members participate but also other banks in the euro money market. 
A lack of participants might seriously threaten the completion of the pre-live verification and 
ultimately  the  reference  rate  itself.  Therefore,  in  view  of  the  tremendous  importance  of 
benchmarks such as EURIBOR, the ECB would like to see banks take responsibility for the 
benchmark in two ways. Firstly, by participating in the pre-live verification and secondly, by 
eventually  joining  the  panel  of  contributors  to  EURIBOR  with  the  launch  of  the  new 
calculation methodology. 
Banks are among the biggest users of EURIBOR. As such, they would also incur the biggest 
costs and losses if it came to an abrupt end. It is therefore up to the banking industry as a 
whole to support this benchmark. But the burden cannot only be shouldered by the current 
panel  banks,  which  have  indeed  shown  their  sense  of  responsibility.  Despite  the  related 
costs  and  perceived  risks,  they  have  remained  in  the  panel  and  helped  to  prevent  any 
disorderly dismantling of EURIBOR. 
But there are other examples. In some cases, banks that are among the largest institutions in 
their  jurisdiction,  and therefore  rely  hugely  on  the  benchmark  to  price  their  products,  have 
chosen to leave the panel. This is a worrisome development. 
Some members left because of the perceived elevated risks related to the usage of expert 
judgement while contributing to EURIBOR. Since their departure, however, there have been 
a  couple  of  important  changes.  Firstly,  a  new  regulation  has  been  adopted  in  Europe, 
establishing rules guiding the process of setting a benchmark and therefore contributing to 
greater  regulatory  certainty.  Secondly,  the  envisaged  reform  of  EURIBOR,  aimed  at 
anchoring the benchmark in transactions, will eventually remove the expert judgement and 
therefore the subjective element in contributing to EURIBOR. 
Some banks also saw as an impediment for their participation in the envisaged transaction- 
based index the costs they will incur for transaction reporting. But the incremental costs for 
joining  the  EURIBOR  pre-live  verification  and  for  contributing  to  a  benchmark  with 
transaction data may actually be limited for those banks, which already report under the ECB 
Money  Market  Statistical  Reporting  Regulation. This  is  because these  banks  have  already 
set up systems in order to extract and report transaction data. 
In conclusion, I hope that banks will indeed take the opportunity to create better, more robust 
and representative benchmarks, which will better suit the needs of end users. 
And I also hope that banks will continue to participate in the panel – or decide to join or re-
join it – so as to ensure that EURIBOR as well as the other reference rates continue to play 
their critical role in the European economy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
