  Yannis Stournaras: Financial stability in Europe and how to improve it 
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the Croatian National 
Bank “Financial stability and policy intervention by Central Banks in Europe – where do we 
stand and what challenges lie ahead”, Zagreb, 23 March 2016. 
 Before I begin my presentation, please allow me to dedicate the following remarks to the late Vassiliki Zakka, who 
was  an  exceptional  colleague  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  and  a  dear  friend.  Before  passing  away  unexpectedly 
several weeks ago, Vasso had contributed to the drafting of this speech. She will be badly missed. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be in Zagreb today and to have the opportunity to share with you 
some thoughts on financial stability in Europe and, in particular, how to improve it. Financial 
stability is a critical condition for achieving our common goals of prosperity and sustainable 
growth.  Yet,  the  financial  landscape  on  which  both  regulators  and  market  participants 
operate, has been rapidly changing; it is very different today from what it was only ten years 
ago, and it will be very different ten years from now. 
I  will  begin  by  describing  the  present  landscape  on  which  efforts  to  strengthen  financial 
stability have been taking place. Then, I will briefly discuss some developments in the EU 
regulatory framework relevant to the financial system and its stability. In particular, we can 
identify a new role for central banks in this framework that stems from mandates that have 
been  revised  to  include  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability.  I  conclude  by  outlining  the 
challenges ahead and I provide some thoughts on the way forward. 
The setting – a broader context 
A. 
Beginning with the initial efforts to forge closer European integration in the early-1950s, the 
European  Union  has  faced  a  series  of  challenges  that  have,  at  times,  tested  both  the 
coherence and the stability of the union. The responses to these challenges have shown that 
the EU is built on solid ground as the bonds among Member States have become stronger 
over time. To cite two notable examples: the breakdown of the Bretton Woods System in the 
early-1970s  led  to  the  creation  of the  European  Monetary  System  –  or EMS  –  in  the  late-
1970s; the breakdown of the EMS in the early-1990s led to the creation of the euro in 1999. 
Developments  since  the  eruption  of  the  2007–08  international  financial  crisis  have  further 
strengthened the bonds among EU members. That crisis raised issues related to “too-big-to-
fail”,  “too-big-to-save”,  and  “too-complex-to-resolve”.  The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision,  following  the  G20  agreement  in  2008,  took-on  the  task  of  comprehensively 
strengthening international bank-regulatory standards. Its updated report, presented to G20 
Leaders  last  November,  noted  that  substantial  progress  has  been  made  towards  finalizing 
post-crisis reforms and that the regulatory-reform agenda for global banks has almost been 
completed. Further clarification of these elements will provide regulatory certainty, supporting 
the banking sector’s ability to make long-term sustainable business plans. 
The euro-area financial crisis, which originated in 2009–10, provided another – more serious 
–  challenge to the  stability  of  the  European  Union.  More  recently,  with  the  recovery  in  the 
euro area still fragile, a slowdown in growth in the Emerging Market Economies, along with a 
rise  in  geopolitical  tensions,  which  have  led  to  an  unprecedented  refugee  crisis,  and 
concerns about a Brexit, have led to an increase in uncertainty. Finally, different approaches 
among  member  states  regarding  banking  union,  and  the  slow  progress  in  establishing  a 
single European deposit insurance scheme, have been hindering further progress in securing 
the financial system architecture needed to enhance stability. 
A  salient  characteristic  since  the  onset  of  the  euro-area  crisis  is  that  shares  of  European 
banks have been trading at a discount to tangible book value, while those of the largest US 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  banks  have  traded  at  a  premium  to  book  value.  This  situation  cannot  be  explained  by 
differences in capital-adequacy ratios since capital ratios for euro-area banks have risen from 
about 8 percent in 2008 to about 14 percent today (Cœuré, 2016). On the contrary, these 
differences  are  indicative  of  a  European  banking  sector  undergoing  a  transformation  that 
demands a comprehensive and radical adjustment of the core business model of operation. 
The first two months of 2016 saw a sharp deterioration in market sentiment, related to not 
only a weakening of global economic activity, but also other concerns: 
• 
First, the threat of low nominal growth, generating not only high NPL ratios but also 
lower and flatter yield curves with potentially negative effects on banks’ profitability. 
Second,  concerns  about  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  with  some  market 
analysts  believing  that  central  banks  may  be  running  out  of  ammunition.  I  can 
assure you that they are not. The monetary-policy decisions by the ECB Governing 
Council two weeks ago provide clear confirmation of this fact. 
Third, regulatory uncertainty about the suite of capital and bail-in requirements – the 
Supervisory Review and Examination Process (SREP), the Minimum Requirements 
for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL), the Total Loss Absorption Capacity 
(TLAC),  and  EBA  guidance  on 
the  minimum  distributable  amount  (MDA). 
Uncertainty as to the actual effects that can be expected from the newly introduced 
BRRD instruments seems to have played a role. 
Fourth, negative feedback loops between equity and debt markets, amplified by low 
secondary market liquidity. 
   The EU response 
B. 
The responses of the European Union to the weaknesses to the financial stability landscape 
that  emerged  have  been  effective,  despite  the  initial  lack  of  crisis  mechanisms  and  the 
unfavorable and challenging environment – an environment in which fires were often being 
simultaneously  fought  on  a  number  of  fronts.  Initially,  the  response  came  in  the  form  of 
monetary policy and a significant easing of the monetary policy stance. Indeed, in October 
2008, six major central banks, including the ECB, executed a coordinated and simultaneous 
cut in interest rates. Additionally, at that time the euro-area countries set out an action plan of 
coordinated  measures  to  restore  confidence  and  improve  financing  conditions  in  the 
economy.  These  measures  included  the  granting  of  government  guarantees  on  bank  debt 
issuance and the recapitalization of banks. With the eruption of the euro area financial crisis 
in  2010,  and  during  subsequent  periods  when  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  was 
dysfunctional, the ECB increasingly implemented nonstandard monetary tools. Additionally, 
to provide financial assistance to countries under stress, in June 2010 Europe created the 
EFSF, which was replaced by the ESM in October 2012. 
Perhaps  the greatest  challenge  –  and surprise –  posed  by  the  euro-area  crisis  was  in  the 
area of financial integration and banking. At the inception of the euro, it was widely-expected 
that  the  single  currency  would  spur  integration  across  previously-fragmented  European 
financial  markets.  Economists  believed  that  this  integration  would  be  stabilizing:  portfolio 
diversification and access to credit markets were expected to encourage risk-sharing while 
making national demand less dependent on national income – that is, portfolio diversification 
was expected to encourage consumption smoothing. And for the euro’s first ten years, that 
scenario unfolded very much as expected. 
Then came a major surprise. The euro-area crisis revealed that countries within a monetary 
union can become subject to balance-of-payments crises – a possibility that had been almost 
completely  overlooked  by  the  architects  of  the  euro.  Moreover,  once  a  crisis  erupted  – 
whether in the sovereign sector or the banking sector – a central feature of the crisis was the 
negative  feedback  loops  between  banking  fragility  and  sovereign  weakness.  One  factor 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  contributing  to  those  feedback  loops  was  the  following.  Although  the  largest  banks  in  the 
euro area and the United States are of roughly the same size in terms of euro-area GDP and 
U.S. GDP, respectively, the largest euro area banks represent a much larger share of any 
individual national economy in the euro area compared with the situation of U.S. banks. This 
circumstance implies that the fiscal consequences of euro-area bank failures could be large 
enough  to  bring  state-solvency  into  question.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  bank  regulation  and 
supervision  prior  to  the  crisis  were  mostly  national  was  seen  as  having  contributed  to  the 
crisis and as having impeded its effective resolution. Consequently, a key lesson of that crisis 
has been that a monetary union is not viable in the absence of a banking union. 
In response to these developments, in 2012 European leaders initiated the creation of the 
Banking  Union  –  which  is  an  integral  part  of  a  genuine  Economic  and  Financial  Union  in 
Europe. The three pillars of the Banking Union are: the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  still-to-be  completed  common  deposit  guarantee 
system. 
As of January 1st 2016, the Banking Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD), which sets 
common EU rules for failing banks, entered into full force. The BRRD aims, inter alia, to end 
the  policy  of  bailing-out  failing  banks  by  introducing  bail-in  tools  to  ensure  that  losses  are 
borne  by  creditors,  including  senior  unsecured  creditors.  The  BRRD,  especially  its  bail-in 
tool,  has  been  criticized  –  perhaps  with  some  justification.  However,  the  argument 
sometimes made, namely, that the activation of the BRRD has been a primary cause of the 
recent deterioration in market sentiment, including the large losses in European bank stocks, 
is  far-fetched.  The  provisions  of  the  BRRD  have  been  widely  known  since  2014.  What 
analysts,  perhaps,  failed  to  realize  is  that  the  new  and  stricter  rules  introduced  with  the 
BRRD will affect the volatility of the prices of banks’ shares should concerns be raised about 
the banks’ profitability, solvency and, most importantly, their viability. 
That said, we must keep in mind that the BRRD is a new and untested framework for failing 
banks, and it is not particularly suited to addressing a systemic crisis. As it will be revised by 
June 2018, we will have to closely monitor its implementation and identify any areas where 
adjustments and fine-tuning will be needed. 
While we may need tools for failing banks, our primary aim as supervisors is the prevention 
of  bank  failure,  in  order  to  foster  financial  stability  and  ensure  that  depositors  remain 
protected.  As  John  Vickers  (2016)  recently  highlighted  “Orderly  bank  failure  is  better  than 
disorderly failure, but it’s best not to fail in the first place…Regulators… are adding usefully to 
the supply of fire extinguishers. With more fire extinguishers the average damage from a fire 
is materially reduced. But that is no good reason to economise on fire prevention”. 
Central Banks and macro-prudential policy 
C. 
Now let me turn to the issue of crisis prevention. The challenges facing EU financial sectors 
in recent years have significantly increased the responsibilities of central banks in the area of 
crisis  prevention.  Mandates  have  been  amended  to  explicitly  refer  to  financial  stability  – 
typically  defined  as  avoiding  rapid  credit  growth  combined  with  increases  in  asset  prices 
beyond  those  justified  by  the  economic  fundamentals  –  as  a  core  central  bank  task.  The 
toolbox for providing financial stability has been expanded to include macro-prudential policy 
tools  and  enhanced  micro-prudential  policy  tools  for  both  the  national  authorities  and  the 
SSM. Examples of macro-prudential tools include: a countercyclical capital buffer, a systemic 
risk  buffer  and  the  other  systemically  important  institutions  buffer  along  with  measures  to 
control, inter alia, leverage, liquidity and large exposures. 
In the past, it was not thought to be necessary to separate monetary policy from the task of 
providing  financial  stability.  It  was  thought  that  price  stability  in  the  market  for  goods  and 
services  would  be  sufficient  to  ensure  financial  stability  in  the  market  for  assets.  The 
experience since the early-2000s has dispelled such beliefs. That experience has shown that 
the business cycle and the financial cycle are not necessarily synchronized; long periods of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  disconnect between the two cycles can materialize. In particular, the financial cycle tends to 
have larger amplitude and lower frequency than the normal business cycle. 
Macro-prudential  policy  bridges  the  gap  between  the  micro-prudential  supervision  of 
individual  banks  and  monetary  policy.  Its  objectives  are,  first,  to  enhance  the  resilience  of 
financial  institutions  and  the  entire  financial  system,  and,  second,  to  smooth  the  financial 
cycle. In this regard, macro-prudential policy allows monetary policy to focus on maintaining 
price stability so that real economic activity can flourish, while micro-prudential supervision 
focuses  on  individual  institutions.  In  this  way,  macro-prudential  policy  enhances  the 
institutional  separation  that  is  one  of  the  principles  of  the  architecture  of  the  euro  area. 
Indeed,  I  believe  that  a  strong  case  can  be  made  that,  had  macroprudential  tools  been 
available  ten  years  ago,  we  may  not  have  had  a  euro-area  crisis.  Ten  years  ago 
macroprudential tools to limit the excess borrowing that was taking place in the soon-to-be 
crisis countries were either not used or were too weak to dampen credit growth sufficiently in 
those countries. 
That said, the usefulness of coordinating policies should not be forgotten – whether that be 
coordination of specific policies across different countries (as happened in the wake of the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  with  the  simultaneous  cuts  in  policy  rates)  or  coordination  of 
policies  within  one  jurisdiction.  Respect  for  the  independence  of  the  various  authorities 
involved in securing financial stability should not imply separation and a lack of coordination. 
Thus,  I  strongly  agree  with  Danielle  Nouy  that  “micro-prudential  supervision  needs  to  be 
complemented by a macro-prudential perspective”. It is imperative, however, that the macro-
prudential toolbox be further enhanced with innovative tools beyond those focused on capital 
requirements.  Cyclical  systemic  risk  can  arise  not  only  as  a  result  of  excessive  credit 
expansion (an issue that can be addressed with the countercyclical capital buffer) but also 
because of inadequate channeling of credit that keeps the real economy under-financed for 
extended periods. 
A lesson drawn from the crisis is that we have focused on rather narrow areas of financial 
activity.  Nowadays,  it  is  important  that  we  focus  on  the  risks  that  might  be  missed  at  the 
micro level, that is the interlinkages between and among sectors, and thus explore how the 
financial system can influence, and be influenced, by the wider economy. In the euro-area, 
there is evidence of limited financing of the real economy, with the consequence that euro-
area investment has not recovered to pre-2008 levels despite ECB policies directly aimed at 
increasing the lending of the banking sector. 
D. 
Developments in the EU financial regulatory framework and further steps 
ahead 
Apart  from  the  elements  of  Banking  Union  and  the  BRRD,  a  number  of  other  important 
regulatory  initiatives  have  been  taken,  covering  not  only  the  banking  sector,  but  also 
insurance,  financial  markets  and  infrastructures.  Many  initiatives  are  on-going  and  further 
steps are required for their completion. 
If macroprudential policy is to effectively curb the financial cycle, it is essential to have tools 
that  deal  with  the  credit-real  estate  relationship.  There  are  two  ways  to  deal  with  this 
relationship.  The  first  is  by  imposing  restrictions  on  credit  institutions  –  that  is,  through 
capital-based measures. The second way in which the credit cycle can be moderated is by 
limiting leverage by households and non-financial corporations. 
With regard to the banking sector, the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) and Directive 
(CRD IV) play a prominent role in setting the prudential standards for credit institutions and 
investment  firms  in  the  EU.  Implementation  is  ongoing  and  expected  to  be  completed  by 
2019. From January 2016, the countercyclical capital buffer (CCB), the systemic risk buffer 
(SRB) and the other systemically important institutions (OSII) buffer have been operational. 
Given  the  need  to  diversify  the  available  tools  beyond  regulations  based  on  capital,  tools 
based on liquidity, leverage and funding sources are also being introduced. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  With  regard  to  the  borrower’s  side,  instruments  such  as  the  loan-to-value  (LTV),  loan-to-
income (LTI) and debt-service-to-income (DSTI) limits are considered to be among the most 
effective  macroprudential  instruments  in  curtailing  excessive  credit  growth.  In  order  to 
effectively moderate the financial cycle, a time-varying dimension is crucial in the design of 
the  various  ratios.  For  example,  the  loan-to-value  ratio  should  be  lowered  during  the 
expansionary  phase  of  a  financial  cycle  and  it  should  be  raised  during  the  contractionary 
phase.  Otherwise,  there  is  a  risk  of  pro-cyclicality  since  leverage  constraints  decrease  as 
asset prices rise. 
Regulatory initiatives for financial markets and infrastructures and the implementation of the 
European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  include  macro-prudential  intervention 
tools (such as an enhanced and cooperative oversight framework for central counterparties). 
Thus  indicators  that  will  contribute  to  better  monitoring  the  extent  to  which  the  system  is 
assuming more risks, as well as tools which can contribute to maintaining financial stability 
are being developed. 
Challenges ahead and the way forward 
E. 
Challenges, of course, remain. I will highlight seven of these challenges. 
1.  The  first  challenge  is  the  completion  of  the  Banking  Union.  Questions  surrounding  the 
financial capacity of the Single Resolution Fund (SRF), both in the short and in the long run, 
have to be addressed. The size of the SRF has been criticized for being insufficient and its 
governance structure has been criticized as being overly complex. If a sound backstop is not 
in place, there will be pressure for stress tests to become softer, which would be a detriment 
to financial stability. The ESM could become an effective backstop to the SRF, safeguarding 
financial stability in the Banking Union. Another issue that requires further reflection concerns 
the implications of implementing a single vs. a multiple point of entry in developing resolution 
plans.  With  respect  to  deposit  insurance,  aside  from  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme 
Directive  (DGSD),  the  transposition  of  which  is  still  pending  in  some  Member  States,  the 
proposed European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) is of paramount importance. Deposit 
insurance  at  the  supranational  level  will  contribute  significantly  to  financial  stability  by 
providing a back-up when national schemes do not have the capacity to handle large shocks. 
Such insurance will be  a decisive step towards breaking the diabolical link between banks 
and sovereign and, along with a sound backstop to the SRF, safeguarding stability across 
the Banking Union. 
It  is  also  important  to  keep  communicating  with  the  markets.  Thus,  we  have  to  provide 
consistent  communication  on  regulatory  initiatives  and  macroprudential  policies  to  reduce 
regulatory uncertainty. It is necessary to revise the legislation and EBA Guideline regarding 
the  definition  of  the  Minimum  Distributable  Amount  (MDA)  to  bring  it  into  line  with  other 
countries. We  need  to  harmonize  the  Minimum  Requirements  for  Own  Funds  and  Eligible 
Liabilities (MREL) and the Total Loss Absorption Capacity (TLAC), for example, by using the 
same definition of eligible liabilities for both tools and adjusting the relative thresholds. Close 
cooperation  between  the  SSM  and  the  SRB  will  be  needed.  One  first  area  where  this 
cooperation  could  be  beneficial  is  at  the  level  of  the  MREL.  Finally,  we  need  to  promote 
strategies for banking sector restructuring while having a comprehensive strategy to tackle 
NPLs. This is particularly important for banks with high NPL ratios. 
2. A second challenge ahead relates to the issue of the increased burden of complying with 
the  new  regulatory  framework  and  assessing  its  cumulative  impact.  I  am  not  referring  to 
additional capital adequacy requirements. In the pursuit of making banks more robust, liquid, 
responsible and transparent, huge progress to regulate their operation and supervision has 
been  achieved.  However,  there  has  been  no  estimate  of  the  cumulative  impact  of  these 
regulations. I welcome and look forward to the report on the impact of capital requirements 
on the economy; however, the impact of other regulations should also be examined. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  We need to keep in mind the principle of proportionality. As new regulation accumulates, we 
know that it can come with costs as well as with benefits. Policymakers need to be watchful 
that,  in  attempting  to  limit  externalities,  they  do  not  inadvertently  create  new  externalities. 
The financial sector ultimately exists to serve the real economy. It is very likely that there are 
trade-offs between ensuring financial stability and imposing such a burden on the financial 
sector  that  it  ceases to be  able  to  do  its job,  namely  to  intermediate  between  surplus  and 
deficit units in any economy in order to encourage long-term investment and growth. Thus 
we  have  to  develop  methods  to  judge  the  appropriateness  of  indicators  and  tools.  Since 
many  of  the  regulations  have  been  applied  over  the  last  few  years,  that  is,  in  a  period  of 
acute  financial  stress,  I  expect  that  in  the  coming  years  there  will  be  a  need  to  reassess 
those  regulations  and  perhaps  conduct  some  fine-tuning.  Similar  arguments  apply  to  the 
national options and discretion in the new regulatory framework. 
3. Closely related to the previous challenge is the degree to which regulatory developments 
should be front-loaded. The regulations themselves often have long phase-in periods such 
that new versions of the regulations are developed before the previous versions have been 
fully implemented. Supervisors have tended to compensate for the long phase-in periods by 
front-loading  all  prudential  requirements,  a  situation  that  sometimes  can  be  considered 
excessively harsh. Of course the long phase-in periods are often a reaction to the expected 
impact  of  the  regulation  on  bank  behaviour  and,  in  particular,  on  the  lending  to  the  real 
economy. Some middle road has to be found. 
4. A fourth challenge is the need to reduce reliance on models. Recently conducted stress-
tests at the EU level followed a “single-model-fits-all” methodology, which left very little room 
for idiosyncratic and specific national characteristics. Moreover, according to some analysts, 
there  is  a  risk that  stress  tests  are  becoming  less  effective  as  a  supervisory  tool.  Instead, 
they  may  increasingly  be  seen  as  having  been  undertaken  in  order  to  calm  the  markets. 
Ideally,  stress  tests  should  be  implemented  in  benign  times  in  accordance  with  an  old 
wisdom attributed to John F. Kennedy, that “the time to repair the roof is  when the sun is 
shining”. In crisis times, there is the risk that crucial inputs such as macroeconomic variables 
are  under  or  over-estimated  and  that  adverse  scenarios  become  unrealistic  –  either  too 
benign  or  too  severe.  In  consequence,  there  are  ambiguous  outcomes  that  are  difficult  to 
interpret.  Additionally,  the  potential  pro-cyclical  effects  of  stress  tests  should  be  explored. 
More appropriately, stress tests should not only place emphasis on solvency, but they should 
explore the impact of the assumed shock on bank liquidity, the implications of applying the 
bail-in  tool,  the  funds  needed  to  meet  any  demand  on  deposit  guarantee  funds,  etc.  We 
should focus on harmonizing processes, while models should be enriched with constrained 
judgement as is standard practice in macroeconomic forecasting. 
5. Fifth, there is a need to widen the scope of regulation. A crucial challenge ahead is related 
to  recent  disintermediation  and  the  development  of  “shadow”  banking  as  an  alternative 
means  of  financial  intermediation.  The  CRR/CRDIV  legal  framework  covers  mainly  the 
banking  sector,  yet  financial  activity  and  the  financing  of  the  euro-area  economy  have 
increasingly  shifted  to  non-banks.  The  need  for  macroprudential  regulation  of  certain 
financial activities becomes clear if we consider that banks and non-banks are closely tied 
through  market-based  intermediation  activities.  These  include  a  broad  array  of  services 
related  to  securitization  transactions,  securities  financing  transactions,  repos,  collateral 
management and derivatives. The consequences of poorly-monitored risks in this area are 
unknown and the risk of a new crisis could be lurking, while spill-over effects are difficult to 
assess. Moreover, the more that policymakers are effective in using macroprudential tools to 
constrain excessive credit growth in the banking sector, the more likely it becomes that there 
will be excessive adjustments in the non-bank sector through leakages. Fortunately, “shadow 
banking” is high on the agenda of the relevant fora and there is a clear need to extend the 
regulatory toolkit. 
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  mention  also  the  Capital  Markets  Union.  The  Capital  Markets 
Union  aims  at  connecting  saving  more  effectively  to  investment  by  funding  projects  in  a 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  transparent  and  ordered  way.  In  this  way,  it  could  contribute  to  growth  by  providing 
alternatives to traditional bank intermediation for savers and investors. In pursuit of growth, 
Europe  needs  a  financial  system  that  is  able  to  meet  the  financing  needs  of  all  economic 
entities (businesses and households) at different stages in their development. 
6. A sixth challenge is one that the SSM has identified as a top priority for its supervisory 
action  plan  for  2016  –  namely,  banks’  business  model  and  profitability.  In  particular,  low 
profitability  in  a  low  (even  negative)  interest  rate  landscape  is  a  key  challenge  that  banks 
need  to  address.  Moreover,  European  banks  have  to  address  the  problem  of  radical 
restructuring  which  has  been  delayed  in  many  cases.  This  observation,  accompanied  by 
frequent top management changes, stands in contrast to strategy implementation in the US. 
It is even more complicated now with the deterioration in market sentiment and the weaker-
than-expected economic outlook. 
Part of the challenge in addressing a new business model relates to the increasing stock of 
Non-Performing Exposures (NPEs) and their management. These exposures are acting as a 
significant impediment to banks’ reorienting their business model as well as, more broadly, to 
growth and financial stability, particularly in the countries of the European South. It should be 
highlighted, however, that we are in a good position to deal with this challenging issue as, 
thanks to the Comprehensive Assessment and the Asset Quality Review, we are aware of 
the  full  picture  and  important  knowledge  has  been  acquired  for  both  monitoring  and 
managing  troubled  assets.  At  the  Bank  of  Greece,  our  research  on  the  issue  of  NPLs 
indicates  that  they  are  overwhelmingly  driven  by  recession.  Thus,  additional  capital 
requirements  cannot  always  provide  a  remedy.  Indeed,  in  some  cases  such  a  remedy  is 
likely to prove sub-optimal. Instead, at my Bank we have concluded that active private sector 
loan  restructuring,  the  improvement  in  the  insolvency  framework,  more  efficient  judicial 
systems and the involvement of loan servicers and private equity funds with experience in 
restructuring sectors of the economy are crucial components of an overall strategy of dealing 
with NPLs. 
7. A seventh challenge, the role of the central bank as a lender of last resort to the banking 
system,  needs  to  be  addressed  on  the  basis  of  principles  that  are  consistent  with  our 
mandate of preserving financial stability. The principle developed by Thornton and Bagehot 
is  well-known.  Central  banks  should  lend  freely  to  solvent  but  illiquid  banks  against  good 
collateral  at  a  high  rate  of  interest.  How  is  this  tried  and  tested  principle  to  be  made 
operational  in  today’s  environment  with  much  larger  bank  balance  sheets  and fewer  liquid 
assets?  In  the  past,  government  bonds  were  automatically  considered  good  collateral. 
Today, central banks accept a wider pool of collateral. By what criteria should collateral be 
judged? We know that liquidity problems can become solvency problems if liquidity is denied 
or  not  provided  generously  enough.  Thus  the  seemingly  simple  principle  developed  by 
Thornton  and  Bagehot  can  be  open  to  various  interpretations.  There  is  a  need,  I  think,  to 
revisit the question. Mervyn King’s pawnbroker concept (2016) provides some new ideas on 
the issue. 
The ultimate aim in meeting these challenges is to make finance in Europe more resilient and 
to enhance and safeguard financial stability. The role of supervisors of the financial system is 
to  enhance  harmonization  while  respecting  proportionality.  They  should  safeguard  a  level-
playing  field  among  all  participants  and  protect  depositors  while  striking  the  right  balance 
between  “strictness”  and  “fairness”.  Their  mandate  is  to  set  clear  boundaries  within  which 
financial intermediation can prosper while financial stability is maintained. 
Concluding remarks 
F. 
The financial sector is facing challenges on many fronts. Banks are no exception. Jonathan 
Hill  (2015,  2016)  recently  spoke  about  “a  brave  new  world  for  banks”  and  the  need  of  a 
revolution in which banks are reformed and restructured with respect to both their business 
models and governance. Supervisors will also have to adapt to this revolution. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Despite the progress made in the past few years, with Banking Union as the flagship of the 
reform  effort,  more  progress  is  needed  as  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  remains 
incomplete. Divergence across the euro area is significant and the crisis of recent years has 
further highlighted existing shortcomings and important differences that need to be bridged. 
With  respect  to  the  financial  system,  we  should  seek  an  approach  that  promotes 
proportionality,  transparency  and  competitiveness.  Regulatory  consistency,  coherence  and 
certainty are crucial to investors’ decision-making process. 
While financial  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  prosperity  in  the  euro  area,  it  is  not  a 
sufficient  condition.  To  this  end,  Europe  should  build  upon  other  proposals  outlined  in  the 
Five Presidents’ Report (2015). As argued in that report, EMU will not be complete until the 
appropriate mechanisms to share fiscal sovereignty are in place. Monetary unions have to 
develop mechanisms for risk sharing. Mark Carney (2015) recently highlighted the stylized 
fact that, whatever happens to asset prices, debt endures. Reducing debt levels is difficult 
and he notes that it is unlikely that high debt in one sector or region can be reduced without 
at least temporarily increasing it in another. Fiscal integration can help in this respect. Allow 
me  to  remind  you  of  Keynes’s  view  about  the  Bretton  Woods  System  –  it  needed,  he 
believed, to provide mechanisms to promote symmetric adjustment within the fixed exchange 
rate area so that there would not be a bias towards deficient demand across the system. A 
more-fiscally-integrated  monetary  union  would  help  address  the  problems  of  asymmetric 
adjustment and the deflationary bias of our monetary union. 
Financial  stability  is  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth;  it  is  also  a  fact,  however,  that 
financial  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  cannot  be  achieved  without  economic  growth. 
Failure to maintain sustainable growth has been the biggest threat to the long-term stability 
of the EU since the onset of the 2007 crisis. An appropriate balance between managing risk 
and enabling investment needs to be struck. In this connection, it is crucial that the regulatory 
framework does not impede, but provides a suitable environment, for sustainable growth. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  ultimately,  a  sustainable  recovery  will  need  to  be  underpinned  by 
higher investment. Yet, in the euro area we presently face a significant investment gap. The 
financial  system  and  its  stability  have  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  closing  this  gap.  Central 
bankers  and  supervisory  authorities  bear  an  enormous  responsibility  in  shaping  a  system 
that can deliver prosperity to the citizens of Europe. We have made  important progress in 
securing  the  financial  stability  needed  to  deliver  such  prosperity,  but  we  have  not  yet 
completed the job. As the ancient Greek mathematician, Archimedes, once said, “Give me a 
place to stand and I will move the earth, but first I need a place to stand, a foundation.” The 
completion  of  our  financial-stability  edifice  will  provide  the  necessary  foundation  for  the 
citizens of Europe. 
Thank you for attention. 
Sources: 
1.  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2015)  “Making  supervisory  stress  tests  more 
macroprudential:  Considering  liquidity  and  solvency  interactions  and  systemic  risk”,  BCBS 
Working Papers No 29, https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/wp29.htm, November 2015. 
2. Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements (2016) “Ultra-low interest rates 
&  challenges 
for  Christian  Noyer,  Paris, 
https://www.banque-france.fr/en/economics-statistics/research/seminars-and-
symposiums/symposium-a-loccasion-du-depart-de-christian-noyer-banque-de-france-et-
banque-des-reglements-internationaux.html, January 2016. 
3. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Finalising post-crisis reforms: an update, 
A report to G20 Leaders, http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d344.pdf, November 2015. 
4. Carney, M. (2015) “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech given to honour the memory of 
The Honourable J. M. Flaherty, P.C., Iveagh House, Dublin, 
for  central  banks”,  Farewell  Symposium 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech794.pdf, 
January 2015. 
5. Cœuré, B. (2016) “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, Speech at the Professor 
Lamfalussy Commemorative Conference, Budapest, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html, February 2016. 
6. Cœuré, B. (2016) “From Challenges to Opportunities: Rebooting the European Financial 
Sector”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Finance Day, Frankfurt, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160302.en.html, March 2016. 
7.  Constâncio,  V.  (2015)  Interview  with  Börsen-Zeitung,  “We  need  more  integration  in 
Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151230.en.html, December 
2015. 
8. Draghi, M. (2015) Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area, Prometeia40, 
Bologna,  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html,  December 
2015. 
9. Draghi, M. (2016) Introductory statement during the Hearing at the European Parliament’s 
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, Brussels, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160215.en.html, February 2016. 
10. EBA (2015) Risk Assessment of European Banking System, 
https://eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1315397/EBA+Risk+Assessment+Report.pdf, 
December 2015. 
11. ECB Financial Stability Review (2015), 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview201511.en.pdf?24cc5509b94b
997f161b841fa57d5eca, November 2015. 
12. Five Presidents’ Report sets out plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary 
Union  as  of  1  July  2015  (2015),  Press  release,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-15–5240_en.htm, June 2015. 
13.  Hill,  J. 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5380_en.htm, July 2015. 
14.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Keynote  speech  at  the  Eurofi  Financial  Forum  2015,  “Capital  Markets 
Union:  Vital  for  Growth”,  Luxembourg,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–
5624_en.htm, September 2015. 
15. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote speech at European Banking Federation, “A Brave New World for 
Banks”,  2015  Annual  High  Level  Conference,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5624_en.htm, September 2015. 
16.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Introductory  remarks  at  the  launch  of  the  Capital  Markets  Union  Action 
Plan,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5749_en.htm,  September 
2015. 
17. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote Speech at the 2015 ECMI Annual Conference, “Europe’s Capital 
Markets  Union:  What  is  the  ‘long-term-  view?”,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5870_en.htm, October 2015. 
18.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Speech  at  the  European  Central  Bank  Forum  on  Banking  Supervision, 
“Bank  Supervision:  Europe  in  global  context”,  Frankfurt,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5985_en.htm, November 2015. 
19. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the European Chamber of Commerce and ASIFMA, Hong Kong, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6076_en.htm, November 2015. 
investment”,  London, 
financial  sector 
that  promotes 
“For  a 
(2015) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  Brussels, 
20.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Press  Conference  on  the  EDIS  Proposal  at  the  European  Parliament, 
Strasbourg, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6154_en.htm,  November 
2015. 
21.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Opening  speech  on  the  overhaul  of  prospectus  rules  for  the  Capital 
Markets  Union,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6202_en.htm, 
November 2015. 
22.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Opening  statement  on  Structured  Dialogue  –  European  Parliament: 
Economic  &  Monetary  Affairs  Committee,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–6206_en.htm, November 2015. 
23.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Speech  at  the  Euromoney  Capital  Markets  Union  Forum  –  Building  a 
Capital  Markets  Union,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–
6244_en.htm, December 2015. 
24.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Speech  at  the  launch  of  the  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Consumer 
Finance, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6293_en.htm, 
December 2015. 
25. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the CRR Review Conference, DG FISMA, “The Impact of the 
CRR 
the  Economy”,  Brussels, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6310_en.htm, December 2015. 
26.  Hill,  J.  (2016)  Keynote  speech  at  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  5th  Anniversary 
Conference, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16–250_en.htm, 
February 2016. 
27.  King,  M.  (2016)  “The  End  of  Alchemy:  Money,  Banking  and  the  Future  of  the  Global 
Economy” Little, Brown. 
28.  Praet,  P.  (2015)  Interview  with  La  Libre  Belgique,  “Europe  must  show  it  can  bring 
prosperity”, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151221.en.html, 
December 2015. 
29. Vickers, J. (2016) “Equity buffers are in the public interest” Letter to the Editor, Financial 
Times, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/abac0ed0-d57a-11e5-829b-
8564e7528e54.html#axzz42IFSkp3i, February 2016. 
and  CRD 
on  Bank 
Financing 
London, 
IV 
of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
