   Abdul-Nashiru Issahaku: Developing Ghana’s banking system 
Speech by Dr Abdul-Nashiru Issahaku, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, at the inauguration of 
the Sunyani regional office building, Sunyani, 30 June 2016. 
 Nananom 
Board of Directors of Bank of Ghana  
Representatives  of Banks in the Brong-Ahafo Region 
Representatives of Security Agencies in the Brong -Ahafo Region   
Heads of Departments 
Regional Managers 
My cherished members of staff  
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen   
Good morning 
I  am  delighted  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  inauguration  of  our  new  Sunyani  Regional 
Office building. Let me sincerely thank the Chiefs and people of  Sunyani,  in  fact,  the  Brong 
Ahafo  Region  for  making  the  land  available  to  us.  This is a clear indication of the support 
and collaboration between the Bank and  the Chiefs. 
And let me also take this opportunity to thank the immediate past Governor of  the  Bank  of 
Ghana  Dr.  Henry  Kofi  Wampah  for  spearheading  this  project  and  seeing to its completion. 
As  we  may  all  be  aware,  prior  to  the  construction  of  this  ultra-modern  office  complex, 
the Sunyani Regional Office had operated from the second floor of a  building whose lower 
floors  were  occupied  by  GCB  Bank.  The  regulator  sharing  office  with  the  client  is  not 
ethically sound and exposes the Bank to familiarity  threats. 
In  addition, the  former Office  did  not  have  a  banknote  processing  capacity  and  depended 
on the Kumasi Regional Office for the processing of its deposits as well as fit-sorting banknotes 
for re-issuance to banks and other financial institutions  in its catchment area. 
We  have  been  under  pressure  and  in  a  hurry  to  catch  up  and  provide  the  facilities 
necessary  to  deliver  the  required  services  in  the  region  and  make  a  difference.  The 
inauguration of this magnificent Sunyani Regional Office with  adequate space for a banking 
hall to be serviced by four tellers, an office space  for Cheque Codeline Clearing supported 
by  a  back  office  to  serve  customers,  and 
fully  equipped  offices,  is  one  of  the  eloquent 
testimonies to show that the Bank  of Ghana is living up to expectations for posterity in this 
region and the country  as a whole. 
Beyond providing this beautiful edifice to reduce the stress in relation to  inadequate office 
accommodation for workers, we have also made provision for a  Cash Processing Centre which 
is yet to have the full complement of machines. A  state  of  the  art  electronic  security  and 
fire-  fighting  systems  have  been  installed to  ensure  maximum  security,  and  staff  welfare 
has  also  been catered  for by providing a canteen and gymnasium. 
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, the story of this beautiful edifice started  about  twenty 
years  ago  when  the  Bank  acquired  the  current  location  for  an  office.  There  were  some 
hitches  that  caused  delays  in  the  implementation  process  as  contracts  had  to  be 
terminated  and  re-awarded  a  couple  of  times  before  Messrs  Micheletti  and  Company 
Limited finally brought the project  successfully to an end in  December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Ladies and gentlemen, after this inauguration, the Sunyani Regional Office would  also operate 
as  a  Cash  Processing  Centre.  To  this  end,  arrangements  are  underway  to  provide  the 
Regional  Office  with  banknote  processing  capacity  to  enable it do fitness-sort deposits of 
the  Deposit  Money  Banks  in  the  catchment  area of the Office. Therefore, when the Office 
becomes fully operational, it would augment  the  services  of  Kumasi  Office  in  churning  out 
clean banknotes, devoid  of counterfeits, to citizens in the northern sector of the country. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, while seeking to manage cash efficiently to protect its  integrity and 
engender confidence in its use, it is important to remind ourselves  of  large  cash  holdings 
outside  the  formal  financial  system  which  continue  to  exert inflationary pressures on the 
currency and render the conduct of monetary  policy  a  daunting  task.  It  is  hoped  that  this 
Regional  Office  and  the  enhanced  scope  of  activities,  will  present  yet  another  opportunity 
to  banks,  rural  banks,  non-bank financial and microfinance institutions to come up with more 
innovative  products  to  mobilise  more  idle  cash  resources  in  the  informal  sector  into  the 
formal banking system. 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  mandate  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana  includes  promoting  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  the  payments  system,  which  also  comprises  the  Electronic  Money  (e-
money) Platform, and consequently enhancing users’ confidence in its  usage.  As  we  do 
periodically  for  all  our  issued  guidelines  to  achieve  greater  effect, the Bank of Ghana is 
currently reviewing the existing guidelines governing 
the  use  of  e-money  with  a  view  to 
developing  a  Legislative  Instrument  (LI)  to  guide  its  operations.  We  recognize  that  any 
disruption or failure in the scheme  will  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the  public’s  confidence 
in  electronic  payment 
instruments.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  is  hopeful  that  the  review  will 
streamline  its  use  and  encourage  greater  participation  from  the  unbanked  sector  of  our 
population. 
Mr.  Chairman,  permit  me  to  share  some  other  thoughts  with  you.  The  issue  of  fraudulent 
activities  by  some  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs),  especially  in  the  regions, brings to the 
fore considerations for beefing up communication delivery  in  the  regions  in  situations  where 
information,  education  and  clarification  are  necessary. The Bank of Ghana is currently in the 
process of establishing Regional  Public  Affairs  offices  manned  by  trained  PR  practitioners 
to  link the  head  office up  with  local  media  who  seek  information  and  clarification  about 
the  Bank’s  operations,  grant  interviews  or  carry  through  some  media-related  activity,  and 
boost the media relations programmes of the Bank. This would make it easier to  know  the 
local  media  and  be  immediately  available  to  receive  enquiries  from  them for the purposes 
of channelling them appropriately for action to be taken. 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies  and Gentlemen, the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  the  noble  intention 
of  nurturing  the  microfinance  sector  in  Ghana  because  of  its  huge  potential  to  push  the 
financial  inclusion  agenda forward  and  alleviate  poverty  among the majority of our people. 
We  see  microfinance  companies  (MFCs)  as  agents and catalysts for the realisation of the 
dream of economic prosperity. 
To  demonstrate  the  commitment  of  the  Bank  to  the  effective  supervision  of  licensed 
MFCs, officers of the Bank have  been stationed at our Regional Offices.  This is meant to 
enhance the monitoring and follow-up of licensed MFCs as well  as  for  the  surveillance  and 
early  detection  and  resolution  of  unlicensed  MFCs.  Furthermore, a new system of reporting 
called  the  Offsite  Surveillance  Electronic  System  (OOSES)  has  been 
to 
automate the  off-site review  and  analysis of prudential returns submitted by MFCs. 
Ladies  and gentlemen, the  Bank  has  additionally  intensified  its financial  literacy  campaign 
to  accurately  inform  and  educate  the  public  on  the  activities  of  unlicensed  MFCs.  Going 
forward, the passing by Parliament of The Banks and Specialised Deposit-taking Institutions 
Bill, and the Ghana Deposit Protection Bill,  will  be  crucial  to  our  efforts  to  ensure  that 
confidence  is  maintained  in  the  banking  sector.  The  two  Bills  will,  among  other  things, 
offer  protection  for  the  small  depositor,  and  deal  extensively  with  the  problem  of 
unauthorised deposit  taking business.  
introduced 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The  Bank  of  Ghana  will  continue  to  provide  a  sound  regulatory  environment  for the  MFI 
sector while  expecting MFCs  to  engage in  prudent activities  aimed at  protecting  customer 
depositors,  maximizing  profits  and  providing  meaningful  financial services to the rural poor 
at affordable prices. 
Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, the Bank of Ghana would like to assure the  community 
of  the  Bank’s  social  responsiveness  and  would  make  every  effort  to  provide employment 
opportunities to the local people. 
Once  again,  I  would  like  to  appreciate  everyone  for  the  hard  work,  commitment  and 
contributions that led to this official inauguration ceremony today. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
