  Vítor Constâncio: International headwinds and the effectiveness of 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
25th Annual Hyman P Minsky Conference on the State of the US and World Economies at 
the Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Blithewood, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, 
13 April 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I want to start by thanking the Levy Institute for inviting me again to address this important 
conference  honouring  Hyman  Minsky,  the  economist  that  the  Great  Recession  justifiably 
brought  into  the  limelight.  His  work  provides  crucial  insights  not  only  identifying  the  key 
mechanisms by which periods of financial calm sow the seeds for ensuing crises, but also 
the  specific  challenges  that  economies  face  in  recovering  from  such  crises.1  Moreover, 
Minsky displayed a keen understanding of the damaging effects of uncertainty, not just on 
economic  performance  but  also,  ultimately,  on  the  fabric  of  civil  society  and  democratic 
institutions.2  These  insights  have  acquired  renewed  urgency  in  view  of  the  world-wide 
resurgence  of  “easy-answer  populism”  whose  simple  but  flawed  solutions  to  complex 
problems become more appealing the greater the uncertainty. 
This  year’s  conference  has  a  very  topical  title  “Will  the  Global  Economic  Environment 
Constrain U.S. Growth and Employment?” Indeed, the prospects for the full recovery of the 
U.S. economy and the normalisation of its monetary policy are of utmost importance but can 
only  be  properly  assessed  in  an  international  context.  Conversely,  international  spillovers 
from the U.S. to the other economies must be well understood, to appreciate the most likely 
scenarios for the global economy. 
Nine  years  after  the  inception  of  the Great  Recession,  it  is  no  secret  that  economists  and 
policy-makers  are  baffled  and  disappointed  with  the  lacklustre  nature  of  the  ongoing 
recovery. The perplexities and anxieties generated by the present situation were summed up 
in  a  rather  open  and  pessimist  way  by  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  in  a  recent 
speech, who noted that: “the global economy risks becoming trapped in a low growth, low 
inflation,  and  low  interest  rate  equilibrium”.3  But,  equilibrium  implies  a  prolonged  stable 
situation, and while that might be emerging in economic terms, the same is not the case in 
social terms. Put differently, the social equilibrium is not stable. Advanced economies must 
either radically change their economic prospects by generating growth and jobs, or they will 
be forced to adjust their social systems in uncharted ways. 
In  the  rest  of  my  remarks,  I  will  first  discuss  some  of  the  hypotheses  put  forward  in  the 
literature  to  explain  the  determinants  of  this  prolonged,  low-growth  period,  sometimes 
characterised as a global liquidity trap. I will then review some of the proposed measures to 
exit  from  the  liquidity  trap,  including  fiscal  and  structural  policies.  While  each  of  these 
measures  has  specific  benefits,  they  also  all  have  limitations  or  are  subject  to  constraints. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  important  to  emphasise  that,  while  having  to  resort  to  non-
standard  tools,  monetary  policies  also  remain  effective  in  fighting  the  global  liquidity  trap 
                                                
1  Hyman  P.  Minsky  (1994),  “The  debt-deflation  theory  of  great  recessions”,  Hyman  P.  Minsky  Archive 
Paper 159. 
2  Hyman  P.  Minsky  (1996),  “Uncertainty  and  the  institutional  structure  of  capitalist  economies”,  Hyman  P. 
Minsky Archive Paper 24. 
3  Carney, M. “Redeeming an unforgiving world” speech given at the 8th Annual Institute of International Finance 
G20 conference, Shanghai, 26 February 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  even  against  international  headwinds.  For  the  euro  area,  I  will  conclude  that  only  an 
encompassing policy mix can deliver stability and prosperity. 
trilemma  of 
flexible  exchange  rates.5  The 
Global liquidity traps 
The literature about liquidity traps and their international contagion is vast. A subset of that 
literature considers the implications of a liquidity trap in the open economy and highlights the 
importance of a global response to the trap.4 For example, Jeanne (2009) demonstrates how 
a  recessionary  shock  in  a  country  can  lead  the  world  into  a  global  liquidity  trap.  This  is 
particularly the case when monetary policy interest rates reach the Lower Bound (or LB). The 
author argues that increasing the expected inflation rate in both countries through monetary 
policy, if feasible, is the more efficient response to the global liquidity trap, more efficient than 
an increase in public expenditures. 
Hélène Rey (2013) shows how monetary policy spillovers from major advanced economies 
create a global financial cycle that reduces the efficiency of monetary policy even in a regime 
of 
international  economics  (free  capital 
movements, and independent monetary policies being only possible with flexible exchange 
rates) is thus reduced to a dilemma that can be resolved with capital controls and effective 
macroprudential  policies  to  limit  the  leverage  of  the  financial  system.  Cook  and  Devereux 
(2014)  use  a  two-country,  new  Keynesian  model  to  illustrate  how  the  liquidity  trap  can 
propagate  from  one  country  at  the  LB  to  the  world  economy,  through  the  interconnected 
international financial  system. This  international contagion  undermines  the  effectiveness  of 
domestic monetary policy even in a regime of floating exchange rates. Capital controls are 
proposed as a solution to restore the independence of monetary policies. 
This  strand  of  literature  is  also  linked  with  the  “savings  glut”  explanations  of  the  Great 
Recession.  Put  forward  by  Ben  Bernanke  in  2005,  it  was  later  used  by  him  in  2007  and 
20106  to  justify  how  capital  inflows  had  depressed  U.S.  medium-term  interest  rates  and 
fuelled the subsequent housing bubble. Despite being contested, this hypothesis has been 
quite  influential  and  has  been  supported  since  2008  by  the  theory  which  explained  global 
imbalances  by  a  “shortage  of  safe  assets”  in  countries  with  underdeveloped  financial 
systems.  The  ensuing  search  for  those  assets,  particularly  in  the  U.S.,  generated  capital 
flows, decreased medium-term yields and allegedly conditioned U.S. monetary policy. Until 
2008,  the  imbalances  resulting  from  excessive  savings  in  search  of  safe  assets  could  be 
equilibrated  by  the  decrease  of  interest  rates.  After  the  crisis,  the  decrease  of  yields  was 
accentuated by the reduction of the stock of assets resulting from weaker private issuers and 
from weaker European sovereigns. Interest rates were therefore pushed down to the LB and 
the phenomenon propagated to other countries through the financial markets. 
The recent paper by Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas (2015) models what happened after 
the  LB  was  reached.7  With  interest  rate  variations  prevented  by  the  LB,  the  supply  and 
demand  of  safe  assets  could  only  be  balanced  through  recessionary  variations  of  output. 
This  would  explain  the  weakness  of  the  worldwide  recovery  and  the  temptation  felt  by  all 
countries to try to use the exchange rate as a way to stimulate their own economy – hence 
the  expression  “currency  wars”  in  the  paper’s  title.  The  authors  highlight  that  the  U.S.,  by 
                                                
4  See  Svensson,  L.E.O.  (2003),  Jeanne,  O.  (2009),  Cook,  D.E.  and  M.B.  Devereux  (2013)  and  (2014), 
Devereux, M.B. and J. Yetman (2014) and Caballero, R.J., E. Farhi and P-O. Gourinchas (2015). 
5  See Rey, H. (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, 
Kansas FED, Jackson Hole Conference. 
6  See Bernanke, B. (2005), (2007) and (2010). 
7  See Caballero, R.J., E. Farhi and P-O. Gourinchas (2015), “Global imbalances and currency wars at the ZLB” 
NBER Working Paper No 21670, October 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  adopting a very expansionary monetary policy earlier, was able to benefit from a depreciating 
U.S. Dollar (USD), but this changed after 2014 when both Europe and Japan embarked also 
in a more expansionary unconventional monetary policies. Due to a non-Ricardian treatment 
of public finances, there is a role for fiscal policy in dealing with the situation. The paper also 
finds that  countries  with  more  wage  and  price  flexibility  have  a  smaller  share  of  the  world 
recessionary  trend  but  “at  the  global  level,  more  downward  price  or  wage  flexibility 
exacerbates the global recession”. 
The  idea  of  a  prolonged  global  liquidity  trap  is  connected  with  the  notion  of  secular 
stagnation, i.e. the possibility of a prolonged situation of low inflation and low growth at the 
global level. The secular stagnation hypothesis in this case refers to the demand-side version 
promoted by Larry Summers8, where a trend of planned savings systematically higher than 
planned investment implies a situation of persistent lack of demand and a negative output 
gap, interest rate at the LB and low inflation or even deflation. The real equilibrium rate that 
ensures the savings investment balance at full employment may indeed become negative as 
recent estimates for the U.S. indicate. 
Eggertsson  and  Mehrotra  (2014)  and  Caballero  and  Farhi  (2015)  modelled  secular 
stagnation  in  a  closed  economy  and  more  recently,  Eggertsson,  Mehrotra,  Singh  and 
Summers (2015)9 presented a model of secular stagnation in a multi-country context in which 
exit  policies  may  include  a  global  increase  of  the  inflation  target  (if  made  credible),  fiscal 
policy stimulus or capital controls for the countries with a domestic positive real equilibrium 
interest  rate.  The  effectiveness  of  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  is  strongly  amplified  by 
possible international co-ordination of their use. 
Some exit solutions 
The whole literature on global liquidity traps provides an overall consistent view of how the 
world  economy  works  and  leads  to  a  bleak  outlook  on  the feasible  exit  solutions  from  the 
present quagmire. 
The first solution is credible forward-guidance about future policy rates linked to a somewhat 
higher inflation target in order to influence inflation expectations. In the type of models used 
in this literature, forward-guidance is the only available monetary policy tool. The measure 
would be more efficient if applied simultaneously by all major jurisdictions. The shortcoming 
of  this  approach  is  the  lack  of  a  sufficiently  credible  commitment  mechanism  that  would 
convince markets about the central bank “committing to be irresponsible”, no matter what. 
The  second  solution  is  to  use  the  exchange  rate  as  a  policy  target  in  order  to  stimulate 
growth  via  net  exports.  Obviously,  this  is  a  zero-sum  game  if  all  countries  try  to  do  it. 
Recently, the hope in many countries has been to depreciate against the dollar as a result of 
U.S.  recovery,  but  the  more  recent  months  have  proved  that  this  is  not  an  assured 
development,  or  perhaps  that  the  U.S.  is  not  ready  to  accept  these  consequences.  I  will 
return to this point later. 
The  third  exit  solution  proposed  in  the  literature  is  the  use  of  capital  controls  that  would 
restore independence to national monetary policy, so that real equilibrium interest rates could 
differ across countries. For those with a positive real rate, capital controls would avoid the fall 
into  the  LB.  It  is  indeed  the  case  that  the  international  community  and  the  IMF  have  now 
                                                
8  See Summers L. (2016), “The age of secular stagnation: what it is and what to do about it” in Foreign Affairs 
March/April 2016 issue. 
9  See Eggertsson, G.B. and N.R. Mehrotra (2014), “A Model of Secular Stagnation”, NBER Working Paper No 
20574, October 2014; Caballero, R.J. and E. Fahri (2015), “The Safety Trap”, NBER Working Paper No 19927 
February 2015 and Eggertsson, G.B., N.R. Mehrotra, S. Singh, and L. Summers (2015) “Contagious Malady? 
Global Dimensions of Secular Stagnation”, Working Paper, Brown University 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  lightly condoned the use of capital controls as a macroprudential tool in developing countries. 
However, the implication of the literature would be to use capital controls among advanced 
economies, an option that stands out as unrealistic for political and ideological reasons. 
The  fourth  exit  solution  is  to  use  tariffs  and  protectionism.  Jeanne  (2009)  illustrates  this 
option  in  his  model,  but  points  out that  it  would  be  less  efficient. Going  beyond  models,  a 
generalised  rush  towards  protectionism  would  aggravate,  rather  than  solve,  the  world 
economy predicament. 
The fifth and final solution is to rely on fiscal policy, the traditional  way-out in situations of 
liquidity traps. All the models concur with this prescription, which is particularly efficient at the 
LB10, and amplified if adopted internationally in an effort of international co-ordination. Fiscal 
policy, however, seems to be out of bounds in all major economies. In the euro area, fiscal 
policy  is  strictly  conditioned  by  the  legislation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  in  the 
U.S., it is seemingly blocked by political partisanship. Apparently, only if the state of the world 
economy  deteriorated  considerably,  would  governments  step  up  the  use  of  all  the  tools  at 
their disposal. 
One can therefore understand the dispirited conclusion of Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas 
(2015):  “Unfortunately,  this  state  of  affairs  is  not  likely  to  go  away  any  time  soon.  In 
particular,  there  are  no  good  substitutes  in  sight  for  the  role  played  by  US  Treasuries  in 
satisfying global safe asset demand. With mature US growing at rates lower than those of 
safe asset demander countries … its debt and currency are likely to remain under upward 
pressure, dragging down (safe) interest rates and inflation, and therefore keeping the world 
economy (too) near the dangerous ZLB zone.” 
Nevertheless, as I will argue later, this list of solutions to the global liquidity crisis dismisses 
too easily non-standard monetary policy tools. Thanks to such tools, international headwinds 
may  hamper,  but  do  not  annul  the  effectiveness  of  major  central  banks  in  influencing 
economic outcomes. 
The structural reforms solution 
Before moving on to monetary policy, let me first recall that another proposed option to boost 
the recovery is to increase growth potential in the medium and long-term through structural 
reforms.  However,  structural  reforms  entail  short-term  contractionary  effects  many  times. 
Eggertsson,  Ferrero  and  Raffo  (2014)  highlight  that  such  contractionary  short-term  effects 
are  amplified  at  the  LB,  because  they  cannot  be  off-set  by  expansionary  monetary  policy 
through a reduction in interest rates.11 A recent IMF  working paper by Bordon, Ebeke and 
Shirono  (2016)  concludes  that  “Existing  studies  have  shown  that  the  long-run  effects  of 
structural reforms on growth and employment are positive.12 However, the evidence on the 
short-run  effects  of  structural  reforms  is  rather  mixed  and  limited.”  The  recently  published 
April 2016 IMF WEO agrees and writes: “Product market reforms deliver gains in the short 
term, while the impact of labor market reforms varies across types of reforms and depends 
on  overall  economic  conditions.  Reductions  in  labor  tax  wedges  and  increases  in  public 
spending on active labor market policies have larger effects during periods of slack, in part 
because  they  usually  entail  some  degree  of  fiscal  stimulus.  In  contrast,  reforms  to 
employment  protection  arrangements  and  unemployment  benefit  systems  have  positive 
                                                
10  See  Christiano,  L.,  M.  Eichenbaum  and  S.  Rebelo  (2011),  “When  Is  the  Government  Spending  Multiplier 
Large?”, Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78 – 121. 
11  See  Eggertsson,  G.B.,  A.  Ferrero,  and  A.  Raffo  (2014),  “Can  structural  reforms  help  Europe?”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, Vol 61, 2–22, January 2014. 
12  See Bordon A.R., C. Ebeke and K. Shirono (2016), “When Do Structural Reforms Work? On the Role of the 
Business Cycle and Macroeconomic Policies”, IMF Working Paper No 16/62. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  effects  in  good  times,  but  can  become  contractionary  in  periods  of  slack.  These  results 
suggest the need for carefully prioritizing and sequencing reforms.” 
To summarise, the effects of structural reforms are contingent on the state of the cycle and 
the  degree  of  slack  in  the  economy  as  well  as  on  the  accompanying  stance  of 
macroeconomic policies. That is why the IMF WEO pleads for the use of structural reforms 
accompanied by fiscal policy when there is fiscal space, a concept that has several different 
interpretations. In their recent Shanghai meeting, the G20 pleaded for the same approach, 
although one can be sceptical about delivery. We can recall the embarrassing results of the 
G20 agreed plan in Brisbane two years ago to generate an additional 2% in world growth via 
a long list of concrete reforms put forward by the IMF and the OECD.  Less than half was 
implemented  and  in  fact,  the  world  economy  now  risks  not  even  attaining  what  was  then 
considered the baseline scenario. 
So, on both the demand and supply sides, there are constraints to effective policy action. I 
would like to add two key issues to this discouraging perspective: one that aggravates the 
challenges with a different version of secular stagnation and another that offers some hope 
related to the role of monetary policy. 
Another version of secular stagnation 
The version of the secular stagnation hypothesis promoted by Robert Gordon in a series of 
papers  and  in  his  recent  magisterial  book  is  a  supply-side  phenomenon.13  The  two  broad 
frameworks for secular stagnation are not mutually exclusive. One emphasises supply-side 
factors that lower potential growth while the other points at chronic weakness in demand as 
the root cause of secular stagnation. Demand and supply factors may, in fact, reinforce each 
other  because  a  chronic  weakness  in  demand  would  amplify  and  exacerbate  supply 
constraints  as,  for  instance,  persistent  unemployment  may  hamper  workers’  set  of  skills, 
thereby curtailing the productive capacity of the economy.14 
Gordon diagnoses a slow-down in the pace of innovation with regard to so called general-
purpose  technologies,  consisting  in  inventions  that  revolutionize  living  standards  and 
business practices. As he points out, many of these technologies, such as electricity, clean 
running water, cars and planes, as well as vaccines and antibiotics, were brought to large 
sections  of  the  population  in  the  time  between  1870  and  1970,  which  he  has  dubbed  the 
“special  century”15.  By  contrast,  he  argues  that  current  innovations,  such  as  the  internet, 
improve existing technologies in a less spectacular and more marginal way. The reduction of 
total  productivity  growth  in  the  U.S.  and  other  advanced  economies,  decade  after  decade 
since the 70s, offers a compelling empirical case for Gordon’s views. 
This  gloomy  assessment  has  not  gone  unchallenged.  Most  prominently,  Joel  Mokyr,  Erik 
Brynjolfsson  and  Andrew  McAfee  argue  that,  given  recent  advances  in  robotics,  genetic 
modifications, 3D printing, and further innovative technologies, we stand at the cusp of a new 
industrial revolution.16 This scenario is certainly desirable. But, as Robert Gordon has also 
pointed out: even if innovation is not slowing in absolute terms, global economy is still facing 
                                                
13  See Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil 
War”, Princeton University Press. 
14  See Blanchard, O. and L. Summers (1986), “Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem”, NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1. 
15  See Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil 
War”, Princeton University Press. 
16  See Mokyr, J. (2013), “Is technological progress a thing of the past?”, VoxEU article, 8 September 2013 and 
Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), “The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time 
of Brilliant Technologies”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  an uphill battle, given the challenges of population aging, rising inequality, failing education 
systems and debt overhang. 
The role of demographics is especially dominant here. As Charles Goodhart and colleagues 
(2015)  have  noted,  recent  decades  have  benefitted  from  a  positive  global  labour  supply 
shock, deriving from the baby-boomer generation in the 1970s, and from the integration and 
expansion  of  emerging  markets  as  part  of  the  global  economy.  These  demographic 
headwinds are fading out, implying that another crucial source of growth is drying-up, at least 
until a demographic reversal takes place in about 25 to 30 years’ time.17 
Beyond these factors, doubts can also be raised about the depth of the economic traction of 
the  innovations  that  are  in  the  pipeline.  The  technological  changes  at  the  turn  of  the  20th 
century and after the Second World War, led to the creation of mass products widely used in 
association with the urbanisation explosion that is about to end. The second wave of income 
growth  was  triggered  by  women’s  participation  in  the  labour  force  and  jump  in  education 
levels,  developments  that  cannot  now  be  repeated  to  the  same  degree.  So  far,  the  new 
products or services associated with the digital economy have not a similar impact on jobs 
and  income.  Part  of  their  value  is  not  even  paid  for  in  a  market,  as  is  the  case  with  the 
internet or social media. To count these and other intangibles which clearly improve our lives 
and  personal  productivity,  would  only  be  justified  in  an  indicator  of  well-being  but  not  in  a 
GDP  concept  that  aims  to  measure  traded  goods  and  services  that  generate  monetary 
income and consequently, jobs. Robotics is expected to introduce an important new wave of 
innovation,  but  that  will  only  make  the  question  of  jobs  more  complicated,  requiring 
significant and difficult changes in the income redistribution systems of our societies. 
This  secular  stagnation  thesis  and  the  related  declining  real  productivity  also  provide  an 
explanation for the continuously decreasing real equilibrium interest rate. Other contributing 
factors  to  this  phenomenon  are  the  demographic  decline,  greater  income  inequality  and 
lower public investment. 
The  declining  real  equilibrium  interest  rate  cannot  be  ignored  by  monetary  policy  that 
grounds  its  rationale  in  real  variables  and  tries  to  achieve  a  real  rate  that  ensures 
macroeconomic stability with low inflation and a zero output gap. Facing the Great Recession 
and  this  development  of  the  real  equilibrium  rate,  central  banks  had  no  alternative  but  to 
reduce rates until the zero lower bound was attained. 
In  other  words,  the  low  level  of  nominal  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies  before  and 
after the crisis cannot be explained only by the “savings glut” view or by the “shortage of safe 
assets”  theory  which  is  its  mirror  image.  These  views  provide  an  explanation  for  what 
happened to nominal market rates but not to the evolution of the real equilibrium interest rate 
over time. What is more, monetary policy also has a decisive influence on interest rates that 
cannot be explained by the loanable funds theory alone. Short-term market nominal rates are 
directly influenced by monetary policy rates and via expectations of future policy rates, and 
risk premia policy rates also influence medium and long-term market rates. 
This means that monetary policy cannot escape responsibility for the low level of rates before 
the crisis. It must however be acknowledged that central banks were doing so in pursuit of 
their mandates, which exclude assets prices or other aspects of financial stability from their 
primary objectives. In the period of the so-called Great Moderation, they ensured low inflation 
and reasonable growth while the financial system brewed credit booms and instability. The 
fact remains that central banks cannot pursue several objectives with the same instrument 
and that, in order to ensure financial stability, they need to be given regulatory powers of a 
macroprudential nature that can smoothen the financial cycle by controlling leverage of the 
                                                
17  See  Goodhart,  C.,  P.  Pardeshi  and  M.  Pradhan  (2015),  “Workers  vs  pensioners:  the  battle  of  our  time”, 
Prospect Magazine, December. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  credit institutions. What happened before the crisis was a failure of financial regulation and 
supervision  that  did  not  react  to  excessive  leverage,  credit  booms  and  growing  debt, 
believing in the rhetoric of the efficient markets hypothesis that blessed all market practices 
and accepting that the risk management techniques behind securitisation and the “originate 
and distribute model“ were safe and sound. 
In  another  criticism  of  the  “savings  glut”  view  of  the  crisis,  Claudio  Borio  and  Piti  Disyatat 
(2011)18 are correct in pointing out that “a focus on current accounts in the analysis of cross-
border capital flows diverts attention away from the global financing patterns that are at the 
core of financial fragility. By construction, current accounts and net capital flows reveal little 
about financing. They capture changes in net claims on a country arising from trade in real 
goods and services and hence net resource flows. But they exclude the underlying changes 
in  gross  flows  and  their  contributions  to  existing  stocks,  including  all  the  transactions 
involving  only  trade  in  financial  assets,  which  make  up  the  bulk  of  cross-border  financial 
activity.” 
They also underline the importance of monetary policy in determining interest rates and other 
analyses have added to the criticism of the vision that external influences were behind the 
low interest rates that led to various asset price bubbles. Hélène Rey (2013) also indicates 
that “A VAR analysis suggests that one of the determinants of the global financial cycle is 
monetary policy in the centre country, which affects leverage of global banks, capital flows 
and credit growth in the international financial system.”19 
To  sum  up,  there  are  some  good  points  against  the  view  that  the  “savings  glut”  or  “safe 
assets  shortage”  theory,  while  useful  in  understanding  key  aspects  of  the  present  global 
economy  framework,  contain  all  the  truth.  In  particular,  they  fail  to  fully  capture  the 
responsibilities  of  monetary  policy  of the major central  banks.  But  they also fail  to  capture 
their possibilities. 
Possibilities and challenges of monetary policy 
Turning to the challenges of monetary policy, perhaps the most salient issue to refer is that 
monetary policy has gone beyond the lower bound on nominal interest rates and is actually 
into negative territory even though, as there is a floor to negative rates, one can say that this 
has  only  displaced  the  lower  level  further  down.  While  this  monetary  policy  move  is 
unprecedented  in  a  historical  perspective,  it  is  entirely  standard  insofar  as  it  relies  on  the 
traditional interest rate instrument. From a purely monetary policy point of view, it is entirely 
consistent to aim at negative rates when the real interest rate has itself turned negative. 
Speaking  from  the  perspective  of  the  ECB,  negative  rates  have  only  been  applied  to  the 
deposit facility which banks use to credit funds to the central bank at an overnight maturity. 
The main objectives of this measure are twofold: first, to further lower money market rates 
and the longer end of the yield curve via expectations effects; and second, to increase the 
velocity of circulation of excess reserves in the interbank market towards the banks that need 
liquidity to sustain or expand their credit portfolio. The banks with excess liquidity have an 
incentive to pass it on to other institutions or use it to fund new loans. We have had some 
success on both scores and the stimulus to demand has benefited the European and global 
economies. 
Many  market  commentators  link  negative  deposit  facility  rates  mostly  with  exchange  rate 
policy. This interpretation may well be correct in the case of small countries trying to avert the 
                                                
18  See  Borio,  C.  and  P.  Disyatat  (2011)  “Global  imbalances  and  the  financial  crisis:  Link  or  no  link?”,  BIS 
Working Paper No 346. 
19  See Rey, H. (2013) “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence”, 
Kansas FED, Jackson Hole Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  risk  of  excessive  currency  appreciation.  However,  recent  experience  clearly  demonstrates 
that it does not work the same way for larger economies. In spite of the ECB’s and the Bank 
of Japan’s decision to implement negative deposit facility rates, both the euro and the yen 
have been appreciating against the US dollar. There is no inexorable link between the levels 
of  deposit  facility  rates  and  exchange  rates,  as  even  the  possibility  of  some  form  of  carry 
trades  depends  on  the  general  situation  of  risk  aversion.  Additionally,  recent  empirical 
evidence points to a relatively limited pass-through of the exchange rate to the economy20.  
It is, nevertheless, important to recall that there are clear limits to the use of negative deposit 
facility  rates  as  a  policy  instrument.  First,  there  is  always  the  possibility  of  hitting  the  limit 
where the preference for cash withdrawals would set in, even if the threshold seems to be 
significantly distant in view of the costs of cash storage, safety and insurance21. Second, the 
instruments should not push banks to pass on their additional direct costs by turning deposit 
rates negative or increasing lending rates to increase margins. Both developments would be 
problematic for our monetary policy goals. Tier systems that simply pass direct costs at the 
margin can mitigate this concern but cannot dispel it altogether. 
Overall,  broadly  counting  all  the  effects  that  negative  deposit  facility  rates  have  on  banks’ 
profitability, the aggregate result comes up positive for the euro area as a whole. Negative 
money  market  rates  reduce  the  cost  of  funding  for  many  banks,  the  lowering  of  yields  for 
several assets produces capital gains and the support to the recovery reduces impairment 
costs on non-performing loans. 
In  more  general  terms,  there  has  recently  been  quite  some  pushback  against  monetary 
policy in certain quarters, in particular questioning its effectiveness in the present situation. 
More sophisticated critiques focus on the alleged exclusive, short-term effects of monetary 
policy  which  can  only  buy  time  for  other  policies,  presumably  structural  reforms,  to  do  the 
real job. 
The  main  common  idea  behind  these  arguments  is  the  more  general  view  that  monetary 
policy is merely about the short-term with supply policies determining the longer term. This 
separation between the short and long terms is an analytical device, a needed abstraction, to 
build simpler models and theories. However, such distinctions are artificial when we consider 
chronological real time. Monetary policy can stimulate demand and investment and as this 
creates  productive  capacity,  a  link  is  established  with  the  supply-side  and  the  long-term. 
Also,  by  speeding  up  the  closing  of  output  or  unemployment  gaps,  monetary  policy 
influences future  potential  output  and  growth.  By  avoiding  protracted  periods  of recession, 
monetary  policy  helps  avoid  hysteresis22  that  affects  productive  capital  efficiency,  when 
equipment is not timely substituted, or when the quality of human resources deteriorates due 
to periods of long unemployment. Both forms of hysteresis influence the supply-side and the 
long-term potential of the economy. As Keynes wrote “Life and history are made up of short 
runs” which implies that the long run is just a sum of many different short terms. Monetary 
policy cannot be reduced to a short-term gimmick since our economies do not spontaneously 
return quickly to zero output gaps and full employment. 
                                                
20  See Forbes, K., I. Hjortsoe and T. Nenova, (2015), “The shocks matter: improving our estimates of exchange 
rate pass-through”, Bank of England Discussion Paper No 43. 
21  See Cecchetti, S. and K. L. Schoenholtz (2016), “How Low Can They Go?”. 
22  See Blanchard, O. and L. Summers (1986), “Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem”, NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1. and Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers (2015), “Inflation and activity − 
two  explorations  and  their  monetary  policy  implications”,  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking  on  Inflation  and 
Unemployment in Europe, Sintra 2015. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  U.S. and Euro Area Monetary Policy 
After the crisis, monetary policy responded forcefully everywhere, particularly in the U.S. with 
the  early  implementation  of  QE  and  credit  easing  measures.  The  U.S.  recovery  has  been 
stronger than in the euro area and for 2016 buoyant growth was expected, accompanied by 
a gradual normalisation of interest rates. This would have been a vital development for world 
economy and at the same time, an important proof that, even with a restrictive fiscal policy, 
monetary  policy  can  play  a  decisive  role  in  generating  a  meaningful  recovery  and  getting 
firmly away from the LB. This would be a relevant disproval of the more sombre views about 
the world economic system and monetary policy. 
Although  this  possibility  is  still  very  much  alive,  it  has  apparently  been  delayed  by  some 
mixed results since the fourth quarter of 2015. Turmoil in financial markets and the external 
environment  seem  to  have  affected  the  economy.  In  the  blogosphere  and  some  market 
literature, we could see minority views about a possible double dip or significant slowdown 
and market expectations for further rate increases this year became quite weak. Importantly 
Chair Janet Yellen has said recently that while “global financial developments could produce 
a slowing in the economy. I think we want to be careful not to jump to a premature conclusion 
about what is in store for the U.S. economy”. 
So, we can continue to hope that the centre of the world economy will hold and will prove its 
resilience, independently of some external headwinds. 
On  our  side,  the  ECB  has  confronted  the  severe  and  persistent  disinflationary  forces 
affecting the euro area economy with a broad set of measures. In particular since mid-2014, 
we have adopted a range of monetary policy tools that had been unprecedented in scope 
and scale for the euro area. These tools have followed a three-pronged approach: first, they 
have entailed targeted measures to revitalise specific market segments and strengthen bank 
lending,  which  is  a  particularly  relevant  conduit  of  monetary  impulses  in  the  euro  area; 
second,  they  have  effectuated  a  broad-based  easing  of  overall  financial  conditions,  most 
notably through central bank purchases in the large and liquid sovereign debt market and, 
third, they included cuts in the main ECB interest rates, including by taking the deposit facility 
rate to negative territory. 
Given  that  monetary  policy  takes  time  to  transmit  to  the  real  economy,  the  full  effects  of 
these  measures  on  macroeconomic  conditions  have  yet  to  fully  materialise.  However,  the 
adjustment  in  financing  conditions,  via  which  monetary  policy  transmission  operates, 
provides encouraging signals. For instance, since June 2014, the GDP-weighted average of 
euro area 10-year sovereign bond yields has fallen by more than 130 basis points and bank 
lending  rates  to  euro  area  companies  by  about  95  basis  points.  The  lion’s  share  of  these 
declines can be directly attributed to the monetary policy measures that the ECB has taken 
since then. 
Our measures have also helped arrest the contraction of loans to companies, which have, in 
fact, started to grow again and are granted at more favourable conditions. As a result, also 
fewer SMEs report that credit is a limiting factor for their businesses. 
Ultimately, what matters for the assessment of our measures is whether they contribute to a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation. Applying a large and diverse set of models to 
account  for  the  uncertainties  surrounding  such  analysis,  ECB  staff  estimate  a  substantial 
effect of our measures on growth and inflation. In the absence of these measures, inflation 
would have been negative in 2015 and would be projected to remain in negative territory also 
this year. Regarding growth, two thirds of one percent of the registered growth in the past 
two  years  can  be  attributed  to  our  monetary  policy.  We  will  continue  to  do  whatever  is 
necessary, in accordance with our mandate, to bring the euro area inflation rate close to our 
objective. 
From  a global  perspective,  monetary  policy  measures that strengthen  the  resilience  of the 
domestic recovery do not amount to a zero-sum game, in which different jurisdictions merely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  aim to debase their currencies vis-à-vis each other. In fact, monetary policy accommodation, 
by improving domestic credit conditions and stimulating nominal spending, creates additional 
global demand, rather than just leading to demand-switching from one economy to the other 
– as some observers have suggested. 
Vice  versa,  a  large  literature  has  reported  a  decline  in  the  exchange  rate  pass-through  to 
inflation,  suggesting  that  the  relative  role  of  this  channel  is  likely  to  have  become  less 
relevant in the quest to reflate the domestic economies.23 
Moreover, as evidence by Kristin Forbes and colleagues for the U.K. economy shows, there 
are  indications  that  exchange  rate  fluctuations  originating  from  monetary  policy  shocks 
display a relatively limited pass-through to consumer prices.24 
Notwithstanding  a  forceful  response,  monetary  policy  can  only  be  one  element  of  an 
encompassing policy mix. Other policy domains, both at national and European level, have to 
step up to their responsibilities to transform the prevailing uncertainty into a positive scenario. 
I  refer,  naturally,  to  a  full  use  of  any  existent  fiscal  space,  especially  for  infrastructure 
expenditures;  to  the  continuation  of  structural  reforms  to  improve  the  business  climate, 
educational  levels,  judicial  system  efficiency  and  product  market  competition,  especially  in 
services;  and finally,  to  institutional  progress  at European  level.  This  refers  in  particular to 
completing  banking  union  and  taking  the  first  steps  of  fiscal  union,  thus  proving  the 
willingness of Member States to create better conditions for the successful functioning of a 
monetary union that can deliver stability and prosperity. 
Thank you for your attention 
This is the full text of a speech delivered in abridged form at Bard College on 13 April. 
References 
Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit” 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve 
Board March 2005. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2007),  “Global  Imbalances:  Recent  Developments  and  Prospects”,  at  the 
Bundesbank Lecture, Berlin, Germany. 
Bernanke, B. (2010), “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble”, at the Annual Meeting of 
the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia. 
Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  Unemployment 
Problem”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1. 
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers (2015), “Inflation and activity − two explorations 
and  their  monetary  policy  implications”,  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking  on  inflation  and 
unemployment in Europe, Sintra 2015. 
Bordon, A.R., C. Ebeke, and K. Shirono (2016), “When Do Structural Reforms Work? On the 
Role of the Business Cycle and Macroeconomic Policies” IMF Working Paper No 16/62. 
Borio, C. and P. Disyatat (2011), “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: Link or no link?” 
BIS Working Paper No 346. 
                                                
23  See ECB (2015), “The International Role of the Euro”. 
24  See Forbes, K., I. Hjortsoe and T. Nenova, (2015), “The shocks matter: improving our estimates of exchange 
rate pass-through”, Bank of England Discussion Paper No 43. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (2016), 
“How  Low  Can  They  Go?”, 
Caballero, R.J., E. Farhi and P-O. Gourinchas (2008), “An Equilibrium Model of “Global 
Imbalances  and  Low  Interest  Rates”,  American  Economic  Review,  March  2008,  98  (1), 
358–93. 
Caballero, R.J., E. Farhi, P-O. Gourinchas (2015), “Global imbalances and currency wars at 
the ZLB”, NBER Working Paper No 21670, October 2015. 
Caballero,  R.J.  and  E.  Farhi  (2015),  “The  Safety  Trap”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No  19927, 
February 2015. 
Carney,  M.  (2016),  “Redeeming  an  unforgiving  world”,  speech  given  at  the  8th  Annual 
Institute of International Finance G20 conference, Shanghai 26 February 2016. 
Cecchetti,  S.  and  K.  L.  Schoenholtz 
http://www.moneyandbanking.com/commentary/2016/2/28/how-low-can-they-go. 
Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum and S. Rebelo (2011), “When Is the Government Spending 
Multiplier Large?”, Journal of Political Economy, 2011, 119 (1), 78 – 121. 
Cook, D. and M.B. Devereux (2014), “Exchange rate flexibility under the zero lower bound,” 
Globalization and Monetary”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 10202, October 2014. 
Cook, D. and M.B. Devereux (2013), “Sharing the Burden: Monetary and Fiscal Responses 
to a World Liquidity Trap”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, July 2013, 5 (3), 
190–228. 
Devereux,  M.B.  and  J.  Yetman  (2014),  “Capital  Controls,  Global  Liquidity  Traps,  and  the 
International Policy Trilemma” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 01 2014, 116 (1), 158–189. 
ECB (2015), “The International Role of the Euro”. 
Eggertsson,  G.B.  and  N.R.  Mehrotra  (2014),  “A  Model  of  Secular  Stagnation”,  NBER 
Working Paper No 20574, October 2014. 
Eggertsson, G.B. and P. Krugman (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A 
Fisher-Minsky-Koo  Approach”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  2012,  127  (3), 
1469–1513. 
Eggertsson,  G.B.,  A.  Ferrero,  and  A.  Raffo  (2014),  “Can  structural  reforms  help  Europe?”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol 61, 2–22, January 2014. 
Eggertsson,  G.B.,  N.R.  Mehrotra,  S.  Singh  and  L.  Summers  (2015),  “Contagious  Malady? 
Global Dimensions of Secular Stagnation”, Working Paper, Brown University 2015. 
Forbes, K., I. Hjortsoe and T. Nenova (2015), “The shocks matter: improving our estimates of 
exchange rate pass-through”, Bank of England Discussion Paper No 43. 
Goodhart, C., P. Pardeshi and M. Pradhan (2015), “Workers vs pensioners: the battle of our 
time”, Prospect Magazine, December. 
Gordon, R.J. (2016), “The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living 
since the Civil War”, Princeton U.P. 
Minsky,  H.P.  (1994),  “The  debt-deflation  theory  of  great  recessions”,  Hyman  P.  Minsky 
Archive Paper 159. 
Minsky,  H.P.  (1996),  “Uncertainty  and  the  institutional  structure  of  capitalist  economies”, 
Hyman P. Minsky Archive Paper 24. 
Mokyr, J. (2013), “Is technological progress a thing of the past?”, VoxEU article, 8 September 
2013; Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), “The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, 
and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies”, W.W. Norton. 
Rey,  H.  (2013),  “Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy 
Independence”, Kansas FED, Jackson Hole Conference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  Summers,  L.  (2016),  “The  age  of  secular  stagnation:  what  it  is  and  what  to  do  about  it”, 
Foreign Affairs March/April 2016 issue. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.,  “Escaping  from  a  Liquidity  Trap  and  Deflation:  The  Foolproof  Way  and 
Others”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2003, 17 (4), 145–166. 
Yu,  Q.,  H.  Fan  and  X.  Wu  (2015),  “Global  Saving  Glut,  Monetary  Policy,  and  Housing 
Bubble: Further Evidence“, Brookings Research Papers, July 2015. 
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
