  Eddie Yue: Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s work on market 
development 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  2nd  Asia  Treasury  and  Trade  Summit  2016  “Treasury  Re-imagined”, 
organized by The Asset, Hong Kong, 11 May 2016. 
 Daniel (Yu), distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen: 
1. 
Good  morning.  I  would  like  to  thank  The  Asset  for  hosting  its  Asia  Treasury  and 
Trade Summit in Hong Kong again. And, it is my great pleasure to welcome all of 
you to this event, in particular those who have travelled from overseas. As CFOs 
and treasurers, you are important users of Hong Kong’s financial services. Over the 
years, we have listened to and  worked with many of you, not just to better serve 
your  business  needs,  but  also  as  partners  to  help  develop  Hong  Kong  as  an 
international financial centre. Let me therefore start this morning by sharing with you 
a  few  examples  of  the  HKMA’s  work  on  market  development.  Some  of  you  here 
today may have heard these facts before, so apologies for that, but we like to repeat 
the good news whenever we can! 
Development of Hong Kong as IFC 
2. 
facilitating 
liquidity  management  and  building  a 
First,  the  promotion  of  renminbi  business.  And,  I’m  delighted  to  see  that 
discussion of the renminbi “as a treasury currency” is high on your Summit agenda 
today! Indeed, Hong Kong is the largest global offshore renminbi business hub, with 
a liquidity pool of close to RMB900 billion, the largest outside Mainland China. Hong 
Kong also boasts a vibrant offshore renminbi bond market, again, the largest outside 
Mainland  China,  with  some  RMB340  billion  bonds  outstanding.  More  than  200 
banks from all over the world are using our renminbi clearing platform to conduct a 
wide range of business activities. The goal of the HKMA, among other things, is to 
promote  offshore  renminbi  business  development  through  securing  the  necessary 
policy  headroom, 
robust 
infrastructure for conducting the business. 
To  make  this  possible,  we  have  put  in  place  a  RMB400  billion  currency  swap 
agreement with the People’s Bank of China, which can be activated when market 
conditions warrant. We have also made available renminbi liquidity facilities to banks 
in  Hong  Kong,  in  the  form  of  an  intraday  repo  facility  of  RMB10  billion,  and  a 
bilateral repo line of RMB2 billion with each of the seven Primary Liquidity Providers. 
In  terms  of  our  renminbi  real  time  gross  settlement  system,  currently  around 
RMB800 billion worth of transactions go through the system every day. So, you can 
see clearly why we have sought to further develop renminbi business. 
Secondly, the promotion of asset management. We want to attract Mainland and 
overseas  asset  managers  to  Hong  Kong.  We  have  made  numerous  trips  to  the 
Mainland and overseas to meet with asset managers, often on a one-on-one basis, 
to explain to them the benefits of establishing in Hong Kong. And, our work is paying 
off. By the end of 2014, the combined fund management business here reached a 
record  high  of  US$2.3  trillion,  an  increase  of  more  than  10%  over  2013.  Today, 
there  are  more  than  1,150  licensed  asset  management  companies  operating  in 
Hong  Kong;  and,  more  than  60  out  of  the  top  100  global  money  managers  have 
operations here. I think these are quite impressive statistics and reflect well on our 
status as an international financial centre. 
3. 
4. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
• 
  9. 
 
 
Thirdly, the promotion of private equity funds. The HKMA proposed, and then 
worked  with  the  Government,  to  extend  the  exemption  on  profits  tax  to  offshore 
private  equity  funds.  The  legislation,  which  was  passed  last  year,  enables  the 
operating  structure  of  private  equity  funds  to  be  streamlined,  and  also  broadens 
private  equity  managers’  ability  to  conduct  asset  management  activities  in  Hong 
Kong. This is attracting more private equity firms to set up or expand their business 
here. 
Fourthly, the promotion of Islamic finance. Legislation  was enacted in 2013 to 
provide a level playing field in terms of tax for sukuk vis-à-vis conventional bonds. 
Two sukuk were successfully launched by the Government in 2014 and 2015 using 
two different structures of ijarah and wakalah. We hope their success will have the 
effect of attracting more entities to issue sukuk in Hong Kong. Up till now, 10 global 
sukuk  (including  the  two  government  ones  I  mentioned)  have  been  listed  on  the 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 
These are just some of the examples of our work on market development. Although 
there is one other important initiative I would like to mention here – our recent work 
to establish IFFO, or to give its title in full, the Infrastructure Financing Facilitation 
Office. As you are no doubt aware, the need for infrastructure financing is huge. The 
Asian Development Bank puts the overall infrastructure investment needs of Asia at 
US$8  trillion  over  the  2010–2020  period.  And,  with  the  Mainland  authorities 
implementing the “Belt and Road” strategy to enhance connectivity within the region 
through increased infrastructure investments, there is likely to be  an even greater 
financing  requirement.  As  such,  Hong  Kong  is  well  positioned  to  develop  into  a 
major financing hub for investments in this field. 
Indeed, the establishment of IFFO has three main objectives: 
building a cluster of key stakeholders in infrastructure financing, including equity and 
debt investors, project sponsors and developers, professional advisors, and relevant 
agencies from the “Belt and Road” countries; 
providing  a  platform  for  information  exchange,  experience  sharing  and  capacity 
building on infrastructure financing among the cluster members; and 
promoting Hong Kong as a major platform for Belt and Road infrastructure project 
sourcing, financing and fund management, leveraging on our role as an international 
financial centre. 
The HKMA is now in the process of setting up IFFO and the response, to date, has 
been  most  encouraging.  In-principle  support  has  been  received  from  the  Asian 
Infrastructure Investment Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the International 
Finance Corporation under the World Bank Group. And others have also indicated 
an interest. IFFO will be launched in July and we look forward to sharing with you 
more information about its work. 
Corporate Treasury Management 
10. 
I would now like to turn to issues of more immediate concern to you in your treasury 
management  roles,  and  to  share  a  few  factors  which  I  believe  are  shaping  your 
business: 
First,  the  continuing  liberalisation  of  the  Mainland’s  capital  account.  As  I 
mentioned earlier, the Mainland authorities have continued to implement measures 
to  liberalise  cross-border  fund  flows.  I  am  sure  many  of  you  are  familiar  with  the 
progress,  but  let  me  just  quickly  name  a  few  key  measures  introduced  in  recent 
years: 
11. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
 The Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect has been in place and operating smoothly 
since November 2014, allowing international investors access to the A-shares listed 
in Shanghai through the stock exchange in Hong Kong, and vice versa. 
The Mainland-Hong Kong Mutual Recognition of Funds scheme was implemented in 
July 2015, allowing Mainland and Hong Kong funds to be distributed in each other’s 
markets through a streamlined approval process. 
The  QFII  arrangement  was  refined  in  February  this  year  by  relaxing  individual 
quotas and shortening the investment lock-up period, among other improvements. 
The People’s Bank of China announced in February a widening of the access to the 
China  Interbank  Bond  Market  to  a  broad  range  of  foreign  financial  institutions 
without any quota restrictions. 
And,  earlier  this  month,  the  Bank  announced  that  it  would  extend  nationwide  the 
pilot  measure  for  cross-border  financing  by  Mainland  corporates  and  financial 
institutions, with the result that case-by-case pre-approval is no longer required. 
These  initiatives  demonstrate  the  central  government’s  commitment  to  liberalising 
the Mainland’s capital accounts. They also present CFOs and treasurers with new 
opportunities to meet their business and investment needs. And, there will be more 
to come. Premier Li Keqiang has said the Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect will 
be launched later this year. 
Secondly,  the  “China  connection”  is  growing  rapidly.  Let  me  briefly  explain 
what I mean by this: in 2014, China’s ODI amounted to US$123 billion, 10 times the 
amount in 2005. This number will be even bigger in the years to come as Chinese 
corporates  go  global,  and  as  the  implementation  of  the  “Belt  and  Road”  strategy 
helps  more  Chinese  corporates  to  invest  in  these  countries.  At  the  same  time, 
multinational corporates are paying more and more business attention to China. In 
2015, FDI into China reached US$126 billion, compared to US$72 billion in 2005. 
The  point  here  is  that  with  more  business  opportunities,  either  because  Chinese 
corporates  are  “going  out”  or  multinational  corporates  are  expanding  into  China, 
comes the need for more sophisticated treasury management. 
Thirdly,  while  corporates  find  more  business  opportunities,  they  also  face 
even  more  challenges  which  you,  as  corporate  treasurers,  are  probably  well 
familiar with. For example, increasing market risks,  where corporates operating in 
multiple  countries  are  faced  with  growing  exposures  to  different  currencies  and 
rates. In fact, divergent monetary policies among key advanced economies have led 
to greater volatility in the global foreign exchange market. And, with the international 
use of the renminbi on the rise, the reform of the yuan’s exchange rate since August 
2015 has also resulted in more two-way movements of the exchange rate against 
other currencies. These recent developments have created more market risks. 
Lastly,  global  regulatory  reforms  have  also  had  an  impact  on  corporate 
treasury management. These reforms, particularly the higher capital and liquidity 
requirements  under  Basel  III,  have  led  to  more  constraints  on  global  banks  in 
providing funding and making a market for hedging tools for corporates. As such, 
there is an undesirable impact on corporate treasurers in terms of financing cost and 
asset and liability management. 
Benefits of CTCs 
16. 
Corporates need smarter solutions to address these opportunities and challenges. 
There  has  been  a  greater  call  for  corporates  to  set  up  more  structured  regional 
corporate  treasury  centres,  CTCs  in  short.  Many  market  participants  have 
considered CTCs useful for a number of reasons: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
     17. 
 one,  through  centralising  treasury  activities,  CTCs  help  effectively  translate 
management’s  vision  into  firm-wide  policies,  such  as  preferences  on  operating 
currencies, hedging and day-to-day transactions; 
two, CTCs help lower funding costs through the optimal use of intra-group funding 
and netting, as well as external financing; make more co-ordinated use of corporate 
balance sheets, and; enable corporates to more effectively tap capital markets for 
longer term funding; 
three, they help optimise working capital positions and facilitate daily sales through 
customised  transactional  arrangements.  And  by  concentrating  excess  liquidity  in 
CTCs, senior management can achieve better visibility and control over their cash 
and reduce frauds; and 
four,  they  act  as  corporate  centres  to  consolidate  various  foreign  exchange  and 
interest rate exposures and allow centralised hedging on net positions. Therefore, 
corporates  can  eliminate  redundant  procedures  to  reduce  associated  costs  and 
enhance efficiencies. 
In  addition,  more  and  more  corporates  are  adopting  technologies,  such  as  the 
“Enterprise  Resource  Planning”  System  and  the  “Treasury  Management  System”, 
which  enable  them  to  improve  control  over  local  subsidiaries’  activities  and 
standardise treasury operations. All in all, CTCs can play the critical role of an in-
house  bank  within  a  multinational  corporation  and  a  function  that  multinationals 
should develop in tandem with their global expansion plans. 
Hong Kong as a preferred CTC location 
18. 
At  the  HKMA,  we  have  set  a  goal  to  promote  the  growth  of  CTCs  in  Hong  Kong 
because their activities, such as foreign exchange and rate hedging, financing, and 
cash management, will help deepen our capital markets and create additional users 
of our financial and professional services industries. As you know, in many cases 
multinational corporates will co-locate their CTCs with their regional headquarters. 
By attracting more CTCs to Hong Kong, we hope this will hasten the process and 
further consolidate our status as an international financial centre. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  Hong  Kong  already  provides  a  conducive  environment  in 
which CTCs can operate, but we are doing more, particularly on the all-important tax 
front.  Through  the  work  done  by  the  Inland  Revenue  Department,  Hong  Kong’s 
Comprehensive  Double  Tax  Agreements  network  has  expanded  from  just  five  in 
2009  to  currently  35  agreements.  These  DTAs  are  important  to  multinational 
corporates as they help reduce the withholding tax rate on interests of cross-border 
loans. The Government has also announced major changes to the tax regime that 
will make Hong Kong an even more attractive destination for setting up CTCs. 
With the changes, the interest deduction rules under the Inland Revenue Ordinance 
will be amended so that interest expenses arising from genuine cross-border intra-
group  financing  activities,  under  specified  conditions,  will  be  deductible.  This  will 
lower the overall tax cost and resolve the “tax asymmetry” issue currently perceived 
by some MNCs as an impediment to their establishing or expanding CTC operations 
in Hong Kong. Corporates which used to solely rely on external financing can now 
explore  the  additional  option  of  internal  funding  through  their  CTC  setup  in  Hong 
Kong. 
And, the qualifying profits derived from corporate treasury activities and transactions 
conducted  by  qualifying  CTCs  will  benefit  from  a  half-rate  concession.  In  other 
words, the applicable tax rate will be cut from the current 16.5% to 8.25%. Broadly 
speaking,  the  scope  of  this  concession  encompasses  corporate  finance,  liquidity 
19. 
20. 
21. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 22. 
 
 
management and risk management activities typically conducted by CTCs for their 
non-Hong Kong associated corporations. The concessionary tax rate at 8.25% will 
be among the most competitive in the region and can be obtained through simple 
election  as  part  of  a  corporation’s  tax filing  process.  In  other  words,  no separate, 
complicated approval process will be involved. 
And, I’m delighted to say the relevant bill to give effect to these changes is now with 
the Legislative Council and the Government hopes to have the bill passed by the 
middle of the year. 
Closing 
23. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  looking  at  today’s  programme,  I  note  that  many  of  the 
themes  I  have  mentioned  will  be  addressed  by  treasury  professionals  in  greater 
depth.  I  hope  the  upcoming  sessions  will 
ideas  for  treasury 
management, and I wish you all a very successful conference. Thank you. 
inspire  new 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
