  Andreas Dombret: In and out, up and down – the future of Europe 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the German Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Tokyo, 15 June 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to be with the German Chamber in Tokyo. Thank you for inviting 
me back. 
In my remarks today I would like to take a closer look at European issues. Starting with the 
economic outlook for the euro area and Germany, I will then touch on the topic of monetary 
policy. After that, I will discuss how the European monetary union can be made more stable 
in the future. 
The  most  exciting  event  in  Europe  this  month  is,  without  doubt,  the  European  football 
tournament.  But  there  is  also  a  political  issue  which  will  also  be  thrilling.  It  is  the  UK 
referendum on 23 June, in  which Britain  will decide whether it  will remain in the European 
Union or go it alone. 
If  the  UK  were  to  exit  the  EU,  Germany  would  lose  a  close  ally  that  shares  its  market-
oriented  economic  view.  Indeed,  I  am  in  no  doubt  that  the  European  Union  has  benefited 
from having the UK as a member. The EU is stronger today because of Britain’s contribution 
to  it.  And  the  European  economy  is  more  open  and  more  dynamic  as  a  result  of  Britain’s 
commitment to open and flexible markets – a position which is very much in tune with the 
Bundesbank’s, I might add. 
But  not  just  that:  A  Brexit  might  also  sway  public  opinion  across  the  EU  on  European 
integration  and  add  fuel  to  the  current  sentiment  that  is  opposed  to  deepening  the  Union. 
And in this regard, the mere fact that a Brexit is even being debated might itself cause some 
damage. 
It is clear to me, however, that the risk of a Brexit is weighing primarily on the UK economy 
and  only  to  some  extent  on  the  rest  of the  EU. While  projections  assessing  the  economic 
impact of Brexit are fraught with uncertainty, I would agree with the bulk of economists who 
say that UK membership is fruitful for both the UK and the rest of the Union. That being said, 
a “leave” vote next week would also take its toll on the prospects for the economy in the euro 
area. 
In its most recent World Economic Outlook, the International Monetary Fund argues that a 
Brexit has the potential to do “severe regional and global damage by disrupting established 
trading  relationships”.  And  I  agree  with  the  IMF  when  it  writes:  “Negotiations  on  post-exit 
arrangements  would  likely  be  protracted,  resulting  in  an  extended  period  of  heightened 
uncertainty that could weigh heavily on confidence and investment, all the while increasing 
financial market volatility.” To keep such risks in check, it would be important – were Britain 
to  vote  to  leave  –  for  the  UK  and  the  rest  of  the  Union  to  proceed  quickly,  and  without 
animosity,  to  a  constructive  discussion  framing  their  future  relationship.  Introducing  trade 
barriers can certainly not be in the interest of either party. 
Economic outlook: Between recovery and new challenges 
2. 
On that note, let me now turn to the state of the economy in the euro area and in Germany. 
Having  got  off to quite a  good  start  in  2016, the  euro  area  economy  is  expected  to  see  a 
resilient,  ongoing  recovery,  supported  by  low  energy  prices  and  the  accommodative 
monetary policy stance. The latest Eurosystem macroeconomic staff projections predict that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  real GDP will grow by 1.6 % in 2016 and by 1.7 % in both 2017 and 2018. This means that 
aggregate economic capacity utilisation in the euro area as a whole may get close to normal 
levels by the end of the projection horizon. 
Germany’s economy, meanwhile, experienced a strong surge in growth in the first quarter of 
2016. Real GDP was up 0.7 %. Aggregate capacity utilisation climbed to a multi-year high, 
boosting  the  willingness  of  German  corporates  to  step  up  their  investment  again.  Private 
consumption  and  buoyant  construction  activity  were  the  main  forces  driving  economic 
growth, but, in contrast to the end of last year, renewed stimulus was coming from exports 
and foreign investment as well. 
While  the  economists  of  the  Bundesbank  expected  the  German  economy  to  lose  some 
traction in spring, the solid underlying cyclical trend will probably remain intact. According to 
our June 2016 economic forecast, the German economy is predicted to expand by 1.7 % this 
year,  by  1.4 %  next  year  and  by  1.6 %  in  2018.  Adjusting for the  number  of  working  days 
makes the growth rates even more uniform, and they are higher than the estimated increase 
in potential output, which is running at about 1.4 % per year. The utilisation rate is therefore 
continuing to rise, and it is expected to be significantly up on the long-term average at the 
end of the projection horizon. 
However,  unlike  the  short  to  medium-term  economic  outlook,  the  longer-term  growth 
expectations  for  the  German  economy  are  not  only  rosy.  We  shouldn’t  let  the  upbeat 
projections for the next few years lull us into a false sense of security. Germany’s long-run 
outlook, like Japan’s, is also being clouded by demographic developments and their negative 
implications for potential growth. So if we want to keep our economies wealthy, we will need 
to  address  the  root  causes  of  declining  prosperity  and  implement  growth-enhancing 
measures. 
The huge influx of refugees to Germany, which peaked last autumn, may dampen the impact 
of  demographics  to  some  extent,  as  refugees  generally  tend  to  be  younger  than  the 
population at large. However, to limit the burden surrounding the current wave of migration, it 
is the precondition that the new arrivals integrate smoothly into the labour market. 
Options and Limits of Monetary Policy 
3. 
Monetary policy cannot increase potential growth – that’s for sure. Its effect on real economic 
activity is limited and temporary. So the most important contribution monetary policymakers 
can make to growth is to guarantee low and stable inflation. 
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  currently  very  low  –  too  low,  monetary  policymakers  say. 
According to its definition of price stability, the ECB Governing Council aims to keep inflation 
rates below, but close to, 2 % over the medium term. 
However, the last time euro-area inflation was close to 2 % was in early 2013. It has been 
following  a  downward  trajectory  ever  since,  and  over  the  past  18  months  it  has  been 
hovering around zero. 
The sharp fall in energy prices is the main reason why inflation in the euro area has been in 
the doldrums over the last 1½ years. Its effect on headline inflation is usually only short-lived, 
however. 
But the decline in energy prices isn’t the only thing that is pinning down inflation. Domestic 
price  pressures  as  measured  by  the  core  inflation  rate,  which  is  the  inflation  rate  with  the 
most  volatile  components  like  energy  and  food  stripped  out,  is  also  low.  And  if  inflation  is 
persistently  weak, it becomes a headache for monetary policymakers. For if inflation stays 
too low for too long, there is a mounting risk of de-anchoring inflation expectations. Lower 
inflation expectations can ultimately translate into weaker wage growth, diminishing domestic 
price  pressures  further  still.  If  such  second-round  effects  occur,  that  makes  it  even  more 
difficult to maintain price stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Against this background, an accommodative monetary policy stance is certainly justified for 
the  time  being.  Currently,  deflation  seems  less  probable  than  ever.  And  let  me  also 
emphasise that there is no evidence of second-round effects so far. According to the latest 
Eurosystem staff projections, inflation is expected to rise again, to 1.3 % in 2017 – driven to a 
large extent by upward base effects in the energy component –, and to 1.6 % in 2018. 
That  being  said,  this  is  why  the  Governing  Council  decided  on  no  further  measures  at  its 
latest  meeting,  all  the  more  so  as  a  comprehensive  set  of  measures  was  adopted  only 
recently in March. That set of measures included, amongst others, lowering policy rates and 
upping the volume of monthly asset purchases. Only now are some of these measures being 
implemented.  As  of  June,  the  Eurosystem  has  started  purchasing  bonds  of  non-financial 
corporations,  and  on  22 June  the  first  operation  in  a  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations will be conducted. 
The Bundesbank has repeatedly stated that purchases of euro-area government bonds are 
not “just another” monetary policy instrument. Central bank purchases of government bonds 
make  for  a  dangerous  combination  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  The  central  banks  are 
becoming  the  euro-area  countries’  biggest  creditors.  For  a  significant  share  of  sovereign 
debt, government financing costs have become decoupled from capital market conditions. If 
governments become accustomed to the favourable funding terms and don’t use this time to 
reduce their large accumulation of debt, this may later put pressure on the central banks to 
put off tightening the monetary reins until a later date for the sake of their country’s public 
finances. 
I am also aware of the fact that many savers are frustrated by the low interest rates. And of 
course, these concerns are perfectly understandable. Their safe investments are providing 
them with either very little or no return at the moment. If you factor the inflation rate into the 
equation, however, the situation does not seem quite so bad. At present, the inflation rate is 
so low that the real interest rate on savings deposits is above zero. This means it is currently 
still higher than it was in the 1970s. To take another example, between 2011 and 2014, the 
real interest rate was actually negative. 
Of course, monetary policy has contributed to the unusually low  level of long-term interest 
rates. Not only the forward guidance, but also the purchase of long-term bonds – issued by 
sovereigns, banks or enterprises – aimed at lowering long-term rates. But long-term interest 
rates  are  not  only  determined  by  monetary  policymakers.  They  are  also  a  reflection  of 
nominal growth expectations, and if potential growth is slowing, it has a depressing impact on 
the real rate of return. Making our economies more prosperous would therefore pave the way 
for  higher  real  interest  rates.  There  are  plenty  of  growth-enhancing  measures  –  like 
strengthening competition in product markets or making labour markets more flexible – and 
all of these measures go beyond the central bank’s sphere of influence. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  the  central  bank  doesn’t  care  about  the  plight  of  savers.  Quite  the 
opposite, in fact – monetary policymakers protect savings from devaluation through inflation, 
in part by deciding on an appropriate monetary policy stance while remaining independent. 
Over the long term, this is also in the best interests of savers. But we shouldn’t forget that 
citizens are not just savers. They are also taxpayers, workers and borrowers – and from this 
perspective, low interest rates are not always a bad thing. 
It  is  also  true,  however,  that  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  entails  risks  and  side-
effects, and these will continue to grow the longer money remains cheap. Therefore, the low-
interest-rate  policy  must  not  prevail  for  any  longer  than  is  absolutely  necessary  from  the 
perspective of price stability. 
There is a risk, for example, that politicians will start to rest on their laurels because of the 
short-term  stimulus  provided  by  this  accommodative  monetary  policy.  Although  a  central 
bank may  be  able  to  temporarily  even  out  weak  demand  in  the  short  run,  it  is  not  able  to 
permanently  raise 
the  repeated 
deterioration in global growth prospects suggests that when it comes to the slowdown in the 
longer-term  growth 
trend.  However, 
its  economy’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  global  economy,  we  are  actually  dealing  more  with  supply-side  rather  than  demand-side 
problems. And there is little that monetary policy can do about these. 
Monetary Policy is no Panacea: Reforming European monetary union 
4. 
The  recent  monetary  policy  measures  are geared  to  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro 
area as a whole. Unconventional in nature though these measures may be, they should not 
be seen as crisis measures like those taken in the wake of the Lehman Brothers collapse, or 
after  the  euro-area  crisis  erupted.  That  being  said,  weak  economic  conditions  and  low 
domestic inflationary pressure are also, to some extent, an outcome of the euro area crisis. 
This crisis, which is actually a combination of at least three kinds of crisis – a sovereign debt 
crisis,  a  banking  crisis  and  a  balance  of  payments  crisis  –  has  been  troubling  European 
policymakers  for  more  than  six  years  now.  Solidarity  among  governments  combined  with 
bold  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  measures  helped  to  contain  the  crisis  and  prevent  it  from 
escalating. 
However, some of those measures have thrown the balance between action and liability out 
of  kilter.  While  fiscal  policy  has  essentially  remained  a  national  domain,  liability  has 
increasingly been transferred to the European level. In that state, however, monetary union 
becomes inherently unstable because the incentives are not aligned. The balance between 
action and liability therefore has to be restored if EMU is to regain a more stable footing. But 
how can this be done? 
In theory, two options are viable. The first would imply a more centralised EMU design with 
formalised elements of common liability. Such a great leap in European integration towards a 
fiscal  union  would,  however,  mean  constraining  national  sovereignty  in  fiscal  affairs  and 
transferring  the  respective  control  rights  to  the  Union  level.  Such  an  initiative  would  need 
sufficient political backing and – in some countries – electoral approval. To be honest, I doubt 
this to be a realistic endeavour in the foreseeable future. 
The second option for realigning responsibility and control would be endorsing the original 
framework  of  the  European  monetary  union,  but  fixing  the  shortcomings  exposed  by  the 
crisis.  The  original  framework,  which  was  agreed  in  the  Dutch  city  of  Maastricht  nearly 
25 years ago, can be described in a nutshell as follows: Shared responsibility for monetary 
policy; national responsibility for fiscal and economic policymaking. 
Important precautions were put in place to prevent unsound fiscal policies from damaging the 
stability  of  the  single  currency.  Those  were  the  “no-bail  out”  clause,  the  ban  on  monetary 
financing and the deficit rules specified in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The  problem  is  that  these  arrangements  failed  to  prevent  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  from 
erupting, and, unfortunately, market discipline did not help, either. The “no-bail out” clause, 
which prohibits a member state from assuming liability for another one’s debts, was expected 
to enhance market discipline. But as it turned out, it simply wasn’t credible enough. At least, 
markets  did  not  adequately  price  in  the  risk  of  sovereign  insolvency.  What  is  more,  the 
preferential treatment of sovereign borrowers encouraged banks to step up their lending to 
governments. That ultimately paved the way for the disastrous sovereign-bank nexus. As the 
crisis  unfolded,  many  banks,  notably  in  the  euro-area  periphery,  raised  their  exposures  to 
domestic government bonds. By doing so, they tied their fate even more closely to that of 
their national governments and made it almost impossible to restructure public debt. 
Making  the  “no-bail  out”  clause  more  credible  is  therefore  key  when  it  comes  to 
strengthening  a  decentralised  EMU  design.  What  we  need,  then,  is  a  procedure  for 
restructuring  debt  in  an  orderly  manner.  This  is  where  the  Bundesbank  has  proposed  an 
automatic maturity extension for all bonds, which would be activated whenever a government 
applies  for  fiscal  support  from  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  Automatically 
extending  maturities  would  allow  the  sovereign  in  question  to  tackle  its  fiscal  challenges 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  while preventing investors from bolting. If it turns out that the ailing country really is insolvent, 
legacy creditors could then be held liable. 
Clearly, achieving a stable monetary union with a decentralised design is not an easy task, 
but it can be done if politicians are willing to implement the institutional reforms needed to 
strengthen individual responsibility. 
Another  project  which  will  reduce  fragmentation  is  the  capital  markets  union,  which  is 
currently in the making. Creating a single market for capital across all 28 EU member states 
by removing barriers to cross-border investment will make a key contribution to improving the 
absorption of macroeconomic shocks and lessening the impact of heterogeneous economic 
developments.  The  creation  of  a  capital  markets  union  could  stimulate  growth  in  the 
European  Union  substantially.  Not  just  that:  it  could  also  boost  the  stability  of  European 
monetary  union.  Integrated  capital  markets  foster  private  risk  sharing,  which  is  a  far  more 
important shock absorber than public risk sharing. Since equity has a much greater capacity 
to  absorb  shocks  than  debt,  fostering  equity  markets  should  be  the  particular  aim  of  the 
capital markets union. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Let me conclude. 
During my speech I pointed out several pivotal decisions that lie ahead for Europe. 
In the next week, we face the challenge that the next step in the EU’s history may well be not 
one of union, but one of separation. Although it is neither the time nor the place to enter into 
this political debate, I really hope that the majority of the UK electorate will share our view 
that most of the current challenges Europe is faced with need a European and not a national 
answer. 
I am confident about the prospects for the euro-area economy, since the moderate recovery 
remains intact – being supported not least by the monetary policy of the ECB. Eight years on, 
euro area GDP has finally recouped the losses it sustained in the crisis. 
However, on a disaggregated level, the picture is still mixed. Some European countries are 
continuing to feel the after-effects of the crisis. The German economy, by contrast, has made 
a brisk recovery, and its prospects for the next two to three years are upbeat. That, however, 
is no reason to be complacent. The long-term growth outlook for Germany is clouded also by 
adverse developments like the demographic impact of an ageing society. 
Prosperity in Germany and Europe depend, in part, on the lessons we learn from the recent 
crisis  in  the  euro  area.  The  European  monetary  union,  as  it  currently  stands,  is  not 
sustainable – at least not as a stability union. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  existing  challenges  in  Europe  call  for  reforms  –  deep  and 
comprehensive reforms. We must now all work together in solving current cases and thereby 
never forget what the European Union has been since its beginnings – namely a project for 
maintaining peace for our continent and beyond. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
