  Guy Debelle: The global code of conduct for the foreign exchange 
market (update) 
Speech by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia,  at  the  ASIFMA/GFMA  Liquidity  Conference  (appearance  via  video  link),  Hong 
Kong, 14 June 2016. 
 Thank you for having me here today to talk about the Global Code of Conduct for the Foreign 
Exchange Market. As you may know, Phase 1 of the Code was launched in New York in late 
May.1 Today I will reiterate the motivation for the work we are doing on the Global Code, then 
update you on where we are at with the process and outline the way forward. 
Why  is the  work going on?  As  I  have  stated  on  previous  occasions, the foreign  exchange 
(FX) industry is suffering from a lack of trust in its functioning. This lack of trust is evident 
both between participants in the market, but at least as importantly, between the public and 
the market. The market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and 
allow  participants  to  have  much  greater  confidence  that  the  market  is  functioning 
appropriately. 
A  well-functioning  foreign  exchange  market  is  very  much  in  the  interest  of  all  market 
participants. This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants 
but also as the exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a 
globalised world, the foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial 
plumbing. 
The Global Code sets out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market 
to  provide  a  common  set  of  guidance  to  the  market,  including  in  areas  where  there  is  a 
degree  of  uncertainty  about  what  sort  of  practices  are  acceptable,  and  what  are  not.  This 
should help to restore confidence and promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX 
market. 
To  that  end,  one  of  the  guiding  principles  underpinning  our  work  is  that  the  Code  should 
promote  a  robust,  fair,  liquid,  open,  and  transparent  market.  A  diverse  set  of  buyers  and 
sellers,  supported  by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively 
transact at competitive prices that reflect available market information and in a manner that 
conforms to acceptable standards of behaviour. 
The  work  to  develop  the  Global  Code  commenced  in  May  last  year,  when  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  Governors  commissioned  a  working  group  of  the  Markets 
Committee of the BIS to facilitate the establishment of a single global code of conduct for the 
wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the 
code.2 
There  are  two  important  points  worth  highlighting:  first,  it’s  a  single  code  for  the  whole 
industry and second, it’s a global code. It’s intended to cover all of the wholesale FX industry. 
This is not a code of conduct for just the sell side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, 
non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth is both across the globe and across the 
whole structure of the industry. The Code is intended to apply to all aspects of the wholesale 
foreign exchange market. 
                                                
1  http://www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf. 
2  http://www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I am chairing this work, with Simon Potter of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York leading 
the  work  on  developing  the  code  and  Chris  Salmon  of  the  Bank  of  England  leading  the 
adherence work. Our Working Group comprises representatives of the central banks of all 
the  major  FX  centres,  drawing  on  the  membership  of  the  Markets  Committee  which  is 
comprised of heads of the market operations areas of the 15 major currency areas.3 Given 
our roles, we are all very much interested in the effective functioning of the FX market. Again, 
it is very much a global effort reflecting the global nature of the foreign exchange market. 
This work is also very much a public sector–private sector partnership. In that regard, we are 
being ably and vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired 
by David Puth, CEO of CLS. The group contains people from all around the world on the buy 
side,  including  corporates  and  asset  managers,  and  the  sell  side,  along  with  trading 
platforms,  ECNs  and  non-bank  participants,  drawing  from  the  various  Foreign  Exchange 
Committees  (FXCs)  and  beyond.  Hence  all  parts  of  the  market  are  being  involved  in  the 
drafting of the code to make sure all perspectives are heard and appropriately reflected. 
At the outset we decided to split the topics we intend to cover in the Code into two parts. This 
first  phase  covers  areas  such  as  ethics,  information  sharing,  aspects  of  execution  and 
confirmation  and  settlement.  The  second  phase  will  cover  further  aspects  of  execution 
including  e-trading  and  platforms,  prime  brokerage,  as  well  as  governance,  and  risk 
management and compliance. We intend that the second phase will be completed in twelve 
months, such that the full Code can be published in May 2017. 
One  factor  influencing  our  choice  of  which  topics  to  cover  in  the  first  phase  was  our 
assessment of what issues the market was looking for clarity on sooner rather than later. 
One  example  of  this  is  around  information  sharing,  where  many  market  participants  have 
highlighted  that  they  are  unsure  what  information  can  be  conveyed  to  counterparties  and 
other market participants. While it is clear (or at least should be) that disclosing the details of 
a client’s order book to a counterparty is not acceptable, market participants have noted that 
there  is  much  less  clarity  around  what  level  of  aggregation,  say,  is  necessary  in  order  to 
convey market colour appropriately. 
As  a  result,  it  appears  some  market  participants  are  being  very  conservative  in  sharing 
information, which can have implications for the effective functioning of the market. This is 
notwithstanding  the  guidance  provided  in  this  area  in  the  Global  Preamble  put  out  by  the 
global Foreign Exchange Committees, including the Australian Foreign Exchange Committee 
(AFXC),  in  March  2015.4  The Global  Code  takes  the  material  in  the  Global  Preamble  and 
fleshes  it  out  a  bit  more,  including  with  some  examples  of  what  is,  and  isn’t  appropriate 
communication, and why. 
Similarly, there have been diverse opinions around what is appropriate behaviour in terms of 
order handling. While there have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviour 
around order handling which have come to light in recent years, in other areas, the market is 
seeking  greater  guidance  as  to  what  principles  should  be  followed,  including  the  different 
standards that may apply depending on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal or 
agent.5  
This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes of conduct that 
the  various  FXCs  had  endorsed  for  the  FX  market.  It  is  an  area  where  we  are  aiming  to 
provide  the  sought-after  guidance.  But  we  are  not  writing  a  procedures  manual  for  order-
                                                
3  http://www.bis.org/about/factmktc/fxwg.htm. 
4  http://afxc.rba.gov.au/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf. 
5 
I am not using these terms in the legal sense that is sometimes the case in particular jurisdictions, but rather in 
terms of common market parlance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  handling. Rather we are articulating principles that need to be taken into account. Individual 
firms may then take these principles and reflect them in their own procedures manual. Our 
aim  in  articulating  these  principles  is  to  provide  market  participants  with  the  framework  in 
which to think about how they handle stop-loss orders. The emphasis here is very much on 
the word “think”. The Global Code will not provide the answers to all your questions, but it 
should help you ask the right questions. 
In a similar vein, I will repeat a point that I have made a number of times in the past. One of 
our most central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so, but for me, an important reason is that 
the more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage 
than principles. If it’s not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay 
seems to be the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise 
the code is, the less people will think about what they are doing. If it’s principles-based and 
less prescriptive then, as I just said, market participants will have to think about whether their 
actions are consistent with the principles of the Code. 
Adherence to the Code 
Alongside  drafting  the  Code,  we  have  also  been  devoting  considerable  time  and  effort  to 
thinking  about  how  to  ensure  widespread  adoption  of  the  Global  Code  by  market 
participants. Clearly, that has been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in 
place  in  a  number  of  markets  over  many  years.  It  is  evident  that  they  were  ignored  on 
occasion, wilfully or otherwise. 
As  I  said  earlier,  we  are  working  with  the  industry  to  produce  a  principles-based  code  of 
conduct  rather  than  a  set  of  prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or 
regulatory obligations on market participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards 
or expectations. But we do expect the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted 
across the entire FX market. 
We laid out our overall approach to adherence to the Code in New York last month6 and we 
intend  to  work  closely  with  market  participants  in  the  coming  year  to  facilitate  the 
development  of  market-based  mechanisms  which  demonstrably  embed  the  Global  Code 
within firms’ culture and practices. These mechanisms need to be sensitive to existing law 
and regulation and to the diverse nature of FX markets globally. Hence a ‘one size fits all’ 
approach  to  adherence  would  not  be  appropriate.  We  need  to  strike  the  right  balance 
between respecting the existing diversity across different markets, and establishing globally 
consistent and effective adherence mechanisms. 
The  success  of  the  Global  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the 
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants. That is why the Global FXCs issued 
a  joint  statement  of  support  at  the  launch  of  the  Code  in  New  York,  making  clear  their 
intention for the Global Code to become an integral part of the wholesale FX market.7  
Furthermore  the  BIS  central  banks  signalled  their  commitment  by  announcing  that  they 
themselves will follow the Code, and that they expect that their counterparties will do so too.8  
Our  intention  is  that  the  complete  Code  will  be  released  following  the  Global  Foreign 
Exchange  Committee  meeting  in  London  in  May  2017.  At  the  end  of  that  process, for the 
code  to  be  effective  and  for  it  to  achieve  what  we  want  it  to  achieve,  it  will  need  to  be 
accepted and endorsed by the FXCs and market participants more generally. 
                                                
6  http://www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/am_may16.pdf. 
7  http://afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html. 
8  http://www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  That  said,  the  process  does  not  really  end,  because  as  the  foreign  exchange  market 
continues to evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it. I will have more to say about how 
this ongoing evolution of the Code might occur in due course. 
Conclusion 
That, I trust, gives you a reasonable overview of the state of play on the Global Code. 
A lot of work has been done to get us to this point. There is still a lot of work to be done. 
The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central 
banks and market participants. All of us recognise the need to restore the public’s faith in the 
foreign exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also 
in helping improve market functioning and confidence in how the market functions. I expect 
that cooperative relationship will continue as we see this process through to its conclusion in 
May next year. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
