   Benoît Cœuré: A budgetary capacity for the euro area 
Introductory remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at a public hearing at the European Parliament, Brussels, 2 March 2016. 
 Madam Chair, Mr Chair, 
Honourable Members of the European Parliament, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am grateful to the two rapporteurs and to the two committee chairs for holding this hearing 
today to advance the public debate on a fiscal capacity for the euro area. We are all well aware 
that political attention is largely focused elsewhere, but we should not lose sight of the objective 
of completing Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), securing its capacity to absorb economic 
shocks  and  creating  confidence  today  in  its  future  economic  performance.  As  I  have  said 
elsewhere, if downside risks to the recovery were to materialise, this would not make it easier 
to respond to the refugee crisis or to counter terrorism.1 
A quick glance at fiscal policies today should further convince us of the importance of this 
discussion:  
• 
The recovery in the euro area is proceeding at a sedate pace; it is mainly supported 
by our monetary policy measures and by the low price of energy. At the same time, 
the global economy is overshadowed by renewed uncertainty and broader geopolitical 
risks.  
Public finances in many euro area countries are still in a fragile condition. After the 
past  significant  progress  in  fiscal  consolidation,  fiscal  policy  is  at  present  mildly 
expansionary  on  average  in  the  euro  area. In many  Member  States,  even  though 
quality improvements by changing the composition of fiscal spending are still possible, 
high debt levels leave no room for fiscal manoeuvre. Only very few countries currently 
have fiscal space available. Rigidities in the economic structure of several Member 
States, although being addressed, are still significant.  
 This situation casts doubt on the euro area’s capacity to face future economic shocks. A key 
policy challenge is therefore how to dispel these doubts today and to make sure that the euro 
area is well-prepared for downturns.  
As one of two central bankers on this podium, it is not my role to explain to you which specific 
design of a fiscal capacity would be the right choice for the euro area. This is a political choice 
and should be the outcome of a political discussion.2 
What I can offer you today is my assessment, as an economist, as to why we need a fiscal 
capacity for the euro area, why it cannot be the silver bullet that will make EMU work better, 
and under what conditions it could function well. 
Fiscal policies in EMU 
The role of fiscal policies in EMU has been at the core of the policy debate for some time now. 
Fiscal policies span a broad range of issues, ranging from public investment and collective 
                                                
1   See Cœuré, B., “Time for a new Lamfalussy moment”, speech at the Professor Lamfalussy Commemorative 
Conference, Budapest, 1 February 2016. 
2   See Cœuré, B., “Towards a political convergence process in the euro area”, speech at the Interparliamentary 
Conference “Towards a Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   goods  –  allocative  functions  that  would  also  include  the  EU  budget  –  to  tools  for 
macroeconomic  stabilisation.  Today,  rather  than  discussing  what,  broadly  speaking,  fiscal 
policy could do to support growth at the current juncture, I will focus on how well-designed 
fiscal policies in an economic and monetary union – where monetary policy is exercised at the 
European level – could act as an instrument for stabilisation.  
Let me start by clarifying that the euro area today is not at a crossroads between two starkly 
different routes, namely, responsible national fiscal policies on the one hand and a common 
fiscal capacity or a euro area budget on the other, with the choice between the routes being 
based  on  political  or  philosophical  priors.  From  an  economic  standpoint,  these  are 
complementary. And in fact, we already have elements of both. 
First, a precondition for fiscal policies to be able to contribute effectively to macroeconomic 
stabilisation is to ensure that markets have faith in the sustainability of public finances. And 
that  is  why  adherence  to,  and  the  full  and  consistent  implementation  of,  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact and Fiscal Compact is so important. As I have said before, this is not a matter of 
theology; it is a political and economic imperative. Markets need to trust the capability of our 
governance framework to effectively coordinate fiscal policies in EMU, and citizens need to be 
confident that common rules are being respected. Let me add that any common fiscal capacity 
will be financed by current or future taxes on the same taxpayers and companies which already 
fund their national budgets. We cannot add to this edifice if its foundations are shaky, that is, 
if national budgets are not clearly sustainable. 
In  concrete  terms,  this  means  that  Member  States  should  rebuild  fiscal  buffers  into  their 
national  budgets  to  be  able  to  weather  future  economic  shocks,  while  at  the  same  time 
adjusting the composition of their fiscal policies to optimally support the recovery. Once these 
buffers are available, the Stability and Growth Pact provides ample flexibility to adjust fiscal 
requirements to enable the functioning of automatic stabilisers on a national level and to react 
to a severe downturn in the euro area as a whole if need be. Whether the Stability and Growth 
Pact should be further reviewed or complemented with new features, such as sovereign debt 
restructuring  mechanisms,  to  improve  ownership  and  set  the  right  incentives  is  an  open 
question, with ramifications which go far beyond our discussion today. But in any case, trust 
will not be rebuilt if we start by unravelling the existing rules. 
Second,  we  have  seen  during  the  crisis  that,  without  monetary  policy  instruments  at  the 
national level, fiscal policies can become overwhelmed if country-specific shocks are very large 
and not well catered for by the shock-absorbing capacity of the economy and the financial 
sector. Action can and should be taken to reduce the probability and size of such large shocks. 
The banking union, with its Single Supervisory Mechanism, Single Resolution Mechanism and 
the new bail-in rules, goes a long way in this direction, provided that all these elements are 
implemented in a resolute and consistent way. But we cannot responsibly assume that the 
euro area will from now on be immune to crises. The Five Presidents’ Report therefore calls 
for  the  creation  of  a  shock-absorption  capacity  at  the  euro  area  level  to  complement  the 
automatic stabilisers of Member States.  
And last but not least, there is ample scope for euro area countries to better absorb shocks 
internally,  by  having  suitably  resilient  economies.  Additionally,  we  need  to  improve  and 
strengthen labour mobility and risk-sharing via financial markets. This is another reason why 
completing the banking union, and why complementing it with a capital markets union with 
substantial  cross-border  equity  links,  is  so  important.  And  this  also  reminds  us  of  the 
importance of preserving labour mobility from the temptation of raising new fences. 
A fiscal capacity for the euro area 
There are many ways a euro area fiscal capacity could be implemented, ranging from simple 
macro insurance or an unemployment benefit scheme to a fully-fledged euro area budget that 
could include the provision of public goods. Each of these options entails its own technical and 
political challenges and opportunities. In the end, the choice as to which option or combination 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   of options should be adopted will need to be a political one. This is in fact an opportunity to 
have a debate about Europe’s collective goals; such a debate is more necessary than ever 
and goes beyond the economic sphere alone.3  
From the perspective of the economist and of the central banker who has a keen interest in 
making EMU as a whole work better, the crucial question behind the discussion about a fiscal 
capacity for the euro area is how to maximise its positive effects on the functioning of EMU, 
while at the same time preserving incentives for sound fiscal policy-making and addressing 
structural weaknesses at the national level. 
To start with, we should all be able to agree that the objective of the fiscal capacity should be 
to make EMU more resilient by increasing the capacity for automatic stabilisation in the euro 
area.  The  aim  should  not  be  to  actively  fine-tune  national  economic  cycles  or  to  equalise 
revenues. This is in line with the design principles described in the Five Presidents’ Report, 
which  notably  insists  that  a  fiscal  capacity  should  not  entail  permanent  transfers  in  one 
direction. A fiscal capacity in this sense would also be distinct in nature from more allocative 
tools such as those provided for by the EU budget. 
To be able to reach this objective, and based on my introductory remarks, I believe we need 
to see significant further progress along the following three dimensions:  
First,  a  pooling  of  fiscal  resources,  whatever  their  nature  and  size  might  be,  only  works  if 
solidarity  goes  hand  in  hand  with  shared  responsibility.  A  move  towards  more  fiscal  risk-
sharing in EMU would therefore require a commensurate shift towards increased joint decision-
making  within  strong  common  institutions.  In  any  case,  access  to  a  joint  euro  area  fiscal 
capacity should be made conditional on compliance with the fiscal rules of the Stability and 
Growth Pact. 
Second, we should aim at containing the burden that falls on fiscal policies by strengthening 
market-based  adjustment.  As  Ludwig  Erhard  famously  said,  we  need  “as  much  market  as 
possible, as much state as needed”. This means structural reform at the national level. But it 
also  means  completing  banking  union  and  supplementing  it  with  a  comprehensive  capital 
markets union at the European level. In addition, this calls again for completing the Single 
Market more broadly, including in the services sector.  
Third, it lies at the very heart of all insurance that risks are distributed equally ex ante. When it 
comes to mutual insurance against asymmetric shocks, it is clear that fiscal risks do not always 
stem from fiscal  action, but from  unsustainable economic  and financial policies  elsewhere. 
Therefore, any move in this direction should be accompanied by a new convergence process 
towards  more  resilient  economic  structures.  Such  a  process  would  allow  us  to  advance 
together towards a better-equipped EMU, outlining a clear path of reform and a commitment 
to a fiscal capacity. Political convergence is needed to kick off such a process, as any new 
convergence process can only be as effective as the legitimacy underpinning it.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by saying that protection against moral hazard is of course very important. At 
the  same  time,  it  should  not  be  used  as  a  strategy  to  relegate  the  move  towards  a  fiscal 
capacity for the euro area to never-never land. The move towards a fiscal capacity could take 
the  form  of  a  gradual  and  conditional  process  that  allows  us  to  move  in  parallel  towards 
restored fiscal buffers at the national level, convergence in the capacity to absorb shocks at 
the  national  level  and  a  strengthening  of  institutions  at  the  euro  area  level,  while  moving, 
equally gradually, towards more central fiscal stabilisation.  
                                                
3   See Cœuré, B.: “Drawing lessons from the crisis for the future of the euro area” speech at “Ambassadors Week”, 
Paris, 27 August 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   I think we should be more ambitious in that respect. In fact, I would even argue that there is an 
urgent need to accelerate our efforts to complete the EMU architecture with a fiscal capacity. 
Although we should acknowledge that this will take time, and that getting it right will require 
effort and precision, we should act without delay and speed up our work.  
Thank you for your attention 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
