  Harun R Khan: Foreign exchange market and cross-border transactions 
– some random reflections 
Inaugural address by Mr Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the 11th Annual Conference of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India (FEDAI), 
Hong Kong, 11 June 2016. 
 The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Shri Himansu Mohanty of the Reserve Bank of India. 
India 
1. 
Shri  C.  Venkat  Nageshwar,  Chairman,  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers  Association  of 
India  (FEDAI),  Shri  Ravi  Sinha,  Acting  Consul  General  of 
in  Hong  Kong, 
Shri D. G. Patwardhan, outgoing CEO of FEDAI, Shri Ashwani Sindhwani, incoming CEO of 
FEDAI, distinguished speakers and panellists and delegates to the Conference. It is a great 
pleasure to be here today in this modern city of Hong Kong which Wikipedia describes as 
world’s most competitive economy, the world’s most visited city, and among the world’s most 
significant financial centres with a very high financial development index. My sincere thanks 
to  the  FEDAI  for  inviting  me  to  inaugurate  their  11th  Annual  Convention.  These  Annual 
events of FEDAI have been quite well known in recent times for the wide participation of the 
foreign  exchange  market  participants,  for  the  depth  and  detail  of  the  deliberations,  and  of 
course, for  the  idyllic  locations  chosen.  I  am  sure  that  this  Convention  too  would  excel  its 
predecessors in all aspects. 
FEDAI was formed in 1958, when Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 was in 
2. 
force and life was rather simple. The Bretton-Woods arrangement was in force, there was a 
fixed exchange rate regime with Rupee pegged to the pound sterling and tranquillity reigned 
in the markets, such as there were. Mandate of FEDAI was simple too: setting the basic rules 
for inter-bank and customer transactions pertaining to computation of rates and settlements. 
Forex  market  and  FEDAI  have  traversed  a  long  way  since  then  in  keeping  with  the 
momentous changes that have taken place in financial markets in general and forex market 
in particular, globally as well as in India. Though not formally designated as a Self-Regulatory 
Organisation  (SRO),  it  has  effectively  played  such  a  role  and  the  smooth  transition  and 
transformation  experienced  by  the  Indian  foreign  exchange  market  over  the  years  can  be 
ascribed to FEDAI in no small measure. I am sure FEDAI will continue to play such a role in 
future with greater élan. 
3. 
In  modern  times,  the  economic  and  market  conditions  have  been  evolving  rapidly 
and  whenever  we  find  ourselves  in  the  cusp  of  transformational  events,  there  is  a  global 
dimension involved. Today, the Indian economy is reported to be more integrated with the 
rest of the world than US and China in the sense that trade-GDP ratio for India (at 49.6 per 
cent) is higher than that for China (41.2 per cent) and US (30 per cent). If we also look at a 
wider  parameter  of  Global  Connectedness  Index  developed  by  Pankaj  Ghemawat  and 
Steven  A.  Altman,  India’s  score  and  rank  is  pretty  high,  e.g.,  in  2013  our  rank  at  71  was 
ahead of China at 84 in a universe of 140 countries. The quest for mobilising resources for 
India’s vast investment needs also has a pronounced outward-looking refrain. As we engage 
more and more with the rest of the world, the cross border transactions not only increase in 
magnitude but also become more complex. Even as we grapple with issues, such as, how to 
improve  the  ease  of  doing  business  to  attract  foreign  investment  and  how  to  contain  the 
potential  instability  due  to  increased  cross  border  engagements,  the  critical  factor  that 
influences our thinking and policy setting is the conditions in the foreign exchange market. In 
this backdrop, I shall discuss today a few select themes relating to “foreign exchange market 
and cross border transactions,” keeping in view the broad topics of this conference, allowing 
freedom in foreign exchange markets and internationalization of Indian Rupee. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Foreign exchange market: freedom with stability 
4. 
The  modern  foreign  exchange  market  as  we  know  it  evolved  after  the  Bretton 
Woods system broke down in early 1970’s and the global currencies became freely floating. 
It may be recalled that in the Bretton Woods regime the currencies were almost fixed vis-a-
vis  US  dollar  and  the  exchange  rate  carried  within  a  narrow  band.  US  dollar  in  turn  was 
linked to gold with a guarantee of the US monetary authorities. When the US Government 
withdrew  this  guarantee  on  August  15,  1971  the  currency  market  went  into  turmoil  and  a 
floating rate regime came into existence. Floating rate regimes were experienced earlier for 
example, during the 30’s when the markets were volatile and disorderly in the extreme and 
were  shut  down  for  extended  periods.  It  may  be  of  some  passing  interest  to  note  that 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  Act,1934  was  framed  during  this  period  and  the  preamble  said  ” 
….And whereas in the present disorganisation of the monetary systems of the world it is not 
possible  to  determine  what  will  be  suitable  as  a  permanent  basis  for  the  Indian  monetary 
system….” 
5. 
The  floating  exchange  rate  regime  that  came  into  existence  in  early  70’s  has 
remained in force for four and half decades. It is not that there has not been occasions of 
disorderliness and turbulence in the market but the regime has not been over turned. 
6. 
Three  interrelated  factors  have  contributed  to  the  evolution  of  foreign  exchange 
market  as  we  see  it  now.  First,  there  has  been  tremendous  improvement  in  global 
communication  infrastructure  gone  are  the  days  when  trading  and  settlement  used  to  be 
done  over  telegraphic  systems  (hence  the  term  cable  rate).  The  modern  communication 
network  has  reached  the  time  and  space  gap  and  the  only  limitation  now  is  the  diurnal 
motion  of  the  earth.  Secondly,  this  period  also  coincided  with  quantum  advancement  in 
computing  capacity.  This  has  helped  in  improving  the  communication  network.  But  more 
importantly it has made trading and settlement quite easier. It is possible for the trader as 
well as the back office to instantaneously understand the implication of a trade. The ultimate 
culmination  of  this  is  of  course  “algorithm  trading”.  Thirdly,  along  with  the  development  in 
computation,  sophisticated  mathematical  models  have  evolved  to  engineer  complex  and 
bespoke financial products. A combination of these three factors has brought about a foreign 
exchange market that is truly global, liquid and large. 
7. 
Notwithstanding the complexity and sophistication of the foreign exchange market, 
the fundamental principle remains simple yet profound. The foreign exchange market deals 
with currencies and a foreign currency is but a commodity vis-a-vis the domestic currency. 
The price is the exchange rate. Any price has two determinants. The supply factor and the 
demand  factor.  The  first  can  be  seen  to  be  derived  from  the  cost  of  production  and  the 
second  from  the  factors  that  affect  demand,  utility  for  instance.  In  the  foreign  exchange 
market, the first factor which ultimately determines the exchange rate in the long run is the 
purchasing power parity or the inflation differential. The second factor that causes exchange 
rate movement in the short run is the expected earnings from exchange rate dynamics. In the 
simplest of cases it is derived from interest rate differential but in the real world the exchange 
rate  demonstrates  random  walk  and  behaves  like  any  other  financial  asset.  It  will  be 
important here to remember that both the factors play equally important role in determination 
of  the  price.  To  quote  Alfred  Marshall,  “We  might  as  reasonably  dispute  whether  it  is  the 
upper or the lower blade of a pair of scissors that cuts a piece of paper, as whether value is 
governed by utility or cost of production. It is true that when one blade is held still, and the 
cutting is effected by moving the other, we may say with careless brevity that the cutting is 
done by the second; but the statement is not strictly accurate, and is to be excused only so 
long as it claims to be merely a popular and not a strictly scientific account of what happens 
(Marshall [1890] 1997, 290).” 
The exchange rate is a key macro-economic variable. It shapes a country’s balance 
8. 
of  payments  and  engagement  with  the  rest  of  the  world.  It  affects  a  country’s  export 
competiveness, of course in conjunction with other factors and its income and employment to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the extent that export sector is important for the economy. It determines the cost of import 
and to the extent that import constitutes articles essential for investment and growth, can act 
as a retarding factor. It affects the price level through the linkages provided by the tradeable 
sector. 
9. 
As we have seen earlier foreign currency behaves like a financial asset. The prices 
of all financial assets are forward looking and are based on the expectation of the future state 
of  the  world.  As  such  a  country  can  face  large  capital  inflows  or  outflows  depending  on 
whether its future is perceived to be promising or discouraging. This in  turn can affect the 
exchange rate which may not be in consonance with the fundamentals of the real economy 
for example the appreciation of the Rupee in 2007–08 was caused by large capital inflows 
attracted by a buoyant and promising economy but affected the export sector adversely. The 
reverse was perhaps the case in the East Asian crisis. The capital flows also pose challenge 
for  the  monetary  policy  setting.  I  allude  to  the  much  discussed  Mundell-Fleming  trilemma, 
i.e., it is impossible to have an open capital account independent monetary policy and fixed 
exchange rate. Capital account openness and independent monetary policy framework could 
lead to flexible exchange rate which can be disorderly and volatile. 
10. 
The  reason  I  am  discussing  these  issues  in  some  detail  is  to  emphasise  the 
criticality of the exchange rate. The importance of exchange rate cannot be over emphasised 
for  developing  countries.  For  instance,  it  has  got  special  importance  for  India  like 
unemployment for Americans and inflation for Germans. The memory of the 60’s and 70’s 
when the critical shortage of foreign exchange reserves forced us to resort to the PL 480 for 
meeting  the  food  requirement  of  the  country  are  pretty  strong.  Exchange  rate  movement 
either  way  can  affect  us  adversely.  Appreciation  could  hurt  our  exports  and  depreciation 
would  make  the  imports  expensive.  Given  that  our  large  part  of  imports  comprises  crude, 
fertilizer, capital goods and intermediates, increase in the cost of imports due to depreciation 
of currency can hurt our growth and employment and affect the fiscal balance. 
In this backdrop, there are two questions that need to be posed. First, how to ensure 
11. 
that the exchange rate remains stable and, as is stated in the preamble to FEMA, 1999, how 
to preserve orderliness in the foreign exchange market? Second, the exchange rate will be 
stable  and  not  fixed,  and  therefore,  there  will  be  some  volatility  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market. Therefore, how to enable those affected by the exchange rate to cope with the risk 
inherent in a volatile market? 
12. 
I will deal with the second problem first. As long as the inflation differential between 
India  and  the  other  countries  remain  positive,  the  Indian  currency  will  exhibit  depreciation 
over the long term. However, in a world dominated by capital flows, there can be significant 
deviations from the long-term path indicated by the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER). 
REER  itself,  one  should  note,  is  a  function  of  several  dynamic  factors  and  variables  and 
hence, may not serve as very accurate anchor as the base period loses its relevance in the 
face of more recent developments. Even in the case of US dollar, the deviation from the long 
term  represented  by  the  REER  is  known  to  have  been  of  the  order  of  80  per  cent.  Such 
volatility  affects  the  earnings  and  balance  sheet  of  all  firms  that  have  contracted  or  even 
economic exposures. The approach to resolve this problem is to provide a deep and liquid 
foreign  exchange  derivatives  market  to  enable  market  participants  to  hedge  their  foreign 
exchange  risk.  I  have  spoken  about the  derivatives  market  in  detail  elsewhere  and  do  not 
wish  to  deal  with  it  in  detail  here.1  The  most  straightforward  derivatives  are  the  forward 
contracts or their exchange traded counterpart, the currency futures where the payoffs are 
simple  and  linear.  While  the  pricing  of  these  derivatives  are  fairly  simple  based  on  the 
interest  rate  differentials,  the  use  of  these  products  by  the  market  participants  is  mostly 
                                                
1 
“Indian Derivatives Markets – Striking a Balance between Risk Protection and Liquidity” address by Mr Harun 
R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Finance Conclave 2015 organised by the SP 
Jain Institute of Management & Research, Mumbai, 17 January 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  motivated  by  their  expectations  of  the  future  spot  rate.  Ordinarily,  if  you  have  a  foreign 
exchange receivable or payable and if you have entered into a forward sale or buy contract, 
your  exposure  is  evened  out  and  you  should  not  be  bothered  about  what  happens  to  the 
exchange rate. However, the concept of mark-to-market is not only in the books of accounts 
but also in the people’s minds. Not unexpectedly, a cloth manufacturer and exporter decides 
her hedging strategy based on her own view of the expected future spot price as different 
from the forward price and of course often based on advice of “experts”. As I have mentioned 
earlier,  the  foreign  exchange  rate  exhibits  random  walk  in  the  short  run  and  the  best 
prediction of tomorrow’s rate is today’s rate. About “expert” advices, I can only paraphrase 
Samuelson’s famous words, “To prove that Wall Street is an early omen of movements still to 
come  in  GNP,  commentators  quote  economic  studies  alleging  that  market  downturns 
predicted four out of the last five recessions. That is an understatement. Wall Street indexes 
predicted nine out of the last five recessions! And its mistakes were beauties.”2 Now, after 
having booked a forward contract, one tracks the path of the spot rate and starts revelling or 
repenting about the imagined gains or losses! 
The other way of hedging risk is by using non-linear derivative options. Once non-
13. 
linearity  is  brought  into  hedging  strategy,  the  universe  becomes  virtually  unlimited.  Any 
combination of linear derivatives will still have linear payoffs. But combination of non-linear 
derivatives  with  themselves  or  with  linear  derivatives  can  result  in  payoffs  of  varying 
complexity.  Such  complex  products  along  with  a  future  that  is  shrouded  in  ignorance  can 
have pretty unpleasant outcomes and sometimes even threaten market stability. 
14. 
In this backdrop we have adopted a gradualist approach in respect of regulation and 
expansion  of  forex  derivatives  market,  keeping  in  view  certain  uncertainties  we  have 
witnessed in the global and local level macro-economic environment. On the one hand, we 
are committed to enable any entity, whether resident or non-resident, with an exposure to the 
exchange  rate  of  Rupee  to  hedge  it  using  onshore  derivatives  and  on  the  other,  we  have 
been  circumspect  about  introducing  new  products,  such  as,  complex  options  including  the 
so-called exotics for reasons no other than the misuse of the products, either not matching 
with one’s risk or even for buying risk with a speculative strategy. As I see it, the universe of 
permitted derivatives will expand and even undertaking a derivative transaction will become 
simpler.  All  this,  however,  depends  on  how  stable  the  currency  markets  remain  and  how 
responsibly  the  market  participants  behave.  I  hardly  need  to  stress  that  in  all  financial 
transactions in general and derivative transactions in particular, the principle caveat venditor 
applies just as strongly as the principle caveat emptor. 
Regulating cross-border transactions: responsibility & responsiveness 
15. 
Now I come to the first question I had posed earlier, that is, how to ensure stability of 
the exchange rate. The obvious response that springs to one’s mind is intervention by the 
central bank. Intervention, however, is to be used only in extreme situations and cannot be a 
part of the policy framework. Intervention has got costs and other implications like negative 
carry  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves,  interference  with  the  monetary  policy  framework, 
cost  of  sterilization  of  intervention  operations,  etc.,  depending  upon  whether  intervention 
consist  of  buying  or  selling  foreign  exchange.  The  strategy,  therefore,  seems  to  be  a 
combination of some capital controls and flexible exchange rate. Earlier this year, the Bank 
of Japan Governor Kuroda was reported to have advised China to “impose capital controls to 
defend  the yuan  rather than  keep  burning  through  currency  reserves”3. The role  of  capital 
controls,  rather  active  capital  account  management,  in  preserving  stability  in  the  external 
sector and foreign exchange market has now been well recognised in the aftermath of the 
                                                
2  Science and Stocks, Newsweek, September 1966. 
3  Bloomberg – January 23, 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  global financial  crisis.  Some  studies  have  shown  that  capital  controls  measures for  capital 
account management are desirable in certain circumstances even when the exchange rate is 
flexible.  Here,  I  can  cite  the  examples  of  how  we  have  been  calibrating  the  outflows 
permitted  under  the  Liberalized  Remittance  Scheme  (LRS)  and  the  inflows  under  the 
External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) framework in the Indian context. 
16. 
During  the  FERA  regime,  there  was  complete  exchange  control.  Not  only  capital 
account,  even  current  account  transactions  were  also  subject  to  control  measures.  During 
the  acute  foreign  exchange  crisis,  the  capital  accounts  were  opened  up  slightly  for  the 
expatriate  non-resident  Indians  by  way  of  incentivised  accounts,  access  to  the  secondary 
market in equities, etc. Since the liberalisation process started in the early 1990s, the capital 
account  has  been  progressively  liberalised.  We  were  courageous  enough  to  think  of  full 
capital account convertibility on two occasions – in 1997 and in 2007. Unfortunately, because 
of unfolding of global macro-economic developments, the implementation of the path to full 
capital  account  convertibility  remained  on  the  drawing  board  stage.  Our  commitment  to 
progressive liberalisation of the capital account has of course remained steadfast through the 
problems  ranging  from  the  post-Pokhran  II  global  reactions  to  the  recent  global  financial 
crisis. 
17. 
What  has  been  our  approach  to  management  of  capital  account?  One  way  of 
looking at the issue is to see how it affects three different segments of the economy – the 
non-financial firms and businesses, the individuals and the financial firms. As far as the first 
segment is concerned, a more open capital account provides better access to resources and 
investible funds, brings in better technology and management practices and improves their 
valuation. Right since the first days of opening up of capital account, the emphasis has been 
to ensure that the real sector is not deprived of the benefits of an open capital account. We 
can say that, in effect, the capital account is fully open for most of the real business sector. 
The restrictions are in respect of individuals and the financial sector. In a resource starved 
country, enabling individuals, particularly those with high net-worth, to transfer their wealth to 
foreign  places  is  surely  a  low  priority  policy  objective.  As  far  as  the  financial  sector  is 
concerned,  the  restrictions  stem  from  the  premise  that  it  is  this  segment  which  creates 
systemic vulnerabilities in an open economy. 
There  is  another  way  of  classifying  capital flows,  viz.  by  the  asset  class  –  equity, 
18. 
debt  and  immovable  property.  The  distinction  between  equity  and  debt  is  too  well  known. 
The  two  financial  contracts  have  their  own  structures  and  implications.  From  the  limited 
perspective of external sector stability, suffice it to say that while a capital inflow in the nature 
of  equity  poses  little  stability  issues  (except  in  socially  or  economically  sensitive  sectors 
where foreign ownership may not be considered appropriate) debt contracts can lead to build 
up of significant risks at the firm and more importantly at the systemic level. History stands 
witness to this proposition. Whether it is Latin America or East Asian countries or Greece in 
recent times, financial and economic stability were rooted in borrowing a foreign currency or 
in a currency over which the country had no control. 
19. 
The regime for foreign debt is dictated by the concern for excessive indebtedness in 
foreign currency which can sow the seeds of instability. Take the example of the ECB the 
regime as is in force today. The prudential focus of the current ECB framework is to provide 
a nudge towards long term borrowing to mitigate rollover risk and/or borrowing in Rupees so 
that currency risk is not borne by the borrowers, discouraging borrowing by those who do not 
have  any  natural  hedge  by  way  of  foreign  currency  earnings  or  earnings  linked  to  the 
exchange  rate,  all-in-cost-ceiling  to  prevent  poor  quality  borrowers  from  accessing  risky 
foreign  currency  loans  and  encouraging  borrowings  from  long-term  lenders/investors  like 
sovereign wealth funds, insurance companies and pension funds. 
Here, I would like to mention two inter-related issues in the passing. Often, we hear 
20. 
mention of foreign currency borrowings as a source of cheap funds. Is it really cheap? In a 
perfect  market  with  no  capital  account  restrictions  there  should  not  be  any  opportunity  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  arbitrage between a fully hedged foreign currency borrowing and a Rupee borrowing on the 
one hand and when the borrowing is long-term with coupons and repayments spread over 
the lifetime of the borrowing and between the cost of hedging and the long term average rate 
of  depreciation  on  the  other.  Thus,  as  far  as  the  cash  flows  are  concerned,  it  would  not 
matter whether an Indian firm avails of foreign currency borrowing or Rupee borrowing. The 
arbitrage opportunities that exist are due to market imperfections and barrier to arbitrage. But 
whether  foreign  currency  borrowing  is  truly  cheaper  requires  deeper  study  with  long-term 
data. The second issue relates to whether foreign currency borrowings should be hedged? It 
is  intuitive  to  expect  that  those  whose  revenues  are  neither  in  foreign  currency  nor  are 
indexed to the exchange rate should not leave the currency mismatch unhedged. Although it 
may be argued that the cost of hedging is often more than the rate of long term depreciation 
of the Rupee, it is worth asking the question whether one can trust one’s instinct to remain 
unhedged hoping and betting that one would be able to ride on the best part of the exchange 
rate  cycle  or  protect  oneself  against  possible  adversities  in  line  with  a  prudential  risk 
management framework. This choice has to be very carefully evaluated. 
Coming back to the issue of other asset class of equity, it needs to be noted that the 
21. 
regime  for  foreign  investment  in  equity  is  pretty  permissive  –  be  it  as  foreign  direct 
investment  or  foreign  portfolio  investment.  As  far  as  I  can  see,  the  only  two  high  level 
restrictions: (i) in a few sectors where the extent of foreign investment is capped due to their 
sensitive nature and, (ii) in the stipulation that the issue or transfer of securities should be at 
fair value. But as always, the devil often is in the detail. Obviously, the investment should be 
in  equity  securities.  Some  leeway  is  provided  through  hybrid  securities  –  fully  and 
compulsorily convertible preference shares and debentures. The other hybrid securities such 
as  partially  convertible  debentures,  optionally  convertible  debentures  or  equities  with 
embedded  optionality  are  not  treated  at  par  with  equities  and  hence  not  permitted  as 
instruments for making foreign direct investment. 
22. 
Most of the details of the structures in the foreign direct investment regime comes 
from the concern to allay the appreciation that a FDI should not be used as a camouflage for 
debt.  But  how  complex  does  the  structure  become!  In  a  manner  of  speaking,  every 
investment  is  an  act  of speculation.  Every  investor must  have  an  expectation  about future 
state of affairs and the cash flows or return that will accrue to him. Every act of investment is 
subject  to  the  usual  information  asymmetry.  Therefore,  every  investment  contract  must 
provide for the probable states of affairs and how the investor will protect himself against the 
uncertainties and the information problems. Straitjacketing investment contracts, thus, often 
results  in  disputes,  or  worse,  much  needed  investment  shying  away  from  socially  useful 
sectors.  Here  I  would  like  to  refer  to  cases  where  hybrid  instruments  (e.g.  optionally 
convertible  preference  shares)  are  issued  with  the  option  to  exit  linked  to  pre-determined 
milestones. This becomes imperative as investment strategy of many investors (e.g. Private 
Equities)  is  often  different  and  there  is  need  for  a  reasonable  exit  option  under  certain 
circumstances without any assured return. 
23. 
This  problem  is  aggravated  by  the  way  the  FEMA  is  structured.  Unlike  in  case  of 
current  account  transactions,  where  the  principle  is  that  everything  that  is  not  specifically 
forbidden is allowed, in case of capital account transactions the principle is that only anything 
that is not allowed is forbidden. This makes a great demand on the framers of regulations, 
lest the investment and business is subject to the limitations of their perceptions. The way 
business is done is forever evolving and it is a difficult job for the regulators to keep pace 
with  it.  There  is  a  very  good  case  for  relooking  at  this  principle  and  align  the  regulatory 
approaches  for  current  and  capital  account  transactions.  Even  as  we  liberalise  capital 
account more and more, the universe of restrictions shrinks and the regulatory structure will 
be simpler if it mentions what is prohibited rather than what is allowed. 
24. 
As  we  move  to  more  liberalisation  and  rationalization  of  regulations,  there  have 
been  some  unsettling  developments  in  the  recent  past.  Advance  remittance  for  imports 
without any corresponding imports into India, receipt of advances for exports without exports 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  materialising  for  a  long  time  and  more  recently  the  revelations  of  the  so  called  “Panama 
Papers”. In case of Panama Papers, on the basis of reports, it is suspected that some Indian 
individuals may have been involved in setting up of businesses maintaining balances abroad 
illegally. Investigations are on and the situation can be assessed only on conclusion of the 
process when full details are available. The question that troubles us is should the unfolding 
of these events influence our approach to regulating cross-border transactions? 
25. 
On this subject I cannot help recalling what the  Finance  Minister Yashwant Sinha 
said  in  the  Lok  Sabha  on  November  19,  1999  while  replying  to  a  debate  on  the  Foreign 
Exchange Management Bill. I quote “What we are trying to do through this legislation is to 
bring the entire management of foreign exchange in line with the changes which have taken 
place as a result of liberalization on current account. I strongly refute with all the emphasis at 
my  command  that  this  piece  of  legislation  is  going  to  help  the  blackmarketeers,  the  black 
money operators or the hawala operators. This is a figment of the imagination of a section of 
the Members of this House and I refute it as I said with all the emphasis at my command. 
This is in terms of meeting a new situation which has come about as a result of liberalization 
of the foreign exchange management and the Act will only facilitate that management. That 
is  the  reason  why  we  are  introducing  this  legislation.  We  have  already  introduced  the 
Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Bill.  The  two  legislations,  I  will  suggest,  should  be 
considered together because they cover the entire gamut of the issues that are involved in 
these two pieces of legislation.” 
26. 
Often what comes across as contraventions of FEMA indeed are issues related to 
tax evasion or money laundering. I wonder if it would not be more appropriate to deal with 
these  wrongs  within  the framework  of tax  and  money  laundering  laws.  It  is  nobody’s  case 
that these wrong doers should go unpunished; indeed the punishment should be swift and 
exemplary. What I am emphasizing is that this should not colour our perception in respect of 
cross border transactions and mould our regulatory approach in a regressive fall back to the 
FERA mindset. After all, countries with no foreign exchange laws do have such wrongs and 
do  effectively  deal  with  them.  There  is  a  case  for  avoiding  any  possible  attempts  for 
regression into FERA regime. This will of course be helped by Authorised Dealers in foreign 
exchange collecting, collating and sharing the information so as to ensure that the regulatory 
intent is not compromised in letter and spirit. 
27. 
Just a word in passing on the internationalisation of the Rupee in recognition of the 
fact that this is one of the themes of this Conference today. This has been an exciting topic of 
discussion  amongst  the  academia  and  market  participants  in  recent  times.  In  the  annual 
conference  of  FEDAI  held  in  Zurich  in  20124,  I  had  alluded  to  this  aspect  in  some  detail 
keeping in view the seven prerequisites for moving towards internationalization of a currency 
as 
to  pace  and  sequence  of 
internationalization; in fact, even its definition and desirability, continue to be raised with a lot 
of passion. I must mention that the Rupee was in a sense an international currency till the 
60’s  and  it  was  even  a  legal  tender  in  parts  of  Africa  and  much  of  Gulf.  Those  were  the 
Bretton Woods days of fixed exchange rate and the Rupee was linked to the Sterling. After a 
quarter century of near autarchy in currency, the 90’s saw a flexible exchange rate regime, 
complete convertibility on the current account and gradual opening up of the capital account. 
Today, Indian holding of global assets including the official reserves and the global holding of 
Indian assets are very large. India has tremendous growth prospects and even in these days 
of tardy growth around the globe, the Indian growth story continues to be a beacon of light. 
The  world  obviously  wants  to  have  a  share  of  this  pie  and  Indian  assets  continue  to  be 
valued and attractive. But with this will come the exposure to the volatility of Indian Rupee 
laid  down  by  Peter  Kennen.  The 
issues  relating 
                                                
4 
“Musings  on  the  FEDAI,  the  forex  market  and  the  Indian  Rupee”  address  by  Shri  Harun  R.  Khan,  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  7th  Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers 
Association of India (FEDAI), Zurich, 5 April 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  and the need for hedging the risk. The NDF market came into existence to address this need 
and, no wonder, continues to thrive. The correct approach to address this problem is not to 
engage in an ad hominem tirade against the NDF market and its participants but to address 
the  genuine  need  by  increasing  the  access  to  domestic  onshore  market  to  all  those  who 
have a legitimate Rupee exposure. Several steps have been taken in this direction and more 
are in the offing. 
28. 
In  a  sense,  internationalisation  of  Rupee  is  rather  a  process  than  an  event.  The 
pace  of  the  process  depends  upon  how  fast  the  capital  account  opens  up  which  in  turn 
depends  upon  the  evolving  macroeconomic  conditions  and  the financial  stability  concerns. 
Rupee cannot be an international currency by issue of a fiat. Pound Sterling in its time or US 
Dollar today achieved the status of the leading international currency of the day because the 
inherent strength of their economies and their financial markets and not by any administrative 
proclamation.  The  conditions  necessary  for  greater  internationalization  of  Indian  Rupee  in 
terms of its acceptability in trade and other cross-border transactions, as a reserve currency 
and reaching much higher level of capital account convertibility will be ensuring the macro-
economic  stability,  and  having  a  deep  and  liquid  financial  market.  In  the  interim,  the 
measures taken and planned for using Indian Rupee in trade denomination and settlement, 
particularly with our neighbouring countries, where intra-regional trade volumes are very low, 
should  be  taken  forward.  And  also  the  facilities  for  onshore  hedging  of  all  non-resident 
entities for their increasing capital account exposure including off-shore Rupee bonds issued 
by multilateral institutions and Indian corporates should be eased further. 
Concluding thoughts 
29. 
As I prepare to hang my boots after a long campaign, various shades of feelings and 
emotions flash across my mind. I have had an almost four decade long association with the 
country’s central bank and with its financial system. This is a pretty long period in the modern 
times.  Around  the  time  I  joined  the  Reserve  Bank,  momentous  things  were  happening 
around  the  globe.  The  Bretton  Woods  System  had  broken  down,  so  had  the  Smithsonian 
Agreement.  Following  the  Jamaica  Agreement  of  Jan  1976,  the  flexible  exchange  rate 
regime had been officially endorsed. The European Exchange Rate Mechanism was being 
conceived and would be introduced in 1979, to culminate in a single currency two decades 
later. 
30. 
Closer  home,  though  the  “draconian”  legislations  FERA,  enacted  in  1973  and 
COFEPOSA, in 1974 were at their prohibitive peak, we had begun to emerge from the dark 
ages. The Green Revolution had taken roots mitigating the pressure on our BoP for importing 
foodgrains  and  the remittances from  the  expatriates  were  buoyant.  Both  put  together,  had 
eased our external sector management. Since then, despite ups and downs, we have grown 
in strength in the management of our external sector, which in turn has catalysed our quest 
for growth and development. Though much remains to be done, the achievements are not to 
be scoffed at. To mention just one statistic, the life expectancy at birth was 41 years in 1960, 
54 years in 1978 and has gone up to almost 70 years at the latest count. 
A vibrant financial sector is an inevitable part of a developed modern society. In due 
31. 
process of development of the financial sector, it culminates in seamless integration with the 
rest of the world. In the meantime, it is the responsibility of the regulators to steer the process 
in  a  non-disruptive  and  facilitative  manner.  I  hope  that  we  have  achieved  that  to  a  large 
extent and I personally feel happy and proud to have played some part in that process. We 
are  now  ready  for  transiting  to  a  more  developed  economy  and  advanced  society.  As  the 
Prime Minister paraphrased Walt Whitman in his recent address to the US Congress “The 
orchestra  have  sufficiently  tuned  their  instruments,  the  baton  has  given  the  signal,  and 
…..there  is  a  new  symphony  in  play”  I  shall  enjoy  the  music  from  my  comfortable  perch 
outside the burden of responsibility. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  I wish the convention all success and would like to convey my best wishes to all the 
32. 
participants for whatever endeavours they may choose to pursue. 
Thank you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
