   Amando M. Tetangco, Jr: Recognizing Success and Managing Black 
Swans, Elephants in the room and Grey Rhinos 
Speech by Mr Amando M. Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the FMAP 2016 Awards and Fellowship Night, Makati City, 
21 July 2016. 
 I am pleased to join you tonight as we recognize those whom the industry has chosen as the 
best in 15 award categories. To the awardees, allow me to extend my early congratulations for 
a job well done. I know that being “recognized by peers” is one of the strongest motivations for 
anyone to be the best that he can be at his chosen craft. So, keep up the good work! 
Tonight’s  celebration  is  also  about  the  fund  management  industry  itself,  which  has  grown 
consistently over the years. If we count only the trust institutions that report to the BSP, assets 
under management as of end March 2016 stood at P2.7T. FMAP estimates that if the other 
asset  management  companies  are  included,  this  figure  will  grow  to  almost  P4T,  covering 
174 peso-denominated fixed income and equity funds and 52 foreign denominated funds. 
The BSP expects these numbers would continue to grow moving forward. The Philippines’ 
strong  economic  growth  nestled  by  a  stable  inflation  environment,  robust  external  liquidity 
position, and a sound banking system, could only further boost the market’s confidence in our 
domestic financial markets. 
The global investors have now become more discriminating, their search for yield during this 
extended period of low global interest rates is balanced by the need for stability of returns. The 
local investor is also becoming more selective and growing in sophistication, gaining more 
willingness to try newer products to meet specific needs.  
With  this  operating  framework,  the  FMAP  and  its  members  must  certainly  evolve  with  the 
changing needs of your constituents. 
It was “Uncle Ben” (Ben Parker, the step-uncle of Spiderman) who said that “with great power 
come great responsibility”. I cannot think of a greater responsibility for a market practitioner 
than to be entrusted with managing the hard-earned funds of others. Funds that will allow your 
clients to raise and educate their kids, buy their dream home, care for aging parents, go on 
that much awaited vacation or save for a stress-free retirement. 
There  are  many  issues  that  we  could  discuss  at  length  with  respect  to  this  “greater 
responsibility”, but for tonight, allow me to only (and briefly) raise just two of these issues. 
First, financial consumer protection is not simply a popular advocacy, it is one which is central 
to prudential oversight. Several studies have shown that the disruptions of the Global Financial 
Crisis were particularly costly because investors found themselves unprepared for the market 
reversal.  In  many  cases,  these  investors  were  enticed  by  the  returns  promised  by  agents 
without necessarily understanding the risks that they were taking. 
In other cases, financial products were so novel that the industry itself did not fully envision 
how and thru which channels the risks would materialize. To be fair, our technical models were 
imprecise. But we must also admit, with some dose of humility in hindsight, that, collectively, 
the markets underestimated the risks and their consequences. 
Because of the agency nature of your business, the industry cannot thrive without considering 
the specific needs of each client. Your clients must also be empowered so they could better 
define their requirements and how their financial resources could be optimized to meet these 
needs. Such symbiotic relationship therefore necessitates that we adhere to the standards on 
financial literacy as a pro-active initiative and consumer redress as a remedial measure, where 
warranted. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The  second  issue  I  wish  to  cover  is  this  –  the  asset  management  business  has  systemic 
implications. 
Consider  the  two  basic  types  of  agency  agreements  1)  the  passively  managed  funds, 
performance of which mirrors or closely tracks that of a specific benchmark, and 2) the actively 
managed or specialist funds, which are not linked to a specific benchmark. There are positives 
to this dichotomy. Actively managed funds have the advantage of potentially higher yields while 
passive funds provide lower costs. The downside however is that shifting towards higher-yield-
but-illiquid exposures exacerbates the vulnerability of financial consumers towards market risk, 
while the ease of passive funds also nurtures “herding” behaviour as well as correlated market 
movements. 
These notions are confirmed by empirical work at the BIS,1 among others, that have shown 
that “asset managers in EME asset markets tend to behave in a correlated manner and that 
investment flows to asset managers and asset prices amplify each other’s fluctuations”. 
This is why my second message for the industry is this: Do not be oblivious to financial stability 
issues. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we “live” in an industry where “change” is literally a minute by minute 
phenomenon (i.e., not only in financial rates and prices but also in market sentiment). But there 
are also those tail risks, the “Black Swan” risk, as popularized by Taleb.2 Moving from “the 
elephant in the room”, Wucker recently talks of the “grey rhino” as the highly probable high 
impact but neglected threat.3 
I am not sure how swans, elephants and rhinos come together, but I am certain that we do not 
want any of what they represent to come true. We can look towards regulation to manage 
market  conduct  within  acceptable  norms,  but,  in  the  end,  it  will  have  to  be  the  market 
practitioners who need to be committed to upholding the standards.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the recognition announced tonight confirms my view that FMAP and its 
members cherish the higher goals we set for ourselves and your chosen business. 
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  recognize  that  investors  and  fund  managers  should  have  the 
leeway  to  invest  in  alternative  instruments  across  jurisdictions  or  in  different  currency 
denominations. Within the bounds of client suitability and effective management of risks, we 
are prepared to revisit existing regulations and make the needed changes. This will not only 
deepen the capital market but more so provide investors with more choices within the perimeter 
of tolerable financial risks. 
The BSP will always be your partner and I am sure FMAP stands ready to always join us in 
the journey for professional excellence, for consumer protection and for financial stability. 
Congratulations to the asset management industry. Congratulations to the awardees. 
Thank you and good evening. 
                                                
1   Ken Miyajima and Ilhyock Shim. “Asset Managers in Emerging Markets”. BIS Quarterly Review. September 
2014. Pp. 19-31. 
2   N. Taleb. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. New York: Random House. 2007. 
3   Michele Wucker. The Gray Rhino: How to Recognize and Act on the Obvious Dangers We Ignore. St. Martin’s 
Press. April 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
