   Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Banknotes exhibition in Malaysia 
Opening remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia 
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the launching of “Works on Paper: Art Inside the Wallet”, Kuala 
Lumpur, 4 August 2016. 
 If you consider yourself to be a typical person , chances are you would never take the trouble 
to  look  at  your  banknotes  closely  unless  you  are  in  a  situation  where  your  banknote  are 
rejected by the cash deposit machine. A typical response in a situation like this is to check your 
money more thoroughly to see if it is a genuine, fit and useable. Otherwise, the interest of 
typical person in banknotes does not go beyond their wallet. 
This attitude towards banknotes is not surprising and even understandable, but I hope this 
exhibition of World Banknotes at Bank Negara Museum and Art Gallery today will spur some 
interest among members of the public on the intricacies of banknotes of our country and the 
world over. 
Today we are presenting, what we thought, the 30 most innovative banknotes from around the 
world, printed in the past two centuries, to show why there is more to banknotes than meets 
the eyes. 
Banknotes of any nations are unique and represent the identity of the issuing country - and not 
surprisingly,  to  most  people  banknotes  are  only  second  to  the  national  flag  as  the  most 
identifiable and recognisable icon of the country. Which is why central banks and monetary 
authorities spend considerable resources and efforts in designing their banknotes not only, to 
be as aesthetically pleasing and attractive as possible, but more importantly, to appropriately 
portray the unique identity of their respective countries. 
Throughout  history,  banknotes  incorporated  significant  natural  and  cultural  aspects  of  the 
country, encompassing nature, history, society, economy and technology. Bank Negara first 
issued currency in 1967. And since then, uniquely, our banknotes have always featured the 
first Yang di-Pertuan Agong, Tuanku Abdul Rahman ibni Almarhum Tuanku Muhammad on 
the  obverse to signify the  stability  and  reflect  the  unity  of  our  country  under the  system of 
Constitutional Monarchy. On the reverse, however, our banknotes have had different icons 
over  the  last  five  decades,  with  the  most  recent  banknotes  series  aptly  themed  “Uniquely 
Malaysia”, due to the icons that can be found exclusively or largely in Malaysia. It has been a 
practice for most countries to change banknotes icons from time to time, and to include new 
theme and incorporate the latest security features. 
The earliest banknotes might have been first issued in China during the Han Dynasty in 118 
BC.  Throughout  history,  banknotes  have  always  signified  pride,  prestige,  authority  and 
sovereignty of the country.  And as such, it is not surprising the authorities would always use 
the best technology available in the production of banknotes. Modern banknotes are extremely 
sophisticated with so many security features embedded, some of which are invisible and only 
visible using machines. Latest digital and printing technology has revolutionised the banknote 
production  to the highest degree of speed, accuracy and consistency, using technologically 
enhanced high speed printing machines to print millions of banknotes every day. 
Despite the rapid innovation of technology, one fundamental and specific aspect of banknotes 
production has never changed. When it comes to banknotes design, no technology can replace 
the required dexterity and the innovative mind of a design artist. Banknotes design has always 
been made by hand and the work is inevitably involves a process that is time consuming and 
requires painstaking efforts. The artist has to meticulously draw in great detail every aspect of 
the banknotes. 
Indeed as you will see at the exhibition, all these micro lines of icons give a distinguishing 
character to the banknotes and contribute to their uniqueness. But all the details serve more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   than an aesthetic purpose. They also serve as the first line of defence against counterfeiting. 
So far, no digital copier, despite having the best resolution of contemporary technology, is able 
to  copy  micro  lines  and  lettering  on  the  banknotes.  So  if  any  of  you  here  have  any  doubt 
whether a banknote in your wallet is genuine or not, place the banknote under a magnifying 
glass and look for micro lines. 
You will be enthralled at how detailed the banknote design when you get to see the blown up 
version  of  banknotes  on  display  here  in  this  exhibition.  Every  single  detail  of  micro  line  is 
visible, and it is the result of a meticulous and love of his work of a single artist, who worked 
with a view to attain the highest standard of perfection. 
Banknote printing of today, unlike in the early days of banknote history, uses sophisticated 
machinery for the highest degree of consistency. Millions of pieces are printed every day to 
the exact quality standard. If you take two pieces of banknotes of any denomination, chances 
are they are identical in every respect. But misprints do occur though very rare. Occasionally, 
members of the public get excited when they are in possession of irregular banknotes with 
some smudge of ink or more seriously incomplete portrait of certain icons. 
While we at Bank Negara will do everything we can to ensure every single banknote is fit for 
usage by removing any irregular ones from circulation, currency collectors are willing to pay a 
handsome  premium  to  own  imperfect  banknotes.  Dato’  Sharuddin,  the  President  of  the 
Malaysian Numismatic Heritage Club who is here with us today might have seen some of these 
irregular banknotes. But unfortunately, we at Bank Negara are never been able to get hold of 
such pieces so that we can exchange them. This despite all the effort made to retrieve such 
banknotes  from  circulation.  I  guess  this  gives  credence  to  the  economic  axiom,  scarcity 
enhances value. Banknotes are art masterpieces in their own right. They have a lot of stories 
and  messages  to  tell,  waiting  for  us  to  look  up  close  and  decipher  their  meanings  and 
symbolism. 
Therefore, I urge all of you to take your time to marvel at the wonders of banknotes on exhibit 
today. I hope this exhibition will open our eyes to view banknotes from a different perspective, 
to have a greater understanding why banknotes have always exuded a strong sense of pride, 
prestige and sovereignty of the issuing country. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
