  Andreas Dombret: Challenges in identifying and monitoring risks from 
non-bank financial entities and how to address them 
Introductory  statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank, at  the  Symposium  on  Asian  Banking  and  Finance,  San  Francisco, 
11 July 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  this  interesting  conference.  It  is  indeed  a  great 
honour and pleasure to join this panel. 
In my remarks today, I would like to cover two important questions for central bankers and 
regulators: First, what are the challenges in identifying and monitoring risks from non-bank 
financial entities? And second, how can we address these challenges? 
The global financial crisis has clearly shown that substantial risks to the financial system can 
emanate  from  non-bank  financial  entities.  This  is  usually  the  case  if  entities  or  activities 
outside the banking system are engaged in credit intermediation, or more generally, perform 
bank-like business with bank-like risks without being subject to banking regulation. 
Without any doubt, the regulatory reforms after the financial crisis contributed to enhancing 
financial  stability  first  at  all  by  higher  capital  and  liquidity  standards  and  improved 
international regulatory and supervisory cooperation. 
But we have to bear one important aspect in mind: these reforms will only reach those non-
banks  that  are  already  regulated  today  such  as  insurance  companies,  for  instance.  And, 
more  generally,  tightening  regulation  might  set  off  a  trend  to  relocate  activities  to  the 
unregulated  non-banks  also  known  as  the  "shadow"  banking  sector.  This  is  something 
regulators have to watch closely. 
Without a doubt, shadow banks can become a source of systemic risk, especially when they 
are  highly  interconnected  with  the  regular  financial  system.  It  is  therefore  of  utmost 
importance to monitor shadow banks' activities and try to regulate them adequately. 
At their 2014 Brisbane summit, the G20 agreed on a new roadmap for regulating the shadow 
banking sector. Work is being conducted simultaneously by the FSB, the Basel Committee 
and IOSCO. 
One main challenge we face in this area is data gaps. What are the reasons for this lack of 
data? 
Unlike  the  banking  sector, the  non-bank financial  sector  comprises  many  different  entities. 
These  have  quite  diverse  business  models,  each  with  different  risk  implications  for  the 
stability of the financial system. Consequently, dedicated "statistics on the non-bank financial 
sector"  are  generally  not  available.  In  addition,  credit  intermediation  activities  tend  to  form 
complex credit chains and linkages in the financial system that may combine and propagate 
risks in previously unexpected ways. 
Yet,  importantly,  the  relevance  of  risk-monitoring  in  this  area  had  also  been  severely 
underestimated before the global financial crisis. This has changed fundamentally. Several 
global initiatives are dedicated to filling data gaps and are already bearing fruit. 
In sum, the monitoring of non-bank entities has been significantly improved not at least as a 
result of the macroprudential mandate according to the German Financial Stability Act, which 
enables macroprudential authorities to drive forward systemic risk monitoring. 
But besides all those forthcomings, the ambitious reform agenda is far from being completed. 
In  my  view,  a  key  task  on  the  way  towards  transforming  shadow  banking  into  resilient 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  market-based financing is now to identify areas where additional FSB recommendations are 
needed and where existing recommendations should be fleshed out. 
We  have  to  drive  this  reform  agenda  with  all  our  efforts  especially  because  challenges 
remain, however: One important feature of the non-bank financial sector is its extraordinary 
capacity  to  innovate.  Central  bankers  and  regulators  will  therefore  continuously  have  to 
adjust their monitoring efforts to these dynamics. 
It  is  my  deepest  conviction  that  when  we  speak  about  regulating  banks  and  non-banks, 
similar activities should be regulated in a similar manner; but differences should be taken into 
account.  It  is  therefore  key  to  regulate  all  activities  adequately  according  to  their  inherent 
risks while avoiding the creation of opportunities for regulatory arbitrage. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
