  Ravi Menon: Reforms in banking regulation – effects and outcomes 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, San Francisco, 11 July 2016. 
 the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco 
Mr  John  Williams,  President  of 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
Let me, on behalf of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, express our appreciation to John 
and his colleagues at the San Francisco Fed. 
• 
• 
It has been a fruitful collaboration on this Symposium. 
We had a good meeting in Singapore last year, and my colleagues and I are very 
pleased to be here in San Francisco for this year’s Symposium. 
There has been no lack of excitement for global financial markets over the past year: 
the US Federal Reserve Bank’s deliberations whether to raise interest rates; 
• 
China’s  transition  to  a  more  market-based  exchange  rate  amidst  a  slowdown  in 
• 
economic growth; and more recently 
the decision by UK voters to leave the European Union. 
• 
But even as banking stocks have taken a pounding – forgive the pun – the global banking 
system has generally held up well. There are no doubt fragilities in some European banks, 
but as yet no disorderly failure or contagion. I think this has at least something to do with the 
regulatory reforms put in place since the financial crisis. 
This morning, I will do two things: 
• 
• 
First, take stock of the progress in making the global banking system safer. 
Second, highlight how we can ensure that banks continue to serve the needs of the 
real economy as we press ahead with the regulatory reform agenda. 
Progress in Making Banks Safer 
Let me start with the progress in regulatory reforms and their effectiveness. 
Key Regulatory Reforms are in Place 
Since the global financial crisis, regulators have put in place reforms to strengthen banking 
resilience and financial stability. There has been good progress in three key areas. 
First,  capital.  Basel  III  imposes  more  stringent  capital  requirements  and  larger  buffers  to 
cushion against losses. 
• 
Capital requirements have been enhanced for specific exposures, including market 
risk,  complex  securitisation,  and  counterparty  credit  risk,  all  of  which  were  major 
sources of losses in the crisis. 
Second, liquidity. Rules have been introduced to strengthen banks’ liquidity risk profiles and 
promote funding stability. 
Third, addressing the “too-big-to-fail” problem. 
• 
Regulators have established frameworks: 
−  first, to identify Global Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs); and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  −  second, 
to  subject 
them 
to  more 
intensive  supervision,  higher  capital 
requirements, and resolution planning requirements. 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has set out key attributes for effective resolution, 
including the preparation of recovery and resolution plans for systemically important 
financial institutions. 
 Implementation Has Been Satisfactory But More Needs to be Done 
Achieving  international  consensus  on  the  key  elements  of  bank  regulatory  reforms  is 
laudable. But for the reforms to have their intended effect, implementation is crucial. 
• 
The  FSB  has  formed  a  Standing  Committee  on  Standards  Implementation  to 
monitor the implementation of the financial reforms among its members 
I chair this Committee and so have particular interest in the issue of implementation. 
• 
The Basel III standards have generally been implemented in a timely manner. 
• 
• 
In bank resolution, progress is more mixed. 
• 
Basel III risk-based capital rules have been rolled out in all 24 FSB jurisdictions. 
Final liquidity rules have been issued in all but two jurisdictions. 
On  the  positive  side,  regulators  have  set  up  crisis  management  groups  and 
developed recovery plans for all G-SIBs 
But significant work remains on operationalising these resolution plans. 
• 
And not all FSB jurisdictions have bank resolution regimes that are in line with FSB’s 
Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes. 
Implementing  reforms  in  a  timely  manner  is  one  thing;  implementing  them  in  a  consistent 
manner  across  jurisdictions  is  another.  Ensuring  consistency  and  level  playing  fields,  and 
minimising  opportunities for  regulatory  arbitrage  have  become the focus  of  implementation 
monitoring. 
The  Basel  Committee  conducts 
implementation of the Basel III capital standards to check for consistency. 
• 
in-depth  assessments  of  member 
The  United  States  and  a  number  of  Asian  countries  –  including  Singapore,  Hong 
Kong, China and Japan were assessed to be compliant or largely compliant in their 
implementation of the Basel III capital standards. 
The European Union was, however, found to be materially non-compliant. 
As  home  to  several  of  the  largest  global  banks  as  well  as  important  international 
financial  centres,  it  is  crucial  that  the  EU  shows  leadership  in  ensuring  more 
complete and consistent implementation of global banking rules. 
jurisdictions’ 
 Regulatory reforms have generally been effective 
The regulatory reforms have been largely effective in meeting their intended outcomes. 
First, banks have become stronger. 
•  Banks are holding more and better quality capital. 
−  Between  2009  and  2014,  large,  internationally  active  banks  have  doubled  their 
average CET1 ratio from just under 6% to more than 11%. 
•  Banks are holding more liquid assets and have reduced leverage levels. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  −  Since  the  crisis,  the  average  liquidity  coverage  ratio  for  large,  internationally 
active banks has risen from about 80% to more than 120%. 
−  Leverage has fallen from around 22 times of equity to about 16 times. 
Second, banks have become more resilient. 
• 
Banking business faces serious challenges on several fronts. 
−  The  prolonged  low  growth,  low  interest  rate  environment  has  pressured  net 
interest income. 
  −  Bouts of financial market volatility amidst a general contraction in market liquidity 
has increased the risks facing banks. 
But banks have held up well. 
−  In the US, nearly all the largest banks have passed the Federal Reserve’s most 
recent annual stress test. 
−  In Singapore, an industry-wide stress test conducted by the MAS indicates that 
Singapore’s  banking  system  will  be  resilient  against  severe  economic  stress 
scenarios in the major economies and Asian region. 
And  beyond  the  stress  tests,  the  global  banking  system  has  remained  relatively 
resilient through actual episodes of market stress in recent years: 
−  the May 2013 US taper tantrum; 
−  the Oct 2014 US Treasury “flash crash”; 
−  the Jan 2015 Swiss franc de-pegging; 
−  the Aug 2015 “Black Monday” selloff; and most recently 
−  the Jun 2016 UK referendum. 
Third, bank lending to the real economy has been stable. 
• 
Overall provision of credit to the economy has been maintained even as banks met 
higher capital and liquidity requirements. 
−  According to the FSB, by the end of 2014, bank lending growth had resumed in 
all regions of the world. 
  The cost of financing has not increased, although I suspect that this has had more to 
do with highly accommodative monetary policies. 
There has been no material shortage in the supply of long-term investment financing 
in most countries surveyed. 
Ensuring that Banks Continue to Serve the Real Economy 
While  the  effect  of  regulatory  reforms  on  the  broader  economy  has  so  far  been  benign, 
regulators must continue to pay close attention to the cumulative effects of various reforms 
and seek to minimise adverse consequences for the real economy. 
Let me highlight two areas that bear close watching: 
• 
• 
First, profitability in the banking sector. 
Second, distribution of credit to key segments of the economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Bank Profitability is Important for Bank Stability 
Let me start with bank profitability. Regulators are not in the business of ensuring profits for 
banks. But we have an interest in the profitability of banks for two reasons. 
First, banks need to be profitable in order to be strong. 
• 
Retained  earnings  are  one  of  the  major  sources  of  equity,  which  is  in  turn  the 
highest quality capital held by banks. 
• 
Healthy capital buffers in turn improve the resilience of banks against losses. 
Second, banks need to be profitable in order to be able to support the real economy. 
• 
• 
Banks have to earn a decent return on their credit intermediation role. 
A study by the Bank for International Settlements shows that banks with high capital 
ratios  at the  start  of the  Basel  III  process  and  strong  profitability  in  the  post-crisis 
years have tended to expand their lending more. 
But  post-crisis,  bank  profitability  has  come  under  pressure  in  a  prolonged  period  of  low 
growth and low interest rates. 
• 
The  banking  industry’s  return  on  equity  (ROE)  has  fallen  significantly  since  the 
financial crisis. 
The  average  ROE  of  the  200  largest  banks  has fallen  from  17%  before  the  crisis 
(2005–2007) to 9% in the period 2011–2013. 
 Monetary policy, as it comes up against diminishing returns at the zero lower bound, is also 
not helping bank profitability. As policy rates are pushed into negative territory in a growing 
number of countries, the implications for financial stability need to be assessed carefully. 
In  a  low  or  negative  interest  rate  environment,  banks  are  likely  to  engage  in  market 
segmentation and charge different rates to different groups of clients. 
• 
• 
Banks are reluctant to impose negative interest rates on retail depositors. 
This means that, to make up for the interest they have to pay on their deposits with 
the central bank, they may have to charge a higher interest rate on their borrowers. 
High returns during the pre-crisis period were in part due to excessive risk taking or leverage, 
coupled with insufficient capital buffers against these risks. 
• 
• 
This has proven both untenable and perilous. 
A  reduction  in  leverage  and  an  increase  in  capital  requirements  are  therefore 
desired outcomes of the reform agenda, to restore more prudent business practices 
and provide more sustainable finance over cycles. 
But  sustainability  in  finance  requires  that  banks  are  reasonably  profitable.  Conversely, 
unprofitable banks are a potential source of instability. 
• 
Poor  profitability  and  low  retained  earnings  will  inhibit  banks  in  building  up  their 
capital buffers. 
Without  sufficient  capital  buffers,  banks  may  be  less  willing  to  lend,  which  may 
constrain the availability of financing to the economy. 
 The Basel Committee is working hard at finetuning the Basel III capital rules: 
• 
• 
• 
to reduce the variability in risk weighted assets applied by banks; 
to revise the standardised approaches for credit and operational risk; and 
to implement the leverage ratio. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  But  in  the  course  of  adjusting  the  capital  rules  to  better  achieve  these  outcomes,  it  is 
important that the overall capital requirements on banks are not significantly increased. 
There  is  a  real  risk  that  overall  capital  requirements  on  banks  could  indeed  increase 
significantly if we are not careful: 
• 
• 
if internal modelling for certain portfolios are completely removed; and 
if  risk  weights  and  credit  conversion  factors  under  the  revised  standardised 
approach are calibrated too conservatively. 
We need to take a holistic perspective in this final stage of the Basel III capital reforms. 
• 
In  trying  to  get  the  design  right,  we  must  not  end  up  making  the  overall  level  of 
capital requirements too high. 
In trying to get the micro calibrations right, we must not end up getting the macro 
settings wrong. 
 We  have  already  achieved  more  or  less  the  right  level  of  capitalisation  for  the  banking 
industry  through  the  initial  set  of  Basel  III  reforms  after  the  financial  crisis.  If  we  now 
precipitate a further increase in the level of capital requirements in the process of adjusting 
the framework and fine-tuning the calibrations, it would unduly constrain credit intermediation 
and consequently economic growth. 
We must guard against these unintended outcomes. It is therefore heartening that the Basel 
Committee has committed not to significantly increase overall capital requirements for banks. 
Distribution of Credit Matters as Much as Allocation of Credit 
Even as we hold the line on aggregate capital levels, we need to be sensitive to the effect of 
capital requirements on specific business lines and on different economies. 
• 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  area  that  we  should  be  watchful  of:  namely  the 
distribution of bank credit across the economy as a consequence of regulation. 
The Basel Committee will be finalising this year its review of credit risk capital requirements, 
as it seeks to address excessive variability in risk-weighted assets. 
• 
The  revisions  to  the  capital  standards  for  credit  risk  that  are  currently  being 
proposed  will  require  bank  exposures  to  be  risk  weighted  under  a  Revised 
Standardised Approach instead of the Internal Ratings Based approaches. 
The  return  to  a  Standardised  Approach  is  motivated  in  part  by  limitations  in  risk 
modelling,  as the  last  crisis  laid  bare.  However,  in  avoiding  excessive  reliance  on 
models, we must be mindful not to “throw the baby out with the bath water”. 
 We  should  examine  carefully  the  impact  of  these  proposals  on  two  areas,  namely  trade 
finance and SME finance. This is of particular significance for emerging economies. 
• 
Across much of emerging Asia, where capital  markets are relatively undeveloped, 
banks are a major source of funding for trade and SMEs. 
Trade and SMEs are major engines of growth in many emerging market economies. 
• 
Let me start with trade financing. 
• 
 Being short-term and self-liquidating in nature, trade financing is probably one of the 
safer forms of bank lending. 
But the proposal to move bank exposures completely to the Revised Standardised 
Approach could result in imposing significantly higher capital requirements for trade 
finance, more punitive than justifiable by its historical losses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   While the availability and cost of trade finance have so far held up well in the face of 
Basel  III  implementation,  the  latest  set  of  proposals  could  have  the  effect  of 
discouraging banks from trade financing. 
This is not what we need at a time when trade is growing more slowly than income 
in many parts of the world. 
 Second, SME financing. 
• 
• 
I would say we are broadly on the right track. 
While SME loans tend to be riskier on a standalone basis, as a portfolio the risks are 
more diversified than loans to larger corporates. 
The Basel Committee recognises this and the current capital framework provides for 
preferential  capital  treatment  for  exposures  to  SMEs  for  banks  using  internal 
models. 
And  the  Basel  Committee  has  further  proposed  applying  a  lower  risk  weight  for 
banks’ SME exposures compared to unrated corporate exposures under the revised 
Standardised Approach. This will help alleviate the cost of SME financing. 
  Conclusion 
Let me summarise my main points. 
We have made good progress in bank regulation since the crisis. 
• 
Implementation has been generally good but some areas need more work and some 
jurisdictions need to close the gaps. 
Overall, the reforms have helped to make banks safer and more resilient. 
• 
As we finalise the Basel III capital reforms, we must ensure that banks are not only safe but 
also serve their purpose of supporting the economy. 
• 
We  should  be  mindful  of  the  effects  of  low  profitability  on  banks’  ability  and 
willingness to lend. 
We  should  be  mindful  not  to  increase  significantly  the  overall  level  of  capital 
requirements on banks even as we finetune the detailed capital rules. 
And we should be mindful not to unduly penalise lending to important segments of 
our economies – like trade and SMEs – even as we address the limitations in banks’ 
internal models. 
  If we do this right, we would have made more progress than ever before – towards a banking 
system that: 
• 
• 
is safe yet purposeful, resilient yet dynamic; 
is  robust  in  the  face  of  business  cycles  and  market  volatilities,  and  supports 
economic growth and creates opportunities for individuals and enterprises. 
Thank you. 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
