  Lesetja Kganyago: The influence of South Africa’s price-setting 
environment on monetary policy trajectory 
A public lecture by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at 
the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University Business School, Port Elizabeth, 7 September 
2016. 
 Good  afternoon,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  share  a  few 
thoughts and ideas with you today. 
South Africa’s economy has been slowing since 2011 in an environment of sluggish global 
growth and falling commodity prices. In July, we expected the GDP1 growth rate for 2016 to 
be about 0 per cent. With the relatively good second-quarter figures released on Tuesday, 
the Monetary Policy Committee (or MPC) of the South African Reserve Bank will be able to 
revise up its annual estimates at the September meeting, but the annual figure will remain 
low. At the same time, inflation has been elevated. Since 2011, it has averaged 5,5 per cent, 
and so far this year it has averaged 6,3 per cent, above the target range of 3–6 per cent. 
All other things equal, the MPC would like to respond to slow and below-trend growth with 
lower  interest  rates.  But  all  other  things  have  been  far from  equal. We have  had  to  make 
decisions  where  we  don’t  like  all  the  consequences  because  of  the  nature  of  the  factors 
driving inflation out of the target range. I would like to discuss what those factors are and how 
we should think about them.  
The immediate inflation problem comes from rising food prices. Two other crucial factors are 
the  exchange  rate,  which  I  will  discuss  in  some  detail,  and rigidities  in  labour  and  product 
markets  that  prevent  wages  and  prices  from  adjusting  in  line  with  economic  conditions.  A 
final issue is the way in which we have operationalised the 3–6 per cent target range over 
time. 
The  main  point  I  would  like  to  make  is  that  monetary  policy  decisions  necessarily  involve 
trade-offs, and the MPC has opted for trade-offs that serve our inflation-targeting mandate 
and the long-term interests of all South Africans. 
Had the starting point been different – had inflation been well within the target range – we 
could have made different choices. But policymakers have to work with the facts they have, 
not the facts they’d like to have. This is my second point. As a society, we must aspire to a 
set of better economic outcomes than we have  now. South Africa is facing the unenviable 
and difficult-to-solve combination of little growth, high inflation, and growing unemployment. 
We have to do better. Thinking through the conditions we face and the alternatives to them 
helps us to envision a reform agenda. 
Food prices 
I’ll start with food prices, the factor over which we have the least amount of influence. 
As you know, South Africa has been suffering from a particularly severe drought. The result 
has been double-digit food price inflation in 2016. This is adding about 1,5 percentage points 
to inflation, which is enough to push headline inflation outside the 3–6 per cent target range. 
Most of the impact this year is coming from higher prices for bread and cereals as well as 
fruit and vegetables. A little later this year, we expect meat prices to rise more strongly and 
keep  food  inflation  relatively  high,  even  if  the  drought  abates.  The  reason  for  this  is  that 
                                                
1  gross domestic product. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  farmers have responded to water shortages by selling animals for slaughter and are likely to 
withhold supply while they rebuild their stocks. Accordingly, we expect food prices to come 
down quite slowly, even if we do get enough rain this year. 
Higher food prices pose an interesting policy problem. They are a classic supply shock. More 
expensive food tends to put downward pressure on other prices because it reduces buying 
power  and  subdues  demand.  If  this  helps  to  check  price  increases,  and  if  inflation 
expectations  are  already  well  anchored  within  the  target  range,  then  policymakers  can  be 
confident that any inflation increase will be temporary. Policy can mostly ignore these kinds 
of  temporary  shocks.  But  if  those  conditions  are  missing  –  if  the  initial  shock  generates 
increases  in  the  prices  of  other  products  and  factors  –  then  a  policy  response  may  be 
required. 
To put it in another way, a pebble can start an avalanche. If you’ve already got all the other 
conditions for an avalanche, you need to worry about pebbles. 
The exchange rate 
The exchange rate of the rand is another important driver of, and risk to, the inflation outlook. 
It has been highly volatile in recent months, reflecting rapid changes in the world economy 
and in South Africa. As such, I would like to discuss it in some detail. 
The  rand  has  been  on  a  depreciating  trend  since  early  2011.  It  reached  the  high  point  of 
R6,63 to the US2 dollar in December 2010 and then commenced a long slide all the way to 
R16,87  to  the  dollar  in  mid-January  of  this  year.  In  real  effective  terms,  meaning  the 
exchange  rate  adjusted  for  inflation  differentials  with  trading  partner  countries,  January’s 
exchange  rate  was  just  about  as  depreciated  as  it  has  ever  been.  Only  the  sudden  rand 
crash of 2001 comes close. 
The  rand’s  steady  depreciation  has  two  underlying  causes.  The  first  factor  is  commodity 
prices. In 2011, our terms of trade reached an all-time high, meaning that the prices of our 
export  goods  had  never  before  been  as  favourable  relative  to  the  prices  of  our  imports. 
China’s economy was still growing at close to 10 per cent a year and its investment levels 
were at nearly 50 per cent of GDP, one of the highest levels ever recorded, which generated 
huge  demand  for  commodities  such  as  iron  ore,  copper,  and  coal.  Five  years  later,  that 
growth rate has come down to between 6 and 7 per cent. Investment has subsided. At the 
same time, many other commodity suppliers have entered the market, further suppressing 
prices. To  take  one  especially  clear  example,  iron  ore  has fallen  from  almost  US$180  per 
tonne in mid-2011 to under US$50 in the first half of 2016. 
The second factor underlying rand depreciation is capital flows. In 2010 and 2011, the US 
Federal  Reserve  was  implementing  quantitative  easing  in  response  to  weak  growth  and  a 
slow  recovery  in  labour  markets.  Meanwhile,  emerging  markets  were  enjoying  a  strong 
rebound from the global financial crisis. The result was investment in search of higher yields 
flowing out of advanced economies into emerging markets, including South Africa. 
Fast-forward a few years and the situation is rather different. US unemployment has fallen 
dramatically  and  is  now  close  to  its  likely  natural  rate.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  stopped 
quantitative easing and is trying to decide how much more to raise interest rates. Meanwhile, 
emerging  markets  have  suffered  a  severe  slowdown.  Some  of  these  countries  have  also 
become  reliant  on  foreign  savings  to  fulfil  all  their  spending  plans,  meaning  that  they  are 
running current-account deficits. Together, these forces have produced a reversal in capital 
flows and currency depreciation. 
                                                
2  United States. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  These two factors underpin the steady depreciation of the rand over the past half-decade. 
But to explain the shifts in recent months, we need to expand the story. 
The first important episode is the sudden and intense bout of rand depreciation around the 
end of 2015 and the start of 2016. Commodity prices and capital flows played their role: the 
prices of South Africa’s export commodities weakened during the second half of the year and 
the  Federal  Reserve  raised  its  main  policy  rate  in  December  2015.  Perceptions  of  South 
African risk were also important, with the rand depreciating abruptly on news that Finance 
Minister Nhlanhla Nene had been removed from his post. 
Bond  prices  and  credit  default  swaps  on  South  African  government  debt  also  spiked, 
signalling  investor  concern  about  the  reliability  of  the  South  African  government  as  a 
borrower. Research suggests that markets were pricing government bonds as if South Africa 
had already lost its investment grade credit rating. Conditions deteriorated further early in the 
New  Year,  when  China’s  economy  experienced  a  period  of  stress.  The  Shanghai  stock 
market index fell sharply and the renminbi was allowed to depreciate abruptly against the US 
dollar, triggering a bout of capital flight from China. In an atmosphere of market fear and risk 
aversion, the rand depreciated further, in line with many of its peer currencies. 
This sell-off in emerging market currencies went too far – an excellent example of the well-
known phenomenon of overshooting in exchange rate markets. As a result, emerging market 
currencies were primed for a rebound episode. World economic conditions began to move 
back  in  their  favour  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year.  China’s  growth  stabilised  with  help 
from  stimulus  policies,  and  commodity  prices  stopped  falling  and  even  registered  gains. 
Meanwhile,  risks  emanating from  the  Brexit  convinced  the  world’s  largest  central  banks  to 
either  ease  policy  or  delay  further  tightening.  The  net  result  was  an  appreciating  trend  in 
emerging  market  currencies.  In  line  with  the  overshooting  diagnosis,  the  countries  which 
experienced  the  largest  depreciations  during  the  sell-off  phase  enjoyed  the  biggest 
rebounds. 
South Africa joined this rally: the rand strengthened through June and July, reaching a recent 
high  of  R13,23  in  early  August.  The  South  African  currency  benefitted  from  commodity 
movements, including from a higher gold price following the Brexit. We also saw the effects 
of a renewed search for yield by investors looking for something better than negative interest 
rates on advanced economy government bonds. 
In  addition,  domestic  factors  were  supportive  of  the  rand.  The  major  ratings  agencies 
reaffirmed  South  Africa’s  sovereign  investment  grade  credit  rating  in  June.  The  local 
elections in August demonstrated the vitality and competence of our democratic institutions. 
But the rand’s appreciation phase would be short-lived. By late August, the rand was up to 
R14,70  to  the  dollar.  Credit  default  swaps  and  bond  yields  also  rose  again, responding to 
heightened  perceptions  of  political  risk.  On  this  occasion,  the  global  exogenous  factors 
remained positive. The rand’s renewed weakness reflected local concerns yet again. 
How  should  monetary  policy  respond  to  a  problem  like  currency  depreciation?  There  is  a 
short game and a long game – and I would like to explore both. 
South Africa has been playing the long game since 2000. It is about getting domestic wage 
and price setters to count the exchange rate less when forming their expectations of future 
inflation. If these economic actors watch the exchange rate, price accordingly, and thereby 
turn  large  parts  of  any  depreciation  into  inflation,  the  overall  economy  and  policymakers 
specifically are left with only bad outcomes. To minimise this effect – depreciation leading to 
inflation  –  we  try  to  align  expectations,  and  consequently  pricing  decisions  by  households 
and firms, to an inflation target that is expected to be reached over time. Economists tend to 
think that exchange rates go up and down and not in one direction; this has indeed been the 
case  for  the  rand.  But  inflation  weakens  an  economy’s  response  to  depreciation  and 
therefore also weakens the prospect of the currency strengthening in future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In the 1990s, the South African Reserve Bank tried to control inflation in part by managing 
the exchange rate. But this approach proved to be unusually difficult; it generated very large 
contingent  fiscal  liabilities  as  markets  bet  against  our  ability  to  defend  the  currency.3  The 
history  of  emerging  market  central  banking  is  littered  with  cases  of  countries  which  tried 
controlling  their  currencies  and  ended  up  depleting  their  foreign  exchange  reserves  and 
hobbling their economies with disruptive exchange controls. These stories usually finish with 
the central banks bowing to inevitable depreciation. 
One  solution  to  this  dilemma  is  to  get  price  and  wage  setters  to  use  another  anchor  –  to 
allow the exchange rate to depreciate in response to shocks without wages and prices taking 
off. This is a fundamental rationale for inflation targeting. 
In recent years, we have observed that the pass-through from depreciation to inflation seems 
to  be  lower  than  it  used  to  be.  Many  of  our  fellow  inflation-targeting  central  banks  have 
reported the same observation. This suggests that we are reaping the rewards of playing the 
long game. Since 2011, the South African economy has absorbed a 50 per cent depreciation 
of the currency without a major acceleration in inflation, and core inflation4 has not exceeded 
6 per cent. 
Then  there’s  the  short  game. The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  is  often asked  if  we  make 
monetary policy decisions based on the exchange rate. We certainly consider the impact of 
the  exchange  rate  on  the  inflation  forecast.  However,  given  the  well-established  inflation-
targeting  regime  and  reduced  pass-through,  we  do  not  need  to  react  to  depreciation  too 
strongly. We  can  avoid  unscheduled  MPC  meetings  and  instant  rate  hikes  of  hundreds  of 
basis points. 
But  this  doesn’t  mean  that  we  can  ignore  depreciation  entirely.  Monetary  policy  requires 
some  judgement  as  to  whether  currency  weakness  will  cause  inflation  to  accelerate  to  a 
persistently  higher  level  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  inflation  target  range.  If  we  see  this 
threat  emerging,  a  monetary  policy  response  is  appropriate  to  reassure  wage  and  price 
setters that longer-term inflation will remain on target. 
When  the  rand  began  appreciating  in  recent  months,  some  observers  started  speculating 
about  a  possible  end  of  the  interest  rate  hiking  cycle  and  the  possibility  of  rate  cuts.  The 
MPC explained, as clearly as it could, that such speculation was premature. South Africa’s 
risk factors had not subsided. At the time, we believed that the rand’s appreciation would not 
last – as indeed it did not. 
Wage and price rigidity 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  has  been  concerned  for  some  time  about  inflation 
persistence  because  of  the  way  in  which  wage  and  price  determination  works  in  South 
Africa.  I  spoke  at  some  length  about  this  issue  at  the  Labour  Law  Conference  in 
Johannesburg  last  month  and  would  like  to  repeat  a  few  key  ideas  here  because  of  their 
central importance to our economic circumstances. 
The typical pattern is that wages and salaries, or overall remuneration, rises strongly, usually 
faster  than  prices  and  irrespective  of  where  we  are  in  the  business  cycle.  In  other  words, 
remuneration costs rise when the economy is doing well and also when economic output is 
stagnant,  which  is  where  we  are  now.  However,  unlike  food  prices  that  can  cause 
widespread  inflation,  rising  remuneration  doesn’t  have  to  become  an  inflation  problem.  If 
workers and firms negotiate pay and in the end agree on lower profits with higher pay, that’s 
a distributional issue, not an inflationary one. In such a case, product prices don’t rise but the 
                                                
3 
4  Core inflation is defined as headline inflation excluding energy and food prices. 
In 1998, the net open forward position was about US$25 billion. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  distribution  of  returns  from  the  sale  of  the  product  does,  with  workers  getting  more  and 
shareholders less. Similarly, if employees become more productive and get higher pay as a 
result, inflation should be stable. In such a case, the higher pay is matched by higher output. 
However,  inflation  pressures  occur  when  remuneration  goes  up  and  firms  just  pass  the 
higher costs on to consumers. With the relative lack of competition in our product markets, 
that’s  typically  what  happens.  The  end  result  is  a  sustained  rise  in  inflation,  which  in  turn 
keeps  nominal  interest  rates  high  and  undermines  competitiveness.  As  long  as  this 
remuneration-price dynamic persists, our ability to lower interest rates is constrained. 
To  see  if  higher  wages  and  salaries  will  become  an  inflation  problem,  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank pays close attention to unit labour costs (or ULCs), defined as average cost of 
labour per unit of output. Since 2010, ULC growth has ranged between around 6 and 8 per 
cent.5  Given  our  weaker  economic  growth,  however,  these  ULCs  should  have  moderated, 
resulting in less persistent inflation. They, of course, did not – or at least not by as much as 
we would have liked to see. 
Moreover, with food prices rising and the currency depreciating, the risk of ULCs rising much 
more strongly has been fairly high. Higher food prices are likely to feed into ULCs with a lag, 
as employees over the next year demand pay increases to compensate for the above-target 
inflation  we’re  experiencing this  year.  History  has  shown  us  that these responses to  rising 
food  prices  carry  through  into  inflation  and  can  push  inflation  outside  the  target  range  for 
extended periods of time. 
Monetary  policy  plays  an  important  role  in  tackling  this  wage-price  spiral.  By  defining  and 
defending an inflation target range, the South African Reserve Bank can help wage and price 
setters  to  escape  the  spiral  by  giving  them  a  focal  point  for  their  demands.  But  then  it 
becomes very important for the inflation target range to hold. If wage and price setters start 
to believe that higher inflation is going to last, then they will adjust their demands upwards – 
and, in the end, they’ll be right. They will fulfil their own prophecy and create higher inflation, 
with the more marginal, less productive jobs destroyed in the process. 
Getting to the root of the remuneration and inflation problem requires more work – over and 
above  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve.  Our  labour  markets  are  quite  segmented,  each 
part operating differently from the others and each requiring different reforms to get a better 
mix of job creation and less inflation. 
The  highly  skilled  market  reflects  skills  shortages,  with  employer  competition  fairly  intense 
and unemployment low. This, in turn, generates strong salary increases, unhealthily feeding 
inequality  and  inflation.  More  jobs  need  to  be  created  in  this  market,  not  just  to  reduce 
inequality and moderate inflation, but also to create more jobs for less-skilled workers. What 
this segment of the labour market needs, in the longer run, is more and better education to 
open the highly skilled job market to more South Africans and better match what students 
study  with  the  skills  required  by  the  private  sector.  Temporary  skilled  immigrants  would 
further ease salaries in this segment of the market and encourage economic growth directly 
by growing our domestic knowledge base. The possibility of pro-growth, pro-equality reform 
in this area should make it a policy priority. 
South  Africa’s  other  two  labour  markets  don’t  absorb  nearly  enough  people,  which  leaves 
many  South  Africans  unemployed  or  out  of  the  labour  force  entirely.  As  the  National 
Development Plan recognises, this problem has a lot to do with spatial legacies and access 
to job networks. Reducing the costs of transport and the costs of accessing job opportunities 
                                                
5  Between 2010 and 2015, annual unit labour cost (ULC) growth has been as follows: 8,3 per cent, 6,6 per cent, 
6,5 per cent, 7,3 per cent, 6,2 per cent and 6,6 per cent. ULC growth is forecast to accelerate to almost 8 per 
cent in 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  should  lower  both  the  supply  cost  of  labour  and,  indirectly,  the  cost  of  creating  jobs.  Both 
would help to moderate wage inflation. 
Institutions also play a key role in our inflation process. An important argument in academic 
literature, specifically by Lars Calmfors and John Driffill, connects unemployment to the kinds 
of collective bargaining rules used in a country.6 The basic idea is that a country can achieve 
better  employment  outcomes  when  costs  take  into  account  firm-level  productivity  or  are 
guided  at  a  very  high,  macroeconomic  level.  This  is  because  company-  or  plant-specific 
unions have a special interest in the health of the firm that employs their members and will 
not want agreements that make the firm unsustainable. By contrast, very large unions have 
the power to shape macroeconomic outcomes. They will therefore avoid making deals which 
will push up inflation, drive up interest rates, reduce investment and growth, and ultimately 
destroy jobs. 
The  worst  outcome  is  to  be  in  the  middle,  between  the  two  options.  Yet  our  current 
arrangements lie precisely there, with industry or sectoral bargaining, implying that the actors 
(meaning unions and business associations) are big enough to inflict costs on the economy 
but not big enough to experience those costs themselves. Newer and smaller firms tend to 
have productivity levels that cannot be easily accommodated in such sectoral agreements, 
resulting  in  less  job  creation  than  we  would  like  to  have.7  This  cost  in  jobs  has  been 
estimated  at  somewhere  between  8  and  13  per  cent  of  total  employment,  in  large  part 
because  sectoral  agreements  hurt  small, 
firms.8  South  Africa  has 
surprisingly few of these firms, relative to its peers. This helps to explain our unusually high 
levels of unemployment. 
labour-intensive 
The implementation of the 3–6 per cent inflation target range 
The last factor influencing our current position of being outside the inflation target range that I 
would like to discuss today is how we’ve gone about implementing the 3–6 per cent target 
range. 
The original plan for the inflation target range, drafted in 1999, was to start with 3–6 per cent 
and  then  to  narrow  the  range  to  3–5  per  cent.9  From  there  we  would  have  had  a  pretty 
obvious midpoint, 4 per cent, on which to anchor inflation expectations.10 
Unfortunately, the planned switch to the 3–5 per cent inflation target range was put off when 
the rand depreciated in 2001 and never reinstated. South Africa was left with a wide target 
range. In hindsight, this might have been useful. After all, it is not possible or even always 
desirable to steer inflation at one exact speed all the time. For instance, the standard practice 
with  a  temporary  shock  –  such  as  a  collapse  in  oil  prices  –  is  to  look  through  the  initial 
change in inflation and only respond if the effect is expected to be permanent. A wide target 
range  means  that  these  inevitable  fluctuations  can  usually  be  contained  within  the  range: 
                                                
6  See  Lars  Calmfors  and  John  Driffill,  ‘Bargaining  structure,  corporatism,  and  macroeconomic  performance’, 
Economic Policy, No. 88, 1988. 
7  Bargaining  council  agreements  typically  disallow  exemptions  for  ‘economic  reasons’.  These  presumably 
include low productivity and unaffordability. 
8  See Jeremy R. Magruder, ‘High unemployment yet few small firms: the role of centralised bargaining in South 
Africa’, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Volume 4, No. 3, July 2012. 
9  The 2001 Medium Term Budget Policy Statement revised the inflation target range to 3–5 per cent for 2004 
and  2005.  In  2002,  however,  with  inflation  close  to  10  per  cent,  the  Finance  Minister  postponed  the  target 
range revision indefinitely. See Trevor Manuel, Address to the National Assembly on the introduction of the 
2002  Medium  Term  Budget  Policy  Statement  and  the  2002/03  Adjustments  Appropriation  Bill,  29  October 
2002 (http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/mtbps/2002/speech.pdf). 
10  As an aside, we see that India has chosen 4 per cent as the midpoint for its recently adopted inflation target 
range.The new target is 4 per cent plus or minus 2 per cent. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  inflation might move to the top or the bottom of the range but it will rarely breach the target 
range entirely. 
Yet this isn’t the way in which the policy committee has targeted inflation. Rather, we have 
kept monetary policy relatively loose over long periods of time, hoping for a bit more growth. 
We have tended to cut rates whenever inflation looked like falling below the midpoint of the 
target  range. We  have  hit  the  lower  half  of  the  target  range  only  for  brief  periods  of  time. 
Looking back, headline inflation has averaged 6,2 per cent over the entire inflation-targeting 
period (since 2000). Furthermore, in the event of shocks, we have repeatedly breached the 
upper end of the target range, with inflation at over 6 per cent for about a third of the time in 
the  last  five  years.  The  perception  of  wage  and  price  setters  is  that  we  have  primed 
ourselves to miss the inflation target by aiming close to the top of the range, regardless of 
our position in the business cycle. 
Trade-offs: final thoughts 
By now, it should be clear why we’ve had high and rising inflation despite weakening GDP 
growth. 
We’ve experienced a drought that has led to sharply higher food prices. 
The exchange rate has been depreciating for several years and is now very weak. Some of 
this depreciation was appropriate and necessary, given falling commodity prices and some 
measure of policy tightening in the US. But the scale of depreciation we have experienced 
speaks to domestic challenges as much as to international ones. 
Our  wage  and  salary  arrangements,  along  with  rigid  product  markets,  generate  persistent 
inflation  pressure,  sometimes  accelerating  inflation  but  always  preventing  it  from  falling 
substantially.  
Finally,  by  allowing  inflation  to  settle  at  the  top  of  the  inflation  target  range,  target  misses 
have been more common whenever any of the underlying drivers of inflation exceeded their 
expected trajectory. 
Imagine the counterfactuals. If wage and salary demands responded to economic conditions, 
they  would  have  moderated  as  the  economy  weakened,  weakening  inflationary  pressure. 
Exchange rate depreciation would have been less extreme without the domestic risk factors. 
With inflation expectations anchored at the midpoint of the target range, we would have had 
an easier time tolerating temporarily high inflation from food prices – and we would have had 
a  clearer  trigger  for  a  monetary  policy  response.  Indeed,  inflation  would  probably  have 
remained within the target range because the starting point would have been lower. In such 
circumstances, it might even have been possible to cut interest rates – the kind of response 
seen in commodity exporters such as Australia and Canada. 
But  we  didn’t  have  these  advantages.  The  best  response  in  our  specific  circumstances 
wasn’t to cut rates. At a minimum, we needed to defend the upper end of the target range, 
ensuring that inflation expectations did not stray from the target entirely. The policy response 
helped to prevent investors from demanding higher interest rates to compensate for inflation 
risk, limiting the rise in longer-term borrowing costs. 
In our second-best world, a gradual and cautious rise in rates was an appropriate means of 
countering  rising  inflation  expectations.  I  would  encourage  you  to  be  satisfied  with  this 
conclusion, but not happy. Happiness will only be appropriate after we have addressed the 
other  problems,  including  the  rigidities  in  our  labour  and  product  markets  as  well  as  the 
domestic risk factors that  are  exacerbating  the rand  weakness.  Monetary  policy  can  offset 
some of the worst consequences of these problems, but it cannot, single-handedly, get us 
out of this troubling mix of little growth, high inflation, and growing unemployment. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
