Mario Draghi: European Systemic Risk Board (welcome address)
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank and Chair of the European
Systemic  Risk  Board,  at  the  first  annual  conference  of  the  ESRB,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  22
September 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to the first annual conference of the European Systemic Risk
Board (ESRB). We have a rich agenda today and tomorrow – one which reflects the value of the
ESRB  as  an  institution.  The  Board  brings  policymakers  together.  We  have  80  member
institutions, each expert in their own field. This diversity of expertise is our strength. The ESRB is
uniquely placed to take a holistic view of the European financial system – to see the overarching
risks and challenges that would be more difficult for our members to perceive individually.
Sharing knowledge and expertise also permits effective coordination of policy. The ESRB acts as
an information hub for the implementation of macroprudential policies for banks, and as a forum
to  discuss  these  policies,  including  their  cross-border  impact  and  the  possible  need  to
reciprocate them in other jurisdictions.
Given its unique Union-wide, cross-sectoral perspective, the ESRB has focused its research on
the  challenges  posed  by  the  structure  of  the  European  financial  system,  and  the  risks  and
opportunities arising from ongoing changes to that structure. In that context, let me highlight two
themes: the extent of overbanking in Europe and the growth of the non-bank sector.
Overbanking in Europe
Two years ago, the ESRB’s Advisory Scientific Committee (ASC) published a widely cited report
entitled  “Is  Europe  overbanked?”.   It  pointed  out  that,  over  the  preceding  two  decades,  the
banking sector had outgrown capital markets. In the late 1990s, the ratio of total bank assets to
equity and private bond market capitalisation in Europe was below two. By 2008, this ratio had
risen to four. By contrast, the comparable ratio in the US remained below one over this period,
and that of Japan remained below two.
1
Banks play a vital role in financing small and medium sized enterprises, which are a key part of
the European economy. This lending must continue to flow to productive projects if Europe is to
prosper.  But  bank  lending  has  a  tendency  to  be  procyclical:  growing  too  quickly  when  the
economy expands, and shrinking sharply when it contracts . As a result, in the aftermath of a
financial  crisis  economic  growth  in  countries  with  bank-based  systems  lags  behind  that  of
3
countries with more balanced financial systems.
2
The  clear  policy  message  is  that  it  is  better  to  finance  the  real  economy  through  several
channels rather than to rely on just one. Capital markets in particular can act as a useful “spare
tyre”.  That is why the ESRB fully supports the capital markets union, which aims to remove
barriers to the development of capital markets.
4
5
Removing these barriers will foster changes in the structure of the financial system in Europe. In
fact, capital markets and other non-bank sources of external finance have been growing relative
to banks.  This growth should improve firms’ access to funding, and ensure that any losses are
dispersed more widely.
Low bank profitability
The overbanking in Europe, highlighted in the ASC’s report, is also a factor in the currently low
 1 / 4
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
level  of  bank  profitability. A  number  of  reasons  have  been  mooted  as  the  causes  of  this  low
profitability,  including  low  interest  rates.  Long-term  real  interest  rates  have  been  falling  in  the
major  advanced  economies  for  two  decades.  Technological  change,  demographics,  income
inequality and safe asset scarcity are just a few of the factors exerting downward pressure on
long-term real rates.  Accommodative monetary policy by the European Central Bank and other
major  central  banks,  acting  in  accordance  with  their  price  stability  mandates,  has  also
contributed to low interest rates.
6
7
Low  interest  rates  tend  to  squeeze  net  interest  margins  owing  to  downward  rigidity  in  banks’
deposit rates.  But overbanking is also a factor in the current low level of bank profitability. Over-
capacity in some national banking sectors, and the ensuing intensity of competition, exacerbates
this squeeze on margins. Such over-capacity also means the sector does not operate at the
efficient frontier, which is one reason why cost-to-income ratios remain high in some countries.
At  the  same  time,  banks  benefit  from  revaluations  in  their  fixed  income  portfolios.  Moreover,
profitability is boosted by a greater flow of lending and lower loan loss provisions than would have
occurred in the absence of accommodative monetary policy. Analysis by the ECB suggests that
these effects tend to outweigh the impact on net interest income over the short term, but the
picture varies depending on banks’ business models.  In the broader context of generalised over-
capacity and technological innovation, some banks will need to review their business models to
bolster profitability.
8
Other financial institutions also face challenges to their business models in this environment.  In
particular,  institutions  providing  longer-term  return  guarantees  –  notably  guaranteed-return  life
insurers  –  face  a  future  of  weak  profitability  unless  they  adapt  their  business  models  to  a
changing  world.  Macroprudential  policy  can  help  to  boost  the  collective  resilience  of  these
institutions and enhance recovery and resolution frameworks.
Systemic risks beyond banking
9
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  ESRB’s  focus  on  systemic  risks  beyond  banking.  As  financial
intermediation  continues  to  shift  from  banks  to  non-banks,  we  need  to  adapt  our  policy
framework. We need to identify migrating risks and develop tools to mitigate them.
10
 
With this in mind, the ESRB published its first annual EU Shadow Banking Monitor in July.
 The
report  identifies  a  number  of  areas  that  require  close  monitoring,  including  rising  liquidity
mismatches, especially among some bond funds. One measure of liquidity mismatch for open-
ended funds is the share of non-liquid assets in total assets, which was 38% for bond funds in
the fourth quarter of 2015, compared with 26% six years earlier. In this context, the ESRB is
further analysing systemic risks posed by liquidity mismatch and leverage in investment funds.
11
Moreover,  the  report  identifies  considerable  interconnectedness  between  banks  and  shadow
banks, particularly money market funds (MMFs). Approximately two-thirds of MMFs’ total assets
are related to banks, mainly in the form of debt securities. This interconnectedness was a key
consideration  underpinning  the  ESRB’s  recommendation  that  MMFs  should  have  a  fluctuating
net  asset  value,  rather  than  promising  a  constant  one,  and  that  they  should  be  subject  to
enhanced disclosure and liquidity requirements.
Macroprudential policy beyond banking
12
More generally, the ESRB is analysing connections across different sectors and geographies of
the  financial  system.  This  cross-cutting  analysis  informs  the  development  and  calibration  of
macroprudential policy beyond banking. In this way, targeted research enhances the quality of
policymaking and thereby improves the resilience of the financial system.
 2 / 4
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The ESRB believes that the smooth functioning and systemic resilience of derivatives markets
can be improved by requiring standardised over-the-counter contracts to be centrally cleared and
traded on exchanges or electronic trading platforms, in line with the commitments made by the
G20  in  2009.  The  EU’s  first  central  clearing  obligation  came  into  effect  in  June  this  year  for
certain interest rate derivatives, and will gradually be extended to other transactions. The ESRB
is monitoring the effects of this obligation on collateral demand and network structure, and will
publish its findings in due course.
13
14
is 
The ESRB is also leading research into new macroprudential instruments beyond banking. One
policy  under  consideration 
the  macroprudential  use  of  margin  and  haircut
requirements.
 Setting margins and haircuts in a conservative or countercyclical manner may
help  to  contain  the  excessive  build-up  of  leverage.  In  addition  to  “leaning  against  the  wind”,
margin  and  haircut  requirements  can  also  improve  financial  stability  by  mitigating  illiquidity
spirals.
  This  is  particularly  important  given  that  an  imbalance  between  the  demand  for  and
supply of liquidity could amplify or transmit shocks through the financial system.
Conclusion
15
Let me conclude.
Since  the  ESRB’s  foundation,  Europe  has  strengthened  its  regulatory,  supervisory,  and  crisis
management frameworks. The ESRB has contributed to building a rich set of macroprudential
policy  tools  for  banks,
  and  continues  to  coordinate  the  calibration  of  those  policies.  The
European  financial  system  has  thus  become  more  resilient,  with  greater  loss-absorbing
capacity.
16
The  financial  system  is  also  adaptive.  Its  adaptability  is  a  strength,  helping  it  to  meet  the
challenges of the current environment. But it also means that policymakers must remain vigilant.
The  need  for  vigilance  is  why  the  ESRB  has  always  warned  against  policy  inaction  bias.
Macroprudential  policy  is  still  in  its  formative  years,  and  policymakers  are  understandably
cautious about deploying novel instruments. But when we see systemic risks, we should act.
Greater risk arises from inaction.
So  as  you  listen  to  the  presentations  at  this  conference,  think  about  the  implications  for
macroprudential  policy  in  a  changing  world.  Is  the  macroprudential  policy  stance  appropriate?
Are the tools at our disposal effective? Your thoughts and comments will reflect the unique value-
added of the ESRB: to bring policymakers together to exchange expertise and coordinate policy
action, with the common aim of reducing the risk of financial crisis.
On that note, I am pleased to open this first annual conference of the European Systemic Risk
Board.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Pagano, M., S. Langfield, V. Acharya, A. Boot, M. Brunnermeier, C. Buch, M. Hellwig, A. Sapir, I. van den Burg
(2014), “Is Europe overbanked?” ESRB Advisory Scientific Committee Report no.4.
Becker,  B.  and  V.  Ivashina  (2014),  “Cyclicality  of  credit  supply:  firm  level  evidence”, Journal  of  Monetary
Economics, 62: 76–93.
Langfield, S. and M. Pagano (2016), “Bank bias in Europe: Effects on systemic risk and growth”, Economic
Policy, 31(85): 51–106.
Levine, R., C. Lin and W. Xie (2016), “Spare tire? Stock markets, banking crises, and economic recoveries”,
Journal of Financial Economics, 120(1): 81–101.
European Central Bank (2015), “Report on financial structures”, October.
Summers, L., “US economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the zero lower bound”, Business
 3 / 4
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Economics, 49(2).
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
For an analysis of the sensitivity of US banks’ pre-provision income over one year to changes in short-term
interest rates, see M. Gomez, A. Landier, D. Sraer and D. Thesmar (2016), “Banks’ exposure to interest rate risk
and the transmission of monetary policy”, ESRB Working Paper no.13.
Cœuré, B. (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates”, speech at the Yale Financial Crisis
Forum, Yale School of Management, July.
These challenges are set out in more detail in an ESRB report on the macroprudential issues arising from low
interest rates and structural change in the EU financial system.
European Systemic Risk Board (2016), “Macroprudential policy beyond banking: an ESRB strategy paper”, July.
European Systemic Risk Board (2016), “EU Shadow Banking Monitor”, July. The methodological background to
the ESRB’s EU Shadow Banking Monitor is described in: L. Grillet-Aubert, J. Haquin, C. Jackson, N. Killeen and
C.  Weistroffer  (2016),  “Assessing  shadow  banking  –  non-bank  financial  intermediation  in  Europe”,  ESRB
Occasional Paper no.10.
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (2012),  “Recommendation  on  money  market  funds”,  December.  Further
analysis of money market funds’ systemic importance is provided in J. Ansidei, E. Bengtsson, D. Frison and G.
Ward (2012), “Money market funds in Europe and financial stability”, ESRB Occasional Paper no. 1.
Abad, J., I. Aldasoro, C. Aymanns, M. D’Errico, L. Fache Rousová, P. Hoffmann, S. Langfield, M. Neychev, and T.
Roukny (2016), “Shedding light on dark markets: First insights from the new EU-wide derivatives dataset”, ESRB
Occasional Paper no. 11.
European Systemic Risk Board (2015), “Report on the efficiency of margining requirements to limit pro-cyclicality
and the need to define additional intervention capacity in this area”, July.
Clerc, L., A. Giovannini, S. Langfield, T. Peltonen, R. Portes, and M. Scheicher (2016), “Indirect contagion: the
policy problem”, ESRB Occasional Paper no. 9.
European Systemic Risk Board (2014), “Flagship report on macroprudential policy in the banking sector”, March;
and  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (2014),  “Handbook  on  operationalising  macroprudential  policy  in  the
banking sector”, March.
 4 / 4
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
