Veerathai  Santiprabhob:  The  Bank  of  Thailand’s  financial  and
monetary policies – the way forward
Speech by Dr Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Thailand Focus
2016 “A new growth strategy”, Bangkok, 31 August 2016.
 Chairman of the Stock Exchange of Thailand,
Secretary General of the Securities and Exchange Commission,
President  of  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand,  Chairman  of  Phatra  Securities,  and
President of Asia Pacific Bank of America Merrill Lynch
Distinguished Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen,
A very very good morning to you all.
It gives me great pleasure to be back at this prestigious forum. Let me begin by thanking the
Stock Exchange of Thailand, Phatra Securities, and Bank of America Merrill Lynch for inviting me
to be part of the 10th anniversary of Thailand Focus. I believe many of you, if not all, have learnt
about Thailand’s reform initiatives and kept eyes on the outcomes of these developments. Today,
this forum will bring you insights from the nation’s key policymakers and give you a chance to
learn about exciting opportunities which Thailand has to offer.
As  for  my  part,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  perspectives  on ‘The  Bank  of  Thailand’s
Financial and Monetary Policies’. Indeed, as the Thai economy is undergoing transformation in
order  to  lift  our  growth  potential,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  roles  of  monetary  and  financial
policies in facilitating this critical transition.
If you may recall, the key takeaway from my talk last year is that the Thai economy is like a
car which has good suspension, but whose engine is in need of an overhaul in order to
move faster. Our sound external position and strong financial institutions are analogous to that
good  suspension,  which  has  so  far  afforded  us  a  smooth  ride  on  the  bumpy  road  of  global
financial volatility. It has been almost a year since our last check-up, and as it has indeed been
an eventful year, I would like to start my talk today by revisiting how the conditions of our car have
developed since then. In the second part of my talk, I will discuss how the Bank of Thailand will
contribute to the engine overhauling process – along with the private sector and the government
which have already launched several initiatives.
In the span of just 8 months since my last Thailand Focus address, the global economy
has gone through several turbulent periods. If you all may recall, on the first working day of
the  year,  the  Shanghai  Stock  Index  fell  by  7%,  with  two  circuit  breakers  triggered  in  one  day.
Crude oil prices saw a steady rise from below 30 USD per barrel to over 50 USD, before being
struck  in  a  back-and-forth  market  within  the  40  to  50  USD  range.  Besides,  we  have  again
witnessed  multiple  rounds  of  volatility  in  the  global  financial  markets  as  a  result  of  shifting
expectations of the Fed’s rate hikes. More recently, Brexit brought to the forefront the concerns
over the health of the European economy, leaving the rest of the world with less hope of a broad-
based economic recovery. Furthermore, 6 central banks have implemented the negative interest
rate  policy  resulting  in  irregular  financial  market  structure .  An  extraordinary  amount  of  the
world’s sovereign debts carry negative yields. Meanwhile, major currencies have been volatile.
Relative to the USD, the Japanese Yen appreciated by 18%, whereas the British Pound dropped
1
 1 / 5
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
by 12% year to date.
As for a small open economy like Thailand, domestic financial markets inevitably felt the
ripple effects of the developments and growing anxiety at the global level. Once again,
risk appetite has turned towards emerging markets – and Thailand is no exception. While last
year, we saw a net portfolio outflow of around 7.6 billion USD, the first 7 months of this year
already recorded a net inflow of over 5 billion USD into bond and equity markets combined. 10-
year  bond  yield  hit  a  record  low  at  1.54%,  while  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Thailand  index  has
marked about 20% gain to date, compared with a 14% fall just one year earlier.
Despite  volatile  asset  price  movements,  the  Thai  financial  system  remains  resilient
thanks to our sound external position and sound financial system. As in the past, foreign
participation  in  the  Thai  bond  market  remains  at  less  than  10  percent,  while  that  in  the  stock
market is around 30 percent of the market capitalization. Both figures are well below those of our
regional peers, suggesting that we are relatively more immune to abrupt capital flights. On the
external stability front, Thailand continues to perform well across most indicators. Last
year, our current account recorded a large surplus of over 8% of GDP, and it is expected to grow
further  this  year.  Moreover,  we  continue  to  have  more  than  enough  international  reserves  to
cover our foreign debt obligations.
Our  banking  system  continues  to  be  strong,  with  ample  capital  buffer  and  cushion
against bad loans. Their capital adequacy ratio continues to be well above the required level of
8.5%, and has increased slightly since my last address. Moreover, amid the gradual economic
recovery,  banks  continue  to  accumulate  high  level  of  loan  loss  provision  to  cushion  for
deteriorating loan quality. The aggregate NPL figure remains manageable at around 2.7% and the
combined  profits  of  the  banking  sector  remain  sizeable  despite  being  slightly  trimmed  by  the
additional loan-loss provisioning.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Maintaining  sufficient  buffers  have  proved  essential  in  coping  with  the  financial
turbulence of the past year, as they helped to shield the economy from facing the full
impacts  of  external  shocks.  Besides  the  financial  system,  the  real  economy  has  also
been  a  beneficiary  of  stable  financial  environment. In  the  first  half  of  this  year,  the  Thai
economy expanded by 3.4%. Despite being weighed down by one of the most severe droughts
during  the  past  year,  farm  income  and  rural  consumption  have  recently  regained  their
momentum,  as  rainfalls  are  back  to  its  normal  level.  In  the  meantime,  public  investment  and
stimulus  measures  have  also  helped  restore  private  confidence,  while  strong  growth  in  the
tourism sector continues to reinforce the momentum of our economic recovery.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Such positive economic development should indeed be welcomed. However, it should
not distract us from making continued investment on a more important task which is to
undertake  the  much-needed  structural  adjustments.  This  is  what  I  referred  to  as  “an
engine  overhaul”  in  my  talk  last  year. Fortunately,  technology  and  innovation  offer  very
powerful  tools  which  can  be  used  to  accelerate  our  growth  engine.  We  need  to  first  position
ourselves  to  receive  the  full  benefits  of  their  arrival  –  both  in  terms  of  human  capital  and
infrastructure. The  good  news  is  that  the  government  has  already  launched  several  initiatives
geared  in  this  direction.  Throughout  this  forum,  you  will  get  to  learn  about  the  rationale  and
aspiration of key reform initiatives, such as the new S-curve, public private sector collaboration,
and upgrading of the tourism and the healthcare sectors.
The Bank of Thailand also plays a critical role in this engine overhauling process, both
through our conduct of monetary policy and financial sector development policy. In the
 2 / 5
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
former,  we  aim  to  provide  an  accommodative  and  stable  macroeconomic  and  financial
environment, so that the ongoing recovery is supported by ample liquidity and not interrupted by
excessive  volatility.  In  the  latter  role  of  development,  we  aim  to  put  in  place  more  efficient
financial  infrastructure  in  order  to  facilitate  business  activities  and  thereby  enhancing  their
competitiveness. Let me elaborate on each role one by one.
Recent experiences have demonstrated to us just how volatile the financial environment
could  be  –  both  in  terms  of  risks  to  economic  growth  and  the  policy  responses  that
follow. Unfortunately, the journey ahead is paved with similar challenges, if not greater – financial
stability  risks  and  economic  rebalance  in  China,  the  growing  monetary  policy  divergence,  the
lower-for-longer  interest  rate  policy  and  perhaps  a  more  widespread  use  of  unconventional
measures  by  central  banks  of  Advanced  Economies.  As  a  small  open  economy,  we  must
therefore ensure that there is sufficient policy room to mitigate the potential adverse impacts or
events  that  could  unfold  in  the  future. In  this  context,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee’s
decision  to  maintain  the  policy  interest  rate  should  be  viewed  as  a  preference  to
preserve  the  limited  policy  space  for  rainy  days  ahead. The  Monetary  Policy  Committee
expected  headline  inflation  to  return  to  the  target  band  later  this  year,  while  core  inflation  has
stayed positive at around 0.8% since the beginning of this year. However, in the event of abrupt
or  excessive  movements  of  financial  market  variables  or  capital  flows,  the  Bank  of  Thailand
stands  ready  to  utilize  the  necessary  policy  tools  in  order  to  support  economic  recovery  and
ensure  the  well  functioning  of  the  domestic  financial  markets.  Looking  forward,  amid  the
prolonged low rate environment both at home and abroad, we will continue to closely monitor the
buildup of imbalances and underpricing of risks in the financial system, while preparing to take
necessary actions in order to prevent them from becoming systemic risks.
All in all, monetary policy in the periods ahead will continue to be a delicate balancing act
between  risks  of  inflation,  growth  and  financial  stability,  and  the  Monetary  Policy
Committee  will  make  sure  that  its  actions  do  not  add  vulnerability  to  the  financial
environment.
Regarding our financial sector development policy, the Bank of Thailand believes that
efficient  and  inclusive  financial  and  payment  systems  can  help  empower  our  growth
engine.  By  efficiently  allocating  resources  to  match  the  diverse  needs  of  different
sectors  in  our  economy,  we  should  be  able  to  release  their  untapped  potential  and
therefore enhance Thailand’s competitiveness. Indeed, our three master plans – namely the
Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  the  Payment  System  Roadmap  and  the  Capital  Account
Liberalization Master Plan – have been designed with such goals in mind.
Although each plan is different in their rationales and implementation, their intended outcomes
can be summarized along three key dimensions – (1) to reduce cost of financial services for
households  and  businesses  (2)  to  deepen  financial  inclusion  and  (3)  to  facilitate  financial
connectivity in the region.
Allow me to delve into some details.
Starting with reducing costs of financial services. As the Thai economy can no longer compete
on  supply  of  cheap  labors,  cost  competitiveness  in  other  areas  are  critical.  In  light  of  this
objective, the Financial Sector Master Plan and the Payment System Roadmap envisage
that  cost  savings  in  the  financial  sector  due  to  more  efficient  operation  of  financial
institutions  and  the  payment  system  would  be  passed  on  to  the  real  sector  and  the
households. Here, I would like to note that the term financial institutions go beyond banks and
finance companies to include non-bank players like e-Payment service providers and FinTech
(Financial Technology) firms as well.
 3 / 5
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
The Bank of Thailand believes that the very foundation for improved financial services’
efficiency is through the adoption of digital technology and shared infrastructure. The
former comprises digitization of operations, product offerings and service channels. An example
of the shared services initiatives is the PromptPay system, the Minister of Finance mentioned in
the  speech. PromptPay  is  an  integrated  retail  fund  transfer  system  that  will  allow
individuals, businesses, and government to transfer funds across service providers at
low costs with ease, flexibility and resilience.
On top of the promotion of e-commerce, PromptPay together with other e-Payment initiatives, for
example shared point of sales (POS) terminals, digital tax messaging, standardized QR codes,
will  lead  to significant  reduction  in  costs  of  cash  management  and  paper  processing,
currently borne by banks, businesses, consumers, as well as the Bank of Thailand. In addition,
the move from cash-based transactions to more electronic-based transactions can potentially
reduce incidences of corruption and improve governance through greater transparency.
On the regulatory front, an important development is the crafting of the Payment System Act
which aims to consolidate fragmented laws and regulations governing electronic payments. The
Act  will  set  out  business  rules  and  regulatory  framework  for  our  payment  systems  that  meet
international standards. To date, the Act has been endorsed by the cabinet and expected to soon
be presented to the National Legislative Assembly.
Let me say a few words about FinTech. We view FinTech as an important addition to our
financial  service  ecosystem.  FinTech  would  give  consumers  more  options  and  save
operating costs for financial institution and service providers. On a bright side, FinTech
firms  are  agile  and  efficient  by  nature.  Yet  allowing  certain  types  of  them  to  run  freely  may
destabilize the ecosystem. We need to promote financial innovation while ensuring that potential
risks from its misuse would not contribute to systemic risks’ build-up. Equally important, there
needs to be adequate consumer protection.
The Bank of Thailand aims to foster a symbiosis between FinTech and our current financial
ecosystem.  Among  others,  we  would  adopt  the Regulatory  Sandbox  Framework,  allowing
banks and FinTech firms to test their innovation with limited group of customers before launching
their services to broader public. Financial institutions are also allowed to invest more flexibly in
FinTech related venture capital. It is worth noting here that the benefits of FinTech are not
only limited to lower cost of financial services but also greater financial inclusion, to which I now
turn.
Greater financial inclusion not only improves welfare of the people but also unleashes
economic potential of the previously excluded. The Bank of Thailand has focused on
promoting financial system’s access and inclusion. For instance, e-Payment channels play
an important role in providing payment access at low costs. Money transfer via the PromptPay
platform will be free for the amount not higher than 5,000 baht. Besides, the government will also
be able to use e-Payment as a means to directly transfer welfare benefits to the targeted group
of end beneficiaries as mentioned by the Minister of Finance.
In addition to embracing FinTech and implementing the e-Payment as part of the key measures
to  improve  financial  access,  other  notable  measures  are  the  implementation  of  the Business
Security Act and the expansion of data bases for individual and SME borrowers. The Business
Security Act,  which  came  into  effect  in  July  of  this  year,  expands  the  list  of  eligible
collaterals for secured lending by financial institutions to include things like inventories, and
receivables. The passage of this Act is a win-win for small businesses as well as banks. The
Bank  of  Thailand  regulations  on  loan  classification,  provisioning  requirement,  and  valuation
guidelines have been issued to help banks adopt this new collateral regime.
 4 / 5
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
Ultimately however, we would like to see Thailand moving from collateral-based lending
towards cash-flow-based lending especially for small businesses with few or no eligible
collaterals but otherwise viable prospects. In order to do so, we need to have sufficient data
for credit risk enhancement and monitoring. In light of this objective, we are developing an
industry-wide SME database from pooled bank data for banks to use for their planning and risk
management. In addition, we are working with relevant parties to amend the Credit Bureau Act
to expand its membership to players like Peer-to-Peer (P2P) lenders. These efforts would get
along  well  with  the  government  policy  to  expand  the  roles  and  coverage  of Thai  Credit
Guarantee Corporation (TCG) to provide credit access for SMEs lacking collateral security.
Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  If  we  look  beyond  our  domestic  market,  increasing  regional
integration brings numerous exciting business opportunities. Thailand’s strategic location
at the heart of Mainland ASEAN along with close economic relations with our neighbors make us
a natural candidate to become a regional connector of trade and financial services. We have
offered many fronts to enhance such connectivity.
To  begin  with,  the Capital Account  Liberalization  Master  Plan aims  to  make  our  financial
markets  serve  residents  and  non-residents  more  flexibly  with  diverse  products  and  services.
This  would  facilitate  regional  financial  transactions.  Companies  with  regional  operations  are
encouraged to set up a Treasury Center (TC) with the flexibility of foreign exchange regulations
as well as tax incentives. To date, 16 companies, most of which are Multinational Corporations
(MNCs) with intention to use Thailand as a springboard to gain access to CLMV, have already
received a TC License, with several more to participate.
The  Bank  of  Thailand  is  also  continuously  promoting the use of local currency in regional
trade settlement. In March this year, cross-currency dealers were appointed to act as clearing
agents  for  the  Baht  and  the  Malaysian  Ringgit.  In  the  near  future,  we  will  allow securities
companies to  buy  and  sell  foreign  currencies  within  the  scope  of  their  brokerage  business.
Foreign  corporations  will  also  be  permitted  to borrow  directly  in  Thai  baht  from  domestic
financial institutions to invest in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS). Also in March of
this  year,  we  have  signed  Letter  of  Intent  with  Malaysia  and  Indonesia,  and  negotiations  are
currently  under  way,  to  establish the Qualified ASEAN Banks. Looking forward, this initiative
should help enhance financial connectivity, and improve operational flexibility of businesses in the
region.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  I  outlined  above,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is  committed  to
establishing financial infrastructure which will facilitate efficient and inclusive growth. If
Thailand were to drive through the volatile and fragile global economy, the growth engine must be
modified  to  suit  this  demanding  environment.  The  financial  technology,  financial  inclusion  and
regional connectivity are very potent tools which can be used to upgrade our financial engine – so
that our vehicle will be agile and powerful enough to move forward effectively in the changing
terrain. In the meantime, the Bank of Thailand will continue to ensure that our suspension system
be  well  maintained  in  order  to  have  a  smooth  ride  on  the  bumpy  road  toward  sustainable
economic prosperity.
1
Include the central banks of Euro area, Sweden, Switzerland, Denmark, Japan and Hungary.
 5 / 5
BIS Central Banker's Speeches
