  Perry Warjiyo: Indonesian economic outlook this year and the years 
ahead 
Keynote speech by Mr Perry Warjiyo, Deputy Governor of Bank Indonesia, at BNP Paribas 
Economic Outlook 2016, Jakarta, 23 March 2016. 
 Introduction 
Following  the  success  of  strong  macroeconomic  policy  adjustments  since  the  Fed  tapper 
tantrum Mei 2013, Indonesia economy is already surpassing its turning point since second 
half of 2015. Macroeconomic and financial stability have been intact at the back of continued 
turbulences  in  the  global  economic  and  financial  environments.  There  was  an  unintended 
consequence  of  the  policy  adjustments,  though,  that  the  domestic  economic  growth  has 
been slowing, albeit still at relatively comfortable level compared to other emerging countries. 
I do believe Indonesia economy  will be better this year. And even  it  will accelerate further 
next year and years to come. Let me persuade you on this. 
• 
First,  we  will  continue  to  stress  the  importance  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability as a prerequisite for sustainable growth. We already show our commitment 
and  long-standing track record  on  this,  and  we  will  continue  to  do  so.  The  recent 
global  economic  and  financial  condition  is  still  challenging  and  uncertain.  But 
compared  to  last  year,  which  was  I  reckon  the  challenging  year,  there  are  some 
elements of certainty that will make 2016 better than 2015, including the likelihood of 
FFR increases. 
Second,  this  is  the  time  where  all  the  three  policy  mix  of  Indonesia  economic 
developments, i.e. fiscal, monetary, and structural reforms, are working together and 
reinforcing each other. This is where actually Indonesia differs with other countries. 
Following  the  brave  removals  of  subsidies,  fiscal  stimulus  has  been  in  effect  and 
accelerated for higher economic growth. Structural reforms have been speed up too. 
The  government  has  done  remarkably  well  in  accelerating  reforms  in  many  key 
areas:  better  investment  climate,  infrastructure  developments,  manufacturing  and 
industry, agriculture, maritime, and tourism. 
Third, central bank policies have been reinforcing the fiscal stimulus and structural 
reforms  by  the government.  Last  year,  at the  backdrop  of  uncertainty  surrounding 
FFR  increases,  we  started  to  relax  our  macroprudential  policy  of  LTV  ratio  and 
reserve  requirements  to  support  bank  lending  for  economic  growth.  This  year  we 
already cut our BI policy rates three times in January, February, and March a total of 
75  bps  to  6.75%.  We  believe  that  monetary  and  macroprudential  easing  are 
consistent with our forecast of stable macroeconomic condition and higher economic 
growth. 
  These three reasons why I am very confident that in 2016 Indonesian economic prospect will 
be  better,  with  higher  economic  growth  and  sound  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability. 
And I believe it will be even more promising in 2017 and beyond. 
Now  let  me  talk  on  these  three  following  aspects:  first,  our  assesment  on  the  global 
economic  and  financial  outlook,  and  the  challenges  that  we  saw;  second,  Indonesian 
economic outlook, how we try to stimulate our economic growth and maintain the stability; 
and third, how BI policy mix plays a key role in this road to Indonesia promising outlook to the 
future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Global Outlook and Risks 
We  particularly  put  emphasize  on  these  three  aspects  of  global  economic  and  financial 
outlook  and  risk:  global  economic  growth,  commodity  prices,  and  divergence  of  monetary 
policies. In addition, we also monitor closely the development in China, as its important role 
in the global and regional economy. 
On the global economic growth. It is still a challenging year. IMF just released in January the 
world economic outlook for this year and next year of 3.4% and 3.6%, respectively, a 0.2% 
lower than earlier forecasts. The US is still the main engine of the global economic growth, at 
2.6% for  both  2016  and  2017. We  see  slower  recovery  in  Europe  at  1.7% for  both  years, 
slightly higher than 1.5% in 2015. So I think that parts of developed economies have started 
their economic recovery albeit at slow pace. The challenge is, of course, on China, which is 
forecasted  to  grow  around  6.3%  this  year  and  6.0%  next  year.  These  are  the  main 
challenges  from  the  global  economic  growth,  which  force  us  to  rely  more  on  domestic 
demand to support our growth. 
On the commodity prices. Last year, we saw a decline on our export commodity price index. 
This year it still declines before rebound in 2017 with slightly positive increase. This means 
that the commodity prices will reach at the bottom this year, and will start rising next year. In 
fact,  palm  oil  price  already  stated  to  rebound,  forecasted  to  increase  this  year.  Though 
volatile in the short-term, oil prices will likely be around $35 per barrel, much lower than $50 
per barrel assumed in the budget. That means our inflation will be lower, even though it puts 
pressures  on  budget  revenues.  All  in  all,  it  is  imperative  for  Indonesia  to  ladder  up  from 
commodity export base to manufacturing.  
On the divergence of monetary policy. After the first FFR increase of 25bps at the end of last 
year,  most  of  the  markets  predicted  another  50bps  increases  this  year,  once  probably  in 
June and another at the end of year. We already included this scenario in our policy making. 
Although it is still challenging, but compared to 2015 I think the uncertainty and volatility will 
be lower this year. We closely monitor the negative policy rates of Euro and Japan. Frankly, I 
am in doubt that these will be effective to address their deflation problems compared to their 
quantitative easing. All in all, these FFR outlook and negative rates in Europe and Japan as 
the ‘push factors’, with the positive outlook in our part as the ‘pull factor’, will be positive for 
FDI and portfolio inflows to Indonesia and rupiah exchange rate. 
On  China.  There  are  three  channels  that  we  need  to  anticipate  from  China  factors:  trade, 
renmimbi  depreciation,  and  investment.  On  trade,  China  slowdown  and  commodity  price 
declines  continue  to  put  pressures  on  our  export.  Our  simulation  shows  that  every  1%  of 
economic  slowdown  in  China  corresponds  to  0.3%  slowdown  in  Indonesian  economic 
growth. On renmimbi, I do not believe there  will be big devaluation as  we saw  last year. I 
think PBoC will continue to intervene and reckon that renminbi depreciation will be gradual 
this year. The challenge in China is of course the policy adjustments that being implemented 
right now, i.e.: further capital account liberalization, financial market development, as well as 
greater exchange rate flexibility. This leads to the third China factor that we must not forget. 
China  is  aggressively  pursuing  its  outward  investment  to  support  economic  growth, 
embedded into its ambitious silk road strategy. So we have to prepare and open our arms for 
greater investments from China, as we have done to Japan and South Korea. 
These are what we see from the global economic and financial condition. Last year up until 
September was the most difficult time, but after December we see some improvements. The 
uncertainty is still there, but overall we are more confident now. We have incorporated these 
uncertainties  in  our  policy  making.  Indonesia  has  shown  its  resilience  in  the  past,  and  it 
poises to progress well now and to the future. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Indonesia Economic Outlook and Risks 
With stimulus from both fiscal and monetary fronts, as well as accelerated structural reforms 
in many key areas, we will be seeing significant improvements on Indonesia economy this 
year  and  beyond.  The  fiscal  stimulus  started  to  kick  in  in  the  third  and  fourth  quarter  last 
year, and budget absorption has been accelerated since early of this year, notably in capital 
expenditures.  The  continuous  series  of  deregulation  packages  from  the  government  will 
provide  greater  impetus  for  better  investment  climate,  competitiveness,  and  buoyant 
economic activities. We are seeing accelerated completions of key infrastructure projects: toll 
road,  airports,  energy,  irrigation,  and  more.  Our  macroprudential  relaxation  and  monetary 
easing will also provide supports for higher economic growth. 
Let me provide our latest economic outlook for this year and next year. 
On economic growth. Last year, we recorded an economic growth of 4.79%. With the fiscal 
stimulus,  the  economic  growth  reached  the  bottom  of  4.66%  in  the  second  quarter  of  last 
year  and  picked  up  to  5.04%  in  the  last  quarter.  Investment  in  construction  related  to 
government  projects  together  with  private  and  government  consumptions  support  the 
recovery.  This  year  will  be  much  better.  Compared  to  early  of  last  year,  where  the 
government must deal with the administrative procedures, this year fiscal stimulus through 
the  acceleration  of  government  projects  already  started  to  kick-in  in  the  first  quarter.  With 
that, our economic growth forecast for this year will be around 5.2–5.6%. It will be supported 
by  fiscal  stimulus  as  well  as  the  monetary  policy  easing  to  accelerate  economic  growth. 
Private  consumption  will  still  be  robust.  Government  related  expenditures,  especially 
investment in infrastructures, will boost the economy, as we saw since Q3-2015. That is why 
the  sectors  that  start  rebounding  will  be  construction,  transportation,  communication,  and 
electricity, which are most of the government related fiscal stimulus sectors. I am sure that 
trade  and  manufacturing  sectors  will  follow  as  the  economic  growth  starts  to  gain  broad 
momentum. This is the dynamic of the stimulus to economic growth that we will be seeing to 
the future. 
On inflation. We managed to lower inflation from 8.3% in 2014 to only 3.3% in 2015, which I 
think a part of its success owes to our monetary policy credibility that we gain since 2013. 
This  year  and  next  year  we  forecast  inflation  within  our  range  of  4±1%.  In  the  past,  the 
challenge of price stability mainly came from administered prices, namely the subsidy of fuel 
and electricity. But the government has succeded in reforming these subsidies. This helps 
the central bank to be more certain in forecasting and controlling inflation. Unlike in the past, 
both  CPI  and  core  inflations  will  be  convergent  and  under  controlled.  Exchange  rate 
passthrough  has  been  benign,  because  of  the  weak  domestic  demand,  commodity  price 
declines, and very well anchored inflation expectation. 
On  current  account  deficit.  Our  macroeconomic  adjustments  in  the  past  have  succeded  in 
lowering the CAD from the peak 4.4% of GDP in Q2-2013 to about 2% for the whole year 
2015. For Indonesia, a CAD of 2.5–3% is still sustainable, because we still need to grow and 
for that we need sustainable financing from FDI and other long-term financing. That is why, 
with 2% CAD in 2015, we have room for monetary easing without worrying to external sector 
stability. This year, with the economic recovery gains momentum, CAD will be expected to 
widened but still within our long term sustainable CAD norm of 2.5–3% of GDP. We expect 
more than enough external financing for these deficits, with FDI constitutes the majority of 
the capital inflows and to a lesser extent long-term private external borrowing and portfolio 
investments. 
On financial system stability. Overall banking industry is sound, with CAR relatively high at 
about 21%. Lending growth is slowing, only about 10% in January 2016. But with economic 
stimulus  from  both  fiscal  and  monetary,  as  well  as  liquidity  injection  with  1%  reduction  of 
reserve  requirement  that  Bank  Indonesia  decided  recently,  we  expect  lending  growth  to 
increase  to  about  12–14  %  this  year.  Overall  NPL  is  low  at  2.7%  (gross)  or  1.4%  (net), 
although a bit increasing for some banks especially for the mining sectors. We have done 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  analysis  on  the  corporate  risks  as  well  as  household  risk.  Last  year  we  record  corporate 
earnings were declining as economy was slowing down. But overall corporates are adjusting 
quite well, as they are doing a lot of efficiency and early repayments of their debts, both local 
and  external  debts. With  economy  is  rebounding,  overall  corporate  performances  will  also 
improving this year. 
Bank Indonesia Policy Mix 
Bank Indonesia mandate is to achieve price stability (inflation) and maintain exchange rate 
stability  to  support  economic  growth.  We  also  support  financial  system  stability.  For  our 
policy making, we analyze and forecast macroeconomic condition two years ahead: inflation, 
economic  growth,  exchange  rate,  current  account  balance,  and  bank  lending,  taking  into 
account the latest assessment on fiscal and financial system conditions as well as on global 
economic growth, interest rates, and commodity prices. We do not rely only one instrument, 
i.e.  interest  rate,  but  employ  a  policy  mix  of  monetary,  macroprudential,  capital  flow 
management and payment systems. As such, in every monthly board meeting we formulate 
interest  rate,  exchange  rate  policy,  monetary  operation,  capital  flows  management,  and 
macroprudential  measures  based  on  the  latest  assessment  and  forecast  on  overall 
macroeconomic and financial system. 
Early last year, we noted the need for balancing of macroeconomic stability and supporting 
economic growth. We forecasted at the time that inflation would be under controlled within 
target, current deficit narrowed, while economic growth slowed because of both external and 
domestic factors. That was the theme of policy coordination between Bank Indonesia and the 
government.  We  agree  to  accelerate  fiscal  stimulus  for  supporting  economic  growth, 
benefiting the savings from subsidy reforms in 2014. At Bank Indonesia, we also rebalance 
our policy mix. While interest rate cut was not possible at that time because of possibility of 
FFR increases, we have started to relax our macroprudential policy. We relaxed LTV ratios 
by  an  average  10%  in  June  2015  and  lower  reserve  requirements  in  June  and  December 
2015.  Following  the  first  FFR  increase  in  December  2015  and  less  uncertainty  about  the 
future courses of possible FFR increases, we started to cuts our policy rates this year. Thus, 
both of our monetary and macroprudential policies are now on easing modes. Together with 
fiscal stimulus and structural reforms by the government, all of the national policy mix, i.e. 
fiscal,  monetary  and  structural  reforms,  are  reinforcing  for  accelerating  economic  growth 
while maintaining macroeconomic and financial stability. 
Let me brief on the latest board decision of Bank Indonesia policy mix. 
On the monetary policy. With inflation will remain low and within target for this year and next 
year,  and  current  account  deficit  under  controlled  witin  sustainable  range,  there  has  been 
room for monetary easing. We have communicate since October last year, and started to cut 
our  BI  policy  rate  by  25bps  in  January  2016.  We  cut  again  the  BI  Rate  in  February  and 
March by 25bps each to 6.75%. More than that, we cut again our reserve requirement by 1% 
to  6.50%  in  February  2016,  which  we  count  would  add  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  by 
about IDR 34 trillion (about USD 2.6 billion) and with money multiplier of about 4.8 times add 
liquidity in the economy of about IDR163 trilliun (USD12.5 billion). Our signal is clear, that 
macroeconomic  stability  provided  us  rooms  for  monetary  easing  for  supporting  economic 
growth  through  interest  rate  cuts  and  ample  liquidity  in  the  banking  system.  Eventhough 
there  is still  room,  we  will  be  cautious  in  deliberating  our further  monetary  easing. We  will 
assess  throughly  overall  economic  and  financial  developments,  both  domestic  and  global, 
when we formulate monetary policy in every monthly board meeting. In the meantime, we will 
focus  on  strengthening  our  monetary  operations 
the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanisms. 
On  the  exchange  rate  policy.  We  adopt  greater  exchange  rate  flexibility.  We  will  let  the 
market  mechanism  to  determine  the  exchange  rate  according  to  evolving  supply  and 
demand.  And  we  are  proud  that  with  continuous  financial  market  deepening  the  size  and 
to  reinforce 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  price mechanisms in the foreign exchange market has been much developed now. That is 
why in most cases the exchange rate reflect the market mechanism. But we do not shy away 
to  intervene  in  the  market  if  exchange  rate  moves  excessively  and  there  is  jittery  in  the 
market, especially in cases of large foreign capital reversals. If necessary, we intervene by 
both  supplying  the  foreign  exchange  and  buying  government  bonds  from  the  secondary 
market. That is why you do not see excessive volatility both in the exchange rate as well as 
in the government bond yield. Last year was a bit difficult because there was capital outflows 
from the equity due to turbulences in the global market. But it has been reversed this year, 
with accumulated inflows from both fixed income and equity. Our exchange rate appreciated 
by  5.5%  year-to-date  to  mid  March.  Going  forward,  with  the  economy  rebounding,  I  do 
believe  that  both  domestic  and  global  factors  will  provide  favorable  environment  for  our 
exchange rate and financial market. 
On the macroprudential policy. We started with relaxing our loan to value ratio, on average 
about 10% in June last year. We also ease liquidity in the banking system, both through our 
monetary operation as well as reductions in the reserve requirement. Overall lending growth 
is  still  low  at  about  10%  now  as  demand  is  just  rebounding  and  not  as  strong  as  yet. 
However, looking closer to each sectors, the construction loan increased by 20% and real 
estate  loan  increased  by  23%,  showing  that  significant  demand  for  bank  lending  from  the 
fiscal stimulus related activities. We haven’t seen the impact on mortgage loan yet, it grew by 
about 10% last month, as demand for housing is not recovering yet. On the second half of 
last  year,  with  the  fiscal  stimulus  and  monetary  easing,  the  domestic  demand  will  keep  a 
pace and it will be so for demand for bank lending. We are seeing now increasing demand 
for lendings to government project related activities, but we will be seeing increasing demand 
for bank loans to other economic sectors as domestic economic growth becomes more broad 
based. 
Final Remarks 
I have shared my optimisms about positive Indonesian economic outlook this year and the 
years ahead. Economic growth will be higher, and macroeconomic and financial stability will 
be sound. There are some risks, of course, that we need to closely monitor and address, e.g. 
FFR increases, China factors, commodity price declines, and fiscal revenues. This is the time 
for Indonesia to move forward, and we will. All the three policy mix at the national level, i.e. 
fiscal  stimulus,  monetary  easing,  and  accelerated  structural  reforms,  are  reinforcing  to 
support  higher  economic  growth.  We  know  it,  and  investors  see  it.  That  is  why  investors 
already make differentiation of their views and valuations among emerging countries, where 
Indonesia as one of the promising economies. That will support for the better Indonesia to 
the future. 
Hope I bring more optimisms to you. I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
