  Mario Draghi: Researching the macroeconomic policies of the future 
Welcome address by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the first 
ECB Annual Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 28 September 2016. 
 Let me welcome you all to the European Central Bank’s first Annual Research Conference 
(ARC). This is of course not the first gathering to discuss research that the ECB has held in 
its  18-year  history.  But  the  ARC  is  deliberately  greater  in  scale  than  the  many  smaller 
workshops  we  have  held  in  the  past,  covering  the  whole  range  of  research  relevant  for 
central banks. Our aim is to bring together academia and central banks working at the cutting 
edge of economics. The ARC will be our flagship research event each year, making today’s 
conference the first of many to come. 
The ECB commits significant resources to research because good research is the foundation 
of good policy. It strengthens the theoretical underpinnings of our policy framework, lays the 
groundwork for the models we use in our conjunctural analysis, and helps battle the terrible 
twins of empirical macroeconomics: endogeneity and identification. The ability of research to 
identify  counterfactuals  allows  us  to  analyse  the  ex  post  effects  of  our  measures,  and  to 
understand the ex ante impact of new policies prior to their launch. 
As the crisis in the euro area has progressed through its various phases, our need for such 
research  has  evidently  increased  sharply.  To  meet  our  inflation  objective  we  have  had  to 
deploy a wide array of new measures, some of which had no precedent in recent monetary 
history, or at least no track record in the euro area. In doing so, we have drawn heavily on 
the body of academic research into unconventional monetary policies that has built up during 
the crisis. But at times we have also had to act faster than academia has been able to follow. 
We  have  depended  crucially  on  internal  research  by  ECB  staff  to  design,  assess  and 
recalibrate monetary policy. 
The fragmentation of the euro area financial system in 2011–12, for example, required us to 
fundamentally  deepen  our  understanding  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  A 
declining  real  equilibrium  rate  has  caused  us  to  adopt  a  negative  interest  rate  policy  to 
provide the right degree of monetary stimulus, which in turn requires a closer study of the 
effects of breaking through the zero bound. We have had to learn how an asset purchase 
programme  works  in  the  special  conditions  of  the  euro  area,  characterised  by  segmented 
asset markets and bank-based transmission. 
We had little choice but to conduct both policy and research in real time. In many cases we 
were operating in largely unchartered waters. But the important point is that, in each case, 
we were able to design effective monetary policies to cope with an unprecedented series of 
shocks. And we did so based on the best insights that research could provide at the time. 
But if our internal analysis has inevitably moved ahead of academia during the crisis, we are 
now eager for academia to catch up. We depend on both internal and external research to 
help us evaluate what we have done, to scrutinise the various measures we have taken, to 
offer insights and analyses that equip us for the future. Good policymaking can only benefit 
from such scrutiny, and we welcome it. 
And looking forward, we depend on research to help us in other ways,  too. Perhaps most 
salient today is the theme of the interactions between monetary policy and other policies – 
what I have elsewhere called “independence in interdependence”.1 
                                                
1  Draghi,  M  (2016),  “On  the  importance  of  policy  alignment  to  fulfil  our  economic  potential”,  5th  Annual 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture at the Brussels Economic Forum 2016, Brussels, 9 June 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  To  my  mind  it  is  increasingly  evident  that,  when  we  operate  near  the  lower  bound,  such 
interactions  are  heightened.  Properly  aligned  policies  can  help  buttress  each  other,  while 
misaligned policies can produce greater side effects. To ensure that monetary policy can be 
implemented with maximum effectiveness and minimum side effects we need to understand 
those interactions better. 
For instance, we know that if interest rates are to rise safely away from the lower bound, we 
need structural reforms to raise potential output in the euro area and boost long-run interest 
rates.  But  the  term  structural  reform  remains  somewhat  vague.  What  are  the  key  reforms 
needed to lift total factor productivity growth, by ensuring optimal rates of innovation and re-
allocation  of  resources  to  where  they  are  most  productive?  How  do  they  differ  among 
countries  and  at  different  stages  of  the  cycle?  Structural  reforms  are  politically  difficult,  so 
they  need  to  be  based  on  rigorous  research  and  optimally  sequenced  to  yield  quick  and 
tangible results to bolster momentum for continued reform. Along the same vein,  we need 
more  robust  policy  prescriptions  on  the  optimal  composition  of  fiscal  policy  to  promote 
growth. 
We also need to understand better how monetary policy works in the new post-crisis financial 
landscape.  Since  the  crisis,  much  research  has  focused  on  the  role  of  financial 
intermediation  in  macroeconomic  dynamics.  But  given  the  ECB’s  newly  acquired  powers, 
more  research 
interactions  between  macroprudential  regulation, 
microprudential supervision and monetary policy to help guide policymakers on their optimal 
mix.  Research  can  also  underpin  the  policies  required  to  complete  capital  markets  and 
banking union which are key to safeguarding monetary transmission in the face of shocks. 
Finally, we need to understand the optimal balance of policy tools in terms of efficiency and 
equity.  We  know  that  failure  by  central  banks  to  act  during  the  crisis  would  have  had 
distributional  consequences  not  only  on  asset  and  debt  holders,  but  also  on  the  most 
vulnerable in our society who are disproportionately affected by unemployment. But little is 
known to date of the distributional consequences of the unconventional tools we have used, 
either  in  respect  of  their  impact  or  over  the  medium  term.  Of  the  range  of  tools  that  are 
effective at delivering our inflation objective, which have the least redistributive effects? And 
how  should  we  combine  those  tools  and  other  policies  to  yield  the  same  benefits  while 
mitigating the costs? 
The complex interlinkages between monetary policy and other policies in the aftermath of the 
crisis have challenged central bankers and academics alike. Setting policy effectively in the 
new  global  environment  requires  a  solid  foundation  of  high-quality  research.  Conferences 
such  as  this  first  ARC  provide  an  excellent  opportunity  to  strengthen  the  links  between 
policymakers and academics and help create that solid foundation. I look forward to the new 
insights that these next two days  will bring. And, having identified the key areas of further 
research required for strong and stable growth in the euro area that is shared by all, I look 
forward to hearing your ideas and analysis at next year’s second ARC. 
is  needed  on 
the 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
