 Peter Praet: Interview in L’Opinion 
  Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
in L’Opinion, conducted by Mr Luc de Barochez on 15 September 2016, and published on 
20 September 2016. 
 Growth is flat, unemployment is high, deficits are large, reforms have stalled... To what 
extent is France a concern for the European Central Bank?  
Unlike  many  other  EU  countries,  France  has  come  through  the  financial  crisis  relatively 
unscathed. It has also not experienced a sovereign debt crisis. Yet, despite conditions not 
being  too  bad,  the  French  economy  remains  surprisingly  subdued  and  the  gloomy  mood 
persists.  Successive  governments  have  shown  that  they  are  willing  to  introduce  structural 
reforms.  And  some reforms  have  indeed  been  implemented.  But  we  are  seeing significant 
difficulties in pushing them through. The biggest concern is the job market, in particular youth 
unemployment. The government has clearly realised that it is harder to do business in France 
than other countries, such as Germany or Belgium. This is due to labour relations, among other 
things. Which is why the reforms to the labour law, to facilitate company-wide agreements, are 
a step in the right direction. 
What  is  the  most  important  solution  for  a  country  like  France?  Policies  to  increase 
competitiveness or prioritising a reduction in the government deficit? 
Both  are  important.  Our  message  is  that  debt  must  remain  sustainable.  But  it  isn’t  just  a 
question of the absolute value of the debt. The quality of public finances is key. Take healthcare 
spending. A country that spends less in this area can sometimes offer higher-quality care than 
a country that spends far more. On the other hand, if debt sustainability can be improved by a 
certain reform, perhaps some small measure of budget flexibility might be given to facilitate 
the  implementation  of  this  reform.  This  sort  of  flexibility  is  accepted  by  the  European 
Commission. But often budget flexibility is granted and then there’s a problem following up on 
the reform! 
The President of the Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, wants to double the size of his 
investment plan, to €630 billion. Is this crucial for growth? 
It’s a good policy direction, but it’s still difficult to assess what the concrete effect of these 
investment plans will be. For now, investment dynamics in the euro area as a whole, and in 
each member country, remain too weak.  
Speaking for Germany, Wolfgang Schäuble rejected ECB President Mario Draghi’s call 
for the country to put its surplus at the service of the recovery. Do you feel like you’re 
preaching in the wilderness? 
Germany respects the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact - thanks to budgetary surpluses 
and despite high levels of immigration, it is optimistic that it will bring its debt below 60% of 
GDP, the limit set by the Maastricht Treaty, sooner than expected. However, the country’s 
enormous current account surplus is an anomaly at almost 9% of GDP. Growth is too driven 
by external demand. Germany has the fiscal space to develop internal demand.  
Berlin is accusing the ECB of being responsible for this imbalance, as your monetary 
policy is weakening the euro and boosting exports. 
Our monetary policy has been extremely accommodative since spring 2014, in response to 
inflation figures and outlooks that were too weak for too long. It’s a single monetary policy for 
the euro area as a whole. It isn’t necessarily optimal for all countries at all times. Every country 
should, therefore, develop other ways to correct the tensions and imbalances. In the case of 
Germany,  the  country  has  to  decide  for  itself  how  it  wants  to  develop  its  internal  market, 
whether by raising wages, increasing investment or reducing taxes. For example, Germany 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   needs structural reforms in certain sectors, like services. The very good environment provides 
a unique opportunity that won’t necessarily last, as Germany is facing substantial industrial 
challenges in the years to come, for example in the car industry. 
The ECB has just gone over the €1 trillion threshold with its securities purchases under 
its quantitative easing programme, but the impact on inflation and growth seems to be 
negligible. 
We can’t say that because where would inflation be without our policy? Let’s not underestimate 
the critical situation we found ourselves in. Our monetary policy has been essential to avoid a 
severe recession. At the start of the crisis in 2007-2008, a huge gap opened up between long-
term  expectations,  based  on  an  assumption  of  high  growth  rates,  and  harsh  reality. 
Exaggerated expectations led to excessive indebtedness. We are experiencing the correction 
of this overborrowing. Thanks to our standard and non-standard monetary policy measures, 
such as our public debt purchases, the situation is starting to return to normal. 
This ultra-accommodative policy ends in principle in March 2017. Will you stop at this 
deadline? 
Our monetary policy objective is to return inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. We will maintain the very substantial amount of monetary support necessary to 
fulfil our mandate. Our monthly asset purchases to the tune of €80 billion should continue until 
the end of March 2017 or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until we see a sustainable 
adjustment in inflation in line with our objective.  
When considering the potential risks to growth, are you including the possible election 
of Donald Trump in the United States with a protectionist programme? 
It’s important to distinguish between election speeches and actual policies. Speeches today 
are tending to be increasingly national and protectionist, and not only in the United States. 
Currently, people are seeing the negative side of globalisation more than the positive. This 
erosion of trust in the importance of international trade is worrying and may hinder the spread 
of  ideas  and  know-how  which  is  essential  for  growth.  For  years,  the  consequences  of 
globalisation for some segments of the population have been underestimated  – supporting 
policies are necessary. 
Another potential risk for growth – if Matteo Renzi were to lose his referendum this 
autumn in Italy, should we fear a new euro area crisis? 
In  Italy,  like  in  France  or  in  other  countries,  the  problem  is  convincing  the  population  that 
reforms are vital for prosperity, and then implementing these reforms. The Italian government 
has undertaken some major reforms. Pension reform, for example, has greatly improved the 
sustainability of pensions. 
European banks are complaining about your negative deposit rates. Can you reassure 
them that you won’t go any further into negative territory? 
We are aware that the interest rate configuration may be difficult for banks. But it is a part of 
their environment to which they have to adjust. We should also remember that a large part of 
the problem arises from an unrestrained financial system which has indulged in excess. The 
favourable financing conditions, supported by our very accommodative monetary policy, have 
greatly facilitated balance sheet adjustments in various sectors of the economy, including the 
financial sector.  
Bankers must carefully consider their business models. Some banks have adopted a good 
attitude – they realise they are in a difficult environment and that they have to manage it. How 
long will this situation last? Some market participants fear that our rate configuration could 
remain unchanged for a very long time, e.g. for ten years. Personally, I think that we shouldn’t 
be overly pessimistic. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Don’t you believe in secular stagnation? 
No. We face serious adjustment difficulties, which stem from the slowdown in productivity, but 
this slowdown can be managed by structural reforms. Secular stagnation is not inevitable.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
