  Raghuram Rajan: The independence of the central bank 
Remarks by Dr Raghuram Rajan, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at St. Stephen’s 
College, New Delhi, 3 September 2016. 
 Good afternoon. It is great to be invited to speak at St. Stephen’s College. In 1980, I toyed 
with  the  idea  of  joining  my  best  friends  in  applying  for  admission  to  the  BA  in  Economics 
here. Because I had worked so hard for the IIT exam, however, I succumbed to the sunk cost 
fallacy and studied Electrical Engineering. I don’t regret a moment of that misspent youth but 
I hope you will grant me temporary membership of your club today! 
Over  the  last  few  weeks,  I  have  outlined  the  RBI’s  approach  to  inflation,  distressed  debt, 
financial inclusion, banking sector reform, and market reform. Today, I’d like to first discuss 
why central banking is not as easy as it appears (just raise or cut interest rates!) and why it 
needs decisions, sometimes unpopular or hard-to-explain ones, to be made under conditions 
of  extreme  uncertainty.  This  will  then  lead  in  to  my  arguments  about  why  we  need  an 
independent central bank. 
To set the stage, think back to the summer of 2013. After Chairman Bernanke hinted that the 
United States might end quantitative easing, capital started flowing out of emerging markets, 
especially those deemed to have weak macroeconomic fundamentals. India, with high fiscal 
deficits, high current account deficits, and near double digit inflation, was deemed one of the 
“Fragile Five” countries. The rupee plunged as debt investors scurried to safe havens. The 
talk  in  international  markets  was  that  the  rupee  could  reach  a  hundred  to  the  dollar,  and 
some international commentators, knowing little about India, talked about an Indian “crisis”. 
In early August 2013, I was appointed to succeed Dr. Subbarao as Governor of the Reserve 
Bank of India. From the Finance Ministry, I went to the RBI to prepare for the transition. 
We  had  to  get  back  the  confidence  of  international  investors.  And  that  meant  convincing 
them that India was still an attractive place to invest in, despite the then paralyzed economic 
reforms. Furthermore, they had to believe that the rupee would retain its value going forward. 
So I went from room to room asking RBI staff what they were working on, and what ideas for 
financial  sector  reform  they  were  prepared  to  contemplate. We  packaged  our  ideas  into  a 
reform program over the medium term that could change the narrative on India, especially 
given the fiscal reforms the government had initiated. 
To bolster the value of the rupee, we had to give investors more certainty that future inflation 
would be low. After all, it was primarily India’s higher inflation with respect to the rest of the 
world  that  led  to  periodic  abrupt  falls  in  rupee  value.  Then  Deputy  Governor  and  now  my 
successor,  Dr.  Urjit  Patel,  agreed  to  prepare  a  report  on  how  we  could  move  to  a  new 
inflation-focused monetary regime. That would help very much in the medium term, but in the 
short run we had to establish that we were not heading towards crisis. The easiest way to 
demonstrate that was to show we could raise plenty of foreign exchange. 
My  thought  turned  to  an  iffy  scheme  that  had  been  presented  to  me  in  North  Block. 
Essentially,  bankers  had  told  us  they  would  bring  plenty  of  dollars  in  as  FCNR(B)  3  year 
deposits, which they  would convert to rupees and invest in India. In return, they wanted a 
cheap rate at which they could convert rupees back into dollars 3 years hence. So long as 
the Reserve Bank could be trusted to provide the forward dollars, this was a great deal for 
the  banks  –  they  got  rupee  interest  income  and  a  guaranteed  cheap  price  at  which  they 
could swap maturing rupees back into dollars. 
As  I  have  said  elsewhere,  I  did  not  think  much  of  this  scheme  when  I  first  heard  of  it, 
dismissing it as a clever ploy by bankers to get a subsidy from a country in trouble. But it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  refused to go away, and my old colleagues at the finance ministry thought it worth a try as 
the crisis of confidence worsened. 
I too became more favourable after thinking carefully about it. First, I weighed the balance of 
risks.  If  we  did  not  move  the  rupee  back  to  fundamental  value,  every  1  rupee  rise  in  the 
dollar-rupee rate would costs us Rs 40,000 crores more in import costs. Assuming the rupee 
was undervalued by Rs 3 for a couple of years, this would mean a loss of lakhs of crores to 
national income. In contrast, even if the scheme was wildly successful in attracting inflows, 
the  payout  would  only  be  in  the  tens  of  thousands  of  crores.  Of  course,  there  might  be 
cheaper ways of restoring confidence but it was not clear what they were. 
Discussions  with  my  soon-to-be  colleagues  at  the  RBI  threw  up  another  rationale.  The 
bankers who proposed the scheme were saying that if the money came in, the rupee would 
appreciate, and it would cost us less to offer the forward subsidy. This was self-serving and 
not quite right. What was right was that if we changed the narrative on India, and the rupee 
continued appreciating between the point when the money came in and the point we covered 
our liabilities to the bankers in forward markets, it would cost us significantly less. In fact, we 
might even make money on the deal. But what if the rupee plunged after the dollars flowed 
in? There were no certainties here. 
The bottom line was that the scheme was a measured risk, with a probability that the RBI 
would lose money, a certainty that the bankers would make money, but also a reasonable 
chance that the country would be significantly better off. Having obtained the concurrence of 
the Finance Ministry, the RBI Governor had to decide. 
Policy making is about deciding in the face of uncertainty, after weighing the alternatives as 
best as one can. On the day I was to take over, with no good options on the table, I had to 
choose the least bad one. I decided to go ahead. 
The  afternoon  of  September  4th  2013,  we  announced  the  package  of  measures.  The 
FCNR(B) scheme drew in $26 billion, more than any of us anticipated. But more important, 
confidence picked up, the rupee continued strengthening beyond when the money came in, 
partly because the global investor mood as well as Indian electoral projections also changed, 
and  we  covered  our  forward  swaps  cheaply.  We  are  fully  covered  for  outflows  today  and 
have made money on the deal. The rupee has been one of the most stable emerging market 
currencies since then. 
Of course, in hindsight it seems like it was the obvious thing to do because it worked. The 
reality is we will never know for certain! Perhaps it was the other elements of the package, 
perhaps it was everything together. Autobiographies are always written as if the author had it 
all mapped out with perfect foresight, ignoring the risks and uncertainties at that time. This 
misleads, as much as those beautiful photographs of a past holiday abstract from the heat, 
the  mosquitoes,  and  the  lack  of  connectivity.  Policy  making  invariably  involves  taking 
measured risks in the face of uncertainty. 
Clearly,  we  do  not  want  to  be  in  the  position  we  were  in  August  2013  ever  again. 
Macroeconomic stability is of paramount importance for India. Equally clearly, drawing from 
this  experience,  the  central  bank  must  have  the  resources,  the  knowledge,  and  the 
professionalism to act when the situation warrants. In the rest of this talk, I want to explain 
why  this  means  India  needs  a  strong  and  independent  RBI  to  ensure  macroeconomic 
stability.  Then  I  will  discuss  what  I  think  is  needed  to  ensure  such  independence  going 
forward. 
The need for macroeconomic stability 
Growth is good, but growth with stability is better, especially in a poor country where so many 
people  live  at  the  margin.  For  the  RBI,  it  means  ensuring  growth  does  not  exceed  our 
potential, adopting prudential policies that reduce our risk, and building sufficient buffers that 
the country is protected against shocks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Having your cake and eating it too: interest rates and the exchange rate 
This  mission,  however,  exposes  the  central  bank  to  criticism.  If  we  try  and  bring  down 
inflation, interest rates will remain higher than borrowers desire. If inflation comes down, the 
currency will depreciate less than some exporters desire. If we push the banks to clean up, 
banks  may  be  less  tolerant  towards  habitual  non-payers.  Whatever  we  do,  someone  will 
object. The RBI then becomes the favorite scapegoat for underperformance – if exports are 
not picking up, it is because interest rates are too high and because the exchange rate is too 
strong. 
Unlike the complainants, the RBI does not have the luxury of economic inconsistency. If we 
start buying dollars in a big way to depreciate the exchange rate, we will be able to buy fewer 
government  bonds  if  we  are  to  maintain  control  over  liquidity.  The  consequence  will  be 
higher  interest  rates  in  bond  market.  Moreover,  the  depreciated  exchange  rate  will  mean 
higher  inflation,  which  in  turn  will  mean  higher  policy  interest  rates  given  the  inflation 
objective the government has set for us. Once again, this means higher interest rates. Just 
look at Brazil or Russia to understand you cannot have a significantly depreciated exchange 
rate and lower interest rates at the same time if you want stable growth! 
First year economics: there is no free lunch. RBI dividend policy 
A fundamental lesson in economics is there is no free lunch. This can be seen in the matter 
of the RBI dividend: Some commentators seem to suggest that public sector banks could be 
recapitalized entirely if only the RBI paid a larger dividend to the Government. Let me explain 
why  matters  are  not  so  simple.  If  what  follows  is  complicated,  trust  me,  it  is.  But  pay 
attention, students, especially because it is about your money. I am sure you will understand. 
How  does  the  RBI generate surplus  profits? We,  of  course,  print the currency  held  by  the 
public,  as  well  as  issue  deposits  (i.e.  reserves)  to  commercial  banks.  Those  are  our  fixed 
liabilities. As we issue these liabilities, we buy financial assets from the market. We do not 
pay interest on our liabilities. However the financial assets we hold, typically domestic and 
foreign  government  bonds,  do  pay  interest.  So  we  generate  a  large  net  interest  income 
simply because we pay nothing on virtually all our liabilities. 
Our total costs, largely for currency printing and banker commissions, amount to only about 
1/7th of our total net interest income. So we earn a large surplus profit because of the RBI’s 
role as the manager of the country’s currency. This belongs entirely to the country’s citizens. 
Therefore, after setting aside what is needed to be retained as equity capital to maintain the 
creditworthiness  of  the  RBI,  the  RBI  Board  pays  out  the  remaining  surplus  to  the  RBI’s 
owner, the Government. 
The RBI Board has decided it wants the RBI to have an international AAA rating so that RBI 
can undertake international transactions easily, even when the Government is in perceived 
difficulty – in the midst of the Taper Tantrum, no bank questioned our ability to deliver on the 
FCNR(B)  swaps,  even  though  the  liability  could  have  been  tens  of  thousands  of  crores. 
Based  on  sophisticated  risk  analysis  by  the  RBI’s  staff,  the  Board  has  decided  in  the  last 
three years that the RBI’s equity position, currently around 10 lakh crores, is enough for the 
purpose.  It  therefore  has  paid  out  the  entire  surplus  generated  to  the  Government, 
amounting  to  about  Rs  66,000  crores  each  in  the  last  two  years,  without  holding  anything 
back. This is of the order of magnitude of the dividends paid by the entire public sector to the 
Government.  In my  three  years  at  the  RBI,  we  have  paid  almost  as  much  dividend  to  the 
government  as  in  the  entire  previous  decade.  Yet  some  suggest  we  should  pay  more,  a 
special dividend over and above the surplus we generate. 
Even  if  it  were  legally  possible  to  pay  unrealized  surplus  (it  is  not),  and  even  if  the  Board 
were  convinced  a  higher  dividend  would  not  compromise  the  creditworthiness  of  the  RBI, 
there  is  a  more  fundamental  economic  reason  why  a  special  dividend  would  not  help  the 
Government with its budgetary constraints. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Here’s why: Much of the surplus we make comes from the interest we get on government 
assets or from the capital gains we make off other market participants. When we pay this to 
the government as dividends, we are putting back into the system the money we made from 
it – there is no additional money printing or reserve creation involved.1 But when we pay a 
special  dividend  to  the  government,  we  have  to  create  additional  permanent  reserves,  or 
more  colloquially,  print  money.  Every  year,  we  have  in  mind  a  growth  rate  of  permanent 
reserves  consistent  with  the  economy’s  cash  needs  and  our  inflation  goals.  Given  that 
budgeted  growth  rate,  to  accommodate  the  special  dividend  we  will  have  to  withdraw  an 
equivalent amount of money from the public by selling government bonds in our portfolio (or 
alternatively, doing fewer open market purchases than we budgeted). 
Of  course,  the  Government  can  use  the  special  dividend  to  spend,  reducing  its  public 
borrowing by that amount. But the RBI will have to sell bonds of exactly that amount to the 
public in order to stick to its target for money creation. The overall net sale of Government 
bonds by the Government and the RBI combined to the public (that is, the effective public 
sector  borrowing  requirement)  will  not  change.  But  the  entire  objective  of  financing 
Government  spending  with  a  special  RBI  dividend  is  to  reduce  overall  Government  bond 
sales to the public. That objective is not achieved! 
The bottom line is that the RBI should transfer to the government the entire surplus, retaining 
just  enough  buffers  that  are  consistent  with  good  central  bank  risk  management  practice. 
Indeed,  this  year  the  Board  paid  out  an  extra  8,000  crores  than  was  promised  to  the 
Government  around  budget  time.  Separately,  the  government  can  infuse  capital  into  the 
banks. The two decisions need not be linked. There are no creative ways of extracting more 
money from the RBI – there is no free lunch! Instead, the Government should acknowledge 
its  substantial  equity  position  in  the  RBI  and  subtract  it  from  its  outstanding  debt  when  it 
announces its net debt position. That would satisfy all concerned without monetary damage. 
If  what  I  have  said  just  now  seems  complicated,  it  is,  but  it  is  also  the  correct  economic 
reasoning. Similar detailed rationales lead us to turn down demands to cut interest rates in 
the face  of  high  inflation,  to  depreciate  or  appreciate  the  exchange  rate  depending  on  the 
whim  of  the  moment,  to  use  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  fund  projects,  to  display 
forbearance in classifying bad loans or waived farmer loans as NPAs, and so on… 
We have been tasked with a job of maintaining macroeconomic stability, and often that task 
requires us to refuse seemingly obvious and attractive proposals. The reason why we have 
to do what we have to do may not be easy for every unspecialized person, even ones with 
substantial economics training, to grasp quickly. Of course, we still must explain to the best 
of our ability but we also need to create a structure where the public trusts the central bank to 
do the right thing. This then is why we need a trusted independent central bank. 
Central bank independence 
In this environment, where the central bank has to occasionally stand firm against the highest 
echelons of central and state government, recall the words of my predecessor, Dr. Subbarao, 
when he said “I do hope the Finance Minister will one day say, ‘I am often frustrated by the 
Reserve Bank, so frustrated that I want to go for a walk, even if I have to walk alone. But 
thank God, the Reserve Bank exists.’” I would go a little further. The Reserve Bank cannot 
just  exist,  its  ability  to  say  “No!”  has  to  be  protected.  At  the  same  time,  the  central  bank 
cannot  become  free  of  all  constraints,  it  has  to  work  under  a  framework  set  by  the 
Government. This requires a number of actions. 
                                                
1  This is not strictly true. Our earnings on foreign exchange assets come from outside the system, so when we 
pay this to the Government as dividend, we are printing additional money. We do account for this. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outline responsibilities of the RBI 
When the responsibilities of the RBI are fuzzy, its actions can continuously be questioned. 
Instead, if the constitutional authorities outline a framework for the responsibilities of the RBI, 
it  can  take  actions  consistent  with  those  responsibilities  and  be  held  to  outcomes.  The 
inflation  objectives  recently  set  for  the  RBI  by  the  Government  are  an  example  of  what  is 
needed. Critics can lambast the RBI if it fails continuously to meet the objectives, but if they 
want  it  to  lower  interest  rates  even  when  the  RBI  barely  meets  its  objectives,  they  should 
instead petition the Government to change the objectives. 
Similarly, the RBI Board has adopted a risk management framework which indicates the level 
of equity the RBI needs, given the risks it faces. The dividend policy of the RBI then becomes 
a technical matter of how much residual surplus is available each year after bolstering equity. 
Frameworks thus reduce the space for differences. 
The  RBI’s  role  in  macroeconomic  stability  is,  however,  still  fuzzy.  While  RBI  clearly  has 
responsibility  for  the  safety  and  soundness  of  credit  institutions  and  the  stability  of  the 
external  account,  there  are  some  areas  that  are  hazier.  For  example,  with  an  inflation 
focused framework, the RBI’s ability to be accommodative depends on fiscal prudence from 
the  center  and  states.  How  much  should  the  RBI  warn  on  fiscal  profligacy,  including  the 
building up of contingent liabilities, and when should such warning be seen as interfering in 
the legitimate decisions of the elected representatives of the people? This is an area where 
clarity would be useful. 
the 
technical  understanding,  will  only  hamper  decision  making. 
Strengthen oversight 
The  freedom  the  RBI  has  to  take  operational  decisions  such  as  the  FCNR  (B)  swap 
arrangement,  albeit  invariably  in  consultation  with  the  Finance  Ministry,  is  important. 
However,  there  are  always  government  entities  that  are  seeking  oversight  over  various 
aspects of the RBI’s activities. Multiple layers of scrutiny, especially by  entities that do not 
have 
Instead,  the 
government-appointed RBI Board, which includes ex-officio government officials as well as 
government  appointees,  should  continue  to  play  its  key  oversight  role.  In  this  regard,  all 
important  RBI  decisions  including  budgets,  licenses,  regulation,  and  supervision  are  now 
either  approved  by  the  Board  or  one  of  its  sub-committees.  Vacancies  in  the  RBI  Board, 
which have remained unfilled for many months now, should be filled quickly so that the full 
expertise and oversight of the Board can be utilized. 
It is also important that Parliament understand what the central bank is doing. The Governor 
and Deputy Governors interact regularly with various parliamentary committees, but we have 
also  initiated  a  six-monthly  interaction  with  the  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on 
Finance, where the Governor reports on the activities of the Bank, and the Committee offers 
its views and concerns. 
Rank of RBI Governor 
There  is  a  reason  why  Central  Bank  Governors  sit  at  the  table  along  with  the  Finance 
Ministers in G-20 meetings. It is that the Central Bank Governor, unlike other regulators or 
government secretaries, has command over significant policy levers and has to occasionally 
disagree with the most powerful people in the country. 
It is dangerous to have a de facto powerful position with low de jure status. Today, the RBI 
Governor  has  the  salary  of  the  Cabinet  Secretary.  He  or  she  is  appointed  by  the  Prime 
Minister  in  consultation  with  the  Finance  Minister.  The  Governor’s  rank  in  the  government 
hierarchy is not defined but it is generally agreed that decisions will only be explained only to 
the Prime Minister and the Finance Minister. There is an informal understanding in India that 
the  Governor  has  the  room  to  make  needed  decisions.  In  the  interests of  macroeconomic 
stability, none of this should be changed, though if these issues are ever revisited, there may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  be some virtue in explicitly setting the Governor’s rank commensurate with her position as 
the most important technocrat in charge of economic policy in the country. 
the  same 
time,  while  different  RBI  Governors  have  different  approaches 
Communication 
I do not fool myself into thinking that reporters and TV cameras follow me around everywhere 
because  I  am  a  magnetic  speaker.  They  follow  RBI  Governors  around  because  they  may 
offer market-moving information on policy. Fortunately, I have escaped unintentionally saying 
anything that moves markets. 
At 
to 
communication, no one can dispense with it. Unlike a developed country, where the Central 
Bank  Chairman  can  offer  periodic  Delphic  pronouncements  about  the  course  of  monetary 
policy, and occasionally remonstrate with Parliament or the government about the course of 
fiscal policy, in our developing democracy the RBI Governor has to continuously make the 
case for the actions the central bank is taking, including the many structural reforms that are 
underway. 
Indeed,  communication  is  as  much  about  educating  as  it  is  about  informing.  For  instance, 
even as I explained to entrepreneurs and retail borrowers why interest rates were not falling 
faster, I had to use the price of dosas to explain to pensioners why they were actually better 
off earning lower nominal but higher real interest rates. Public understanding can help ease 
the way for reforms, as well as increase support for policies. The RBI Governor therefore has 
to explain again and again. 
Occasionally, of course, the Governor has to warn about the dangers of certain courses of 
action or certain tendencies in the economy for growth and macroeconomic stability. Finally, 
the Governor is also a role model for the youth in this country, and should therefore not duck 
the responsibility to urge them to follow the highest standards of citizenship when he or she 
is invited to speak directly to them. 
Conclusion 
My parents could give me a wonderful childhood and a great education in this country. We all 
grow up with such debts, and public service is a way to partially repay them. However, the 
last few years, working with dedicated colleagues at the RBI and the Finance Ministry, have 
been so fulfilling that I think I have received rather than given. I believe we have undertaken 
important  reforms  in  payments,  in  banking,  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  and  liquidity 
management, in financial markets, and in the resolution of distress, as well as within the RBI 
itself. Only time will tell whether they will have lasting impact, but I tried to do the best job I 
could, without fear or favor. This is the last public speech I will give in India for a while – my 
successor has to take over the RBI’s communication and I want to get out of his way. It has 
been  an  honor  to  work for the  country  and  especially  to  talk to  people  like  you,  its future. 
Thanks for listening to me. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
