  Karnit Flug: The formulation of long-term economic policy – strategic 
thinking about challenges to the economy 
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug, Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel, to  the  Eli  Hurwitz  Conference 
“The  formulation  of  long-term  economic  policy:  Strategic  thinking  about  challenges  to  the 
economy”, Tel Aviv, 25 May 2016. 
 Per capital GDP in Israel is about 40 percent lower than that of the US. According to a study 
conducted by the OECD, in a “business as normal” scenario – relaying on the existing trends 
regarding the development of factors of production and productivity in Israel and around the 
world  –  the  gap  is  not  expected  to  be  closed  in  the  next  few  decades.  This  is  the  non-
encouraging  point  of  departure.  Given  that  this  is  not  sufficient,  we  need  policy  aimed  at 
achieving long-term goals, based on the formulation of a strategic plan in key areas and its 
actual implementation. 
This plan must be based on an assessment of the situation at the point of departure, and of 
the  trends  and  forces  that  the  plan  will  need  to  take  into  account:  projected  demographic 
trends,  the  unpredictable  geopolitical  situation,  and  the  global  environment  –  which  is 
expected  to  be far  less pleasant  than  it  was  in  previous  decades.  All  of  this  must  also  be 
analyzed  in  view  of  the  current  state  of  the  fiscal  aggregates,  including  the  level  of  public 
debt,  the  level  and  composition  of  public  expenditure,  and  the  tax  system  –  rates  and 
composition.  Based  on  these  trends  and  forces,  we  can  assess  the  main  challenges  with 
which the strategic plan will need to deal. 
The  demographic  trends  are  among  the fundamental factors  that  policy  makers must  take 
into account in formulating strategic plans in main policy areas. The combination of an aging 
population  –  the  elderly  population  is  expected  to  grow  from  10  percent  of  the  total 
population to 17 percent in the next four decades – and a significant decline in proportion of 
the working age population, alongside an increase in proportion of the population groups that 
tend  not  to  participate  as  much  in  the  labor  force  (there  are  expectations  of  a  marked 
increase in proportion of the ultra-Orthodox population and a moderate increase in proportion 
of the Arab population), require preparation in almost all areas in which government policy 
operates. 
To  illustrate,  I  would  like  to  provide  a  brief  overview  of  some  of  the  implications  of  these 
trends for  two  key  areas  in  which  the  formulation  and  implementation of  a  broad  strategic 
plan is required – the area of healthcare and long-term care, and the area of human capital. 
The examples will illustrate that without the implementation of such a strategic plan, not only 
will we not move forward toward closing the gaps vis-à-vis the other advanced economies, 
the gaps vis-à-vis the countries at the forefront will widen. 
It is important to state at this point that in recent years, there has been significant progress in 
the  government’s  strategic  planning  led  by  the  National  Economic  Council.  A  deputy 
directors-general forum for planning and strategy has been established, and is preparing a 
plan for the government’s work; seven areas in which the government has chosen to focus 
have been identified; interministerial cooperation has been intensified; and detailed targets 
have been set in a number of areas, and work has begun toward achieving them. 
However, the challenges are large, and the way toward formulating a work plan, and more 
importantly toward implementing such a plan, remains long. 
In the area of healthcare and long-term care, in view of the trend of aging population, we can 
estimate  that  the  volume  of  needs  for  medical  and  long-term  care  services  will  increase 
sharply, and we must already prepare for this now. While the general population is expected 
to  increase  by  23  percent, the  number  of  elderly  citizens  is  expected  to  increase  by  more 
than double that – 52 percent. As a direct result, the demand for various healthcare services 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  will  also  increase  by  about  60–70  percent,  all  while  the  overcrowding  in  the  hospitals  is 
already very high. In addition, about half of the physicians in the system are aged 55 or more 
–  the  highest  figure  in  the  western  world  –  and  the  rate  of  those  completing  medical  and 
nursing school is lower than in other countries, even after the increase in recent years. As 
such, the number of physicians per capita is expected to decline. 
The  Israeli  healthcare  system  is  considered  very  high-quality  by  international 
comparison.  However,  given  the  overcrowding  in  the  hospitals,  the  long  wait  for  various 
procedures, and the low rate of doctors and nurses per capita, the level budgeting for the 
healthcare system must be adjusted to the tasks imposed on it, a significant increase in the 
physical infrastructure and human capital in the system, and streamlining the long-term care 
system, with particular attention to improving systemic coordination. These can be advanced 
only  through  a  multi-year  plan  based  on  a  detailed  analysis  of  future  needs.  Only  the 
formulation and implementation of such a program will be able to maintain and improve the 
high-quality Israeli healthcare system, in view of the trends that are expected to weigh it 
down even more in coming years. 
In terms of human capital: 
The  increase  in  education  over  the  past  four  decades  has  been  a  main  component  in 
economic growth during that period. Average annual per capita growth has by 1.8 percent, of 
which 0.8 percent is due to the increased stock of human capital. The question is whether 
the  current  trends  in  the  creation  of  human  capital  will  be  reflected  in  a  similar 
contribution to future growth. 
In order to answer this question, we must examine what level of education is expected to be 
relevant to the labor market in the coming years, in view of the demographic trends. A study 
conducted  by  Dr.  Eyal  Argov  of  the  Bank  of Israel  Research  Department translated  actual 
years  of  schooling  into  years  of  schooling  in  terms  of  earning  capacity,  and  indicates  that 
while the ultra-Orthodox have an average of 17 years of schooling, these are the equivalent 
of  just  10  years  of  effective  schooling  in  terms  of  earning  capacity.  This  finding, 
particularly  against  the  background  of  the  projected  demographic  trends,  indicates  that  a 
marked  slowdown  in  the  effective  schooling  of  the  entire  population  is  expected  in  the 
coming years – which is expected to markedly lower the contribution of increased education 
to per capita GDP growth. The extent of the slowdown depends on the extent to which the 
actual number of years of schooling is translated into effective schooling in terms of the labor 
market, or in other words, to what extent the learning content is in line with what is required 
to successfully integrate into the labor market, which will lead to increased earning capacity 
and  a  higher  standard  of  living.  I  should  note  that  in  the  rest  of  the  population  groups 
examined (ultra-Orthodox women, Arabs, and non-ultra-Orthodox Jews), no difference was 
found between the average actual number of years of schooling and the number of years of 
effective schooling for the labor market. 
In terms of the quality of education of the working-age population and its compatibility with 
the needs of the labor market, it turns out that despite the fact that the rate of workers with 
post-secondary  degrees  in  Israel  is  relatively  high  by  international  comparison  –  about  30 
percent – this is not reflected in labor productivity in most industries. 
For instance, the rate of those with higher education required according to the composition of 
occupations in the non-export-oriented manufacturing industry is about 3 percent. The actual 
rate  is  about  18  percent,  more  than  in  parallel  industries  in  the  OECD  countries.  But 
productivity – or output per worker – in those industries is 33 percent lower in Israel than the 
OECD average. We can see from this that the extra education does not translate into 
effective education that provides skills that contribute to high labor productivity. 
The quality of the education system, as reflected in international tests, is also relatively low, 
which does not bode well for the skills of workers that will be joining the labor market in the 
next few years. We do not have relative advantages compared to the rest of the world, other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  than human capital and our innovation and creativity. As such, these trends are worrisome in 
this context. 
Against the background of these trends, a study conducted by the OECD indicates that the 
future contribution of human capital to the expected growth in Israel in the next 15 years is 
near zero – almost the lowest among OECD countries. 
In  view  of  the  analysis  of  the  trends  I  have  presented,  it  is  clear  that  in  order  to 
support  sustainable  and  inclusive  growth,  which  will  lead  to  a  higher  standard  of 
living,  constant  improvement  is  required  in  the  level  of  human  capital  of  the  entire 
population. The education system, and the education required to provide the content and 
skills that will enable effective integration into the labor market for all parts of the population, 
including schooling in Mathematics, English, Hebrew, Sciences and Computers. 
• 
An increase in investment in the education system is required, with an emphasis on 
expanding  affirmative  action  in  all  aspects  of  the  system,  and  for  all  levels  of 
education. 
In particular, the quality of secondary and college education must be strengthened 
and  improved,  including  in  the  post-secondary  technological  schools  and  in 
professional training for graduates. 
The future needs of the labor market must be examined, and skills and qualifications 
must be adjusted to dynamic needs, including by providing cognitive skills that will 
provide the ability to adjust to a changing labor market. 
  The  conclusion  arising  from  the  analysis  that  I  have  briefly  provided  in  the  areas  of 
healthcare  and  education  is  clear,  and  illustrates  the  importance  of  formulating  and 
implementing  a  long-term  policy  that  deals  with  the  fundamental  demographic  trends  and 
other trends and forces facing the Israeli economy in the coming years. 
The future is already here, and we must deal with it now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
