  
 
Louis Kasekende: Shaping the future of smallholder financing in Uganda 
Keynote address by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
High-Level  Meeting  on  “Developing  approaches  for  financing  smallholder  household  in 
Uganda”, Kampala, 20 April 2016. 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers  of  this  high  level  meeting,  the  Uganda  Agribusiness 
Alliance,  for  inviting  me  to  give  a  keynote  address.  The  modernisation  of  agriculture  is 
probably  the  most  important  developmental  challenge  facing  Uganda;  without  agricultural 
modernisation  it  is  very  difficult  to  envisage  how  Uganda’s  economy  will  ever  be  able  to 
achieve middle income status. 
The vast majority of farmers in Uganda are smallholders and they produce almost all of the 
country’s agricultural output. Ninety six percent of total farm output in Uganda is produced on 
farms of five hectares or less in size. There is no feasible route to agricultural modernisation 
which does not place the smallholder at its centre. 
Although  Ugandans  often  perceive  themselves  as  “blessed  by  nature”  our  agricultural 
performance has been poor for several decades. Aggregate output growth has been weak 
and the growth that has occurred has largely been the result of increases in land acreage 
under cultivation and increases in the agricultural labour force. Both average land and labour 
productivity  have  been  stagnant  for  decades.  The  2012/13  Uganda  National  Household 
Survey indicated that two thirds of farmers are classified as subsistence farmers. An earlier 
survey  found  that  even  the  most  commercialised  quintile  of  farmers  marketed  only  50 
percent of their output. 
Modernising smallholder agriculture in Uganda will require helping farmers to improve their 
farm  practises,  utilise  more  modern  farm  inputs,  especially  high  yield  variety  (HYV)  seeds 
and  produce  more  output  for  the  market,  thereby  raising  yields  per  acre  and  labour 
productivity.  We  know,  from  the  work  done  on  demonstration  plots  supported  by 
development  agencies  that  farmers  can,  in  principle,  achieve  large  increases  in  their  crop 
yields  even  with  relatively  low  input  technologies  combined  with  the  adoption  of  good 
agricultural practises. Ugandan smallholder farming has the potential for transformation but 
the  constraints  to  this  transformation  are  both  large  and  multifaceted.  A  lack  of  access  to 
finance  by  smallholders  is  one  of  these  constraints,  although  not  necessarily  the  most 
binding  constraint  for  the  majority  of  smallholder  farmers  at  this  early  stage  of  agricultural 
development. 
To tackle the multiple constraints to the modernisation of smallholder agriculture, we need to 
adopt, and persevere with, a holistic long term approach. Such an approach should have four 
key components. 
The first, and probably most important in the early stages of agricultural development, is to 
provide  agricultural  extension  services  which  can  reach  the  majority  of  smallholders 
throughout the countryside and provide advice on the adoption of good agricultural practises 
and the optimal crops to be grown, given the characteristics of their farms, as well as post-
harvest  handling  and  storage.  Agricultural  extension  services  must  be  supported  by  good 
agricultural  research.  Both  agricultural  extension  and  agricultural  research  have  the 
characteristics  of  public  goods,  because  the  dissemination  of  agricultural  knowledge  from 
one farmer to another means that social benefits exceed private benefits. Hence, they should 
be subsidised through the Government budget.  
The second component of a holistic agricultural strategy should be to strengthen land rights. 
As  in  many  African  countries,  land  tenure  systems  in  Uganda  are  often  complex  and  the 
ownership or usufruct rights of farmers are often unclear and insecure. This deters farmers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  from  making  long  term  investments  in  land  improvements  and  it  is  also  an  impediment  to 
access to formal sector credit, because land with unclear ownership is not suitable for loan 
collateral. 
The  third  component  is  better  rural  infrastructure,  especially  rural  feeder  roads.  The 
commercialisation  of farming  is  impeded  by  the  high  costs  of transporting farm  inputs  and 
outputs, from farm gate to and from the market, because of poor roads. High transport costs 
drive down farm gate prices of farm output and drive up input prices, which undermine the 
commercial  viability  of  farming.  More  public  investment  in  the  construction  and  proper 
maintenance of rural feeder roads is essential to support the modernisation of smallholder 
agriculture. 
The fourth component is improved access to finance. As I noted earlier, this may not be the 
binding constraint for many smallholders, especially subsistence farmers. Access to finance 
will only benefit those farmers who have the knowledge and capacity to use purchased farm 
inputs  to  raise  their  productivity  in  a  manner  which  generates  profits  and  which  does  not 
expose them to a potentially ruinous level of risk. This probably currently applies to only a 
minority  of  smallholders  in  the  country,  although  the  number  of  smallholders  who  could 
benefit  from  finance  should  rise  substantially  if  the  other  constraints  to  agricultural 
modernisation are effectively tackled. 
In formulating policies for the development of agricultural finance best suited to support the 
modernisation  of  smallholder  farming  it  is  necessary  to  address  two  important  questions: 
what  specific  type  of  financial  services  do  smallholder  farmers  need?  And  what  types  of 
financial  institutions  are  most  appropriate  for  delivering  these  services?  A  third  important 
question  is  whether  the  provision  of  finance  to  smallholders  warrants  any  form  of  public 
subsidy.  I  will  not  attempt  to  provide  comprehensive  answers  to  these  questions  but  I  will 
offer some thoughts on them. 
Smallholder farmers will probably need a range of financial services, beyond the provision of 
credit, to support their efforts to modernise. These services will include savings and probably 
insurance products. The latter are especially important to mitigate the risks that arise from 
possible  crop  failures  and  the  volatility  of  farm  gate  prices,  which  are  a  deterrent  to 
commercialisation. 
I don’t think it is likely that commercial banks will be the main vehicle for providing financial 
services  to  smallholder  farmers,  because  the  banks’  business  models  entail  transactions 
costs,  which  are  too  high  to  make  serving  customers  with  micro-savings  and  micro-loans 
commercially viable. Instead other types of financial institutions which can access customers 
at  lower  cost  and  develop  lending  models  which  can  mitigate  the  risks  of  lending  to 
customers  with  little  formal  collateral  are  more suited  to  providing  financial  services  to  the 
smallholder sector. These institutions include microfinance institutions, including those which 
take deposits, and savings and credit cooperatives (SACCOs). 
There  may  be  a  case  in  principle  for  subsidising  the  provision  of  financial  services  for 
smallholders,  because  rural  financial  markets  are  undoubtedly  afflicted  with  market 
imperfections,  but  I  don’t  think  it  is  a  very  compelling  one  in  practise.  Clearly,  the  public 
resources  available  for  supporting  agricultural  modernisation  are  highly  constrained  and  it 
would be a more efficient use of these scarce resources to focus them on providing public 
goods  such  as  agricultural  extension  services  rather  than  in  reducing  the  cost  of  credit. 
Furthermore, the availability of subsidised credit creates incentives for its misallocation; it is 
very difficult to target subsidised credit effectively at those borrowers who need it the most 
and prevent it being diverted to richer farmers instead. 
Finally,  I  want  to  stress  the  importance  of  more  research  into  all  aspects  of  agricultural 
finance  and  its  efficacy  for  agricultural  modernisation.  The  characteristics  of  smallholder 
farming in Uganda are very heterogeneous. What types of agricultural finance work best in 
different  circumstances  (different  crops,  different  land  tenure  systems,  etc)  is  mainly  an 
empirical  question  for  which  economic  principles  can  only  take  us  so  far.  There  is  no 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  substitute  for  detailed  empirical  research,  for  example  research  involving  randomised 
controlled  trails.  I  hope  that  Ugandan  researchers  will  take  up  this  challenge  and  help  to 
guide us in charting the way forward for agricultural modernisation in Uganda. 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
