   Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and the 
Philippine banking sector – sustaining financial stability amid global 
volatility 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central bank of the Philippines), at the annual reception for the banking community, Manila, 
19 January 2016. 
 On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank all of you for joining us tonight for 
our annual reception for the banking community which brings together leaders and movers of 
our  economy  within  this  historic  400-year  old  Fort  San  Antonio  Abad.  This  is  a  cherished 
tradition at the BSP – to recognize the value of our partnership in sustaining the growth of the 
Philippine economy. 
This Fort, an enduring symbol of centuries past, provides us a most fitting venue to reflect on 
the year just past and what lies ahead as we continue to move forward together. 
The year that was 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Philippine  banking  sector  was  again  a  source  of  strength  and 
stability for our economy in 2015. Sound, stable and liquid, our banks continued to be a major 
source of funding for our productive sectors and thereby helped generate jobs that support 
inclusive growth across the country. 
As  of  the  third  quarter  in  2015,  the  asset  base  of  the  banking  industry  had  reached  over 
P11 trillion,  growing  over  P1  trillion  in  12  months,  while  continuously  achieving  higher 
prudential standards by keeping non-performing loans at low single digit-levels. (2.3% as of 
September 2015). The combined resources of the banking industry are sufficient to finance 
the requirements of the real economy. 
And with a continuing build-up in capitalization, our banking sector more than meets national 
and  international  standards.  In  fact,  our  semestral  stress  tests  confirm  further  that  bank 
capitalization stands resilient, even against extreme tail events. Indeed, the numbers do speak 
for themselves. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  sustained  growth  and  stability  of  our  banking  sector  in  2015 
happened amid global financial turmoil. The much-anticipated Fed lift-off finally took place last 
December, with interest rates moving up on signs of a gradual revival of the US economy. 
Other concerns that made for a challenging 2015 were slowing inflation in the Eurozone and 
Japan, economic restructuring in China, and the sharp drop in oil prices. 
But despite all that, it was, on balance, another good year for our economy in general, and the 
banking sector in particular. The Philippine economy continued to expand, with 2015 inflation 
settling  at  1.4%,  our  lowest  in  20  years.  Our  external  position  is  robust  and  offers  buffers 
against possible external shocks, with a Balance of Payments surplus, healthy level of Gross 
International  Reserves  that  could  pay  for  over  10  months  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and 
services, and remittances through banks from overseas Filipinos that continue to grow year 
after year. 
Indeed, for our banks, 2015 was a year that tested their resilience but they came out of it 
stronger and more stable. 
Continuity amid change 
Now, we start 2016 from a position of strength. This is a good place to start. We have done 
our homework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
We  should  be  able  to  manage  external  risks  that  may  arise  from  continuing  volatility  and 
possible contagion and closer to home avoid excessive leverage and imprudent practices. 
In particular, we anticipate that 2016 will continue to test the resilience of our banking system, 
with market volatility that can heighten market liquidity and credit risks. 
We  therefore  need  to  stay  firmly  committed  to  the  pursuit  of  financial  stability  as  the 
overarching prudential norm. It is a public good that benefits us all and gives us the space to 
pursue growth and profit opportunities. 
Moving forward, there are game changers we have to contend with. Among others, regional 
integration will happen. This means that we have to be ready for the challenges that are sure 
to come with it and more important, to ensure that we reap the benefits we stand to gain from 
integration. 
Certainly, the BSP will actively pursue bilateral arrangements to designate Qualified ASEAN 
Banks or QABs under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework but much work must be 
done  in  parallel  on  payments  and  settlements,  market  infrastructure  and  capital  market 
development. 
To  further  enhance  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  we  shall  have  the  Interest  Rate 
Corridor  in  the  next  few  months.  Aside  from  enabling  smoother  market  rate  adjustments 
relative to BSP policy rates, we see that the IRC will contribute to having more active and 
efficient financial markets.1 
And in support of the national goal of inclusive growth, we will pursue with 12 other government 
agencies the implementation of our National Strategy for Financial Inclusion. Our objective is 
to make our financial system more inclusive, responsive and more accessible to the Micro, 
small and medium enterprises, as well as to the underbanked and the unbanked. 
There is room for banks and other institutions to participate in this program. I hope therefore 
to see more banks and other institutions support this crucial undertaking not only as a matter 
of corporate social responsibility, but as a legitimate and sustainable business opportunity that 
should make our economy stronger. We also know that an inclusive financial system makes 
for greater stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen of the banking community. I also call on you to make sure that your 
banks  and  all  your  branches  serve  the  public  by  exchanging  old  banknotes  identified  for 
demonetization with new generation banknotes even if they are not your regular clients, even 
if  they  are  sidewalk  vendors  exchanging  just  a  handful  of  old  banknotes.  This  is  financial 
inclusion at its best. 
The BSP also pins its hope on gaining mileage on its financial inclusion targets with the launch 
of  our  National  Retail  Payments  System  Project.  The  NRPS  is  envisioned  to  provide  an 
accessible,  inclusive  and  safe  electronic  payments  system  using  inter-operable  payments 
network that financially links the country – from Batanes to Sulu – 24/7. 
Amid  all  these  exciting  developments,  we  have  also  introduced  the  Financial  Consumer 
Protection  framework  to  ensure  that  new  participants  to  the  financial  system  are  provided 
sufficient guidance and protection. This calls for pro-active programs for consumer education, 
transparency and providing necessary information for redress mechanisms. I look forward to 
the active participation of banks in this activity. 
Indeed, we have a full agenda that will help maintain the strength and stability of our banking 
sector. 
                                                
1   “How central banks influence interest rates” Speech by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central 
Bank  of  Norway),  at  the  Centre  for  Monetary  Economics  (CME)  /  BI  Norwegian  Business  School,  Oslo, 
1 October 2015. http://www.bis.org/review/r151002b.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
In this connection, the entry of new foreign banks under our liberalized regime should further 
enhance the quality of competition among our banks and nurture innovations that will ultimately 
benefit the general public. 
This reminds me that during our co-chairmanship of the Financial Stability Board Consultative 
Group for Asia, then Vice Minister Masamichi Kono of the Japan FSA, advised that we should 
enjoy a cup of matcha or green tea to get us going through the day and that we should take 
mugicha at night to relax. In the same spirit, we can all enjoy Ginseng tea or Maesil cha from 
South Korea, Oolong tea from Taiwan or Teh Tarik from Singapore. All of these are said to 
help our internal juices flow and rejuvenate our body. 
You may ask, why am I mentioning tea from Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and Singapore? 
Well, it is because the Philippine banking community is going to be even more dynamic with 
the entry of six banks from these jurisdictions. Like the tea that is good for our body, the entry 
of these six banks to the Philippines could catalyse further innovations in our banking sector. 
We expect more to come in. 
What else do we see in 2016? The consensus forecast for 2016 is for modest and uneven 
global economic growth. 
Certainly, we are not immune to adverse external developments. We will have to deal with 
their ramifications, the bumps on the road, so to speak. 
Nonetheless,  we  believe  that  our  sources  of resilience  will  sustain  our  growth  momentum. 
Private consumption continues to be buoyant while the services and industry outputs remain 
firm. And Government spending is expected to further increase in line with continuing efforts 
to address issues on spending bottlenecks, especially for public infrastructure. 
Thus, while 2016 will test the resilience of our banking system, we can rely on the quality of 
our preparations to manage evolving risks from volatility as market tide shifts. 
This is also evident even to external analysts. Fitch Ratings has given the Philippine banking 
system a positive rating outlook for 20162, the only one for Asia-Pacific. Among others, Fitch 
noted  the “generally  healthy  profile  of  local  lenders,  sound operating  environment  and  the 
Philippines’s strong economic fundamentals.” 
Congratulations to our Philippine banks! 
Final thoughts 
Ladies and gentlemen. We will continue to pursue our reform agenda to ensure stability for the 
long-term. We are unfazed by the challenges that will come our way because we are prepared, 
because we have been doing our homework. And we embrace continuing reforms because 
that is the key to stability and to more opportunities moving forward. 
Finally, we at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas thank the members of the banking community 
for your active support and cooperation, in implementing policies and programs in pursuit of 
our  mandate  to  provide  stability  to  prices  and  the  banking  sector  –  stability  that  sustains 
economic growth for the long-term; stability that promotes inclusive growth. 
At this point, may I request the other Members of the Monetary Board to join me onstage. 
Secretary Cesar Purisima, Freddie Antonio, Phillip Medalla, Andy Suratos, Jun de Zuniga and 
Val Araneta. 
Together, let us offer a toast to the Philippine banking industry– may you continue to be sound, 
stable, liquid, and responsive to the needs of our economy, our country and our people. And 
                                                
2  Business World “Fitch upgrades outlook of Philippine banking industry to ‘positive’” 16 December 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
may all of us here at Fort San Antonio Abad be blessed with a happy, healthy and prosperous 
New Year. Cheers! 
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! Maraming salamat 
sa inyo! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
