  Takahide Kiuchi: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Takahide  Kiuchi,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Ishikawa, 23 June 2016. 
I. 
Economic activity and prices in Japan 
 The Bank of Japan’s view 
A. 
The Bank of Japan explains its assessment of the current situation and outlook for Japan’s 
economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  which  is  released  after 
each Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM), and in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(the Outlook Report), which is published four times each year. Therefore, I will first give you 
an  overview  of  its  assessment  of  the  current  situation  and  outlook  based  on  the  latest 
Outlook Report and Statement on Monetary Policy. 
Japan’s  economy  has  continued  its  moderate  recovery  trend,  although  exports  and 
production  have  been  sluggish,  due  mainly  to  the  effects  of  the  slowdown  in  emerging 
economies.  The  outlook  through  fiscal  2018  envisages  that,  although  sluggishness  is 
expected to remain in exports and production for the time being, domestic demand is likely to 
follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the 
household and corporate sectors, and exports are expected to increase moderately. Thus, 
Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less 
fresh food) is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the 
effects  of  the  decline  in  energy  prices,  and  thereafter  accelerate  toward  2  percent. 
Meanwhile,  assuming  that  crude  oil  prices  will  rise  moderately  from  the  recent  level,  the 
timing  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  reaching 
around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target  –  is  projected  to  be  during  fiscal  2017. 
Thereafter, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to 
be around 2 percent on average. 
My personal view 
B. 
I believe that Japan’s current growth rate and inflation rate are generally stable, in light of the 
economy’s  growth  potential,  and  that  there  is  a  relatively  high  probability  of  this  situation 
continuing during the projection period in the April 2016 Outlook Report. 
However, when expressed in figures, my view is fairly cautious compared with the medians 
of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. This is mainly because I believe that (1) there is not 
a driving force from the demand side – including in terms of the effects of monetary easing – 
that will bring about economic growth at a pace clearly higher than its potential; (2) there are 
downside risks to the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts in terms of demand 
both at home and abroad; and (3) as a result of these factors, the output gap is expected to 
remain more or less at a neutral level, making it difficult to expect that the underlying trend in 
inflation will rise markedly. 
Next, I will mention several points of attention regarding the outlook for economic activity and 
prices based on my view. 
1. 
According  to  the  Bank’s  estimates,  the  potential  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy,  which 
represents from the supply side – the pace of growth that is consistent with the economy’s 
Stagnant potential growth rate 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 Sluggish private consumption 
Medium- to long-term growth expectations and business fixed investment 
 
 
growth  potential,  is  still  at  a  low  level  in  the  range  of  0.0–0.5  percent.  No  notable 
improvement has been observed in the past several years, either. In particular, in line with 
the  sluggish  rate  of  increase  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP),  which  reflects  technological 
advances, the rate of increase in labor productivity – which considerably affects firms’ wage-
setting behavior, which in turn impacts private consumption and prices – has continued to be 
stagnant. 
However, the output gap, which represents the degree of utilization of capital and labor, has 
generally maintained a  neutral level over the past several years. This means that Japan’s 
economy has continued to show stable growth that is more or less consistent with its growth 
potential. 
2. 
Although  business  fixed  investment  has  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  it  has  not 
grown  as  strongly  as  had  been  expected  when  considering  the  high  levels  of  corporate 
profits. 
I think that the fact behind this situation is that, while the high levels of profits in recent years 
had been brought about largely by improvement in price factors that cannot necessarily be 
considered sustainable – namely, improvement in the terms of trade reflecting changes in the 
exchange  rates  and  commodity  prices  –  the  prospects  for  future  sales  volume  have  not 
improved. In this respect, the potential growth rate is still at a low level and is expected to 
improve  only  very  moderately;  therefore,  firms  may  not  significantly  change  their  cautious 
stance on business fixed investment in the domestic market. 
3. 
Private consumption has been resilient, but I think that it is still sluggish. It seems that price-
related factors that once curbed private consumption, such as the consumption tax hikes and 
price  increases  for  food  and  daily  necessities,  have  been  fading  away  recently.  However, 
wages have not improved by as much as had been expected, as seen in the fact that the 
base pay increase resulting from the labor-management wage negotiations this spring seems 
to have been somewhat lower than the level in 2015. This has led to households’ cautious 
outlook for wages, which might be one factor restraining private consumption. 
I would note that these developments in wages might be attributable to persistent concerns 
among firms that a rise in labor costs, including an increase in base pay, may undermine the 
future situation for corporate profits amid the lack of a rise in the expected productivity growth 
rate and in the expected medium- to long-term economic growth rate. 
In addition to households’ cautious outlook for wages arising from firms’ stance of curbing 
labor  costs,  future  concerns  that  are  rooted  in  the  fiscal  condition  and  the  social  security 
system may be another factor restraining private consumption among a broad range of age 
groups. 
4. 
The  expectations  for  a  global  economic  downturn  that  mounted  at  the  beginning  of  2016 
have  receded  somewhat  recently,  reflecting  improvements  in  U.S.  and  Chinese  economic 
indicators and the stabilization of crude oil prices. However, it is difficult to expect the U.S. 
economy  in  its  current  status  to  act  as  a  strong  driving  force  of  the  global  economy. 
Therefore, the scenario of advanced economies leading the global economic recovery has 
remained unrealized. 
In emerging economies, business fixed investment has been weak due to excess production 
capacity and excess debt, eroding the global economy’s current recovery potential. These 
problems could destabilize global financial markets, particularly through adjustments in the 
corporate  bond  markets  in  emerging  economies  that  may  be  triggered  by,  for  example, 
changes  in  the  flow  of  funds  caused  by  the  U.S.  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  I  am  paying 
attention  to  the  possibility  that,  if  the  global  economy  shows  signs  of  a  slowdown  again, 
Overseas economies and downside risks to Japan’s exports 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Developments in the underlying trend in inflation 
 
 
resulting  in  a  decline  in  energy  prices,  there  will  be  growing  risks  on  the  financial  front, 
including (1) adjustments in the markets for high-yield bonds, mainly those issued by energy-
related  firms,  and  (2)  heightened  credit  risk  involved  in  financial  institutions’  exposure  to 
these firms. 
In  light  of  this  export  environment,  I  have  continued  to  regard  developments  in  overseas 
economies  and  global  financial  markets  as  the  most  serious  downside  risks  to  Japan’s 
economy. 
5. 
Since  the  beginning  of  fiscal  2016,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  retail  prices  of 
consumer goods – mainly processed food – has tended to shift downward. Presumably, this 
is because at the beginning of the fiscal year, the price increases did not spread as much as 
in  the  past  two  years  owing  to  (1)  the  depreciation  of  the  yen  having  come  to  a  pause, 
(2) private consumption having been sluggish, partly due to the effects of irregularly warm 
weather, and (3) the pace of wage increases having remained only moderate. 
Under these circumstances, I expect that the year-on-year rates of change in the indicators 
of the underlying trend in prices, such as the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) and 
the  CPI  (all  items  less  food  and  energy),  will  decelerate  somewhat  over  the  next  several 
months. Moreover, I do not assume that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items 
less fresh food) will reach the price stability target of 2 percent by fiscal 2018, the last year of 
the projection period in the April 2016 Outlook Report. 
Even  so,  as  the  expected  decline  in  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  for  the  time  being  is 
largely attributable to the disappearance of temporary factors such as the depreciation of the 
yen, I expect that prices will generally stay stable. While the level of the underlying trend in 
inflation – represented by, for example, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items 
less fresh food and energy)  – is lower than the price stability target of 2 percent, I do not 
believe that this is causing any particular problem for current economic activity because the 
rates  do  not  deviate  widely  from  firms’  and  households’  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
The Bank introduced Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) in April 2013 and 
then QQE with a Negative Interest Rate in January 2016, with a view to achieving the price 
stability  target  of  2  percent  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  at  the 
earliest possible time. 
Against these decisions, I have been insisting on a change to QQE – including a reduction in 
the pace of the Bank’s asset purchases – and a review of the negative interest rate policy, 
based  on  an  examination  and  a  comparison  of  positive  effects  and  side  effects  of  these 
measures. Furthermore, I think that enhancement of facilities to provide liquidity is important, 
in  order  to  maintain  financial  system  stability  through  securing  the  smooth  functioning  of 
financial markets and financial intermediation. 
I would like to explain the organization of the thinking behind my policy stance. 
Rebalancing of Two Mandates of the Bank’s Policy 
A. 
The  two  mandates  of  the  Bank’s  policy  are  to  ensure  price  stability  and  financial  system 
stability. Monetary easing measures in recent years – such as QQE and the negative interest 
rate  policy  –  have  proceeded  with  emphasis  placed  on  price  stability,  based  on  the 
recognition that financial system stability has been sufficiently secured. 
I  admit  that  the  financial  system  can  be  assessed  as  being  generally  stable  at  present. 
However, potential vulnerability  in the financial system has increased under the prolonged 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
low-interest  rate  environment,  and  this  trend  has  been  augmented  by  the  large-scale 
monetary easing. Therefore, I think that the outlook is by no means optimistic. 
From this viewpoint, I have continued to cast a dissenting vote on the negative interest rate 
policy  since  its  introduction  through  the  most  recent  MPM  held  in  June  2016.  I  have 
considered that negative interest rates would decrease the functioning of financial markets 
and financial  intermediation,  as  well  as  impair the  stability  of the  JGB market  and  smooth 
conduct  of the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases,  and therefore  an  interest rate  of  0.1  percent  –  the 
same  rate  as  before  –  should  be  applied  to  all  current  account  balances  excluding  the 
amount outstanding of the required reserves held by financial institutions at the Bank. 
Moreover, I think it is time for the Bank to shift the focus of its policy from price stability to 
financial  system  stability.  I  believe  that  such  a  shift  will  eventually  benefit  the  Bank  in 
pursuing the ultimate goal of contributing to the sound development of the national economy 
through  achieving  the  intermediate  objectives,  i.e.,  the  Bank’s  two  mandates,  in  a  well-
balanced manner. 
Necessity to maintain the sound functioning of financial intermediation 
B. 
In recent years, financial institutions’ profitability – represented by operating profits from core 
business  –  and  loss-absorbing  capacity  have  been  declining,  particularly  among  regional 
financial institutions. Downward pressure on their net income also seems to have increased 
recently, due in part to the fact that profit taking, mainly through sales of investment trusts, 
has become difficult in a situation where changes have been observed in the depreciating 
trend  of the  yen  and the  increase  in stock  prices  that  continued  to  be seen  over  the  past 
several  years.  Furthermore,  there  is  concern  that  the  profit  environment  for  financial 
institutions might become increasingly severe, mainly due to a further narrowing of interest 
rate margins on loans and a greater reduction in yields on securities – both of which followed 
the introduction of the negative interest rate policy – as well as to a rise in credit costs. 
In this situation, banks may take excessive risks at a time of profit deterioration in an attempt 
to increase their profits, but they may become excessively risk averse in the future, mainly 
because  losses  will  be  incurred  by  a  possible  worsening  of  economic  and  financial 
developments.  This  could  negatively  affect  economic  activity  and  financial  markets  by 
exacerbating firms’ and households’ borrowing constraints and through banks’ fire sales of 
assets. 
Furthermore, from a longer-term perspective, the impairment of banks’ financial soundness 
might also have negative effects on the efficiency and productivity of the economy. To give 
an  example,  banks  with  declining  loss-absorbing  capacity  might  postpone  appropriate 
treatment  of  borrowers  with  weak  performance  amid  a  continued  decline  in  banks’ 
profitability.  This  may  cause  a  situation  in  which  capital  and  labor  are  being  allocated  to 
inefficient firms, and thus result in pushing down the rate of increase in TFP in the overall 
economy over the long term. 
With these points taken into account, the malfunctioning of financial intermediation through 
the impairment of banks’ financial soundness might further push down the potential growth 
rate  of  the  economy,  which  is  currently  at  a  low  level  in  the  range  of  0.0–0.5  percent. 
Monetary policy is usually thought to affect the demand side of the economy. However, if the 
policy impairs financial system stability, the supply side of the economy – for example, the 
productivity  growth  rate  and  the  potential  growth  rate  –  may  also  be  adversely  affected, 
causing losses in social welfare. 
C. 
Concerns about the stability of the JGB market and smooth conduct of the 
bank’s JGB purchases 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  the  JGB  market  has  been 
increasingly unstable – as evident from heightened volatility of JGB yields. I consider that this 
has exerted negative effects on the stability of financial markets as a whole. In this situation, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
there have been adverse effects on the smooth conduct of the Bank’s JGB purchases. For 
example, the bid-to-cover ratios of its JGB purchasing operations have declined somewhat 
and there is a growing tendency for the bid rates to fall below the market rates. 
Before the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, financial institutions did not face 
particular problems in selling JGBs to the Bank and in turn increasing funds in their current 
accounts at the Bank to which an interest rate of 0.1 percent was applied without their taking 
interest rate risk. However, given that many financial institutions attach more importance to 
obtaining stable income gains rather than having temporary capital gains, I consider that they 
have become significantly discouraged to sell JGBs to the Bank and increase funds in their 
current accounts at the Bank. This is because the difference between the yields of JGBs held 
by  financial  institutions and  the  interest rates  applied  to  current  accounts  at the  Bank  has 
widened with the introduction of the negative interest rate policy. 
In  addition,  with  the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  the  Bank  adopted  a 
multiple-tier  system  in  which  the  outstanding  balance  of  each  financial  institution’s  current 
account at the Bank is divided into tiers, with different interest rates – including a negative 
interest rate – being applied to each tier. Because of this, financial institutions, particularly at 
the  beginning  of  the  introduction  of  the  policy,  have  tended  to  reduce  or  not  increase  the 
Policy-Rate  Balance,  to  which  a  negative  interest  rate  is  applied.  As  a  result,  they  are 
proceeding with purchases of JGBs, particularly those with super-long maturities that are still 
offered with positive yields, and I think that this is one of the factors behind further tightening 
of the JGB market conditions and somewhat unstable conduct of the Bank’s JGB purchases. 
Given this, I consider that the decline in JGB yields, particularly those on JGBs with super-
long maturities, since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy is not necessarily 
evidence that the policy has been exerting positive effects stably. 
I would like to note that, with the increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings, the 
Bank is also increasing the amount of reinvestment in JGBs resulting from redemption. Thus, 
even though the target for the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings 
remains  the  same,  the  gross  amount  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases  has  been  increasing. 
Also,  fiscal  2016  marks  an  important  point  in  considering  the  supply-demand  balance  of 
JGBs. It is the year in which the gross amount of the Bank’s JGB purchases is expected to 
almost reach the gross amount of JGB issuance by the government. This implies that it is 
becoming difficult for the Bank to maintain the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of 
its JGB holdings solely by purchasing from the market the equivalent amount of JGBs issued 
by the government. It is considered that the Bank increasingly will need to purchase JGBs 
from financial institutions before redemption of such JGBs up to the amount needed for it to 
maintain the pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings. Given this, it is 
necessary to sufficiently recognize that it was at this exact timing that the negative interest 
rate policy – which discourages financial institutions to sell JGBs – was introduced. 
Future conduct of monetary policy 
D. 
My  assessment  is  that  QQE,  which  focuses  on  JGB  purchases,  already  has  exerted  a 
considerable effect, as evidenced by the closing of the negative output gap at an early stage 
and the subsequent correction of the weak prices. 
However, I consider that the additional effects of QQE have been diminishing, given that the 
continued decline in long-term real interest rates, which is considered to be the main source 
of policy effects, already has come to a halt. On the other hand, numerous side effects of 
QQE arising from the Bank’s JGB purchases have not diminished; rather, they seem to be 
increasing  steadily.  These  side  effects  include  (1)  various  problems  stemming  from  the 
distortion of the JGB market – for example, a risk of instability in the financial system caused 
by impairment of the proper functioning of the JGB market in terms of liquidity and the price-
discovery function, and a risk that drastic fluctuations in JGB prices will cause revisions to 
prices of other financial products and assets; (2) a limit to the Bank’s JGB purchases and 
increased volatility in the market in case of arising concerns among market participants about 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
such  a  limit;  and  (3)  deterioration  in  the  Bank’s  financial  soundness  in  the  course  of 
normalizing monetary policy. 
Under  these  circumstances,  I  believe  that,  by  reducing  the  pace  of  the  Bank’s  JGB 
purchases – or the annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings – 
the balance between the positive effects and side effects of QQE could be improved while 
ensuring  stability  in  the  JGB  market.  In  the  meantime,  if  the  Bank  does  not  reduce  the 
amount outstanding of its JGB holdings, it will be possible to avoid a rise in long-term real 
interest rates – a factor that leads to a decline in policy effects – thereby firmly ensuring the 
accumulated  effects  of  the  Bank’s  JGB  purchases.  On  this  basis,  I  have  been  proposing 
since  April  2015  to  reduce  the  annual  pace  of  increase  in  the  amount  outstanding  of  the 
Bank’s JGB holdings. In proceeding with the reduction, I think that it is possible to diminish its 
effects on financial markets by providing a thorough explanation, or forward guidance, to the 
markets that the reduction will actually enhance the stability and sustainability of the Bank’s 
JGB purchases. 
Moreover, I think that measures such as the review of the negative interest rate policy give 
due  consideration  to  the  stability  of  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  financial 
intermediation, which are critical infrastructures of economic activity. Implementation of such 
measures will bring about efficient resource allocation through appropriate operation of said 
functioning,  and  thereby  support  positive  efforts  by  the  government  and  firms  toward 
increased  productivity  so  that  such  efforts  lead  to  a  higher  potential  growth  rate  and 
ultimately to an improvement in people’s lives. 
Lastly, I believe that improving communication with financial markets and enhancing flexibility 
are the immediate challenges for the Bank in the conduct of monetary policy. 
As the Bank has emphasized its stance of achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the  earliest  possible  time,  overly  heightened  expectations  for  additional  monetary  easing 
tend to be observed in financial markets whenever there is an expectation that the Outlook 
Report will present a delay in the projected timing of the year-on-year rate of change in the 
CPI (all items less fresh food) reaching around 2 percent. In addition, since the introduction 
of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  views  have  become  increasingly  widespread  that  the 
Bank will launch unforeseen easing measures at an unexpected timing. I presume that these 
phenomena  not  only  have  become  one  of  the  factors  behind  reduced  predictability  of 
monetary policy and increased volatility in financial markets, but also have led to impairment 
of  the  credibility  of  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy  conduct.  For  this  reason,  I  consider  it 
important that the Bank thoroughly communicate with financial markets regarding its conduct 
of  monetary  policy  and  bear  in  mind  the  need  to  provide  a  detailed  explanation  so  as  to 
narrow the perception gap between them. 
In order to achieve the 2 percent price stability target, I think that it is vital to have a positive 
change in economic structure that would increase the underlying trend in inflation – through, 
for example, efforts by the government and firms – and that a considerable period of time will 
be required for this to take place. Therefore, rather than aiming to achieve the 2 percent price 
stability target through monetary policy alone  in the short term, I believe that resetting the 
time  frame  for  achieving  the  target  to  the  medium  to  long  term  and  conducting  monetary 
policy in a flexible manner – coupled with an improvement in communication with financial 
markets – will lead to maintaining economic and financial market stability. This will result in 
reaching the Bank’s ultimate goal of contributing to the sound development of the national 
economy. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
