  S S Mundra: Information technology and cyber risk in banking sector – 
the emerging fault lines 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
“International Seminar on Cyber Risk and Mitigation for banks”, organized by the Centre for 
Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL), Mumbai, 7 September 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri R Ravikumar is gratefully acknowledged. 
Good Morning! 
1. 
At the outset, I would like to compliment CAFRAL for organizing this International 
Seminar on Cyber Risk and Mitigation for banks and FIs, a topic which has assumed centre 
stage, not only in India but globally. Let me begin by quoting John Chambers, former CEO of 
CISCO,  who  famously  summed  up  the  significance  of  cyber  risk  for  the  enterprises  thus: 
“There  are  only  two  types  of  organisations,  one  who  have  been  hacked  and  others 
who don’t know that they have been hacked.” I observe that the schedule of the seminar 
is  fairly  comprehensive  and  I  am  sure  that  the  participants  would  benefit  from  both  –  the 
presentations as well as from mutual deliberations and sharing of their unique experiences 
on  the  subject.  In  my  address  today,  I  intend  to  focus  on  two  key  dimensions  of  cyber 
security in banks: a) Internal Information Technology Security & b) Network vulnerabilities 
Evolution of IT in Indian banks 
2. 
I would begin by briefly tracing the evolution and adoption of Information Technology 
by banks in India. As regulator of the banking system in the country, Reserve Bank of India 
has played a very important role in technology adoption by banks. Rangarajan Committee on 
Mechanisation  in  Banks  (1984)  could  be  considered  as  the  harbinger  of  adoption  of 
technology  for  Indian  banks.  Thereafter,  various  committees  /  working  groups  have 
recommended  gradual  adoption  of  technology  and  need  for  associated  safeguards  in  the 
sector. The journey  of  basically  commenced  with  the  advent  of  Ledger Posting  Machines, 
moved to Total Branch Automation and then to Core Banking Solution (CBS). In the 1990s, 
the  new  generation  private  sector  banks  were  mandated  to  commence  their  operations  in 
fully  computerised  environment.  As  Gordon  Moore’s  prediction  of  doubling  of  overall 
processing  power  of  the  computers  every  two  years  kept  coming  true,  more  and  more 
applications in the banking space got pushed to the computerised environment. 
3. 
RBI also played a very pivotal role in developing the payment market infrastructure 
and  facilitating  use  of  technology  in  the  banking  sector  by  setting  up  institutions  like  the 
IDRBT, NPCI, CCIL etc. Currently, these institutions provide the platform for running mission-
critical and secured payment system applications like RTGS, Secured Financial Messaging 
System, Negotiated Dealing Settlement System etc. 
4. 
Information  Technology  Act  enacted  in  the  year  2000  gave  a  further  fillip  to 
conducting of transactions in a computerised environment by providing a legal underpinning. 
Internet penetration gradually increased which led to increasing use of internet as a channel 
for delivery of banking products and services. The exponential growth of mobile phone users 
in the country also fast-tracked their usages as a delivery channel. The latest in the long line 
of innovations in the banking technology space is Unified Payment Interface (UPI), which has 
pushed the boundaries on remittances. To cut a long story short, technology adoption has 
increased  manifold  and  today  no  bank  can  survive  without  robust  technology,  customer 
friendly digital products, hassle free user experience and continuous innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Fintech revolution 
5. 
With  the  advent  of  Fintech  related  innovations  across  the  globe,  well  established 
banks  are  challenged  once  again.  Today  most  of  the  banking  needs  can  be  managed 
through  the  mobile.  Card  based  payments  also  have  matured  with  the  advent  of  pre-paid 
cards,  tap  and  go,  virtual  card,  multi-currency  card,  QR  code  based  payments,  etc. 
Technology  has  moved  from  being  an  enabler  and  differentiator  to  being  an  ultimate 
necessity and a way of life. By the end of this year, a handful of payment banks would have 
commenced  their  operations  in  India,  stretching  the  banks  on  technology  front.  Some 
technological advancement that are gradually making a foray into financial sector include big 
data,  artificial  intelligence,  block  chain  technology  and  internet  of  things.  Let  me 
mention a few examples. 
6. 
Banco Santander has expressed its intention to provide secure transactions using 
voice  recognition  via  its  banking  app.  RBS  has  trialled  “Luvo”,  an  AI  customer  service 
assistance  to  interact  with  staff  and  to  potentially  serve  customers  in  near  future.  Japan’s 
Softbank,  in  collaboration  with  Paris-based  robotics  experts,  Aldebaran  has  developed 
Pepper, the world’s first humanoid robot. Pepper is already being used in customer services 
industries as a replacement to an information booth or the welcome desk. Mizuho Financial 
Group Inc. bank has reportedly introduced Pepper to its flagship branch in Tokyo in 2015 to 
deal  with  customer  enquiries,  while  Mitsubishi  UFJ  Financial  Group  has  tested  “Nao”,  a 
humanoid robot to interact with customers. Taking cue from their Japanese counterparts, I 
understand  that  HDFC  Bank  in  India  is  also  intending  to  introduce  similar  automation  via 
robotics. 
To buttress the point around increasing reliance on technology in the banking sector 
7. 
in India, let me reel out some statistics. As per the latest RBI Annual Report, the share of 
electronic transactions in total transactions in volume terms has moved up to 84.4 per cent 
from 74.6 per cent in the previous year. Likewise in value terms, their share has also inched 
up  to  95.2  per  cent  from  94.6  per  cent.  At  end-March  2016,  the  national  electronic  funds 
transfer (NEFT) facility was available through 130,013 branches of 172 banks, in addition to 
business correspondent (BC) outlets. NEFT handled 1.2 billion transactions valued at around 
Rs.83  trillion  (approximately  $  1.3  tn)  up  from  928  million  transactions  for  Rs.60  trillion 
(approximately $ 0.9 tn) in the previous year. In March 2016, NEFT processed the highest 
ever monthly volume of 129 million transactions. Similarly, the internet banking and mobile 
banking based payments are increasing at a rapid pace. I have already mentioned the UPI 
earlier.  In  this  context,  it  will  also  be  appropriate  to  mention  the  huge  enrolments  under 
Aadhaar  (a  unique  identifier  for  residents  in  the  country)  with  linkage  to  individual  bank 
accounts, which in association with UPI has created an underlying potential to enable some 
kind of “account number portability” going forward. This can transform the banking sector 
in a way that cannot be fathomed now. 
8. 
While  everyone  appreciates  the  ease  of  doing  24  X  7  banking  transactions  in  a 
quick  and  efficient  manner,  the  backbone  for  enabling  such  advanced  technology  based 
solutions  is  provided  by  the  IT  architecture  of  the  banks.  To  optimally  leverage  new 
technology for providing new digital products, the IT systems at banks needs to be robust, 
capable of handling increasing volumes in a secure manner, providing connectivity to various 
applications accessing the bank’s core banking solution in a safe manner and at the same 
time ensuring confidentiality of customer information. Recognising these challenges, Reserve 
Bank  of  India  has  been  providing  guidance  to  banks  on  managing  the  adoption  of 
technology.  Towards  this  end,  one  of  the  major  initiatives  of  RBI  was  the  setting  up  of 
Working Group on Information Security, Electronic Banking, Technology Risk Management 
and Cyber Frauds (under Shri Gopalakrishna). The Group made important recommendations 
in  nine  broad  areas  viz.  IT  Governance,  Information  Security,  IS  Audit,  IT  Operations, 
IT Services Outsourcing, Cyber Fraud, Business Continuity Planning, Customer Awareness 
programmes and Legal aspects. The guidelines, since issued by the RBI, clearly underlined 
that implementation of these recommendations needed to be risk based and commensurate 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
with the nature and scope of activities engaged into by individual banks as well as the level 
of  dependence  of  the  business  processes  on  technology.  Board  level  committees  in  the 
banks  had  been  mandated  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  these  guidelines  in  their 
respective banks. While substantial progress has been made in the past few years, I believe 
that banks still have to travel a lot of distance before the requirements are fully met. Given 
the centrality of technology in the functioning of banks today, this can no longer be treated as 
mere matter for compliance but has to be viewed as a core business issue. 
Supervisory concerns 
9. 
With  computerisation  of  various  activities  within  a  bank,  as  a  regulator  and 
supervisor,  we  have  come  to  expect  much  higher  capability  from  banks  in  generation  of 
relevant  management  information  for  decision  making  purposes.  However,  one  feels  that 
there  is  a  substantial  gap  between  the  promise  and  the  delivery.  Let  me  highlight  a  few 
specific areas. 
10. 
One  of  the  primary  areas  of  concern  for  the  financial  world  is  to  ensure  that  the 
banking system is not abused by the unscrupulous elements for money laundering purposes. 
Regulations  on  Know  Your  Customer  /  Anti-Money  Laundering  are  robust  across 
jurisdictions.  However,  we  often  find  banks  not  having  robust  systems  to  comply  with  the 
regulations. At the time of on-boarding of the customers, banks are required to assess their 
customers,  their  business  and  expected  turnover  in  their  account,  source  of  such 
transactions etc. In recent times, we have come across several instances of banks having 
allowed  transactions  in  their  customers’  accounts  without  any  due  consideration  to  their 
declared business profiles. The accounts received multiple RTGS/NEFT inward transactions 
and  several  such  remittances  were  sent  out  of  these  accounts  as  well.  Several  accounts 
were abused to send money abroad in the form of advance import remittances. Despite the 
disproportionate activity in such accounts, the monitoring mechanism of banks fell short of 
our expectations. I wonder why banks are not able to devise fool proof technology-based 
solutions  to  identify  such  transgressions.  As  you  may  be  aware,  RBI  had  to  impose 
penalties on 13 banks for non-compliance with extant KYC/AML instructions including failure 
to categorise their customers in line with their risk profiles. 
11. 
is 
for  system-based 
identification of NPAs. We feel there is much scope for improvement in this area. While we 
appreciate  that  the  banks  use  multiple  systems,  the  rules  are  elaborate  and  at  times 
qualitative, posing challenges to capture the parameters in computer systems; however, with 
the  progress  in  technology  this  problem  should  have  been  solved  much  earlier.  What  we 
expect is a robust system based identification of NPAs, not only for the regulator’s use, but 
also for the banks’ internal use so as to facilitate timely recovery / resolution. 
The third area that I would like to touch upon is the Automated Data Flow project, 
12. 
wherein it was envisaged that banks would enable their systems for automatic flow of data 
for regulatory reporting purposes. I understand that ADF implementation has not progressed 
to  the  desired  extent  and  despite  significant  progress  on  technology  front,  quality, 
consistency and timeliness of data submissions remains to be an issue. 
13. 
I can go on. One common thread I see in all the above cases is the lack of Board 
level oversight and commitment from the executive management. Technology service 
providers,  particularly  product  vendors  also  have  a  role  to  play.  It  is  important  that  the 
technology they provide is capable of meeting the regulatory requirements on a continuous 
basis and gaps, if any, are addressed within a short span of time and such upgrades flow 
seamlessly and in a cost effective manner to all of their clients. 
Another  area 
to  my  mind 
the  process 
that  comes 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Recent cyber incidents 
14. 
financial world. 
- 
Let  me  now  turn  towards  some  of  the  recent  cyber  incidents  pertaining  to  the 
  On  2  August  2016,  Bitfinex,  a  Hong  Kong  exchange  for  the  trading  of  digital 
currencies,  announced  that  some  of  its  customer  accounts  were  hacked  and 
bitcoins  stolen.  The  value  of  the  stolen  bitcoins  has  been  reported  to  be 
approximately US$65 million or more. As a consequence the value of bitcoins came 
down and the trust on the digital currency shaken. 
In the beginning of the year, Bangladesh Bank was the target and an attempt was 
made to steal US$1 billion and ultimately the attackers could successfully get away 
with  US$81  million.  Recently,  in  India  too,  a  similar  attempt  was  made  on  a 
commercial  bank  by  generating  fraudulent  payment  instructions  on  the  Nostro 
accounts and transmitting them over SWIFT messaging system. Though monetary 
loss  could  be  prevented  with  proactive  follow-up  with  the  concerned  paying  / 
intermediary banks, the incident has reinforced the fact that the various stakeholders 
have not learnt the lessons yet. We have also come across instances of fraudulent 
messages  confirming  documentary  credits  being 
transmitted  using  SWIFT 
infrastructure. Although, the latter incidents were mainly a result of failure of internal 
controls and non-adherence to “four eyes principles”, it is also on account of reliance 
on  disparate  systems  whereby  SWIFT  transactions  could  be  done  without 
originating a corresponding transaction in the CBS. 
In  another  incident  involving  shared  mobile  wallet  of  a  bank,  vulnerabilities  were 
observed  in  the  application  itself  which  led  to  exploitation  by  the  attackers.  The 
originator  of  the  transfer  could  get  the  amount  reversed  back  to  him  without 
corresponding  debit  in  the  recipient’s  account  in  a  large  number  of  transactions 
(total amount involved was around Rs.12 crore). Bank was not performing any real 
time reconciliation and noticed it only when there was a spike in transactions which 
led  to  detection  during  reconciliation.  The  vulnerabilities  exploited  in  the  incident 
could have been averted, had the launch of the product not been rushed through. 
In another incident, an e-payment validation website of a large bank was hacked. 
Surprisingly,  the  bank  was  not  aware  of  the  incident  till  it  was  notified  by  a  law 
enforcement agency. There was a Facebook post by a person from a neighbouring 
country claiming responsibility for the operation. Though the hacking incident did not 
result in any pecuniary loss as the site attacked was only performing validations of 
inputs entered by end users, nevertheless it demonstrates a serious security breach. 
15. 
As  may  be  seen  from  the  examples  quoted  above,  the  cyber  threat  landscape  is 
widening. This is natural, given that the money no longer moves only in physical form, but 
mostly  through  electronic  means.  It  opens  avenues  for  unscrupulous  elements  to  devise 
ingenious methods for stealing it. One of the key targets by the attackers is the credential of 
the customers, as it provides the key to the “khazana (treasure)”. Recent experience shows 
involvement of organised gangs and nation-state actors having huge financial backing. On 
the  other  hand,  the  cost  of  orchestrating  such  attacks  is  coming  down.  There  are  several 
reports indicating availability of credentials of customers for sale in dark web, which is 
really scary. 
 Improving cyber resilience 
16. 
Globally, the focus has now shifted to cyber security. Cyber security is no longer an 
isolated incident affecting one industry / one country. Several cyber-attacks in recent times 
have been designed to achieve political /religious objectives as also for securing funds for 
promoting terrorism. This has assumed frightening dimensions as it has an important bearing 
on financial stability. The importance accorded to the issue can be gauged from the fact that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 the  FPC 
their  meeting 
in  June  2013, 
 
 
global  standard  setting  bodies  as  well  as  reputed  central  banks  have  been  committing 
extremely large resources to address this menace. 
17. 
Several countries have taken steps to improve their cyber resilience. Committee on 
Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  and  Board  of  the  International  Organization  of 
Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  have  issued  Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial 
market  infrastructures  in  June  2016  after  consultation  with  stakeholders.  Financial  Policy 
Committee  (FPC)  of  the  Bank  of  England  launched  the  CBEST  initiative  –  a  Vulnerability 
Testing  Framework.  Following 
issued  a 
recommendation  requesting  that  Her  Majesty’s  Treasury  and  the  regulators  work  with  the 
core of the UK financial system and its infrastructure to put in place a programme of work to 
improve and test resilience to cyber-attack. The committee also noted it was important that 
boards  of  financial  firms  and  infrastructure  providers  recognised  their  responsibility  for 
responding  to  those  attacks.  Recently,  in  May  2016,  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority 
launched  a  Cyber  security  Fortification  Initiative(CFI).  The  CFI  mainly  comprises  following 
three pillars: 
Cyber Resilience Assessment Framework; 
(a) 
Professional Development Programme; and 
(b) 
Cyber Intelligence Sharing Platform. 
(c) 
18. 
In  India  too,  we  have  been  working  on  strengthening  the  defence  against 
cybercrimes. Government of India has taken several steps to tackle the menace of cyber-
attacks  and  important  institutional  arrangements  have  been  made.  Indian  Computer 
Emergence  Response  Team  (CERT-In)  has  been  established  which  monitors  Indian 
cyberspace  and  coordinates  alerts  and  warning  of  imminent  attacks  and  detection  of 
malicious  attacks  among  public  and  private  cyber  users  and  organisations  in  the  country. 
Banks / Financial Institutions have been identified as critical infrastructure for the purpose. A 
National Cyber Coordination Centre has also been established. 
19. 
RBI  has  issued  instructions  on  cyber  security  framework  in  banks  on  June  2, 
2016. I am sure many of you would have had a chance to look at the instructions. Among 
others, the circular expects banks to put in place a board approved cyber-security policy, to 
prepare a cyber-crisis management plan, to make arrangement for continuous surveillance, 
to  reckon  the  security  aspects  while  procuring  /  connecting  /  implementing  hardware, 
software,  network  devices  etc.,  to  ensure  protection  of  consumer  information,  to  share 
unusual cyber security incidents with RBI, to assess the gaps in cyber security preparedness 
on  the  basis  of  baseline  requirements  articulated  in  the  circular  and  to  set  up  a  Cyber 
Security  Operations  Centre.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  has  set  up  an  Expert  Panel  on  IT 
Examination  and  Cyber  Security  (Chairperson:  Smt.  Meena  Hemchandra)  drawing 
representatives  from  the  industry  as  members.  The  Panel  is  providing  assistance  in  IT 
examination/cyber  security  initiatives  of  banks,  review  examination  reports  and  suggest 
actionable items. RBI also launched a detailed IT examination programme in October 2015. 
This is proposed to be extended to more than 30 major banks during 2016–17 and to cover 
all  banks  by  2017–18.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  proposes  to  set  up  a  Cyber  Security  Lab, 
which will assist IT examiners in conducting analysis of cyber security of banks. RBI is also in 
the process of operationalizing its IT subsidiary (the Reserve Bank Information Technology 
(ReBIT)  Pvt  Ltd.  The  mandate  for  ReBIT,  among  others,  is  to  focus  on  issues  around  IT 
systems  and cyber  security  (including  related  research)  of the financial  sector  and  to  also 
assist in the audit and assessment of the entities regulated by the Reserve Bank. 
20. 
I am also pleased to note that IDRBT has released a comprehensive check-list on 
cyber  security  prepared  by  a  panel  of  experts  drawn  from  industry  and  academia  in  July 
2016.  I  observe  that  the  checklist  covers  wide-ranging  aspects  of  cyber  security  like 
enterprise  control, IT  infrastructure  security,  Endpoint  security,  Security monitoring  as  also 
outsourcing  security.  I  trust  the  banks/  financial  institutions  would  find  it  very  useful  when 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
they  try  to  benchmark  the  practices  obtaining  at  their  own  institutions  against  the  best 
practices indicated in the checklist. 
increasingly  exploiting 
Expectations from banks 
21. 
Let  me  now  share  some  of  the  expectations  from  banks.  First  and  foremost,  we 
expect the Board of Directors to get actively involved in the Technology related aspects. IT 
strategy needs to be closely aligned with the business strategy. With strides in technology, it 
would  be  difficult  for  Boards  that  do  not  have  members  having  expertise  in  technology 
related areas to effectively adopt technology. Technology risk, including cyber-risk, is to 
be  treated  just  like  any  other  inherent  risks  faced  by  the  banks  viz.  credit,  market, 
operational  risks  and  thus,  Board  needs  to  articulate  what  is  their  risk  appetite,  which 
residual risks they would like to carry and what kind of mitigation strategy they would like to 
follow. In the name of technology adoption, while banks are proactive in procuring various 
latest gadgets, what we observe across institutions is that the configurations of such devices 
are  seldom  given  sufficient  importance  and  left  to  the  vendors.  Vulnerabilities  exist  in 
hardware, middleware, software, OS, applications, network devices, communication devices 
etc. It is, therefore, important to pay sufficient attention while procuring / implementing any 
new  devices/  solutions.  Cyber  criminals  are  also 
the 
vulnerabilities  in  the  smart  phone  software  by  infecting  the  Operating  systems  with 
malware. The banks which are big on mobile banking as a service delivery tool must also 
look to guard against this emerging risk. 
22. 
Another  area  of  concern  is  the  patch  management.  OEMs  release  patches  after 
known vulnerabilities are escalated to them and if the patches are not rolled out in time, we 
are practically leaving the door open for exploitation. User management leaves much to be 
desired-practice of shared passwords, no passwords, free administrator level access, dated 
authorized users list are quite common place. Often, there is no robust process for creating 
new  users,  reviewing  the  list  and  deleting  inactive  users.  Then,  there  is  the  issue  of 
implementing physical security. I have seen physical access control systems being in place 
but usage not insisted upon. Further, the dependence on the vendors is increasing and many 
a times only the vendors know how the system is to be operated. Customer information is 
stored at vendors’ facility without adequate safeguards. Another curious thing I note is that 
while the banks claim that they do not get skilled resources, the same vendor provides some 
critical services to multiple banks. This raises a question as to whether the banks know what 
they get from their outsourced vendors, including the quality of delivery. Timely decision to 
scale up capacity is very important to ensure continued availability of services and business 
growth. People and processes need to be given adequate importance, for without capable 
hands even best of the systems is bound to fail. Monitoring is paramount – whether the port 
that was opened for a specific purpose was closed in time, who analyses the important logs 
that are created religiously, how incidents are responded to, whether the security operations 
centre (SOC) is integrated with inputs from various systems, whether the exceptions thrown 
out are escalated to appropriate levels etc. 
23. 
The  security  culture  at  banks  needs  to  change  for  the  better.  In  a  brick  and 
mortar environment, if the safe is not having good locking system, or the walls are showing 
some cracks, roof is leaking, banks do notice. In a digital world, is it not important to look at 
such  leaks,  cracks  and  vulnerabilities  and  take  appropriate  action?  Phishing  attacks  on 
customers are increasing. Is it not the responsibility of banks to educate their customers and 
build  some  work  around  to  prevent  the  fraudsters  to  escape  so  easily?  Considering  the 
inability of the customers to withstand organised electronic crimes, RBI has put in a place a 
framework  for  limiting  the  liability  of  customers  in  unauthorised  electronic  banking 
transactions  as  a  customer  protection  measure.  Similarly,  whether  it  is  technology 
service provider or SWIFT like infrastructure provider, is it not the vendor’s responsibility to 
ensure that their agents meet all the electronic security requirements at all times and that the 
environment  is  secure  enough  to  carry  out  the stated  business? I feel  society  as  a  whole 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
need to recognise the emerging digital landscape and do their bit to ensure that our digital 
world, while it brings convenience and comfort to all the consumers, does not compromise 
the security. 
Conclusion 
24. 
• 
  In conclusion, I would like to recapitulate some of my observations. 
Cyber  security  has  emerged  as  an  important  area  of  attention  world  over, 
particularly for the financial sector 
Cyber  incidents  are  increasingly  shifting  towards  targeting  of  financial 
institutions  instead  of  end  users.  A  manifestation  of  this  trend  is  evident  in 
Carbanak,  a  major  advanced  persistent  threat  (APT)  attack  against  financial 
institutions  around  the  world.  The  surprise  factor  in  this  APT  attack  was  the 
criminals’ change in approach and careful planning whereby rather than using the 
usual  cybercriminal  method  of  stealing  consumer  credentials  or  compromising 
individual online banking sessions with malware, the Carbanak gang targeted banks’ 
internal  systems  and  operations,  resulting  in  a  multichannel  robbery  that  is 
estimated at $ 1 billion . 
Cyber risk cannot be brought down to zero. Hence a quick restoration plan with least 
damage  post  breach  is  crucial.  There  is  a  need  to  evolve  a  blueprint  of  co-
ordination  between  financial  institutions  and  public  authorities  in  such  an 
eventuality. 
25. 
The pace of expansion of digital world is increasing and hence, technology adoption 
should be conscious, purposeful and value adding. For improving the IT security, the banks 
need to focus on increased staff/customer awareness and training. Cautioning the staff and 
the  customers  to  refrain  from  opening  suspicious  emails,  emails  from  unknown  persons, 
entering personal account details on fake websites, vishing etc. can be effective first steps in 
this endeavour. 
26. 
While the financial sector has been ardently working for decades to prevent fraud 
and  strengthen  the  detection  and  protection  mechanisms,  the  threats  to  their  internal 
operations networks has been considered to be low until attacks like Carbanak happened. 
Under the emerging circumstances, the banks need to be mindful of likely attacks from within 
the bank’s internal core systems and try to plug such vulnerabilities. Banks need to practice 
“Cyber Hygiene” and I hope the Board and Top Management develop early sensitivity to this 
important task. The CISO also has a very important role in supporting the Board and Senior 
management  in  this  initiative  by  focussing  on  IT  governance,  information  security  audits, 
customer communication, fraud management and legal aspects. Our view is that CISO’s role 
needs to be enhanced from an operational level to strategic level. 
27. 
I wish the Seminar all success and hope that the deliberations would be mutually 
beneficial  to  everyone  and  would  help  crystallise  ways  and  means  for  a  more  secure, 
efficient and transparent banking sector going forward. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
