  Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks – forging ties – profile of Mark 
Carney 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  XXIIV.  Arthur  Burns 
Memorial Lecture, Berlin, 22 September 2016. 
 Chairman Friedrich Merz, 
Governor Mark Carney, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to welcome you to the twenty-fourth Arthur F. Burns memorial lecture. 
The Bundesbank has a tradition of hosting this lecture. The close collaboration between the 
Bundesbank and the Atlantik Brücke goes back to one of my predecessors, Karl Klasen, who 
was chairman of the Atlantik Brücke from 1978 to 1984. This involvement has continued to 
this day and Bundesbank Executive Board member Andreas Dombret is the current treasurer 
of  the  Atlantik  Brücke.  As  for  myself,  having  participated  in  its  German-American  Young 
Leaders Program many years ago, I have remained in touch with the association since that 
time. 
The  Atlantik  Brücke  was founded  in  1952  with  the  aim  of forging  closer  links  between  the 
United States and Germany. Its purpose was to foster better mutual understanding and keep 
the transatlantic dialogue alive for future generations. 
At a time when economic integration and migration are being seen by some people as an 
economic  threat  and  in  view  of  the  often  more  inward-looking  style  of  politics  currently 
perceptible on both sides of the Atlantic, it is important to set a counterpoint and to put the 
case for open markets and international co-operation. Institutions such as the Atlantik Brücke 
can make an important contribution in this regard. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it gives me great pleasure today to welcome Mark Carney, Governor 
of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial Stability Board. 
Our speaker today is a perfect role model for North American and European partnership. A 
Canadian citizen, he was appointed Governor of the Bank of England in 2013, making him 
the first non-Briton to hold this position in the institution’s 320-year history. 
Mark’s  arrival  in  London  in  2013  attracted  the  kind  of  attention  in  the  British  media  only 
usually seen when another famous Canadian visits the country: Justin Bieber. And like Justin 
Bieber, he already had an established fan base when he took over the reins at Threadneedle 
Street. One of them was the former finance minister George Osborne, who praised Mark in 
front of Parliament as “the outstanding central banker of his generation”. 
Indeed, even at his young age, Mark had carved out a reputation in the world of finance and 
central  banking,  having  filled  an  impressive  range  of  posts  in  both  the  private  and  public 
sector. 
Born  in  Canada,  Mark  earned  a  scholarship  to  Harvard  University  at  the  age  of  18.  He 
studied economics and went on to receive his PhD from Oxford University in 1995. 
Over  a  period  of  10  years,  he  held  various  positions  at  Goldman  Sachs  in  different  cities 
around the world, including Tokyo and London. During this time, he became familiar with how 
the  financial  markets  work;  knowledge  that  would  prove  extremely  valuable  in  his  later 
positions. 
However, rather unusually, Mark’s long-term plan was to eventually work in the public sector. 
He  once  said:  “Some  people feel  an  obligation to  public  service,  and  if they  do, then they 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  should pursue it.” In 2003, Mark followed his own advice and joined the Bank of Canada as 
deputy governor. 
After a brief secondment to the Federal Department of Finance, he was appointed Governor 
of the Bank of Canada in February 2008, making him the youngest central bank governor 
among the G7 countries – at least until he gave me the baton in 2011. Today, Mark and I are 
the longest serving governors of the G7 countries. In contrast to public perception, the world 
of central banking can sometimes be fast-paced… 
Mark  had  not  been  in  his  new  position  for  long  when  the  financial  crisis  erupted  with  full 
force.  However,  unlike  other  major  economies,  Canada  avoided  a  deep  recession  and 
handled the crisis rather well. Just one month after his appointment, Mark cut interest rates 
to  record  lows  and  accompanied  this  measure  by  clear  forward  guidance.  In  short,  Mark 
demonstrated leadership during the financial crisis. 
And it was precisely this talent for leadership that gained him the Reader’s Digest title of the 
Most Trusted Canadian in 2011. In the same year, he was appointed Chairman of the FSB, 
where he is currently serving his second term. 
On  the  1st  of  July  2013  Mark  took  the  helm  at  the  Bank  of  England,  one  of  the  most 
respected central banks in the world. In the light of Britain’s decision to leave the European 
Union, his job has its own specific challenges. Again, this is a situation that requires strong 
leadership. 
Dear  Mark,  during  your  time  at  Oxford  University,  you  were  a  successful  hockey  player, 
acting as goal-keeper and co-captain of the Oxford Blues. Wayne Gretzky, a living hockey 
legend  who  also  played  for  your  favorite  team,  the  Edmonton  Oilers,  once  said:  “A  good 
hockey player plays where the puck is. A great hockey player plays where the puck is going 
to be.” This holds for us central bankers, too. While we certainly shouldn’t take our eye off 
where the puck is at present, we still need to look far enough ahead to anticipate where it is 
heading in the long run. 
And this is exactly what you are doing. It is largely thanks to you that the FSB analyses the 
long-term  economic  consequences  of  climate  change.  While  this  issue  might  not  be  as 
imminent as the Brexit vote, the longer-term economic implications are more far-reaching. 
The FSB has established a private-sector-led task force, developing proposals for voluntary, 
consistent  and  comparable  corporate  disclosure  of  climate-related 
risks. 
Furthermore,  at  the  COP21  in  Paris  last  year,  the  leaders  of  the  G20  considered  how  to 
harness the capacity of financial markets to effectively finance the transition to a low-carbon 
economy. 
In your widely regarded speech “Breaking the tragedy of the horizons” in October 2015, you 
reminded politicians and members of the financial and insurance sector of the risks arising 
from climate change itself and the transition to a greener economy. 
And  so  I  am  delighted  that  you  will  address  this  topic  again  today.  Before  we  go  into 
overtime, I will hand over to you: Mark, the floor is yours. 
financial 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
