Alex Brazier: A macroprudential approach to bank capital – serving 
the real economy in good times and bad 
Speech  by  Mr  Alex  Brazier,  Executive  Director  for  Financial  Stability  Strategy 
and Risk  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  27th  Annual  Institute  of  International 
Bankers  conference, Washington DC, 7 March 2016. 
 I  am  grateful  to  Rob  Edwards,  Jas  Ellis  and  Calum  Mitchell  for  their  assistance  in  preparing  these 
remarks. 
Your industry has known better starts to a year. 
Bank stocks down, volatility up, earnings disappointing. All ghosts of crises past. 
But one ghost has not returned to haunt us. 
Questions  about  returns  haven’t  translated  as  they’ve  done  before  into  questions 
about resilience. 
Investors  may  have  real  questions  about  whether  some  banks  can  generate 
adequate return on equity in a difficult global economic and trading environment. 
They  may  also  be  more  alert  to  the  risks  in  and  appropriate  returns  to  contingent 
capital instruments. 
But when UK bank price-to-book ratios were this low in 2009, senior unsecured debt 
spreads were over 350bps. 
At the height of the euro crisis in 2011, they were 300bps. 
Today, they are just 73bps (chart 1). 
Underlying that is the transformation of bank capital. 
In  the  UK,  major  banks  now  have  core  tier  1  equity  ratios  averaging  nearly  13%. 
Before the financial crisis they had – on Basel III definitions – just 4.5% (chart 2). 
Those new levels of resilience are seen in the results of stress tests. 
Last year, the Bank of England subjected UK banks to a sharp slowdown in China, a 
fall  in  oil  prices  and  intense  market  volatility,  coupled  with  stressed  estimates  of 
redress costs for past misconduct. 
Across the system, banks in the test incurred losses of £37bn. That’s over twice the 
losses of the system in the financial crisis. 
Back then, losses on that scale would have wiped out almost two thirds of the capital 
of the entire British banking system. 
With  so  much  more  capital  today,  the  stress  test  showed  those  losses  could  be 
absorbed, even while the system continued to grow credit to the real economy. 
Far  from  sideswiping  the  real  economy  under  stress,  the  test  showed  the  banking 
system could continue to support it.1
And yet, there is still, eight long years after the crisis, a lively debate in newspapers, 
blogs and academia, about whether the capital strength of the banking system should 
be built up further. 
1  Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/results011215.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
   About  whether  authorities  should  abandon  the  conclusions  of  Basel  III  and  of  the 
UK’s  post-crisis  Independent  Commission  on  Banking  and  compel  banks  to  go 
further. 
A debate like that is all to the good; these are important questions for society. 
But it has to be balanced against the merits of clarity. 
Clarity you need to run your businesses effectively. 
Clarity investors need to allocate and price capital efficiently. 
Clarity the public, and Parliaments, need to hold policymakers and banks to account. 
That’s  why,  in  December,  the  Bank  of  England  gave  a  clear  statement  about  the 
appropriate baseline level of capital for the systemic part of the UK banking system.2 
Across  major  UK  banks,  no  less  than  3.75%  of  total  assets  should  be  funded  with 
tier 1 capital. 
If risks were properly measured, this would translate into 11% of risk weighted assets. 
However, there are shortcomings in existing measures of risk, including banks’ own 
pension  schemes,  interest  rate  risk  in  banking  books  and  concentrations  of 
exposures. 
So on current measures, we expect major UK banks to fund no less than 13½% of 
risk weighted assets with tier 1 equity.3 
After a long march to build capital strength, UK banks are within a hair’s breadth of 
that today. And the rewards of greater resilience are being reaped. 
Our expectations for capital are founded on the need for a banking system that can 
serve the real economy, in good times and bad. 
Our aim is to be prudent and to make macroeconomic sense. 
Our aim is to be macroprudential. 
It’s  clear  why  the  approach  has  to  be  prudent.  The  wider  economic  costs  of 
poorly capitalised banks can be immense. 
The cutbacks of credit, of market making, and of essential payment services under 
stress can be economically devastating. 
On  average,  during  the  Great  Recession,  output  fell  in  those  countries  that 
experienced financial crises by nearly twice as much as in countries that did not. That 
gap in performance has persisted since. 
We estimate the full, net present value, economic costs of typical past financial crises 
to have been catastrophic – around 75% of GDP and in some cases much more. 
So  nobody  should  deny  the  economic  case  for  well  capitalised  banks.  And  it  was 
obvious in the aftermath of the crisis where bank capital needed to go. Up. A lot. 
                                                
2  Available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrsupp.pdf.  
3  Major UK banks are required to hold, on average, additional tier 1 capital of 2.5% of risk weighted 
assets under “pillar 2a” requirements. These compensate for existing shortcomings in risk measures 
and lift average capital requirements from 11% to 13.5%. Should the shortcomings in risk measures 
be corrected, measures of risk weighted assets would increase.But at the same time, our expectation 
for capital as a share of risk weighted assets would fall back. The two effects can be expected to 
offset so that no extra capital would be required. Ongoing work in the Basel Committee addressing 
excessive variability in risk weights should not materially affect overall capital requirements.   
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In  fact,  with  market  confidence  so  low  at  the  time,  more  capital  not  only  boosted 
resilience, it was also needed for lending to resume. 
Capital  was  good  for  resilience  and  good  for  growth.  That’s  why  countries  that 
recapitalised their banking systems quickly secured earlier and stronger recoveries, 
with the US leading the way. 
However, after a point, another unit of capital buys a much smaller fall in the 
probability of bank failure. There may be seriously diminishing returns. 
And  at  the  same  time  it’s  possible  that  ever  more  bank  capital  may  not  best 
serve the real economy. 
It may be prudential. But it may not be macroprudential. 
We have to be alert to the possibility that more bank capital could hold back growth. 
The costs of higher levels of capital can be overstated, including – let’s face it – by 
some  bank  executives  who  mistake  private  costs  to  today’s  shareholders  for  true 
economic costs. 
It’s often forgotten that lower leverage makes equity and debt less risky, driving down 
the cost of both. That isn’t just a textbook result; it’s supported by the data. 
But the evidence from numerous studies is that this effect is incomplete. Total funding 
costs  do  rise  as  companies  –  of  all  sorts,  not  just  banks  –  swap  debt  for  equity 
funding.  And  this  effect  goes  beyond  what  can  be  explained  by  the  differential  tax 
treatment of debt and equity.4 
The  drivers  of  this  are  unclear.  It’s  an  area  where  there  is  much  to  learn;  where 
partnership between the industry and academia could be productive in bringing theory 
and practice closer together.5 
In  general,  it  seems  that  investors’  preferences  for  different  types  of  assets  are 
affected not just by the risk and return of those assets. 
Equity investors seem to want higher, more volatile returns. They like their equity to 
be equity-like. So making it safer doesn’t reduce its cost as much as it should. 
And for banks, whose short-term debts are the money used by the real economy, the 
effect is compounded. Depositors want a stable liquid store of value for a rainy day. 
They don’t want equity. So they understandably take some persuading to swap their 
rainy day fund into bank equity.6 
Regardless of its cause, the evidence that higher capital requirements can push up 
bank funding costs can’t be ignored. The costs will be borne by real borrowers – in 
higher cost of funds, and real savers – in lower returns. 
In theory, monetary policy may be able to offset the overall effect of that on inflation. 
But  it  can’t  alter  the  fact  that  the  costs  will  be  higher  of  matching  lenders  with 
borrowers, capital providers with capital seekers, and risk takers with risk hedgers. 
                                                
4  Miles et al (2012) presents a central estimate that the reduction in the volatility of equity returns and 
riskiness of debt offsets about half the increase in funding costs that would, other things equal, result 
from switching debt to more expensive equity funding.  
5  Elliott (2013) sets out areas of disagreement in the debate about the economic costs of higher bank 
capital requirements.  
6  The low risk anomaly, whereby lower risk stocks generate no lower and in some cases even higher 
stock  returns  than  higher  risk  stocks,  is  documented  for  banks  by  Baker  and Wurgler  (2013).  The 
impact of depositor liquidity preference is discussed in Kashyap et al (2010).   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   That’s not just a private cost. It’s a social cost too. 
At the margin, it will force a change in the mix of economic activity. The ability to turn 
future  cashflows  into  today’s  investments  will  be  curtailed.  Spending  will  replace 
investment. Investment projects will have lower returns. 
That holds back future economic potential. 
Although  it’s  impossible  to  be  precise,  it  seems  that  once  a  baseline  degree  of 
resilience has been established, more capital could actually cost the economy. 
We estimate that a 100bps increase in capital requirements across a banking system 
could result in an economic cost with net present value of 0.6% of GDP.7 
This  all  raises  an  important  macroprudential  question:  how  to  best  protect  the  real 
economy without the unnecessary risk of holding it back? 
Our answer in the UK has three parts. 
First, to protect the economy from the consequences of bank failure. And to do 
so at minimal economic cost. 
Effective  bank  resolution  unlocks  this.  With  minimum  disruption  to  existing  funding 
structures,  it  opens  the  door  to  preserving  the  functions  of  failed  banks  without 
recourse to the taxpayer. 
Serious  progress  has  been  made  in  building  resolution  regimes.  An  EU-wide  legal 
framework  is  now  in  place.  Cross-border  arrangements  have  been  stepped  up. 
Agreements  have  been  reached  on  temporary  stays  to  closing  out  contracts  in 
resolution. 
And  the  G20  agreement  on  Total  Loss  Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC)  standards  for 
global systemic banks has a game-changing principle at its heart. 
Systemic banks must have the capacity to replenish capital, up to minimum regulatory 
standards, even if all capital – of all tiers – has been completely burned through.8 
It’s a game changer because it hardwires the recapitalisation of failing banks. Bailed-
in debt holders become, very quickly, the proud new owners of the bank. 
Case  study  evidence  is  striking.  Rapid  recapitalisation  of  failed  banks  speeds 
economic recovery. It cuts the long-term costs of systemic bank failure in half. 
But  resolution  through  bail-in  is  more  than  a  fire  extinguisher.  It’s  a  non-flammable 
coating of the banking system too. It helps to prevent bank failures in the first place. 
Unsurprisingly,  the  evidence  is  that  when  debt  holders  face  the  consequences  of 
failure, banks take fewer risks. 
International estimates suggest that the removal of the heads-I-win-tails-you-lose ‘too 
big to fail’ subsidy cuts the risk of failure by a third. 
As  you  know,  the  removal  of  that  subsidy  isn’t  a  pipedream.  Rating  agencies  are 
already removing “state support” uplifts from bank debt ratings.9 And yes, it will raise 
                                                
7  This is very similar to estimates of Miles et al (2012), who find the effect of increasing capital from 3% 
of total assets to 6% of total assets to be around 6% of GDP.  
8  The Bank of England, as UK resolution authority, is now consulting on proposals to implement that 
principle  in  the  UK  for  all  systemic  banks,  as  it  must  do  under  the  European  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution Directive.  
9  Moody’s and S&P have removed or reduced government support from the ratings of some UK and 
US banks. Fitch has revised the support assumptions for UK and US banks to remove the ‘Support 
Rating Floors’ that capture government support assumptions.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the  cost  of  banking  services  and  reduce  return  on  equity.  But  those  costs  are  the 
flipside of the removal of a subsidy – they are not wider social costs. 
It is essential that efforts to ensure even the largest banks can be resolved remain on 
track.  In  the  UK,  that  includes  the  ringfencing  of  entities  taking  core  deposits. 
Impediments to resolvability must continue to be addressed. 
If those efforts hit obstacles, higher equity requirements will be needed to achieve the 
same ends. The necessary protections for the real economy have to be bought. The 
only question is at what price. 
But  even  with  an  effective  resolution  backstop  in  place, the  costs  of systemic  bank 
failure are far from insignificant. 
So  the  second  part  of  our  macroprudential  approach  is  a  baseline  capital 
standard  that  makes  economic  disruption  caused  by  a  weak  banking  system 
extremely rare. 
But not more so. 
Our  baseline  –  tier  1  capital  of  13.5%  of  risk  weighted  assets,  or  around  3.75%  of 
total assets – aims to do this. 
The  dual  key  approach  –  risk-weighted  capital  and  leverage  –  recognises  the 
imperfections in risk weight models and guards against them. 
On past loss performance, this standard reduces the probability of failure to extremely 
low levels, and the probability of simultaneous failures that drive crises to even lower 
levels. And that past performance includes the global financial crisis. 
In the UK, even the two biggest failures of the crisis – Royal Bank of Scotland and 
Halifax  Bank  of  Scotland  –  suffered  losses  comfortably  within  these  baseline 
standards. Using Basel III definitions, both suffered losses – even over three years – 
of around 5% of risk weighted assets.10 
So going further could have a sharply diminishing further effect on the probability of 
banking failure. 
And it could run the risk of economic cost. 
Our standard recognises those risks. By not taking it higher, we are seeking to strike 
a balance; to be macroprudential. 
That balance is also served by the make-up of the requirements. 
Hard floor capital requirements don’t help the real economy. They simply move the 
point  of  failure  and  distress  of  banks  to  a  higher  level  of  capital.  They  may  make 
banks  more  resilient,  but  they  don’t  make  credit  supply  and  essential  service 
provision more resilient. 
So a large slice of bank capital should take the form of a useable buffer: a cushion 
that sits on top of minimum capital requirements that can be run down and built up 
gradually afterwards. 
The emphasis is on useable. 
                                                
10  Over the three year period 2008–2010, HBoS incurred losses of £25bn. This amounted to around 5% 
of  its  2008  risk  weighted  assets  (£536bn  on  a  Basel  III  basis).  In  the  same  period,  RBS  incurred 
losses on trading activities and impairments on all assets totalling £40bn, or 5% risk weighted assets 
(£783bn on Basel III basis). These banks failed because they entered the crisis with very low capital 
strength. On a Basel III basis, RBS is estimated to have had a CET1 ratio of just 1.97% at end 2007. 
HBoS had 4.1%. See FSA (2011) and Bank of England/FCA (2015).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   That’s why, although they are well meaning, mandatory restrictions on distributions of 
dividends,  coupons  and  pay  when  capital  buffers  are  used  can  have  a  perverse 
effect. They  create  incentives  to  avoid  dipping  into  capital  buffers  by  taking  actions 
that have broader economic effects.11 
Our baseline standards mean the biggest banks will be subject to a baseline capital 
buffer of nearly 5% of risk weighted assets, sitting on top of an 8.5% hard floor for tier 
1 capital (see table 1).12 
A buffer of 5% goes beyond agreed international standards. 
Basel  III  sets  a  minimum  buffer  of  2.5% for  all  banks  (the  conservation  buffer)  and 
supplements it only for banks of global importance. We are intending to go further for 
big banks of domestic importance, just as the United States is going further on capital 
buffers for its largest banks.13 
A buffer of 5% gives room for systemic banks to absorb losses without being forced to 
close their doors and cease their service to the economy. It achieves not just greater 
bank resilience, but greater resilience of service to the macro economy. 
It’s macroprudential. 
Stress tests tell us that this capital buffer would be big enough to absorb a deep UK 
recession  with  sharply  rising  interest  rates  and  falls  in  property  prices,  or  a  deep 
global  recession,  centred  on  China  and  emerging  markets,  with  associated  global 
deflation. 
But it would be a mistake to think that a 5% capital buffer is always and everywhere 
the right one. 
So the third part of our approach is flexibility. 
Flexibility to raise capital buffers if the threat of future losses grows, and cut 
them again if those threats materialise or recede. 
That flexibility avoids what might otherwise be a need to capitalise the system for the 
very riskiest times, all the time. It avoids taking unnecessary risks of holding the real 
economy back. 
There will be times when risks are heightened and so to protect the economy, banks 
should have bigger capital buffers. Broadly, we are seeking to match the size of those 
buffers – the strength of defence – to the threat of future losses as they change over 
time.14 
But how will we know the threat level has changed? 
                                                
11  The Bank of England has called on the European Commission to revisit such rules in the European 
Capital  Requirements  Directive  IV.  The  Bank’s  response  to  the  Commission’s  call  for  evidence  is 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/regframework/detailed 
available 
answers010216.pdf 
at 
12  The 8.5% minimum is composed of 6% common international standard agreed under Basel III plus 
the 2.5% pillar 2a requirement that reflects shortcomings in risk measures.  See footnote 3.  
13  We plan only for only the systemic part of the banking system to have a 5% buffer. In line with Basel 
standards, smaller banks will be subject to a buffer only half the size. That reflects the difference in 
economic costs between a big – systemic – bank coming close to or actually failing and a small bank 
doing so.  
14  This will take effect by supplementing baseline capital requirements with the countercyclical capital 
buffer rate on UK exposures.   
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   We’ll be looking for the evidence that borrowers might have overstretched; that asset 
prices could be vulnerable to reversal; and that economic imbalances exist that could 
correct. 
Assessing risks isn’t the same as “calling the cycle”. We shouldn’t be asking whether 
a downturn or a bad event is destined to happen. We are not looking for irrefutable 
proof. Capital buffers should be based on whether the evidence says there is a threat 
that could materialise in future, not whether it is going to. 
The most interesting thing I heard a senior policymaker say about the financial crisis, 
not  a  Bank  of  England  policymaker,  was  that  we  spent  far  too  long  thinking  about 
whether there was a housing bubble and not enough time thinking about what if there 
is a housing bubble. 
The  consequences  for  banks  will  be  informed  by  our  annual  stress  test.  With  the 
stress scenario varying systematically with our assessment of the risks, the test will 
guide us as to how – given banks’ exposures – our judgement about the risks should 
be reflected in capital buffers. 
In addition, we’ll have a bias to acting early and gradually – to raising countercyclical 
capital buffers before the threat level is seen to be heightened. 
The  Bank  of  England  expects  to  be  adding  around  1%  to  the  capital  buffer  on  UK 
exposures of all banks, even before the overall threat of future losses looks high. 
That  bias  reflects  the  time  lags  in  implementation  and  in  the  cost  of  time-varying 
buffers lagging behind the threats. As well, there is clear evidence that sudden, sharp 
increases  in  capital  requirements  can  have  a  material  effect  on  credit  supply  and 
economic activity. Acting earlier allows us to take smaller steps. 
With  this  approach,  the  UK’s  systemic  banks  will,  except  in  post-crisis  repair,  be 
required  to  run  with  capital  buffers  a  little  above  our  baseline  standard.  Leverage 
requirements  will  also  be  scaled  up,  with  banks  typically  being  required  to  fund  no 
less than 4% of total assets with tier 1 capital. 
Should the threat level rise above normal, so too will capital buffers. They’ll go as far 
as needed to ensure banks’ defences keep up with threats if they grow. 
And  importantly,  if  threats  materialise,  or  shrink,  we’ll  reduce  our  expectation  for 
capital buffers back towards the baseline level. 
In  doing  this,  we’re  aiming  to  turn  what’s  happened  in  the  past  on  its  head.  Bank 
capital buffers have been too small in the good times and needed to be built up in the 
bad. They were pro-cyclical and amplified the bad times. 
Now, we’re making them countercyclical. Buffers will built up from their base level as 
the risks grow, so they can be drawn down, if and when the risks materialise. In the 
bad times, banks will be able to absorb losses and move on to continue to serve the 
real economy. 
Our flexibility extends beyond moving capital buffers up and down. 
With higher baseline capital and leverage requirements now being reached, we are 
learning about the effects of those requirements on the provision of services to the 
real economy. 
Some  of  those  effects  have  come  into  sharper  focus  in  recent  months.  Sovereign 
repo markets have shown signs of reduced liquidity, for example. And there are also 
signs of reduced market-making activity in sovereign and corporate bond markets. 
None of these developments should make us rush to amend capital standards that 
have  been  put  in  place  to  protect  the  real  economy.  After  all,  the  levels  of  dealer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   activity and of market liquidity in the run-up to the crisis were ephemeral. They did not 
serve the real economy. 
It is important that other parts of the financial system, such as asset managers, adapt 
to the new environment and manage liquidity positions prudently. 
But  these  developments  should,  and  they  are,  prompting  us  to  assess  whether 
targeted  amendments  to  the  design  of  regulations  could  benefit  the  real  economy, 
without exposing it to more risk. 
The  design  of  new  requirements  was  macroprudential.  So  must  be 
implementation. 
The system has come a long way on the march to more capital and greater resilience. 
The  benefits  of  that  are  being  seen  today.  Lending  to  real  economies  is  growing 
again. Resilience is more insulated from questions about returns. 
With  resolution  regimes  well  advanced  and  game-changing  bail-in  principles 
established,  the  upward  march  to  higher  capital  levels  can  soon  reach  the  new 
baseline. 
A  baseline  that,  on  what  we  know  today,  protects  the  real  economy  without 
unnecessary risk of holding it back. 
And with the flexibility to adapt and continually align resilience with threats, we have a 
compelling  answer  to  the  question  of  how  to  marry  prudence  with  macroeconomic 
sense. 
So that you can protect and serve the real economy in good times and bad. 
Thank you.  
their 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 1  
Major UK bank price to book ratios and  
wholesale funding spreads 
Price to book ratio (RHS)
Senior unsecured bond spread (LHS)(a)
Percentage
points
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
  Ratio
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
(a) Constant-maturity unweighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps 
for the major UK lenders’ five-year euro senior unsecured bonds or a suitable proxy 
when unavailable. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   Chart 2  
Major UK banks’ approximated CET1 capital ratio 
Per cent
Interquartile range
Weighted average
06
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
 Sources: PRA regulatory returns and Bank calculations. 
(a) Major UK banks’ estimated common equity Tier 1 capital as a percentage of their risk-
weighted assets. Calculated as aggregate peer group common equity Tier 1 levels over 
aggregate risk-weighted assets, according to the CRD IV definition as implemented in the 
UK. Major UK banks are Barclays, Co-operative Bank, HSBC, LBG, Nationwide, RBS and 
Santander UK. 
(b)  From  2006,  the  chart  shows  Bank  calculations  approximating  common  equity  Tier  1 
capital ratios. 
(c) From 2014 , the chart shows common equity Tier 1 capital ratios as reported by banks. 
Table 1  
Average Tier 1 capital requirements across  
UK systemic banks 
Tier 1 Capital Requirements 
 
Minimum requirements (no less than 75% CET1) 
 
 
Pillar 1 
 
 
Pillar 2a 
(reflecting shortcomings in risk measures) 
 
 
Baseline capital buffers (CET1) 
 
Capital conservation buffer 
 
Additional buffers for systemic importance 
 %RWA 
% Total Assets 
(leverage) 
8.5% 
3% 
6% 
2.5% 
 
5% 
2.5% 
 
2.5% 
 
   
0.75% 
  Total Tier 1 baseline requirements 
 
+ UK countercyclical buffer rate at standard risk level 
 
13.5% 
 
1% 
 
3.75% 
0.35% 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   References 
Baker,  M  and  Wurgler,  J  (2013),  ‘Do  strict  capital  requirements  raise  the  cost  of 
capital?  Bank  regulation  and  the  low  risk  anomaly’,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research Working Paper No. 19018, May. 
Bank  of  England  (2015),  ‘Supplement  to  the  December  2015  Financial  Stability 
Report:  The  framework  of  capital  requirements  for  UK  banks’,  available  at  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/fsr/2015/fsrsupp.pdf 
Bank  of  England  (2015),  ‘Stress  testing  the  UK  banking  system:  2015  results’ 
available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/ 
speech883.pdf. 
Bank  of  England  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  and  Financial  Conduct 
Authority, ‘The Failure of HBoS plc’ http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/ 
publications/reports/hbos.pdf. 
Bank of England (2016), ‘Bank of England response to the European Commission 
Call for Evidence on the EU Regulatory Framework for Financial Services’, available 
at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/regframework/detail 
edanswers010216.pdf. 
Brooke, M, et al (2015), ‘Measuring the macroeconomic costs and benefits of higher 
UK  bank  capital 
requirements’,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
financialstability/Documents/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper35.pdf. 
Elliott,  D  (2013),  ‘Higher  bank  capital  requirements  would  come  at  a  price’,  The 
Institution,  February,  available  at  http://www.brookings.edu/research/ 
Brookings 
papers/2013/02/20-bank-capital-requirements-elliott. 
FSA (2011), ‘The Failure of the Royal Bank of Scotland’, Financial Services Authority 
Board Report http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/rbs.pdf. 
Kashyap,  A,  Stein,  J  and  Hanson,  S  (2010),  ‘An  analysis  of  the  impact  of 
substantially  heightened  capital 
requirements’,  Mimeo,  May,  available  at 
http://chifl.shufe.edu.cn/upload/htmleditor/File/120919100455.pdf. 
Miles, D, Yang, J and Marcheggiano, G (2013),  ‘Optimal  bank  capital’,  Economic 
Journal, Vol. 123, pages 1–37. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
