  Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Islamic banking in emerging markets – 
forging Uganda’s economic progress 
Keynote speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the Islamic Banking Conference, Kampala, 13 May 2016. 
 The Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 
Delegates from the IDB Group and Bank Negara Malaysia, 
Resources Persons, 
Representatives from the Banking Sector, 
Representatives from the various Professional Bodies, 
Participants, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  gives  me  great  honour  and  pleasure  to  speak  at  the  Islamic  Banking  Conference  in 
Uganda. 
Let  me  begin  by  congratulating  the  Islamic  University  in  Uganda  for  organizing  this 
conference on Islamic Banking. I further wish to welcome the participants to this conference 
and urge you all to take keen interest in the topics to be discussed in order to enhance your 
understanding of the Islamic Banking model. 
The  theme  of  this  Conference  is  “Islamic  Banking  in  Emerging  Markets:  Forging 
Uganda’s Economic Progress”. 
The history of Islamic Banking in Uganda can be traced to 2008 when the Bank of Uganda 
(BoU) first received an application from an institution which was desirous of operating as an 
Islamic Bank. Subsequently, BoU received numerous inquiries from most of the commercial 
banks  in  Uganda  seeking  to  offer  Islamic  financial  products  through  Islamic  Banking 
“windows”.  At  that  time,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  had  licensed  two  Islamic  Banks  while 
National  Bank  of  Rwanda  had  licenced  an  Islamic  Microfinance  Institution  and  Bank  of 
Tanzania had commercial banks offering Islamic Financial Services through windows. 
In November 2009, Bank of Uganda conducted an in-house training on Islamic Banking and 
Finance and the participants included regulators of the financial sector from Bank of Uganda, 
the  then  Insurance  Commission,  Capital  Markets  Authority  and  the  Uganda  Revenue 
Authority. 
Like Conventional Banking, Islamic Banking can only thrive with the existence of an enabling 
Legal  and  Supervisory  Framework.  BoU  accordingly  undertook  a  study  on  the  Islamic 
Banking model to explore its fit in the existing legislative framework. The study revealed that 
the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  2004  (FIA  2004),  contained  prohibitions,  which  could  not 
facilitate  the  operation  of  Islamic  Banking.  In  recognition  of  this  fact,  therefore,  Bank  of 
Uganda proposed amendments to the FIA, 2004, which  were approved by Parliament and 
hence the enactment of the Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act 2016, in January 2016. 
The  amendments  to  the  then  FIA,  2004  were  intended  to  embrace  Islamic  Banking  and 
focused on the impediments highlighted as below: 
First,  Section  37  of  the  then  FIA,  2004  prohibited  Financial  Institutions  from  directly  or 
indirectly engaging in Trade, Commerce and Industry. This restriction inevitably impeded the 
smooth  operation  of  Islamic  Banking  given  that  Islamic  Banking  is  anchored  on  financial 
institutions’ participation in these very sectors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Second,  Section  38  of  the  then  FIA,  2004  prohibited  Financial  Institutions  from  acquiring 
immovable  property  that  was  not  intended for  use  in  conducting  banking  business.  As  the 
available  literature  on  Islamic  Banking  suggests,  in  some  Islamic  Banking  contracts,  a 
Financial Institution must buy and therefore own the asset before reselling it to the customer 
at a profit. This very critical process was rendered impossible under the then FIA, 2004. 
The  FIA  2004  was,  therefore,  amended  to  lift  the  above-mentioned  restrictions  for  Islamic 
Banks and/or Conventional Banks that would want to offer Islamic Windows. 
In  addition  to  the  above  amendments,  the  Financial  Institutions  (Amendment)  Act  2016 
provides  for  the  institution  of  key  Governance  structures  such  as  the  Shari’ah  Advisory 
Boards, which are crucial in upholding Shari’ah compliance. 
In order to operationalize the Financial Institutions (Amendment) Act 2016 regarding Islamic 
Banking,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  in  advanced  stages  of  instituting  Regulations  and  a 
Supervisory Framework for Islamic Banking. 
Furthermore,  as  part  of BoU’s  Financial  Literacy  programs  and following  the  enactment of 
the  Financial  Institutions  (Amendment)  Act  2016,  Bank  of  Uganda  has  embarked  on 
multimedia  sensitization  campaigns  on  Islamic  Banking  entailing  Radio  Talk  Shows, 
Newspaper Inserts, Workshops, and Journals, among others. I, therefore, urge the general 
public to be on the lookout for these awareness activities and be ready to render your direct 
participation once called upon by the Bank of Uganda. 
Islamic  Banking  has  gained  prominence  internationally  due  to  its  exponential  growth  and 
resilience to financial crises as well as the nature of Shari’ah-Compliant finance models that 
focus on the principles of investment in real assets and risk-sharing. In the Islamic Banking 
model, each contract is backed by an underlying asset or investment activity which creates a 
direct link between financial markets and economic activity. The Islamic finance model has 
thus  contributed  to  the  spread  of  real-asset-based  finance  principles  in  many  jurisdictions 
and is regarded as an ideal option for the financing of infrastructure projects. This provides a 
conducive environment for achieving a more integrated approach to economic growth. The 
success stories of Islamic Banking experienced in other jurisdictions would, without a doubt, 
be  replicated  in  emerging  markets  like  Uganda  once  Islamic  Banking  is  rolled  out.  I  am 
happy to note that the agenda for this conference covers the envisaged benefits of Islamic 
Banking, among other topics. 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  therefore  to  emphasize  that  while  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance  is 
envisaged  to  significantly  contribute  to  Economic  Growth  and  Development,  it  remains  an 
emerging field in the Financial System worldwide. I, therefore, urge all stakeholders to clearly 
understand Islamic Banking and Finance model; appreciate its unique tenets that distinguish 
it from Conventional Banking and at the same time acknowledge the similarities between the 
two  (2)  models.  This  will  significantly  contribute  to  the  effective  rollout  and  growth  of  the 
Islamic Banking sector in Uganda. 
On its part, Bank of Uganda will continue to collaborate with all stakeholders and ensure that 
the  requisite  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  Structures  for  supporting  the  growth  of  Islamic 
Banking and Finance in this country are robust and conducive for all investors. 
With those remarks, I wish you fruitful deliberations. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
