   Javier Guzmán Calafell: The Mexican economy in an adverse external 
environment – challenges and policy response 
Remarks by Mr Javier Guzmán Calafell, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mexico, at “Santander 
Mexico Day”, Mexico City, 11 January 2016. 
 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal. 
I  would  like  to  start  by  thanking  Banco  Santander for the  opportunity  to  share  with  such a 
distinguished audience some views about the Mexican economy, the challenges deriving from 
a harsh external environment, and the policy approach that has been implemented to cope 
with these challenges.  
More  than  seven  years  after  the  eruption  of  the  worst  financial  crisis  since  the  Great 
Depression, the world economy continues to face a difficult situation. Global growth remains 
below its long-term trend, affected by a low rate of expansion of advanced economies (AEs) 
and  a sharp  deceleration  in  emerging  market  economies (EMEs).  Although  difficulties  of a 
cyclical  nature  are  behind  these  developments,  the  persistence  of  this  trend  points  to  the 
presence of structural causes as well. In this context, the volume of world trade has continued 
to moderate and seems in fact to be declining at the margin,1 and as a result of a combination 
of demand and supply forces, commodity prices are showing a generalized retrenchment. The 
situation is further complicated by persistent nervousness in international financial markets and 
the consequent volatility of capital flows. 
Naturally, these difficult external conditions have affected the Mexican economy. I would stress 
in particular three developments in this regard: 
First, the US economy remains one of the best performers in the advanced world. During 2015, 
GDP growth in this country is estimated at 2.5 percent, above calculations for potential growth. 
This compares with a figure of only around 1.5 percent for the rest of AEs. Nonetheless, the 
expansion  of  economic  activity  in  the  US  has  been  unequal  among  sectors.  In  particular, 
industrial output has remained stagnant since early last year as a result of the appreciation of 
the dollar, lower output and investment in the oil sector following the decline in oil prices, and 
weak global growth. Since there is a close association between the industrial sectors in Mexico 
and the US, this has had an adverse impact on exports and economic activity in Mexico. 
Second, the price of the Mexican oil mix has declined by 77 percent since mid-2014. This has 
had important repercussions on the Mexican economy, particularly in view of the importance 
of oil revenues in the fiscal accounts. And the impact has been worsened by a pronounced fall 
in oil output. The latter, of around 33 percent since 2004, has also adversely affected industrial 
production  through  direct  and  indirect  channels.  In  addition,  as  export  capacity  has  been 
reduced, Mexico has become a net oil importer. To have an idea of the magnitude of the shock, 
it is worthwhile to note that the oil trade balance switched from a surplus of 0.7 percent of GDP 
in 2013 to a deficit of 0.8 percent of GDP in the period January–September 2015. 
Third,  uncertainty 
influenced  economic 
developments  in  Mexico.  Concerns  have  related  partly  to  the  expected  normalization  of 
monetary policy in the US. But financial markets in Mexico have also been affected by other 
developments, such as nervousness about the situation in several EMEs, especially China, 
the divergent monetary policy stances in the main advanced economies, and problems of a 
financial  markets  has  also 
international 
in 
                                                
1   Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2015):  OECD  Economic  Outlook,  Volume  2015 
Issue 2, November. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   geopolitical nature. In this context, net portfolio capital flows to Mexico fell from US$ 39 billion 
in January–September 2014 to 20 billion in the same period of 2015. 
The exchange rate has worked as the main adjustment mechanism to these shocks. Thus, the 
nominal peso-dollar rate has shown a significant depreciation, of around 37 percent from early 
September 2014 to January 8, 2016. It should be noted that depreciation of the Mexican peso 
vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar  is  consistent  with  movements  observed  in  the  currencies  of  some 
commodity exporting AEs, such as Canada and Norway. Likewise, the evolution of the peso 
compares favorably with the exchange rates of other EMEs in that period.2 It is also important 
to stress that, as I will explain in more detail later on, the pass-through from the depreciation 
of the peso to domestic prices has been modest. 
Furthermore,  adjustment  of the  Mexican  peso  has  been  orderly,  as shown  not  only  by the 
volatility  of  foreign  exchange  options,  well  below  the  average  for  EMEs,  but  also  by  the 
behavior of capital flows. In particular, notwithstanding the prevailing uncertainty, investments 
by foreigners in long-term government securities denominated in pesos have shown resilience. 
These are developments worth noting, particularly since the Mexican economy is one of the 
most open to international capital movements among the emerging world. Indeed, the orderly 
depreciation  of  the  peso  has  been  supported  by  a  solid  macroeconomic  position,  the 
mechanisms that have been implemented to provide liquidity to the foreign exchange market, 
the high level of international reserves, and the FCL agreement currently standing with the 
IMF. 
What have been the implications of these developments for economic growth and inflation in 
Mexico? 
Naturally, the difficult external environment has adversely affected economic growth. In the 
face of weakness in industrial production in the US, and an even more complicated situation 
in the rest of the world, manufacturing exports have remained flat over the course of 2015. 
Consequently,  the  upturn  in  economic  activity  observed  in  2015  is  mostly  explained  by 
domestic demand.3 On the one hand, the increase in employment, the recovery of real wages 
made possible by low inflation, higher remittances in peso terms and the expansion of bank 
credit have stimulated private consumption. At the same time, private investment, mainly in 
machinery  and  equipment,  has shown  an  upward  trend. When  seen from  the  supply  side, 
services has been the leading sector, as industrial production has been affected by the decline 
in oil output and stagnation of this sector in the US. 
It is reasonable to expect the continuation of a gradual strengthening of economic activity in 
2016 and 2017. The anticipated revival of industrial output in the US, coupled with depreciation 
of the peso, should reflect in the evolution of manufacturing exports. In addition, consumption 
growth would be supported by a favorable behavior of its main determinants. By enhancing 
confidence, the expansion of exports and consumption should provide additional stimulus to 
private investment. The latter would also be underpinned by the ongoing efforts of structural 
reform. On the other hand, it is important to note that downside risks for growth persist, and 
that a negative output gap is expected to prevail until the end of 2017. 
                                                
2   Since early September 2014, the Canadian dollar and the Norwegian Crown have depreciated, respectively, by 
29.8 and 41.7 percent against de US dollar, while a basket of EME currencies excluding the Mexican peso (the 
sample includes the currencies of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hungary, Indonesia, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Russia, 
South Africa and Turkey) has depreciated between 44.2 (simple average calculation) and 59.7 percent (GDP-
weighted average calculation). 
3   Even though, from a national accounts perspective, the external sector has continued to contribute positively to 
real GDP growth, this is to a significant extent due to the effect of the peso depreciation on the valuation of trade 
flows. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Expectations  for  economic  growth  in  Mexico  for  2015  and  2016  have  been  adjusted 
downwards, but to a lesser extent than in other EMEs.4 On the other hand, even though current 
GDP  growth  (around  2.5  percent  at  annual  rate  through  the  first  three  quarters  of  2015) 
remains insufficient, this has to be seen against the context of the adverse shocks that the 
economy has faced, the anticipated pickup in coming years, and a Latin American region which 
is estimated to have contracted in 2015 and foreseen to show very modest, if any, GDP growth 
in 2016. 
In the case of inflation, performance has been better than expected. Headline CPI inflation 
registered eight consecutive months of historical minima in the period May–December 2015, 
with a figure of 2.1 percent in December. This is explained by a low and stable core component, 
and  a  downward  trajectory  of  non-core  inflation.  In  this  context,  short-term  inflation 
expectations have been adjusted downwards, while those for the medium and long term have 
remained stable. 
These favorable inflation results have been achieved despite the significant depreciation of the 
peso. In fact, the impact of the exchange rate has concentrated on the prices of tradable goods, 
without second round effects. 
The latter is explained by a combination of factors. The most important among them is the 
credibility of monetary policy and in general of the macroeconomic policy framework over the 
course  of  many  years.  This  has  allowed  a  structural  change  in  the  process  of  price 
determination in Mexico, which has yielded, among other results, a decline in the pass-through 
from the exchange rate to inflation. In addition, the measures of structural reform carried out 
by the government have led to declines in the prices of several key inputs, telecommunications 
and electricity among them. This has combined with a negative output gap and a favorable 
evolution of the prices of agricultural goods, which have also contributed to contain inflation.  
Of  course,  upside  risks  to  inflation  must  not  be  disregarded.  The  recent  behavior  of  the 
exchange rate in the context of strengthened recovery of economic activity might result in a 
higher pass-through from the exchange rate to prices. In addition, given the natural uncertainty 
that surrounds estimates of potential growth, the output gap might close faster than anticipated.  
The relatively favorable evolution of the Mexican economy in the face of major shocks, has 
been enabled by an adequate economic policy framework. This includes: 
First, as I already noted, a credible monetary policy. In the context of the inflation targeting 
framework,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  Mexico  has  focused  on  achieving  an 
efficient  convergence  to  the  3  percent  target,  i.e.  at  the  lowest  possible  cost  in  terms  of 
economic activity. On the basis of this rationale, Banco de México responded to internal and 
external developments by reducing its benchmark interest rate by 150 basis points from March 
2013 to June 2014. Headline inflation fell from 4.3 percent in March 2013 to 2.1 percent at the 
end of 2015. In other words, the monetary policy stance allowed to simultaneously reduce the 
inflation rate and support economic activity. 
On  December  17,  2015,  Banco  de  México’s  Board  decided  to  increase  the  target  for  the 
overnight interbank rate by 25 basis points to a level of 3.25 percent. The presence of record 
low levels of inflation, stable medium- and long-term inflation expectations, and the anticipation 
of  a  negative  output  gap  during  the  period  of  influence  of  monetary  policy  supported  an 
                                                
4   According to IMF data through October 2015 presented in its World Economic Outlook, Mexico’s real GDP 
growth forecast for 2015 has been revised downwards by 1.7 percent points (p.p.) since it was initially projected 
at 4.0 percent in April 2010. In contrast, the median revisions on growth forecasts for other EMEs (namely Brazil, 
Chile, China, Colombia, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Peru, Poland, Russia, South Africa, Thailand and 
Turkey) amount to –2.3 p.p., while growth for the Latin American and Caribbean region (LAC) has been revised 
downwards by 4.2 p.p. For the 2016 forecasts, the corresponding revisions (with respect to the initial estimate 
in April 2011) are: –0.4 p.p. for Mexico, –1.8 p.p. for other EMEs, and –3.1 p.p. for LAC.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   unchanged monetary policy stance. However, with the increase in interest rates in the US, 
such a strategy would have implied costs well above the potential benefits. 
In particular, it carried the risk of disorderly capital outflows and an additional depreciation of 
the peso. This would have endangered both the inflation target and financial stability. It is also 
important to take into consideration that, notwithstanding the interest rate increase, monetary 
conditions in Mexico remain very lax, due to the significant real exchange rate depreciation. 
Thus, the impact of an increase in the reference rate on economic activity should be modest. 
Looking ahead, monetary policy in Mexico will continue to be implemented in a highly uncertain 
environment. To start with, while first adjustment of interest rates in the US has removed a 
major source of concern for the world economy and normalization of monetary policy in that 
country is expected to proceed gradually, it is also true that the implications of further increases 
in  the  federal  funds  rate  for  international  and  domestic  financial  markets  are  unclear. 
Furthermore, as I already mentioned and as underlined by the events of the last days, the 
world economy is facing a particularly challenging situation. 
Naturally,  the  evolution  of  inflation  in  Mexico  will  be  responding  to  a  combination  of  many 
factors, both external and domestic, and a careful monitoring of them will be required. The 
Board of Banco de México has made clear that close attention will continue to be paid to all 
determinants of inflation and to medium- and long-term inflation expectations, with particular 
focus  on  the  relative  monetary  position  between  Mexico  and  the  US,  the  pass-through  of 
movements in the exchange rate to prices, and the degree of slack in the economy. The Board 
has  also  stressed  that  any  additional  measures  required  will  be  implemented,  with  due 
flexibility and whenever this is needed, to consolidate the efficient convergence of inflation to 
the target. 
Second, a timely adjustment of fiscal policy. Oil revenues account for a high share of total 
public revenues, thus implying a significant vulnerability to fluctuations in oil prices.5 In view of 
this risk, the government has decided to hedge oil prices yearly since 2005. This allowed to 
ensure an oil price for the Mexican mix for public finance purposes of 76 dollars per barrel 
(dpb) in 2015 (against the observed average of 47 dpb) and of 49 dpb for 2016 (24 dpb at 
present). In addition, a number of measures on the revenue and expenditure sides have been 
implemented  to  guarantee  the  sustainability  of  the  fiscal  accounts.  On  these  bases,  the 
government remains committed to reduce the PSBR (public sector borrowing requirements) 
from 4.1 percent of GDP in 2015 to 3.5 percent in 2016, and further to 2.5 percent in 2018. 
This will also allow a downward path for public debt as a share of GDP.  
Third,  a  sound  financial  system.  Mexico  was  one  of  the  first  EMEs  to  meet  the  Basel 
capitalization requirements, and as of November 2015 the schedule for compliance with Basel 
liquidity  standards  was  met  by  the  required  banks,  with  nearly  all  others  having  met  this 
regulation in advance. In addition, the levels of corporate and household indebtedness are 
moderate, and as a share of GDP well below the figures observed in other EMEs and in AEs.6 
Furthermore, risks from corporate foreign-currency liabilities are alleviated by long amortization 
periods,  fixed  interest  rates,  natural  hedging  and  the  prudent  use  of  derivatives.  It  is  also 
important  to  note  that  a  comprehensive  framework  has  been  set  in  place  for  monitoring 
financial stability risks. On the other hand, risks must be carefully assessed, particularly in view 
of the difficult external environment. For these reasons, it will be essential to persevere in the 
strengthening of the macroeconomic framework and in the implementation of any regulatory 
measures required to cope with those risks.  
                                                
5   During  the  period  2010–2014,  the  corresponding  figure  was  around  36  percent.  With  the  increase  in  tax 
revenues,  the  drop  in  oil  prices  and  the  reduction  in  oil  output,  the  share  fell  to  19.3  percent  in  January–
November 2015. 
6   See Institute of International Finance (2015): Emerging Market Debt Monitor – Update, December. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Fourth, a major effort of structural reform. The potential rate of GDP growth in Mexico during 
the  last  decades  has  been  insufficient  to  meet  the  population’s  needs.  The  measures  of 
structural reform adopted since late 2012, considered by the OECD as the most ambitious 
among the organisation’s membership,7 have been focused on overcoming this problem, by 
increasing both private investment and productivity. It is worth to highlight the broad-ranging 
scope of such efforts, as they comprise not only several key sectors of the economy, but also 
measures aimed at improving the institutional framework. Even though the full impact of these 
structural  changes  on  potential  GDP  will  take  time  to  materialize,  some  effects  are  readily 
visible  in  a  number  of  areas.  These  include,  among  others,  a  more  flexible  labor  market; 
increased competition in several sectors of the economy; a fall in the prices of some widely 
used  key  inputs;  higher  private  investment  in  areas  such  as  telecommunications,  gas  and 
electricity generation; widespread participation of private firms in oil field auctions; and a more 
important  role  of  the  financial  system,  through  both  private  and  public  intermediaries,  in 
supporting economic growth.  
Two  additional  implications  of  the  policies  implemented  are  worth  noting.  According  to  the 
World Bank, the business climate in Mexico has improved significantly in recent years, to levels 
close to best performers in the emerging world.8 Also, Mexico’s creditworthiness, as measured 
by credit ratings assigned to government securities, has continued to ameliorate over the last 
couple of years, to levels above most EMEs, while still maintaining a positive outlook amidst a 
difficult external environment. 
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that,  notwithstanding  major  economic  shocks,  the 
Mexican economy has shown a relatively good performance, and it is reasonable to expect a 
gradual  strengthening  of  economic  activity  in  the  next  couple  of  years.  In  fact,  Banco  de 
Mexico’s forecasts currently place real output growth at 2.5–3.5% in 2016, and at 3.0–4.0% in 
2017. In addition, following an ambitious program of structural reform, Mexico is one of the few 
EMEs where an increase in potential GDP is expected. Meanwhile, CPI inflation is projected 
to rise moderately from the current minima to levels around the 3 percent target throughout 
both 2016 and 2017. It should also be noted that with the recent increase in the federal funds 
rate signaling confidence of US authorities in the economic outlook, Mexico is likely to benefit 
in coming years from close links to that economy.  
However, external conditions for Mexico will probably remain very difficult. Not only is the world 
economy moving across a particularly complicated juncture, but major structural challenges 
need to be overcome. 
Therefore, it will be essential to continue to implement a prudent and flexible monetary policy; 
adhere strictly to the announced strengthening of public finances; pursue the overall stability 
of the financial system, while promptly addressing emerging risks; and maintain the structural 
reform  momentum,  by  ensuring  that  the  policies  underway  are  timely  and  efficiently 
implemented, as well as by adopting any additional measures required to achieve a rate of 
potential growth in accordance with the country’s needs. 
                                                
7   See  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2015):  OECD  Economic  Surveys:  Mexico, 
January. 
8   See World Bank (2015): Doing Business 2016: Measuring Regulatory Quality and Efficiency, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
