  Ravi Menon: China at an inflection point – what does it mean for Asia? 
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the 
Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF)  City  Lecture,  London,  5  May 
2016. 
 Mr David Marsh, Managing Director and Co-founder of OMFIF 
Ms Foo Chi Hsia, Singapore’s High Commissioner to the UK 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen 
The China syndrome 
China’s size and promise have long enthralled the world. 
• 
 The dream of penetrating China’s market was colourfully captured in the words of a 
British commentator in the 1840s: 
“If we could only persuade every person in China to lengthen his shirt-tail by a foot, 
we could keep the mills of Lancashire working around the clock” 
Well, war, revolution, and central planning quickly laid to rest that fantasy. 
• 
Since the closing decades of the last century, the gravity-defying growth and transformation 
of the Chinese economy have once again stirred global imagination. 
• 
GDP  growth  averaged  10%  per  annum  during  1980–2010,  ahead  of  virtually  all 
other economies. 
China’s size, growth, and rapid integration with the rest of the world mean that no evaluation 
of the global economy can be complete without looking at China. 
• 
In 2000, just 5 countries ranked China as their top export market, compared to 53 
countries that ranked the US similarly. 
In  2014,  43  countries  ranked  China  as  their  top  export  market,  higher  than  the 
comparative figure for the US, at 31. 
 The  recent  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  and  volatility  in  its  financial  markets  have 
therefore sparked fears that the Chinese economy was headed for a “hard landing” and that 
it would drag down much of Asia with it. But much like the dreams of a vast insatiable market 
two centuries ago, today’s fears are understandable but overblown. 
To many, China’s economy seems like what Winston Churchill described the Soviet Union 
half  a  century  ago:  “a  riddle  wrapped  in  a  mystery  inside  an  enigma”.  China  is  indeed  a 
complex economy but is not necessarily beyond comprehension. 
China’s  economy  is  at  a  major  inflection  point.  It  is  facing  three  necessary  but  significant 
challenges at the same time: 
• 
First,  the  Chinese  economy  is  adjusting  to  a  lower  rate  of  growth.  Managing  this 
moderation without major dislocation is a key priority for China’s policymakers. 
Second,  China  is  addressing risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  its  economy  and financial 
system. Doing this without triggering a crisis of confidence is another key priority. 
Third,  China’s  economy  is  undergoing  perhaps  the  most  comprehensive  and 
ambitious structural reform programme of any country in modern times. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  In the short term, these three objectives may at times be in conflict, presenting a trilemma of 
difficult  trade-offs  for  policymakers. But  if  successfully  executed,  these  objectives  are 
mutually reinforcing and will lay the foundation for a more sustainable and vibrant First World 
economy. 
Moderation in growth 
Why is China growing more slowly? 
As China reaches a more mature stage of development, it is simply unrealistic to expect it to 
grow  at  the  same  rate  as  before.  China  is  confronted  with  the  reality  of  supply-side 
constraints that every economy eventually runs into. 
• 
According  to  UN  projections,  China’s  working-age  population  (aged  15–59),  is 
projected to shrink by 0.6% each year over the next 15 years. 
Slower growth does not mean anaemic growth. China may no longer grow at 8–10%, but it is 
well positioned to grow by 6 to 6.5% for the next five years. With the right mix of structural 
reforms, there is substantial scope for China to achieve faster catch-up in productivity and 
income levels. 
• 
China’s  per  capita  GDP  is  modest  by  international  standards  and  its  labour 
productivity remains well below the frontier. 
The less developed regions in China still have scope to grow at rates that are higher 
than  the  national  average,  and  this  process  of  internal  convergence  is  itself  an 
important source of future productivity growth. 
 The large size of the Chinese economy means that, at even more moderate rates of growth, 
the incremental demand from China will be quite substantial in absolute terms – and this is 
what matters for the global economy. 
• 
China growing at 6% today adds US$340 billion of GDP compared to US$260 billion 
that a smaller China growing by 10% added 10 years ago. 
China contributed to more than one-third of world GDP growth last year, more than 
the combined contributions of the US, Europe and Japan. 
 Addressing vulnerabilities 
Against this backdrop of moderating growth, China is also faced with the task of addressing 
vulnerabilities in its economy and financial system. 
The chief risk is leverage – both its level and its growth. 
• 
According  to  the  BIS,  China’s  credit-to-GDP  ratio  stands  at  around  250%,  having 
risen by 100% points since end-2008. Nearly 70% of that increase is attributable to 
corporate debt. 
There are concerns that part of the corporate borrowing has been used to pay off 
existing loans, rather than being channelled towards productive activities. 
Many of the Chinese firms having difficulty servicing their debt are from the heavy 
industry sector facing excess capacity. 
  China has the fiscal resources to backstop its financial sector’s liabilities and thereby stave 
off a systemic financial crisis. But the debt overhang will weigh on corporate investment and 
present a further headwind to growth. Indeed, with continuing producer price deflation, the 
real debt burden will keep rising, even as profitability falls. 
In a good scenario, the debt ratio stabilises at the current level, and then gradually declines 
as nominal GDP rises faster than credit; in other words, China grows out of its debt problem. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  However, this requires that enterprises that are no longer viable are unwound in an orderly 
manner. 
• 
Earlier this year, Chinese authorities announced plans to reduce excess capacity in 
the steel and coal sectors. 
The government has also issued directives to banks to stop extending loans to firms 
that  are  persistently  loss-making,  while  providing  credit  to  competitive  companies 
which are experiencing temporary difficulties. 
 The road to addressing China’s debt vulnerabilities is long and fraught with risks along the 
way. But if recent efforts are sustained and economic growth does not tank, the prospects 
are good for an orderly and gradual deleveraging. 
Structural reforms 
More  than  the  moderation  in  economic  growth  or  even  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  financial 
system, it is the outcome of the structural reform effort that will be decisive for the long-term 
prospects for the Chinese economy. 
The Third Plenum reform blueprint of 2013 provides a comprehensive roadmap for China’s 
full  transition  to  a  market  economy.  It  is  a  thoughtful,  coherent,  and  well-conceived  plan. 
While  implementation  has  been  slower  than  expected  in  some  areas,  China  has  probably 
made more progress in structural reforms than any major economy during the last few years. 
But much work still lies ahead. 
Take for instance fiscal reform. China has taken several steps to improve the sustainability 
and transparency of its public finances, especially at the local government level. 
• 
Changes  to  China’s  budget  law  last  year  have  helped  to  bring  more  government 
spending on-budget. 
Local  governments  are  now  allowed  to  raise  funds  in  the  bond  market,  reducing 
their reliance on land sales to fund expenditures. 
And earlier this week, on 1 May, China replaced all business turnover taxes with a 
more efficient value-added tax (VAT). 
  But  work  remains  in  the  areas  of  reducing  off-budget  spending,  strengthening  social 
spending, and refining environmental and property taxes. 
Domestic financial liberalisation is another area where the glass is half full and half empty. A 
lack of depth and sophistication in China’s domestic financial market has limited the returns 
on  household  savings,  indirectly  crimping  their  purchasing  power.  It  has  also  restricted 
financing to promising businesses. 
• 
• 
China has taken the important step of liberalising interest rates. 
But  it  also  needs  to  develop  deeper  and  broader  capital  markets.  This  will  help 
better price risk capital and ensure that financing flows to more productive economic 
activities. 
China  has  proceeded  with  capital  account  liberalisation  in  a  careful  and  systematic  way, 
“crossing the river by feeling the stones”. 
• 
Since  2008,  the  use  of  RMB  outside  China  has  been  permitted  for  all  current 
account transactions. 
Capital account transactions in RMB were subject to various quotas and schemes, 
which have been progressively expanded. 
And  late  last  year,  China  allowed  foreign  institutions  to  issue  bonds  in  China’s 
onshore interbank bond market for the first time. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  But opening up the capital account amidst a slowing economy, a still developing domestic 
financial system, and a debt overhang, is no easy task. 
China has also made progress in reforming its exchange rate framework. 
• 
Decoupling  the  RMB  from  the  US  Dollar  last  year  –  while  it  caused  considerable 
anxiety  in  the  markets  –  was  an  important  and  necessary  step  towards  a  more 
market-based exchange rate. 
The shift to a trade-weighted index for evaluating the exchange rate of the RMB will, 
however, take some time to gain credibility among market participants. 
 The most decisive yet most difficult piece in the overall reform programme is the reform of 
state-owned enterprises, or SOEs. The SOEs have been generating lower rates of returns on 
investment compared to the non-state sector, and are a drag on China’s overall measured 
productivity performance. 
• 
An SOE restructuring blueprint was announced last year, with the aim of improving 
competitiveness  and  efficiency  but  without  outright  privatisation,  for  example  by 
consolidating similar SOEs or promoting “mixed ownership”. 
This is a strong step in the right direction, but the Third Plenum’s vision of a market-
based economy can only be realised if SOEs are subject to competitive forces in all 
aspects of their operations. 
 China in transition: near-term effects on Asia 
So, what does this all mean for the global economy, and Asia in particular? 
• 
There  has  perhaps  been  too  much  focus  on  the  slowdown  in  China’s  headline 
growth rate and not enough attention paid to the changes in the composition of that 
growth. 
More  than  China’s  economic  slowdown,  its  economic  transition  will  have  a  bigger 
impact on the world, and Asia in particular. 
 Let us consider first some of the near-term effects on Asia. 
First, the slowdown in China’s investment and associated imports will impact exports in the 
region. 
• 
IMF data shows that China’s goods import volume contracted by 0.7% in 2015, the 
first shrinkage in at least 18 years and a large step-down from its 10-year average 
growth rate of 10.5% (2005–2014). 
In value terms, China’s nominal goods imports fell by a sharper 14.2%, which can 
be  attributed  to  steep  falls  in  global  prices  of  commodities,  delivering  a  harsh 
“negative terms of trade” blow on the affected countries. 
 Second, China’s rebalancing away from investment and towards consumption will weigh on 
the exports of economies which are most exposed to Chinese demand for capital goods. 
• 
Asian economies as a whole cater more to Chinese investment demand rather than 
its consumption demand. Therefore, at least in the short term, the impact of China’s 
rebalancing is skewed towards the downside for the region. 
The  Asian  NIEs  which  export  manufactured  capital  equipment  to  China  will  be 
adversely affected. 
In a relatively better position to weather the shift are Malaysia and the Philippines, 
as they export a variety of agricultural produce and consumer goods to China. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  4 
   However,  it  would  be  misleading  to  attribute  Asia’s  weak  export  performance  solely  to 
China’s slowdown. 
• 
While  Emerging  Asia’s  nominal  exports  to  China  fell  by  4%  y-o-y  last  year,  the 
decline in the region’s exports to advanced economies and other emerging markets 
has been even sharper. 
An  MAS  study  shows  that  the  ASEAN-4  economies’  value-added  exposure  to G3 
final demand is still about 1.4 times its exposure to China’s final demand. 
 Third,  the  inevitable  transition  pains  of  a  restructuring  China  will  trigger  periodic  bouts  of 
volatility in financial markets across Asia. 
• 
Shocks  from  China’s  financial  markets  are  transmitted  through  the  banking  and 
portfolio  channels  due  to  the  substantial  holdings  of  Chinese  assets  by  foreign 
investors and lenders. 
Another avenue of transmission would be through the confidence channel, whereby 
events in China affect risk appetites in other markets. 
 China in transition: medium-term implications 
In the medium term, China’s rebalancing could bring more positives to Asia in spurring trade, 
boosting investment, and expanding regional production networks. 
First,  there  are  ample  opportunities  for  countries  which  re-orientate  the  structure  of  their 
exports to tap on Chinese’s burgeoning demand for consumer goods and services. 
• 
Demand for final  consumption goods  will  increase  as  China’s  middle-class  grows, 
stimulating  imports  of  consumption  goods  even  as  trade  in  intermediate  goods 
slows. 
Indeed, at a rate of nearly 10% per annum, China’s import of consumption goods 
has grown by more than twice that of intermediate goods over the past ten years. 
 Second, direct investment will increasingly be an area where China’s impact on the region is 
felt. Since late last year, China has emerged as a net exporter of direct investment. 
• 
Outward direct investment from China has grown by 28% per annum over the nine 
years to 2014. 
Third, a new regional production network could emerge in Asia. 
• 
Indonesia and the economies in Indo-China, with favourable population dynamics, 
are  well-placed  to  absorb  the  labour-intensive  and  lower  value-added  jobs  that 
China is shedding as wage costs rise. 
The  Chinese  push  to  finance  infrastructure  construction  in  less  developed  Asian 
countries,  as  part  of  its  One  Belt  One  Road  plan,  will  greatly  enhance  these 
countries’ attractiveness as nodes in the Chinese manufacturing network. 
 Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
China is in the midst of an unparalleled economic transition. It is grappling with the challenge 
of  managing  a  growth  slowdown,  addressing  vulnerabilities  in  its  financial  system,  and 
implementing structural reforms – all at the same time. It is not an easy task, juggling these 
three balls at the same time. 
The  Third  Plenum  blueprint  shows  that  Chinese  policymakers  are  keenly  aware  of  what 
needs to be done to foster a dynamic, market-based economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Their track record managing the rapid growth and transformation over the last three 
decades augurs well. 
And  as  they  gain  in  confidence  implementing  reforms  and  as  their  economic 
institutions  strengthen,  they  will  grow  in  their  willingness  to  accept  the  vagaries, 
fluctuations, and diminution of central control that are inherent in a market economy. 
 The next chapter in the China growth story has only begun. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
