  Vítor Constâncio: Presentation of the European Central Bank Annual 
Report 2015 to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the 
European Parliament 
Introductory remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, 
to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 
7 April 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, 
Honourable Members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  honoured  to  once  again  present  the  ECB’s  2015  Annual  Report  to  your  Committee. 
Please allow me to take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thoughts, and those of the 
ECB’s Executive Board and ECB staff, for the victims of the recent attacks in Brussels, in the 
heart of Europe. Our thoughts are also with their families and friends. 
Events like this remind us that Europe must stand together. And our institutions have a role 
to play in this respect. 
The presentation of our Annual Report to those representing the European Union’s citizens is 
a key element of our accountability, which is a necessary counterpart to our independence. 
That is also why we have decided to publish our feedback to the input you provided in the 
Resolution on the 2014 Annual Report, together with this report. This is the first time we have 
done  so.  This  decision  reflects  the  importance  of  having  a  fruitful  dialogue  between  our 
institutions, for the benefit of European citizens. 
Today, I will first discuss the monetary policy measures that the ECB has taken to fulfil its 
mandate and what impact these have had on the real economy. I will then explain how steps 
to  complete  banking  union  and  a  capital  markets  union  would  not  only  support  a 
strengthened  EMU  (along  with  fiscal  and  economic  union,  as  well  as  democratic 
accountability)  but  also  contribute 
financial  stability.  As  European 
developments need to be put into a wider perspective, I will also say a few words on ongoing 
discussions  in  international  fora  regarding  global  developments  and  international  financial 
regulation. 
to  enhancing 
Monetary policy and its impact on the real economy 
2015 was characterised by a modest economic recovery. However, inflation dynamics were 
weak  and  continued  to deteriorate throughout the  course  of  the  year. Thus,  after  adopting 
our credit easing measures in the middle of 2014, we took further decisive action in 2015 to 
pursue our price stability mandate. 
Let  me  remind  you  that,  in  January  last  year,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  had  moved  into 
negative  territory,  the  outlook  on  inflation  had  worsened  significantly  and  market-based 
inflation  expectations  stood  at  historic  lows.  In  this  situation,  we  judged  that  our  monetary 
policy measures had to be stepped up in view of our price stability mandate. Therefore, as of 
March  2015  we  expanded  our  asset  purchase  programme  (limited  until  then  to  covered 
bonds) to public sector securities. 
These  asset  purchases,  together  with  the  measures  taken  since  June  2014,  have  proved 
very effective by activating a broad range of channels to support growth and inflation in the 
euro area. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  First, they have contributed to a tangible, broad-based easing of market funding conditions, 
transmitting the stimulus to the euro area economy at large.1 
Second, through improving borrowing conditions for firms and households in the euro area, 
these measures have also promoted a recovery in lending that went back to positive growth 
in the second half of 2014, supporting expenditure on investment and consumption.2 
Without these measures, the euro area would have been in outright deflation last year and 
prices  would  have  fallen  at  an  even  faster  rate  this  year.  Growth  would  have  been 
significantly lower.3 
Towards  the  end  of  2015,  significant  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  started  to  materialise. 
Headline  inflation  entered  negative  territory  in  September  (–0.1%),  slightly  recovered  in 
December (0.2%) and January 2016 (0.3%) before turning negative again in February (–0.2%). 
This was partly due to a substantial decline in crude oil prices by 48% in euro terms from 
May  2015  to  January  2016.  The  decline  in  oil  prices  reflected  continued  oversupply, 
weakening oil demand and the OPEC countries not cutting production targets. In particular, 
around  half  of  the  decline  in  headline  inflation  from  January  to  February  reflects  that  the 
already negative annual energy inflation turned even more negative. 
To counteract the risks to our price stability objective, we first recalibrated our policy stance 
last  December  and  then  unveiled  another  comprehensive  set  of  measures  at  our  last 
monetary policy meeting in March 2016. 
In  discussing  our  recent  monetary  policy  measures,  it  is  essential  to  consider  the  global 
environment  in  which  they  were  taken.  This  environment  was  characterised  by  subdued 
growth, historically weak trade developments and low inflationary pressures reflecting sharp 
falls in energy prices. The more recent developments have been affected in particular by the 
outlook for emerging markets contributing to global financial market volatility in the second 
half of 2015 and again in February this year. 
In  this  respect,  these  developments  are  analysed  in  the  box  in  the  Annual  Report  entitled 
“Financial stress in emerging market economies” in order to understand their impact on the 
euro  area  economy.  This  is  against  the  background  of  the  discussions  carried  out  in 
international fora, most recently at the meeting of G20 ministers and central bank governors, 
as  well  as  at  the  BIS  meetings  in  February  in  Shanghai.  Risks  to  the  global  outlook  and 
global financial stability  will feature prominently on the agendas of the various meetings in 
the context of the IMF and World Bank spring meetings next week. 
Consistent with this global scenario, the ECB has done and, within its mandate, will continue 
to do whatever is needed to pursue its price stability objective which now implies also trying 
to foster growth, in order to close the negative output gap that is putting negative pressure on 
inflation.  However,  other  policies  must  also  act  to  deliver  a  lasting  and  sustainable 
improvement in economic growth prospects. 
Such a common European effort should entail a three-point action plan: 
                                                
1  Since June  2014,  euro  area government  bond  yields  have  fallen,  on average, by  around  120  basis  points. 
Furthermore,  funding  conditions  for  banks  and  companies  in  the  euro  area  have  improved  markedly:  the 
respective bond yields have declined by around 65 and 55 basis points on average. 
2  Bank lending rates for non-financial corporations in the euro area have fallen on average by some 80 basis 
points since June 2014. Lower lending rates, in turn, have triggered a marked response in the supply of, and 
demand for, bank credit: the volume of credit to both euro area households and firms has been on a steady 
recovery path since mid-2014. 
3  ECB  estimates  suggest  that,  had  there  been  no  asset  purchase  programme  (including  the  recalibration  of 
December 2015), inflation would have been negative in 2015. ECB assessments also suggest that the asset 
purchase programme (including the recalibration of December 2015) will contribute to raising the GDP of the 
euro area by around 1.5% in the period 2015–18. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  First, structural unemployment is still high and potential output growth low in the euro area. It 
is therefore imperative to make our economic structures more efficient. This calls for action to 
raise productivity and improve the business environment, also by providing adequate public 
infrastructure. 
Second, fiscal policies should play their role in the economic recovery. Of course, the fiscal 
rules of the European Union must not be called into question. But all Member States can and 
should strive to make the composition of their fiscal policies more conducive to growth and, 
where available, countries with fiscal space should use it. 
Finally,  we  need  a  clear  vision  for  EMU.  I  am  aware  that  political  attention  is  focused 
elsewhere right now. But leaving EMU unfinished will leave us too fragile and vulnerable to 
be able to deal with future shocks. 
Completing banking union and financial union 
One  area  that  deserves  particular  attention  is  the  finance  sector.  This  year’s  ECB  Annual 
Report outlines the key challenges the euro area is facing, namely (i) a further increase in 
risk  premia,  a  decline  of  financial  asset  prices  inducing  capital  losses,  in  the  context  of 
possible emerging market stress and persistently low commodity prices; (ii) weak profitability 
for  insurers  and  for  banks,  aggravated  for  some  banks  by  non-performing  loans  (NPLs) 
inherited  from  the  crisis;  (iii)  sovereign  and  corporate  debt  sustainability  concerns;  and 
(iv) the  potential  for  stress  in  the  investment  funds  sector  –  and  shadow  banking  more 
broadly. 
In  the  past  few  months,  a  discussion  has  started  about  the  need  for  a  new  risk  reduction 
agenda. But, before discussing such further steps, it is worth recalling that we have already 
made  significant  progress  –  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis  –  in  “de-risking”  Europe’s 
financial  system.  We  enhanced  and  implemented  the  single  rulebook;  defined  a  common 
resolution  framework  for  banks  to  protect  European  taxpayers;  established  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  and  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  and  conducted  a 
Comprehensive Assessment of banks to deal with legacy issues before the start of Banking 
Union. 
The results are tangible. The Common Equity Tier 1 ratio has risen, on average, from around 
9%  to  13%  since  2012  for  significant  institutions.  Most  European  banks  have  managed  to 
meet the fully-loaded capital requirements by now. 
While a lot has been achieved, there is no room for complacency: too many of our banks are 
still troubled by the ghosts of the past, legacy assets and NPLs. The ECB as supervisor is 
actively looking into this and has identified the issue as a priority. 
So,  what  is  left  to  be  done  to  mitigate  the  remaining  risks  and  make  the  financial  system 
more resilient? 
It is important to further improve and fine-tune what we have started. 
First, there is still room for improvement when it comes to establishing a truly level playing 
field, for example by creating a truly single rulebook. The ECB is contributing here with its 
work on options and discretions in the CRD IV/CRR framework, but you as legislators can 
also play an important role to complement our action. 
Second, we should implement the missing elements of the international regulatory agenda. I 
will come back to this. 
Third, we need to complete the banking union with the European Deposit Insurance Scheme 
(EDIS).  The  European  Commission’s  proposal  sets  out  a  clear  roadmap  towards  a  single 
EDIS, which I strongly welcome. It already provides safeguards against moral hazard, and 
ensures that banks pay for their own risks. I understand that you will discuss the proposal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  later today. I am sure that the European Parliament as co-legislator will play a decisive role in 
this process of strengthening and completing the banking union. 
Fourth, progress needs to be made to foster private risk-sharing via financial markets. We 
have therefore strongly supported the European Commission’s initiative to establish a capital 
markets union (CMU) from the very start, as you will remember from my introductory remarks 
to this Committee last year. 
A well-functioning, diversified and integrated capital market would support the transmission 
of  our  monetary  policy,  create  deeper  and  more  liquid  markets,  and  increase  the  shock-
absorbing capacity of the European economy, thereby contributing to financial stability. The 
revitalisation of the securitisation market is an essential element of this agenda, as it can free 
up capital for lending and thus increase funding for the real economy. Therefore, the ECB 
strongly  welcomes  the  Commission’s  proposed  regulations,  which  strike  the  right  balance 
between  the  need  to  revive  the  European  securitisation  markets  and  yet  maintain  the 
prudential nature of the framework. Timely adoption of the final rules is essential for creating 
regulatory  certainty for  issuers  and  investors  alike, thus  supporting the revitalisation  of  the 
market. 
The ECB’s contributions to regulatory initiatives at international level 
Let me now turn to the international regulatory agenda, also in response to the call by ECON 
to receive more information on these issues. As I argued before, initiatives at European level 
are not taking place in isolation. 
Last  November,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  finalised  the  total  loss-absorbing  capacity 
(TLAC)  standard  for  large,  complex,  global  systemically  important  banks.  TLAC  is  an 
important  milestone  in  overcoming  the  “too  big  to  fail”  problem.  It  now  needs  to  be 
implemented in the European framework. 
To  further  reduce  risk-taking  and  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  banking  system,  the 
finalisation and implementation of the leverage ratio and the strategic review of the capital 
framework  should  be  matters  of  priority.  The  Basel  Committee  concluded  its  work  on  the 
definition of the leverage ratio, the trading book requirements and is working to conclude the 
revision of risk-weighted assets framework both for the standardised approach and for the 
use of banks’ internal risk models before the end of the year. 
Swift legislative action on the key unfinished parts of the Basel III agenda will provide clarity 
to the financial system and support the latter in financing the recovery. As confirmed by G20 
Finance Ministers and Governors at their meeting in Shanghai, the aim is now to focus on 
making Basel III effective without further increasing regulatory capital requirements. 
In  addition,  in  2015  the  Basel  Committee  initiated  a  review  of  the  prudential  treatment  of 
banks’  exposures  to  sovereign  risk.  This  review  –  which  is  being  conducted  in  a  “careful, 
holistic and gradual manner” – is meant to take into account several broad issues relating to 
the role of sovereign debt markets and the impact that any changes may have on this role 
and on certain market segments. 
In  particular,  in  reviewing  the  existing  regulatory  treatment  of  sovereign  risk,  due 
consideration should be given to the liquidity function of sovereign bonds and to its potential 
implications  for  monetary  policy  implementation  and  transmission.  Given  the  widespread 
reach and impact of any policy action in this area, consistency at the global level is key to 
ensuring a truly international level playing field as it is stated in the Five Presidents Report. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Europe  is  facing  a  number  of  challenges  simultaneously,  in  the  economic  sphere  and 
beyond. Addressing these challenges requires a joint response. The ECB is doing, and will 
continue  to  do,  its  part  by  taking  the  necessary  measures  to  fulfil  its  mandate.  However, 
further work is also required in other policy areas to cement the foundations of the European 
Union,  foster  innovation  and  productivity,  and  put  the  economy  back  on  a  path  of  robust, 
sustainable growth and job creation. 
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to taking your questions. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
