   Graeme Wheeler: Monetary policy challenges in turbulent times 
Speech written by Mr Graeme Wheeler, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and 
delivered by Mr John McDermott, Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 
for the Otago Chamber of Commerce, Dunedin, 23 August 2016. 
 I will discuss some of the main challenges confronting central banks in conducting monetary 
policy, particularly in small open advanced economies. The scope and influence of monetary 
policy  in  these  economies  is  heavily  constrained  by  economic  and  financial  developments 
outside their borders. As a result, expectations of what monetary policy can achieve often run 
ahead of reality. I will then discuss some of the alternate views around an appropriate strategy 
for managing monetary policy in New Zealand under current circumstances. I will conclude by 
discussing the Reserve Bank’s current policy strategy. In doing so, I will draw heavily on and 
emphasise  the  messaging  contained  in  the  recently  released  August  Monetary  Policy 
Statement. 
Challenges faced by central banks in implementing monetary policy 
I)  
Nearly  ten  years  on  from  the  start  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC),  growth  remains 
disappointingly  weak  in  many  regions.  The  IMF’s  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  is 
appropriately  titled  “Too  Slow  for  Too  Long”.  It  includes  further  downgrades  in  2016–2017 
growth  projections  for  all  the  major  economies,  and  for  many  emerging  and  developing 
economies. Tangible downside risks were identified, and the projections were shaded down 
further in July revisions. A similar picture emerges in the OECD’s latest  Economic Outlook, 
which highlights the “self-fulfilling low growth trap” that has enveloped the global economy. 
Central banks face a difficult global economic and financial environment: 
• 
global  economic  growth  remains  significantly  below  its  long-term  average  despite 
unprecedented monetary accommodation.1 The rate of potential output growth across 
the advanced economies has slowed due to lower growth in total factor productivity 
and weak growth in the capital stock.2 Output growth in the emerging markets has 
also slowed; 
The  volume  of  global  merchandise  trade  (which  is  a  strong  catalyst  for  global 
economic growth) has drifted lower since the start of 2015. In an environment of weak 
economic growth and reduced trade volumes, trade restrictions in G20 countries have 
                                                 
1   Global GDP growth has averaged 3.8 percent per annum since 1961. The decline in output from the pre-GFC 
trend path of GDP has been 15 percent or more in several countries. Global growth in 2015 was 3 percent, the 
weakest since 2009, and below trend growth of 3.8 percent. 
2   Potential output growth per capita in the OECD area has declined from around 2 percent in the late-1990s to 
around 1 percent at present. Analysis cited by the OECD indicates that about half of this slowdown is due to 
weak  capital  stock  growth  –  reflecting  both  lower  investment  since  before  the  GFC,  and  higher  rates  of 
depreciation arising from the growing share of ICT and intangibles in total investment. The other half of the 
slowdown is attributed to lower growth in total factor productivity (TFP), reflecting weaknesses in the spread of 
innovation through the economy, in business dynamism, and in product market reform. Potential output has also 
been held back by weak labour market performance, including deteriorating skills of the long-term unemployed, 
and by the impact of weak global trade in holding down the benefits to growth arising from competitive pressures, 
technological spill overs, and innovation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
      been rising steadily3 and many governments are concerned about the strength of their 
exchange rates; 
headline  and  core  inflation  and  short-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  advanced 
economies are very low, and the level of neutral interest rates has fallen; 
interest rates are at historic lows and countries with negative policy rates now account 
for 25 percent of global output.4 The volume of quantitative easing by central banks 
is expected to reach record levels in 2016. Around US$13.4 trillion of bonds carry a 
negative yield; and 
high asset valuations are presenting risks to financial stability in many economies and 
the level of household debt remains high (and has been rising rapidly in several large 
emerging market countries). 
The conduct of monetary policy has become more complicated as global financial integration 
has continued to increase, and as the financial policy spillovers arising from the extraordinary 
monetary policy measures of the major central banks have increasingly been felt in the smaller 
and peripheral markets.5, 6 
Many of these issues are likely to be long lasting. They have complex structural elements to 
them and are unlikely to fully self-correct as global growth recovers. For example: 
• 
low  inflation  in  some  countries  is  linked  to  demographic  change,  especially  in 
countries with a declining workforce and rapidly ageing population. Low inflation is 
also due to technological change around information flows and energy production, 
and to the global over-supply of commodities and manufactured goods; and 
the decline in neutral real interest rates may be linked to the slowdown in productivity 
growth, and the growth in global savings linked to post-GFC deleveraging and aging 
populations. 
 In responding to this economic setting, monetary policies are being stretched well beyond the 
normal  parameters  and  stresses  envisaged  when  policy  frameworks  were  designed  and 
inflation goals were first specified.  
Questions that central banks are grappling with 
II)  
In a world of unconventional monetary policy and unprecedented monetary accommodation, 
several questions are on central bankers’ minds; questions such as: 
• 
what are the risks that global growth will be revised lower? What is the outlook for 
commodity  prices,  and  especially  oil  prices?  How  can  the  advanced  economies 
                                                
3   The last five years of merchandise trade growth has been the weakest period since the 1980s. Between mid-
October 2015 and mid-May 2016 G20 economies introduced new trade measures at the fastest pace seen since 
2008. (WTO Director General’s Mid-Term Report on Trade Developments issues on 25 July 2016). 
4   Countries with policy rates at or below 0.5 percent now account for around 65 percent of global GDP. Around 
USD13.4 trillion of bonds carry a negative yield. 
5   Global  foreign  exchange  market  turnover  reached  an  estimated  $US5.3  trillion  a  day  in  2013,  up  from 
$US3.8 trillion in 2007 and $US1.5 trillion in 1998. Global trading in OTC interest rate derivatives – mainly swaps 
and forward rate agreements – increased almost ten-fold between 1998 and 2013 (from $US265 billion in 1998 
to $US2.3 trillion in 2013). The notional amounts outstanding in OTC derivatives markets (mainly interest rate 
contracts) reached almost $US700 trillion in 2013, compared with $US500 trillion in 2007 and under $US100 
trillion in 1998. 
6   Chen, J, Mancini – Griffoli, T, and Sahay, R (2014) “Spillovers from United States Monetary Policy on Emerging 
Markets: Different this Time?”, IMF Working paper WP/14/240. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
        achieve the growth rate needed to generate the “escape velocity” to ensure a durable 
recovery and moderate inflationary pressure?; 
how long are the major central banks likely to run a divergent monetary policy stance 
(although they have become more similar as the Federal Reserve has pushed back 
expectations of interest rate rises)? When might the Federal Reserve next raise the 
Fed Funds rate?; 
has  monetary  policy  reached  the  limits  of  its  effectiveness  in  central  banks  with 
negative policy rates and large programmes of quantitative easing? How much scope 
is there for additional monetary accommodation and will this be deployed – especially 
by large central banks, such as the European Central Bank and Bank of Japan?; 
how serious are the distortions created by negative interest rates, and by quantitative 
easing and the associated rapid expansion of central bank balance sheets? How can 
these balance sheets be deleveraged over time and excess bank reserves absorbed, 
and  what  does  this  imply  for  monetary  policy,  asset  prices  and  global  long  term 
interest rates?; 
what  are  the  risks  that  inflation  expectations  will  fall  further?  How  can  inflation 
expectations  best  be  raised  when  policy  rates  are  already  low,  household 
indebtedness is high and households and firms are reluctant to borrow more?; 
how  reliable  are  the  central  bank’s  estimates  of the  output gap?  How flat  has  the 
Phillips Curve become and how much has the neutral interest rate fallen?; and 
how should fiscal policy support monetary policy? 
• 
Monetary  policy  decisions  are  influenced  by  assessments  of  such  questions  based  on 
research, modelling and scenario analysis. The complexity of the discussions that underlie 
policy decisions within a central bank belies the apparent simplicity of what is often a single 
interest rate instrument and a single inflation target.  
Policy Choices in New Zealand 
III)  
New Zealand’s economy is in its eighth year of expansion. In many respects the economy is 
performing well: economic growth is above trend; employment growth has been strong; labour 
force participation is high; and the unemployment rate continues to decline. Furthermore, real 
wage growth has been quite strong; until recently, the household savings rate has been rising; 
and increasing economic growth has not been accompanied by the sharp deterioration in the 
current account that has accompanied previous recoveries. Not least, the cost of living, as 
measured by the consumers price index, has been rising slowly.  
As with every economy, there are also some negative aspects: domestic economic growth has 
been weaker on a per capita basis; slow global growth and rising protectionism creates risks 
for our export sector; the global dairy market has serious oversupply problems that depress 
our  dairy  returns  (although  the  last  two  dairy  auctions  have  been  encouraging);  excessive 
house  price  inflation  is  creating  financial  stability  risks;  our  exchange  rate  is  too  high  and 
affecting the competitiveness of our export and import substitution industries; and headline 
inflation (but not underlying inflation) lies below the target band in the Policy Targets Agreement. 
In addition, the strongest migration cycle in several decades is creating stresses as well as 
positives for the economy.7 
Monetary policy decisions attract considerable comment in most advanced economies, and 
New Zealand is no exception. That’s because monetary policy can have important effects on 
                                                
7   High net immigration raises potential output growth, increases aggregate demand, moderates wage pressure 
and increases house price inflation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   peoples’ lives. It can affect the level of activity in the economy in the short-term, the cost of 
living for individuals and their expectations about wage and price outcomes, asset valuations, 
the cost of borrowing and the returns to savers and investors, and the incentives for risk taking. 
But  several  factors  constrain  the  influence  of  central  banks,  particularly  in  small  open 
economies. Long term interest rates are set by global saving and investment flows, country 
risk premia and expectations for economic growth and inflation. Central banks only have limited 
control over tradables inflation. For example, they have no influence on the global oversupply 
of commodities, manufactured goods and capital goods, or on overseas inflation rates. This 
did not matter so much when the annual increase in New Zealand’s import costs in the run up 
to the GFC was averaging 2 percent, but does when they have averaged minus 1.9 percent in 
recent years.8 
Central banks generally have limited control over the exchange rate. For example, the Reserve 
Bank has lowered the OCR six times since June 2015 and the TWI remains some 2½ percent 
higher than it was at the commencement of cutting. Central banks cannot persistently achieve 
a lower nominal exchange rate unless monetary policy is fully dedicated to that goal (and even 
then cannot permanently achieve a lower real exchange rate). They might influence financial 
risk taking through short term interest rates, but other factors, such as regulation and taxation, 
will determine whether this flows through into investments that enhance productivity and real 
income growth. In addition, the scope that central banks have to influence short-run activity 
and  wage  and  price  setting  behaviour  diminishes  as  interest rates  approach  zero,  and the 
limits for quantitative easing are reached. 
Reflecting  these  constraints,  central  banks  must  make  finely-balanced  judgements  when 
setting  monetary  policy. We attempt  to  base those judgements  on  evidence, research and 
scenario analysis and continue to review our policy record and international experience to see 
what we can learn from them. We also encounter a range of views about what monetary policy 
can achieve and how it should be operated. I will touch on three policy views that have recently 
been expressed in the New Zealand context. 
1. 
The view that flexible inflation targeting is not an appropriate framework for conducting 
monetary policy 
The Bank’s position is that flexible inflation targeting remains the most appropriate monetary 
policy  framework  for  conducting  monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand.9  Provided  that  sufficient 
flexibility is allowed to accommodate the frequent and often severe impact of external shocks, 
the most important contribution monetary policy can make to promoting efficiency and the long-
run growth of incomes, output and employment is the pursuit of price stability. 
This also remains the view of the 30 or so central banks that describe themselves as inflation 
targeters, and includes most central banks in the advanced economies and several emerging 
market economies. I am not aware of any central bank that has moved away from an inflation 
targeting framework since the GFC. For example, no country has adopted price level targeting 
or targeted nominal income given the practical difficulties and theoretical challenges to those 
frameworks. However, several central banks, like the RBNZ, have expressed concerns that 
the  unprecedented  monetary  accommodation  in  the  aftermath  of  the  GFC  has  led  to 
excessively inflated asset prices. Many countries have introduced macro-prudential policies to 
help alleviate the risks this poses to domestic financial stability. 
                                                
8   The average annual percentage change (in NZ dollar terms) in goods and services import prices was 2 percent 
in the period 2005–2007 and –1.9 percent in the period 2012 – 2016 Q1. 
9   Several RBNZ speeches discuss the merits of flexible inflation targeting. For example, McDermott J (2012) “The 
Future of Inflation Targeting” (2015) “The Dragon Slain? Near-Zero Inflation in New Zealand”, Wheeler G (2014) 
“Reflections on 25 Years of Inflation Targeting” (2015) “Some Thoughts on the Inflation Outlook and Monetary 
Policy”. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   There have been assertions that inflation targeting is broken because inflation is low. These 
assertions  do  not  stack  up.  Inflation  has  primarily  been  low  because  of  unforeseen  and 
unforeseeable global events. Monetary policy in New Zealand remains effective and able to 
influence domestic demand, and thus, non-tradable inflation. 
While there is some academic debate about the merits of different inflation targets, few, if any, 
central  banks  have  modified  their  inflation  targets  in  the  last  few  years.  Although  there  is 
nothing  sacrosanct  about  what  particular  inflation  band  or  target  should  be  adopted  as  a 
measure of price stability, central banks have been reluctant to change targets. This is usually 
because the prospect of “making it easier when times become tougher” reduces the incentives 
on central banks to achieve earlier agreed goals and, in doing so, could damage the central 
bank’s credibility (particularly if a perception develops that the central bank will continually seek 
to respecify goals). 
New Zealand’s inflation target specification is not out of line with that set by the major central 
banks. For example, the Federal Reserve, Bank of Japan, Bank of England and the Bank of 
Canada have adopted inflation goals framed around 2 percent annual inflation (the European 
Central Bank expresses the goal as “achieving annual inflation rates of below, but close to, 
2 percent over the medium term”.)  
The view that the Reserve Bank should not lower interest rates 
2. 
Proponents of this view argue that the economy is growing strongly and interest rate reductions 
are  unwarranted  and  undesirable.  They  suggest  that  borrowing  costs  are  not  constraining 
business investment, and worry that lower rates will accentuate already excessive house price 
inflation and sow the seeds for a major housing market correction that will slow growth and 
likely lead to a recession. They also argue that monetary policy is in danger of focussing too 
much on borrowers and ignoring the effect that lowering interest rates could have on those 
reliant on interest incomes. This view acknowledges that inflation could remain at low levels 
for many years and that we should accept that outcome. 
There are two inter-related risks with this approach that are linked to the exchange rate and 
inflation expectations, and which may lead to even lower inflation. According to the last BIS 
triannual survey, the New Zealand dollar is the 10th most traded currency in the world with the 
2013 data showing average daily turnover of USD105 billion, roughly equivalent to 65 percent 
of New Zealand’s GDP.10 If financial markets believe that the Bank has abandoned its inflation 
objectives  and  is  seeking  to  maintain  policy  rates  at  a  level  consistent  with  below-target 
inflation, they will conclude that the easing process is over and proceed to bid the exchange 
rate up, perhaps substantially so. 
The TWI exchange rate is already at a high level based on the Bank’s models. A sizeable 
appreciation  would  further  squeeze  incomes  in  the  tradables  sector,  and  drive  tradables 
inflation  lower  for  longer,  thereby  lowering  overall  headline  inflation.  A  significantly  higher 
exchange rate that is not matched by a rise in commodity prices would likely slow economic 
growth.  
But it also carries another important risk. Low headline inflation increases the risk that inflation 
expectations  might  fall  and  become  embedded  in  wage  and  price  setting  outcomes  that 
become  self-perpetuating  and  drive  headline  inflation  lower.  The  outcome  might  be  an 
economy with less house price inflation, but with a higher exchange rate, slower growth, and 
lower inflation. 
                                                
10   BIS “Triennial Central Bank Survey, Foreign Exchange turnover in April 2013: Preliminary Global Results”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   If inflation expectations fall too far, it can be very difficult to raise them back up. In such a 
situation, further  cuts  in interest  rates  would  be needed  to  stimulate  economic  activity  and 
increase inflationary pressures.  
The Reserve Bank should rapidly lower interest rates 
3. 
This view advocates bringing inflation quickly back to the mid-point of the inflation band by 
rapidly cutting the OCR. Driving interest rates down quickly would lower the exchange rate, 
contributing to increased traded goods inflation and stronger traded goods sector activity. The 
ensuing increase in house price inflation is not seen as a consideration for monetary policy, 
even though there would be an increased risk of a large correction in the housing market and 
associated deterioration in economic growth. 
There would be considerable risks in this strategy. An aggressive monetary policy that is seen 
as exacerbating imbalances in the economy would not be regarded as sustainable and would 
not generate the exchange rate relief being sought.  
With  the  economy  currently  growing  at  around  2½  –  3  percent  and  with  annual  growth 
projected to increase to around 3½ percent, rapid and ongoing decreases in interest rates 
would  likely  result  in  an  unsustainable  surge  in  growth,  capacity  bottlenecks,  and  further 
inflame an already seriously overheating property market. It would use up much of the Bank’s 
capacity to respond to the likely boom/bust situation that would follow and would place the 
Reserve  Bank  in  a  situation  similar  to  many  other  central  banks  of  having  limited  room  to 
respond to future economic or financial shocks.  
Such consequences suggest that a strategy of rapid policy easing to extremely low rates would 
be counter to the provisions in the PTA that require the Bank to “seek to avoid unnecessary 
instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate” and to “have regard to the soundness 
of the financial system”.  
The Reserve Bank’s current approach 
IV)  
I will outline the thinking that underpins our August Monetary Policy Statement. 
The Bank recognises the considerable flexibility that has deliberately been built into the PTA. 
This includes provisions that: 
• 
deliberately  frame  the  inflation  objective  in  terms  of  an  inflation  band  with  an  “on 
average over the medium term” connotation; 
recognise that commodity price movements, such as oil prices, and government tax 
and pricing decisions may move measured inflation outside the band; 
require the Bank to monitor asset prices and have regard to financial stability risks; 
and 
avoid unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate.11 
• 
The forecasts contained in the August Monetary Policy Statement have the economy’s output 
gap currently at zero and rising to around 1.2 percent of GDP in 2018. We assess core inflation 
to currently be within the lower half of the target band and headline inflation is forecast to reach 
the  lower  end  of  the  target  band  in  December  2016.  The  output  and  inflation  projections 
assume 35 basis points of further OCR cuts from the current level of 2.00%.  
                                                  
11   For an explanation of how the Bank interprets the PTA and the considerations that lay behind the changes 
introduced at the last review see Wheeler G (2016) “The Global Economy, New Zealand’s Economic Outlook 
and the Policy Targets Agreement”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The key rationale for cutting the OCR by 25 basis points in August was to lower the risk of a 
further decline in short-term inflation expectations. 
In terms of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, we see the primary influence working 
through the demand and risk taking channels that raise annual non-tradable inflation to just 
under  3.5  percent  over  the  projection  period.  We  also  anticipate  that  as  our  interest  rate 
differentials narrow against other advanced economies, the exchange rate will weaken and, 
along with an increase in commodity prices and gradual rise in world inflation, will help traded 
goods inflation to move into positive territory. 
Our  decision  to  further  lower  the  OCR  does  increase  the  potential  risk  of  further  fuelling 
increases in asset prices, including within the housing market. This is one of the difficult trade-
offs that we have had to confront. The risks here are partly balanced by our macro-prudential 
policy moves that will further boost the resilience of the banking system. 
It  may  sound  trivial  for  central  banks  to  note  that  they  will  closely  monitor  the  emerging 
economic  data,  but  that  is  the  reality  of  the  situation  in  a  world  where  there  are  major 
uncertainties and every indicator of growth and inflation is carefully scrutinised. The Bank’s 
output and inflation projections, and the associated interest rate track, are based on a series 
of assumptions and judgements that are continually tested in the light of new information and 
analysis. It is this emerging economic data that will determine whether the assumed 35 basis 
points of further easing is realistic or whether more or less monetary stimulus will be required. 
Concluding comments 
V)  
Central banks do not have special powers of market foresight or a franchise on wisdom. But 
they do have significant research and analytical capacity that can deliver valuable insights, and 
this is being applied to challenges associated with the current global economic and financial 
developments. It means that central banks are in a position to modify their perspectives and 
policies as new analysis and data becomes available. 
In the end, judgement is inevitably involved in balancing a range of risks and uncertainties. 
Some of these lie beyond the influence of the central bank, while others can be addressed or 
moderated  through  monetary  policy.  Policy  decisions  inevitably  involve  reflection  and 
pragmatism in managing different trade-offs. 
We  remain  committed  to  the  inflation  goals  in  the  Policy  Targets  Agreement.  Our  present 
judgement is that the current interest rate track, involving an expected 35 basis points of further 
interest rate cuts, balances a number of risks weighing on the economy while generating an 
increase in CPI inflation back towards the midpoint of the 1 to 3% target range. We do not 
believe that the outlook and balance of risks warrants a position of no policy change, nor a 
position of rapid easings. If the emerging information and risks unfold in a manner that warrants 
a change in our judgements, we will modify our policy settings and  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
