   Daniel Mminele: Recent economic and monetary policy developments in 
South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
European Economics & Financial Centre (EEFC), London, 12 January 2016. 
 Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.  
Thank you to Professor Scobie and the Board of the EEFC, and I am truly humbled by the 
invitation to participate in the Distinguished Speakers Seminar Programme.  
Let me start by thanking the European Economics and Financial Centre for the good work they 
are doing in seeking to forge closer links between theorists and practitioners in economics and 
finance. I guess when it comes to monetary policy, that’s where the art and the science meet. 
Your work reminds me of the quote that is attributed to Yogi Berra that “In theory there is no 
difference between theory and practice, in practice there is.” The practice of monetary policy 
has been undergoing significant changes, and it will be interesting to see how much of all that 
ends up being embodied in the theory.  
The New Year is typically a time for reflection and as such I thought it appropriate to start by 
reflecting  on  some  of the  recent  international  economic  developments.  I  will  then focus on 
South African economic developments and end with a consideration of some of the issues that 
will warrant attention in the monetary policy sphere in the year ahead.  
International economic developments and outlook  
Over the past year, the global economy has struggled to gain traction. Unfortunately this has 
been an all too familiar theme in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. According to the 
IMF, world growth for 2015 is expected to have slowed to 3.1 per cent, from 3.4 per cent in 
2014,  reflecting  a  weaker  than  anticipated  recovery  in  advanced  economies  and,  more 
significantly, broad-based weakness in emerging market economies. The IMF expects growth 
to pick up in the coming year, to 3.6 per cent with downside risks continuing to dominate.1 A 
further slowdown in China and other emerging markets (EMs), tightening financial conditions 
and lower commodity prices could provide significant headwinds to growth going forward. The 
volatility in financial markets in the first week of 2016, influenced to a large extent by ongoing 
concerns about Chinese growth and uncertainties about the policy response of authorities, 
served as a reminder that many investors remain very nervous about the road ahead. Then 
there is the issue of geopolitical risks, which unfortunately have also shown signs of escalating 
of late.  
Global  growth  in  2015  was  driven  by  the  advanced  economies  and  in  particular  by  the 
sustained recoveries in the United States and United Kingdom. The US experienced higher-
than-expected growth in the third quarter, which, together with robust domestic private demand 
and job creation, allowed the Fed last month to finally embark on its much anticipated lift-off 
as part of policy normalisation. Market participants viewed the Fed’s statement following the 
December FOMC meeting as somewhat dovish, reinforcing the gradual prospective path of 
normalisation.  Furthermore,  as  demonstrated  by  the  FOMC’s  “dot  plots”  over  the  last  few 
FOMC meetings, the range of the projected target federal funds rate has narrowed, signifying 
a more clearer and coherent path of normalisation. Such perceived moderation of the Fed’s 
expectations,  together  with  ample  advance  notice  through  its  communication  strategy,  no 
                                                
1   World Economic Outlook, IMF, October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   doubt helped markets digest the dreaded “first hike in the cycle” (the first increase in the Fed 
funds target in almost ten years) without major price swings.  
In  Japan  and  the  euro  area,  however,  growth  remains  weak  and  fragile.  The  euro  area 
expanded  by  an  annualised  1.2  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter,  and  indicators  ranging  from 
business confidence to credit growth are showing increasing signs of upward normalization. 
However, concerns over a lack of pricing pressures2 prompted the ECB to lower its deposit 
rate and extend its QE programme last month. On the other hand, even as Japan avoided a 
technical recession in the third quarter, inflation remains well below its 2 per cent target level. 
Going forward, it is anticipated that growth in advanced economies will strengthen on the back 
of  supportive  fiscal  and  accommodative  monetary  policies  and  lower  commodity  prices. 
However, weaker growth in emerging markets and resultant feedback loops, harbour downside 
risks.  
Emerging  market  growth  continued  to  disappoint  in  2015,  with  the  slowdown  in  China, 
recessions  in  Brazil  and  Russia  and  weak  commodity  prices  dominating  the  outlook  going 
forward. China continues to rebalance its economy, and according to the IMF is expected to 
have grown by 6.8 per cent in 2015, and achieve growth of 6.3 per cent in 2016.3 Monetary 
policy continues to support the economy, with the People’s Bank of China reducing the policy 
rate by 165 basis points in 2015, and new fiscal measures announced in 2015 should help 
shore up demand and avoid a hard landing. Meanwhile the Chinese financial markets have 
gained  in  prominence  in  the  past  few  years,  which  is  why  the  turbulence  over  last  week 
warrants particular attention. The Chinese authorities’ decision to implement and then remove 
the  7  per  cent  “circuit  breaker”,  which  was  triggered  twice  in  the  week,  was  a  significant 
development and may suggest that financial market volatility may well be something that we 
have to live with for the time being.  
On a more positive note, India’s strong growth momentum continues. The IMF expects India 
to grow faster than China for the first time since 1999, forecasting GDP growth of 7.3 per cent 
in 2015 and 7.5 per cent in 2016. Indeed, India’s economy grew by 7.4 per cent, year on year, 
in the third quarter, making it the world’s fastest growing major economy for that quarter. In 
Russia, third quarter data suggests that the pace of contraction, and the impact of declining oil 
prices  and  political  sanctions  may  be  slowing.  Prospects  for  Brazil,  however,  remain 
challenging, with the economy contracting by 4.5 per cent, year on year, in the third quarter. 
Meanwhile the 10.7 per cent year on year increase in consumer prices recorded in December 
confirmed  that  Brazil  missed  their  inflation  target  for  the  first  time  in  more  than  a  decade. 
Political  challenges  have  weighed  heavily  on  consumer  and  business  confidence,  while 
cutbacks in public investment and government spending will impinge on the growth prospects 
in the near-term.  
Closer  to  home,  the  growth  momentum  is  slowing  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA).  Since 
achieving growth of 5.0 per cent in 2014, the region is forecast to grow by 3.8 per cent in 2015, 
and  4.3  per  cent  over  the  coming  year.4  As  you  are  aware,  the  region  is  dependent  on 
commodity exports and as such has been hard-hit by the decline in commodity prices and the 
slowdown  in  global  trade.  Oil  exporters,  such  as  Nigeria  and  Angola,  have  been  severely 
affected, with growth for this group of countries expected to drop from 5.9 per cent in 2014, to 
3.6 and 4.2 per cent for 2015 and 2016 respectively. The further unexpected decline in oil 
prices that we have witnessed since the beginning of the year does not bode well for growth 
prospects and may result in actual outcomes being worse than current forecasts. Yet even for 
oil-importers, reduced demand for raw materials has meant that the benefits of cheaper energy 
imports have been offset by the general decline in commodity prices, which have decreased 
Inflation in the euro area stands at only 0.2% y/y in both November and December 2015. 
                                                
2  
3   World Economic Outlook, IMF, October 2015. 
4   All data on sub-Saharan Africa from the Regional Economic Outlook for sub-Saharan Africa, IMF, October 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   by approximately 40 to 60 per cent between January 2013 and August 2015. In several African 
countries, the decline in prices of commodity exports has also led to a deterioration in both 
external  and  government  balances,  which  had  already  been  stretched  by  ambitious  public 
infrastructure  programmes  and  some  relaxation  of  government  spending  discipline.  In  an 
environment  of  higher  US  interest  rates,  international  diversification  of  investments  is  less 
forthcoming with a result that many countries in the region have found that external financing 
has become more difficult, or at least more costly.  
This has been the case of middle-income countries on the African continent, such as Ghana 
and Zambia, where tighter financing conditions as well as supply constraints are expected to 
weigh  down  on  growth.  Other  countries,  however,  face  fewer  of  the  aforementioned 
constraints, such as Kenya and Senegal, and are expected to see an acceleration in economic 
activity,  supported  by  public  investment  and  private  sector  activity,  respectively.  For  low-
income countries in the region, the outlook is more favourable, mainly as a result of robust 
infrastructure investment and private consumption driving growth. On average, this group of 
countries is expected to grow by 6.0 per cent in 2015, which while impressive, is still roughly 
three quarters of a percent lower than was forecast by the IMF in October 2014. This downward 
revision highlights the challenging headwinds facing the region. In the context of persistently 
low commodity prices, less favourable financial conditions, currency pressures, and external 
and fiscal vulnerabilities, risks to the outlook for sub-Saharan Africa remain on the downside.  
On the inflation front, global inflationary pressures are subdued. In advanced economies, lower 
commodity prices and weak growth have led to lower inflation, and even deflation in some 
cases.  Core  inflation  is expected  to  remain  soft  in  advanced  economies  over the  next two 
years,5  reflecting  persistent  slack  and  lower  import,  particularly  energy  prices. In  emerging 
markets the picture is more mixed. In Latin America, countries such as Chile, Colombia, Peru 
and Brazil have raised interest rates, as currency depreciation has led to a rise in inflation, and 
inflation expectations in some cases. However, in other emerging markets, particularly in Asia, 
policy rates have been eased in order to support growth. Overall, despite significant currency 
depreciations faced by emerging markets, inflation pressures in general remain fairly contained 
mainly as a result of weak demand.  
Moving  to  the  economic  outlook  for  2016,  one  issue  that  is  likely  to  dominate  the  policy 
landscape is the tightening of international financial conditions and the impact that this may 
have  on  emerging  markets.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  crisis,  extraordinarily 
accommodative  monetary  policies  in  the  advanced  economies  and  the  search  for  yield, 
combined with the relative strong growth performance of many emerging markets, drove strong 
capital inflows into emerging markets.  
However, as you are aware, there has been a turning of the tide. This is in response to both 
the  beginning  of  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  the  US,  as  well  as  the  weakening 
fundamentals in many EMs. For example, the IIF expects non-resident inflows to emerging 
markets to have reached US$ 548 billion in 2015, below the levels recorded in 2008/2009, and 
for net capital flows to EMs in 2015 to have been negative. As a share of emerging market 
GDP, capital inflows are estimated to have fallen from a high of 8 per cent in 2007 to 2 per 
cent for 2015.6 China accounts for a large proportion of these outflows, with the IIF estimating 
capital  outflows  of  over  $500  billion  from  the  country  in  2015.  The  market  turbulence 
experienced in September and October 2015, as well as in the past week, also highlight the 
manner  in  which  developments  in  China,  and  fears  of  a  crisis  in  emerging  markets,  will 
influence  financial  market  conditions.  Whilst  the  announcement  of  the  initial  Fed  rate  hike 
removed one source of uncertainty, other potentially more disruptive risks persist.  
                                                
5   Economic Outlook, OECD, November 2015. 
6   Capital Flows to Emerging Markets, IIF, October 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Despite  the  weakness  and  uncertainties  that  exist  in  the  outlook for  advanced  economies, 
developments in emerging markets are likely to prove crucial for the global economy in 2016. 
Between the 1980s and present, emerging markets and developing countries’ share of global 
GDP growth  (in  PPP  terms)  has  doubled to  over  70  per  cent.7 The growing  importance of 
emerging  markets  to  the  global  economy  implies  that  a  faster  slowdown  in  China,  or  a 
protracted  slowdown  in  EMs  in  general,  could  threaten  the  fragile  global  recovery.  Recent 
research  by  the World  Bank  indicated  that  on  average,  a  one  percentage  point  decline  in 
growth in BRICS countries could lead to a reduction of global growth of 0.4 per cent over the 
next two years.8 At the same time, EMs face significant headwinds in the form of monetary 
policy  divergence  in  the  advanced  economies,  weaker  commodity  prices,  dwindling  policy 
buffers  and  a  weak  global  growth  and  trade  outlook.  Further  dollar  appreciation  and  an 
increased sensitivity of EM yields to US rates not only pose risks to growth and inflation in 
many emerging markets, but also to financial stability, through balance sheet exposures.  
Policy makers globally need to commit to policies aimed at boosting both actual and potential 
output, in order to support a strong, sustainable and balanced global recovery. Looking to the 
near-term,  demand  management  measures  also  have  a  role  to  play  in  supporting  growth 
outcomes  globally.  In  many  advanced  economies,  negative  output  gaps  and  low  inflation 
trends allow for a continuation of accommodative monetary policies, and in some instances for 
more expansionary fiscal policies. In many emerging markets, however, the scope for both 
monetary  and  fiscal  easing  has  narrowed,  as  policy  makers  look  to  manage  rising 
vulnerabilities.  In many cases  cyclical  policies  need  to move  in  sync  with  structural  reform 
measures aimed at boosting potential growth in the medium-to-long term.  
Globalisation  and  interconnectedness  are  key  features  of  the  world  economy.  Thus, 
exogenous influences are an integral part of policymaking today. This includes, inter alia, the 
spillover risks generated by policy decisions in large key economies such as the US or China. 
To further support global growth, there is therefore a need for continued global cooperation, 
and well calibrated communication, in order to mitigate the negative spillovers national policies 
may generate.  
South African economic developments and outlook  
2015 was a challenging year for the South African economy. Despite consecutive contractions 
in the primary sector in the second and third quarters, we avoided a technical recession in the 
third quarter. The economy registered annualised growth of 0.7 per cent in the third quarter, 
driven by a rebound in the manufacturing sector. Growth continues to be constrained by certain 
cyclical elements, such as weaker global trade and commodity price declines, as well as more 
idiosyncratic  factors.  Electricity  shortages,  although  easing  somewhat  as  more  generating 
capacity has come online, continue to constrain production in some of the energy intensive 
sectors of the economy. In addition, the recent drought, said to be the worst in decades, has 
had a severe negative impact on the agricultural sector, which may worsen in coming quarters. 
Indeed initial crop estimates indicate that South Africa will likely need to import a significant 
amount of grain this year.  
Looking to the year ahead, as at November last year the Bank’s projections for growth was 
1.5 per cent for this year and 2.1 per cent in 2017 as electricity constraints ease, but the risks 
remain skewed to the downside. The slowdown in China and persistently low commodity prices 
are expected to have a negative impact on the mining sector, which, while contributing only 
5 per cent to GDP has accounted for more than 60 per cent of South Africa’s export revenues 
over  the  past  decade.  Internal  estimates  by  the  Reserve  Bank  indicate  that  the  drop  in 
commodity prices between June and November 2015 could take a quarter of a percent off real 
                                                
7  
8   Global Economic Prospects, World Bank, January 2016. 
IMF WEO database. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   GDP growth in 2016.9 With regard to manufacturing, the Barclays Purchasing Managers’ Index 
fell sharply in November from 48.1 to 43.3 index points – the lowest level since August 2009, 
suggesting a constrained outlook for the sector. Furthermore, business confidence remains 
low, with the SACCI Business Confidence Index for December 2015 declining by 3.1 index 
points to 79.6, when compared to the month prior. The 2015 annual average of the Business 
Confidence Index is at the lowest level since 1993.  
Unsurprisingly, in light of the weak growth prospects for the South African economy, and low 
levels of business confidence, growth in gross fixed capital formation has remained subdued. 
After reaching a five-year low in 2015, private sector fixed investment growth has since picked 
up slightly. The SARB expects private sector fixed investment growth to reach 1.6 per cent in 
2016, from 0.4 per cent in 2015, with electricity shortages and weak demand for commodities 
being among the main factors responsible for this subdued outlook.10  
On the demand side, the financial position of households remains under pressure, despite 
some  gradual  deleveraging  since  the  global  financial  crisis.  Consumer  expenditure  growth 
remains weak as a result of a moderation in real income growth and low levels of consumer 
confidence. Real spending on durable goods contracted in the third quarter of 2015 – the first 
contraction since the second quarter of 2009. Credit extension to the household sector has 
been weak over the last few years, and is likely to remain so in the future, given the subdued 
growth  and  employment  prospects  South  Africa  faces  over  the  short-  to  medium-term. 
Unemployment remains high, at 25.5 per cent. With electricity price increases and last year’s 
personal  tax  increase  further  constraining  consumer  income  growth,  the  Bank  projects 
household consumption growth to be below 2 per cent for 2015 and 2016.  
According to the World Bank, structural impediments have been putting a brake on emerging 
market  growth,  with  declining  potential  growth,  on  average,  accounting  for  a  third  of  the 
slowdown in EMs since 2010, South Africa being no exception.11 Our estimates suggest that 
potential output growth for 2015 in South Africa was around 1.8 per cent, the lowest since the 
transition to democracy, and a significant decline from the 4.0 per cent level in the pre-crisis 
period.12  However,  monetary  policy  has  a  limited  role  to  play  in  boosting  potential  growth. 
Structural policies are needed to boost the productive capacity of South Africa and promote 
the steady growth that is needed to make a meaningful dent in our unemployment figures. The 
Infrastructure Development Act and Employment Tax Incentive introduced by government are 
meant to address some of the structural impediments in the economy.  
Like other emerging markets, South Africa has felt the impact of tighter international financial 
conditions. Data shows that portfolio flows into South Africa and into emerging markets as a 
whole  have  followed  the  same  trend  since  2010.  Consequently,  South  Africa’s  recent 
experience of capital outflows and currency pressures has displayed similarities with the rest 
of  the  emerging  world.  Between  September  and  November,  non-resident  sales  of  equities 
amounted  to  R25.9  billion,  while  net  bond  sales  amounted  to  R5.9  billion.  We  have  also 
observed that, in recent years, capital inflows have been increasingly sensitive to shifts in the 
US yield curve; while the rand, since May 2013, has been negatively correlated to US Treasury 
yields.  
Given these experiences, the lift-off in the US suggests that were higher Fed funds rates to 
push longer-term US yields higher, South Africa could anticipate tighter financial conditions 
and further pressure on the rand. Indeed, immediately following the announcement, the rand 
                                                
9   Monetary Policy Review, SARB, November 2015. 
10   Monetary Policy Review, SARB, November 2015. 
11   “Slowdown in Emerging Markets: Rough Patch or Prolonged Weakness?” by T. Didier, M. Kose, F. Ohnsorge 
and L. Ye, World Bank Policy Research Note PRN/15/04, December 2015 
12   Monetary Policy Review, SARB, November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   fell against the dollar, although it subsequently rallied somewhat, and government bond yields 
rose. While some volatility was expected, the relatively muted market response in South Africa 
and elsewhere is encouraging, and suggests that the rate hike was mostly priced in by the 
market.  Continued  clear  communication  by  the  Fed  will  be  instrumental  in  containing  the 
potential negative spillovers of US monetary policy to emerging markets going forward.  
Rand depreciation remains a significant source of risk for the South African economy. While 
many peer emerging market currencies have also faced currency depreciation and volatility, 
the rand  has,  on  average,  underperformed.  Since  the  beginning  of  last year,  the  rand  has 
depreciated by 44 per cent against the US dollar, 48 per cent against the Yen, and 31 per cent 
against the euro. Furthermore, since the end of 2015, the rand has also lost ground against 
other emerging market currencies. It is clear that both external and internal developments have 
been  driving  the  rand  weaker.  Tighter  global  financial  conditions  as  the  beginning  of  Fed 
normalization  approached,  uncertainties  regarding  the  rebalancing  in  China  and  the 
consequent decline in commodity prices, have played a part – unfortunately, these factors may 
well persist into the coming year.  
Domestically, weaker growth prospects and perceptions around political events such as the 
cabinet  reshuffle  resulted  in  volatility  in  the  local  financial  markets  increasing  sharply  just 
before year-end. Markets initially reacted extremely negatively to the developments, with local 
assets experiencing severe selling pressure. The exchange rate of the rand touched what was 
then a historic low of R16.05 against the US dollar, the benchmark R186 government bond 
yield reached its highest level in seven years of 10.62 per cent on 11 December, while the 
country’s  5-year  CDS  spreads  also  widened  substantially  by  72 basis  points  relative  to 
emerging market peers. Part of this selloff was later reversed, but the impact of this on investor 
sentiment, as well as local business and consumer confidence may linger. This is particularly 
true in the context of recent sovereign credit downgrades.  
The seemingly persistent current account deficit, which currently stands at 4.1 per cent of GDP, 
remains another source of vulnerability. Despite a drop in the price of oil and the depreciation 
of the rand, the current account deficit widened in the third quarter of last year, after benefiting 
from a temporary positive trade balance in the previous quarter. Despite recording a small net 
inflow of foreign direct investment in our financial account in the third quarter of 2015, portfolio 
flows dominate, and this makes us vulnerable to changing risk sentiments in the markets.  
In terms of the trade account, despite the depreciation in the currency, slower growth in export 
volumes and the decline in commodity prices have meant that South Africa only experienced 
marginal growth in the nominal value of merchandise exports. At the same time, the value of 
merchandise imports rose by 3.6 per cent in the third quarter of 2015, driven by a boost in the 
quantity and price of imports, as a result of the weaker rand. Intermediate and capital goods 
account for approximately three quarters of South Africa’s imports, and as such our demand 
for imports remains relatively price-inelastic. Furthermore, key export sectors, such as mining 
and  manufacturing,  have  been  unable  to  fully  exploit  the  benefit  of  a  weaker  rand  due  to 
electricity  constraints  and  labour  disputes,  not  to  mention  the  impact  of  lower  international 
commodity prices and demand.  
Our external vulnerability is however mitigated somewhat by our level of reserves, measured 
in terms of import cover, which increased from 4.8 months in June to 5.2 months in September. 
Relatively low levels of foreign-denominated debt also limit the financial stability risks that can 
arise as a result of currency depreciation. Foreign debt of government remains low, at 9.8 per 
cent of total gross loan debt of national government, and 4.8 per cent relative to GDP as of the 
end  of  the  third  quarter.  Furthermore,  South  Africa’s  proportion  of  total  foreign  debt  as  a 
percentage  of GDP  is  also  relatively  low,  at  41.6  per  cent.  Unlike  in  some  other  EMs,  the 
issuance of international debt by non-financial corporates, while having picked up over the last 
couple  of  years,  does  not  present  a  significant  financial  stability  risk,  as  many  of  these 
corporates are commodity exporters or other multinationals likely to have hedged their foreign 
currency assets and liabilities.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   As outlined in the most recent Medium Term Budget Policy Statement (MTBPS), and echoed 
by Finance Minister Gordhan, South Africa remains committed to a path of fiscal consolidation. 
The budget deficit for 2014/2015 was 3.6 per cent of GDP, and is expected to reach 3.8 per 
cent  in  2015/2016,  before  narrowing  to  3.0  per cent  in  2018/2019.  Implementing the fiscal 
sustainability measures as detailed in the most recent Policy Statement, in conjunction with 
the structural reforms needed to address impediments to growth, are all crucial in these times 
and this is something that the authorities are cognisant of and remain committed to achieving.  
While South Africa is currently facing some headwinds, the fundamentals underpinning the 
South African economy, such as the strong macroeconomic policy framework and the strength 
of institutions, provide the platform from which to successfully implement structural reforms 
that will lift both potential and actual growth and enhance resilience to external shocks.  
The South African monetary policy outlook  
Over the past year, the South African Reserve Bank has faced the policy challenge of rising 
inflationary  pressures  amid  weak  domestic growth  and  significant  external  headwinds. The 
deterioration in the inflation outlook over the past year prompted the SARB to raise the repo 
rate  by  25  basis  points  in  July  and  again  in  November  2015.  Looking  ahead,  domestic 
constraints, exchange rate developments, the domestic drought and tighter financial conditions 
pose significant risks to the inflation outlook, and will continue to inform the monetary policy 
stance of the Bank in 2016.  
Headline inflation for 2015 is expected to have averaged 4.6 per cent, on the back of low oil 
prices, well within the target band of 3 to 6 per cent. However, the SARB forecasts show that 
inflation will pick-up over the next two years, averaging 6.0 per cent for 2016, with two breaches 
of the target, in the first and last quarter of the year. This anticipated rapid acceleration in 
headline inflation is as a result of base effects from the fall in fuel prices in 2014, coupled with 
rising  food  price  inflation,  which  is  forecast  at  6.0  per  cent  for  2016,  and  fairly  sticky  core 
inflation, which I’ll return to in a moment. I should add that these forecasts were presented to 
the  MPC  in  November  of  last  year,  and  that  following  the  recent  developments,  they  are 
currently being revised in preparation for our next MPC meeting later this month.  
According  to  the  latest  inflation  expectations  survey  in  the fourth quarter  of  2015, average 
headline CPI inflation expectations of analysts, business people and trade unions for 2016 
increased  marginally  by  0.1  percentage  points  to  6.2  per  cent,  respectively.  Average 
expectations for 2017 increased by a more substantial 0.3 percentage points to 6.2 per cent, 
driven largely by trade unions who raised their forecast by a noticeable 0.4 percentage points 
to 6.3 per cent. This uptick, while marginally above the upper target limit, nonetheless suggests 
that the risk of a “de-anchoring” of inflation expectations, from the upper end of the 3,0–6,0 per 
cent  target  range,  where  they  had  stabilized  in  recent  years,  cannot  be  overlooked. 
Furthermore, break-even inflation rates reflect elevated longer-run inflation expectations, with 
implied inflation rates from five- and ten-year bonds averaging 6.5 per cent over the past year.  
Despite  weak  growth  and  the  lack  of  demand  pressures,  inflation  in  South  Africa  remains 
elevated  partly  because  of  structural  rigidities  in  product  and  labour  markets.13  Product 
markets in South Africa are highly concentrated and are characterised by high and inflexible 
prices, which reduces the sensitivity of corporate pricing power to the business cycle and thus 
adversely impacts on inflationary pressures. Wage growth in many industries is not strongly 
correlated  to  productivity  growth,  and  the  shortage  of  skilled  workers  in  the  tertiary  sector 
means that average salary expectations – at 7.1 per cent for 2016 – remain above current and 
expected inflation. This of course has implications for core inflation and is part of the reason 
that it hasn’t slowed as much in 2015 as we would have hoped. After averaging 5.6 per cent 
                                                
13   Monetary Policy Review, SARB, November 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   in  2014,  core  inflation  is  expected  to  have  only  moderated  to  5.5  per  cent  in  2015,  which 
coincides with the Bank’s forecast for this year.  
As the MPC has clearly noted in its statements, the currency remains a key source of risk for 
inflation  in  South  Africa,  despite  some  recent  evidence  of  weaker  pass-through.  Rand 
depreciation is a major factor underpinning inflationary pressures in so far as they increase the 
domestic  prices  of  imported  goods.  Commodity  price  movements  also  lead  to  a  negative 
demand shock, which serves to offset inflationary pressures somewhat. Recent indications 
suggest, however, that the transmission of import prices to domestic prices has been more 
muted in South Africa and other emerging markets. In our case, this could be explained by a 
lack of demand pressures, represented by a negative output gap, which is forecast at –1.8 per 
cent of GDP for 2015.14 However, it is unclear as to whether this trend will continue, or if the 
full impact of the pass-through is merely delayed, and policy makers must thus remain vigilant.  
Earlier in 2015, there were signs of a relatively benign path for the exchange rate, as it held up 
well against the yen and euro. However, as the year progressed and the rand weakened across 
the board, inflation risks heightened and prompted the decision to resume the hiking cycle in 
July  2015.  In  general,  the  MPC  aims  to  see  through  the  first  round  effects  of  exogenous 
shocks. However, in the context of prolonged currency depreciation, the first and second round 
effects are harder to disentangle. As such, the Bank decided to increase the policy rate to 
minimise the risk of second-round effects and the need for a stronger reaction in the future.  
But the impact of a weaker currency is not limited to its effect on inflation. The currency impacts 
on real output through two channels, namely, trade and income. With regard to the former, 
theory states that currency depreciation will boost net exports, as exports become relatively 
cheaper in the world market. However, as a result of the prevailing structural constraints, the 
potential  benefits  from  depreciation  to  exporters  and  import-competing  firms  have  not  fully 
materialised. As far as the income effect on growth is concerned, currency depreciation, and 
the ensuing rise in inflation, will lead to a decline in real wages and real disposable income, all 
else being equal. This in turn would negatively impact on real household expenditure and real 
GDP growth. While some may question our decision to further raise rates in November given 
the weak growth outlook, the income channel highlights the growth enhancing effect of keeping 
inflation under control.  
The SARB decided to raise rates in July and November 2015 in order to prevent potential 
second-round inflationary effects from occurring and to anchor long-term inflation expectations, 
which remain uncomfortably close to or above the upper band of the inflation target. In general, 
risks to the inflation outlook for 2016 remain tilted to the upside and have recently deteriorated 
further. Rand depreciation, electricity tariff increases, and the impact of the drought on food 
prices are expected to outweigh the impact of lower oil prices. Nevertheless, the Bank has 
made it clear that any future decisions will be data dependent and driven by the developments 
in the inflation outlook.  
It may be useful to comment on this concept of data dependency, which some have argued 
was violated in the wake of our most recent policy adjustment in November 2015. We think of 
“data”  in  the  broader  sense  of  all  pieces  of  information  on  a  collective  basis  that  in  our 
judgement may have a bearing on the inflation trajectory in the medium term, rather than only 
in a narrower sense of looking at individual economic indicators as they are released. The 
latter  would  invariably  embed  a  “behind-the-curve  bias”,  which,  given  the  lags  with  which 
monetary policy works, would be contrary to the principle of needing to adopt a forward looking 
approach to monetary policy formulation, and also reduce policy flexibility.  
                                                
14   Monetary Policy Review, SARB, November 2015. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion  
In conclusion, there is no doubt that South Africa, as an emerging market economy, remains 
vulnerable to global economic and financial markets developments and currency pressures 
these uncertainties generate, as well as a number of domestic challenges to both growth and 
inflation outcomes. The opening weeks of 2016 suggest that the conduct of monetary policy in 
South Africa will be further complicated. Therefore utmost vigilance remains the order of the 
day, and risks will require close monitoring as we move deeper into 2016, and preparedness 
to take decisive action within our flexible inflation targeting framework if the key mandate of 
price  and financial  stability  comes  under  threat. Given  the  recent  escalation  of risks  to the 
inflation outlook, including since the last meeting of the MPC, the MPC will need to assess very 
carefully whether the current monetary policy stance remains appropriate.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
