  Erdem Başçi: Recent economic and financial developments in Turkey 
Speech by Mr Erdem Başçi, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at the 
press  conference  for  the  presentation  of  the  January  2016  Inflation  Report,  Ankara, 
26 January 2016. 
 Distinguished Guests, 
Welcome to the briefing held to convey the main messages of the Inflation Report of January 
2016. 
The report typically summarizes the economic outlook underlying monetary policy decisions, 
shares  our  evaluations  on  macroeconomic  developments  and  presents  our  medium-term 
inflation forecasts, which were revised in view of the developments in the last quarter, along 
with our monetary policy stance. In addition to the main text, the report includes seven boxes 
entailing up-to-date and interesting analyses on various topics. The boxes in this Report look 
into the sources of the changes in end-2015 inflation forecasts, offer projections about the 
repercussions of base effects on inflation in 2016, and analyze the dynamics of inflation in 
Turkey. Moreover, there are boxes that elaborate on Turkey’s changing export market share, 
study the relationship between consumer confidence indices and financial volatilities, analyze 
the effects of minimum wage hikes on overall wages, and scrutinize the relationship between 
loans  and  growth  by  sectors.  The  titles  of  the  boxes  are  shown  on  the  slide.  All  of  these 
analyses shed light on noteworthy issues in the Turkish economy. I strongly recommend that 
you read these boxes, which will soon be published on our website. 
I  would  like  to  commence  my  speech  by  reviewing  the  global  economic  outlook,  given  its 
ongoing influence on our policies. Volatilities in financial markets continue amid uncertainties 
about  global  monetary  policies  and  concerns  over  global  growth.  Interest  rate  volatility 
experienced some decline right after the anticipated first Fed rate hike in December 2015; 
however,  volatilities  began  increasing  as  of  early  2016  mainly  due  to  worries  about  the 
Chinese economy and geopolitical developments (Chart 1). The global economic slowdown 
since  2014  continued  into  the  second  half  of  2015,  especially  across  emerging  market 
economies.  Commodity  prices  remained  on  the  decrease  as  well.  Developing  economies 
were largely affected by the global fluctuations in this period. Portfolio inflows stayed weak 
and exchange rate volatilities remained high (Chart 2). 
The  effects  of  global  market  volatility  were  felt  in  the  Turkish  economy  as  well.  However, 
reduced domestic uncertainty and the CBRT’s tight monetary stance and other liquidity –and 
financial-stability– oriented policies limited these effects.  
Chart 1.  
VIX and US Interest Rate Volatility Index  
(MOVE Index) (Basis Points) 
Chart 2. 
Portfolio Flows to Emerging Economies 
(4-Week Moving Average, Billion USD)  
and Currency Volatility Index (JPMVXYEM) (Percent) 
Source:  Bloomberg.  
 Source: EPFR, Bloomberg 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Monetary policy and financial conditions  
1. 
As you all know, we released a road map on 18 August 2015 regarding the policies to be 
implemented before and after the normalization of global monetary policies. In line with this 
road map, we kept our policy stance tight against the inflation outlook, stabilizing for the FX 
liquidity, and supportive of financial stability. In order to simplify the operational framework of 
the liquidity policy, we terminated the lower interest rate on borrowing facilities provided for 
primary dealers by the CBRT and simplified collateral conditions following the announcement 
of  the  road  map.  We  aimed  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  banks’  liquidity  management  by 
adopting the use of foreign exchange deposits as collaterals against Turkish lira transactions. 
Moreover,  we  took  further  steps  to  support  foreign  exchange  liquidity,  core  liabilities  and 
long-term borrowing. 
In view of inflation expectations, the pricing behavior and other factors affecting inflation, we 
maintained the tight monetary and liquidity stance throughout 2015. Accordingly, we kept the 
one-week repo rate, the overnight lending rate and the overnight borrowing rate unchanged 
at  7.5,  10.75  and  7.25  percent,  respectively,  during  the  last  quarter  of  2015  and  the  first 
month of 2016. One-week repo auctions continued to be the main tool for the CBRT funding, 
while the share of the marginal funding remained high (Chart 3). Thus, the average funding 
rate settled at around 8.9 percent as of January 2016, higher than the one-week repo rate. 
Additionally, we kept the interbank overnight repo rates at the upper band of the interest rate 
corridor  (Chart  4).  Our  future  monetary  policy  decisions  will  be  conditional  on  the  inflation 
outlook.  Taking  into  account  inflation  expectations,  the  pricing  behavior  and  the  course  of 
other factors affecting inflation, we will maintain our tight monetary policy stance as long as 
deemed necessary. 
Chart 3.  
CBRT Funding*  
(2-Week Moving Average, Billion TL) 
Chart 4. 
CBRT Rates and BIST Interbank O/N Repo Rates  
(Percent) 
*Marginal funding is O/N funding quoted at the upper limit of the corridor.  
Source: CBRT. 
 Source: BIST, CBRT. 
 The  yield  curve,  which  was  nearly  flat  in  the  last  quarter  of  2015  as  in  the  entire  year, 
assumed a positive slope in January 2016 (Chart 5). This was mainly due to long-term rates 
that rose amid the uncertainty surrounding global markets, geopolitical risks and heightened 
inflation expectations, which also affected the spread between 5-year market rates and the 
BIST overnight interbank rates. After remaining negative across the fourth quarter of 2015, 
the spread turned slightly positive in the first weeks of January as a result of rising 5-year 
market rates (Chart  6).  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 5. 
Yield Curve Between October 28, 2015- January 22, 
2016 (Percent) 
Chart 6.  
Money Market Rates  
(Percent, 5-Day MA) 
Source: Bloomberg, 
Maturity (Year) 
 Source: Bloomberg, BIST. 
 Regarding our Turkish lira liquidity policy, there has been some decline in banks’ FX swap 
deals with the market for short-term funds owing partly to changes we made to the guidelines 
for  the  use  of  FX  deposits  as  collateral  following  the  announcement  of  our  road  map. 
Considering that banks’ need for FX swaps can be further reduced through a rise in the use 
of this option and in the limits allotted to banks, we increased these limits from USD 3 billion 
to  USD  3.6  billion  and  from  EUR  900  million  to  EUR  1.8  billion  as  of  7  January  2016. 
Moreover,  we  raised  the  maximum  ratio  of  50  percent  that  banks  are  able  to  pledge  as 
FX-denominated collateral against their borrowings at the CBRT Interbank Money Market to 
70 percent effective 13 January 2016. We expect this arrangement to play a stabilizing role 
against  the  stress  likely  to  be  experienced  in  credit  risk  pricing  due  to  global  factors  and 
boost  the  demand  for  FX-denominated  bonds  issued  abroad  by  the  Treasury.  Detailed 
information about our Turkish lira liquidity policy of 2016 can be found in the “Monetary and 
Exchange Rate Policy for 2016” we published on 9 December 2015. 
Besides interest rate and liquidity policies, we continue to promote prudential borrowing by 
employing other policy instruments that support financial stability. We have enacted a series 
of measures since end-2014 with regard to FX required reserves and remuneration rates on 
TL required reserves which aim to support core liabilities and extend the maturity of non-core 
liabilities. These policies have proved effective in extending the maturity of FX liabilities and 
suspending  the  upward  trend  in  the  loan  to  deposit  ratio  (Chart  7).  In  order  to  reduce  the 
intermediation costs of the banking system and provide additional support to core liabilities, 
we raised the remuneration rates on TL required reserves by 50 basis points each month in 
September, October and December 2015. Additionally,  we made some adjustments to the 
coverage  of  reserve  requirements  on  9  January  2016.  Accordingly,  some  funds  at 
participation  and  investment  banks  were  made  subject  to  reserve  requirements  and  the 
coverage of non-core liabilities was expanded. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Chart 7.  
Maturities of Non-Deposit Liabilities  
(Percent) 
 Chart 8. 
ROM Reserves, FX Deposit Facility and External FX Liabilities 
of the Banking Sector Due in 1 Year 
(Billion USD) 
Source: CBRT. 
 Source: CBRT. 
 In  the  road  map  released  in  August,  we  also  included  some  measures  to  enhance  the 
flexibility of the foreign exchange liquidity management. To this end, we hiked the transaction 
limits  for  banks  at  the  CBRT  Foreign  Exchange  and  Banknotes  Markets  on  1  September 
2015. Consequently, the sum of FX deposit limits allocated to banks and gold and foreign 
exchange assets held at the CBRT under the reserve option mechanism (ROM) reached a 
level that is considerably above the external debt payments of banks which are due within 
one  year  (Chart  8).  Moreover,  in  the  “Monetary  and  Exchange  Rate  Policy  for  2016”,  we 
announced further steps to strengthen the stabilizing feature of the ROM. All these measures 
taken in line with the road map have increased Turkey’s resilience against global volatility.  
Amid an economic environment fraught with prolonged global uncertainties, it is important to 
contain  negative  spillovers  into  the  Turkish  economy.  In  terms  of  the  fundamentals  of  the 
economy,  the  significant  improvement  in  the  current  account  balance  over  the  past  few 
years, reasonable growth rates in loans and a loan composition that supports price stability 
and  financial  stability  all  contributed  to  reducing  economic  fragilities.  These  developments 
were due to the tight monetary policy and the measures taken regarding financial stability as 
well  as  the  sharp  fall  in  commodity  prices  in  the  case  of  the  current  account  balance. 
Moreover,  the  effective  use  of  the  measures  presented  in  the  August  road  map  has 
alleviated  the  excessive  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates  and  loan  rates.  Our  current  tight 
monetary policy reduces the economy’s sensitivity to global shocks, thus supporting financial 
stability. We maintain the view that the tight monetary policy may be implemented within a 
narrower  interest  rate  corridor,  should  the  global  volatility  decline  persistently  or  policy 
measures  that  would  maintain  and  improve  the  gains  in  external  balance  and  financial 
stability be implemented effectively. 
In  2015,  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  extended  to  the  non-financial  sector,  which 
decelerated  partly  due  to  our  tight  monetary  policy  stance,  and  the  macroprudential 
measures  introduced  by  the  BRSA  regarding  consumer  loans  excluding  mortgage,  fell  to 
13.6  percent,  adjusted  for  the  effect  of  exchange  rates.  The  noticeable  slowdown  across 
consumer  and  commercial  loans  that  started  in  the  third  quarter  continued  into  the  fourth 
quarter,  causing  these  loans  to  post  an  annual  growth  rate  of  8.7  and  16.2  percent, 
respectively, at the end of the year (Chart 9). Thus, commercial loans continued to grow at a 
faster  pace than  consumer  loans  in the fourth quarter  of  2015, following the  same  pattern 
since early 2014. We expect that these developments in loan growth and loan composition 
will contribute to the rebalancing process and financial stability as well as limit the effects of 
the  recent  cost  pressures  on  inflation.  The  annualized  growth  rates  of  13-week  averages 
show  that  consumer  and  commercial  loans  lagged  far  behind  past  years’  averages;  the 
former across 2015, the latter mainly in the second half of 2015. However, as reflected by 
13-week averages, both loans, particularly commercial loans, saw a modest rise during the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  last  quarter  of  2015  (Chart  10).  The  recent  adjustments  made  to  the  risk  weights  of 
consumer loans are likely to support loan growth in the upcoming period. Yet, due to ongoing 
tight financial conditions, we expect annual loan growth rates to remain at reasonable levels 
in the coming months. 
Chart 9.  
Annual Credit Growth Rates  
(Adjusted for Exchange Rate, Percent) 
 Chart 10.  
Annualized Credit Growth Rates (Adjusted for Exchange 
Rate, 13-Week Moving Average, Percent) 
Source: CBRT. 
 Source: CBRT. 
 Macroeconomic developments and main assumptions  
2. 
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  macroeconomic  outlook  and  our  assumptions  on  which  our 
forecasts  are  based.  First,  I  will  summarize  the  recent  inflation  developments,  and  then 
continue  with  the  domestic  and  foreign  demand  outlook  upon  which  we  based  our 
projections.  
In the fourth quarter of 2015, consumer price inflation (CPI) increased by about 0.86 points 
quarter-on-quarter to 8.81 percent, overshooting both the projections of the October Inflation 
Report  and  the  uncertainty  band  around  the  year-end  inflation  target  (Chart  11). 
Unprocessed food prices were the main drivers of this higher-than-forecasted rise in annual 
inflation. In fact, inflation excluding unprocessed food and tobacco was close to the October 
Inflation  Report  forecast  in  this  period  (Chart  12).  The  lagged  effects  of  the  Turkish  lira 
depreciation were particularly evident through the core goods channel. Yet, the continued fall 
of import prices in the fourth quarter limited the rise in CPI inflation. 
Chart 11.  
October Inflation Forecasts and Realizations (Percent) 
Chart 12.  
October Inflation Forecasts and Realizations  
Excluding Unprocessed Food and Tobacco (Percent) 
* Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
Source: TURKSTAT, CBRT. 
   In the fourth quarter, despite the decline in USD-denominated import prices, cost pressures 
on  inflation  continued  due  to  food  prices  and  exchange  rate  developments.  We  see  that 
these  rising  cost  factors  limit  the  improvement  of  the  underlying  trend  of  core  inflation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  (Chart 13).  Furthermore,  we  will  monitor  closely  the  effects  of  the  adjustment  in  minimum 
wages on overall wages and on inflation (Chart 14). 
Chart 13.  
Core Inflation Indicators SCA-H and SCA-I 
(Seasonally Adjusted, Annualized 3 Month Average,  
Annual Percentage Change) 
Chart 14.  
Real Gross Minimum Wage  
(2003 Prices, TL) 
Source: TURKSTAT, CBRT 
 *Real gross minimum wage is obtained by dividing the average gross 
minimum wage at current prices to the consumer price index in a given 
year. Consumer price index is taken as 2003=1. Consumer prices in 2016 
are based on January 2016 Inflation Report projections. 
Source: Ministry of Labor and Social Security, TurkStat, CBRT. 
 In sum, annual inflation increased in the fourth quarter due to an ongoing rise in food prices 
as  well  as  the  lagged  effects  of  the Turkish  lira  depreciation  throughout 2015. We  believe 
that  the  upcoming  inflation  outlook  will  depend  on  both  the  volatility  in  energy  and 
unprocessed  food  prices  and  the  effects  of  the  global  market  uncertainty  on  inflation 
expectations.  In  addition,  the  large  adjustment  made  to  net  minimum  wages  for  2016  will 
have an impact on inflation. Therefore, we expect inflation to remain elevated for some time. 
At this juncture, in addition to maintaining our tight monetary policy stance, fighting against 
the structural elements of inflation also remains important.  
Notwithstanding  the  significant  external  shocks  in  recent  years,  we  were  able  to  limit  the 
worsening in inflation and inflation expectations thanks to our current policy framework, but 
price  stability  is  yet  to  be  achieved.  Ten  years  of  experience  with  inflation  targeting  has 
shown  that  the  fight  against  inflation  requires  collaboration  from  all  relevant  parties.  We 
believe  that  government  income  and  wage  policies  as  well  as  structural  issues  related  to 
food prices are important components in this endeavor. Moreover, macroprudential policies 
towards  prudential  borrowing  also  facilitate  the  fight  against  inflation  by  supporting  a 
balanced growth. Thus, bringing inflation permanently down to the 5-percent target requires 
all institutions to continue resolutely with the efforts made in recent years. 
According to the GDP data of the third quarter of 2015, economic activity proved more robust 
compared  to  the  outlook  presented  in  the  October  Inflation  Report,  and  the  GDP  grew 
steadily by 1.3 and 4 percent on quarterly and annual bases, respectively (Chart 15). On the 
spending front, final domestic demand increased modestly in the third quarter, while external 
demand contributed positively to the GDP after three quarters (Chart 16).  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 15.  
GDP and Final Domestic Demand  
(Real, Seasonally Adjusted, Billion TL) 
Chart 16.  
Contribution of Demand Components to Year-on-Year 
GDP Growth (Percentage Points) 
 
Source: TURKSTAT. 
 Source: TURKSTAT. 
 The demand outlook for 2016 leads to expectations of stronger economic activity compared 
to 2015. Amid waning domestic uncertainties, rising consumer and investor confidence may 
boost domestic demand. Revival of investments, at least partially, in 2016 that were delayed 
in  2015  due  to  domestic  uncertainties  and  the  effect  of  the  strong  post-crisis  employment 
performance coupled with the recent wage developments on the income channel are likely to 
support domestic demand. Moreover, the projected fall in the current account deficit and the 
strong public finances also provide room for policy responses against possible shocks. The 
rebound in the EU economy continues to support our exports, while the uncertainties related 
to  the  Middle  East  and  Russia  constitute  downside  risks  (Chart  17).  Moreover,  volatility  in 
global financial markets and concerns over global growth may deteriorate financial conditions 
and  foreign  demand.  In  sum,  we  expect  that  in  2016,  domestic  demand  will  prove  slightly 
stronger  than  2015,  while  foreign  demand  will,  despite  the  existence  of  geopolitical  risks, 
recover  owing  to  the  recovery  in  the  EU.  Accordingly,  we  project  that  maintained 
macroprudential  measures  coupled  with  favorable  developments  in  the  terms  of  trade  will 
support the ongoing improvement in the current account deficit (Chart 18). 
Chart 17.  
Imports by EU 
(Real, Seasonally Adjusted, 3-Month Average 2010=100) 
Chart 18.  
Current Account Balance (CAB)  
(12-Month Cumulative,  Billion USD) 
Source: Eurostat. 
  Source: CBRT. 
 As you all know, food, energy and import prices also play a great role in inflation forecasts. 
Therefore, before moving on to forecasts, I will briefly talk about our assumptions regarding 
these variables. 
The downtrend in commodity prices in international markets, chiefly oil prices, continued in 
the last quarter of 2015 as well. Stemming mostly from the lack of demand from China and 
other  developing  economies,  this  trend  caused  import  prices  in  the  Turkish  economy  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  recede in USD terms. Therefore, we made downward revisions to assumptions for crude oil 
prices  and  USD-denominated  import  prices  With  regard  to  annual  averages,  we  reduced 
crude  oil  price  assumptions  from  USD  54  to  USD  37  for  2016.  Also,  we  revised  the 
assumptions  for  annual  percentage  changes  in  average  import  prices  downwards  by 
4.9 points for 2016. We revised the assumed inflation for food prices upwards from 8 percent 
to 9 percent for 2016 due mostly to the effects of minimum wage adjustments on costs and 
demand (Chart 19). 
Chart 19. Revisions in Oil and Export Prices* 
Oil Prices* (USD/barrel) 
Import Prices* (USD, 2010=100)  
* Shaded area indicates the forecast horizon. 
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
  * Shaded area indicates the forecast horizon. 
Source: Bloomberg, CBRT. 
 Effective as of January 2016, some items with administered prices saw price increases. We 
estimate that the additional effect on the year-end inflation of the portion of these increases 
that remain above 5 percent will be 0.4 points in 2016. In turn, we monitor meticulously how 
the  rise  in  the  minimum  wage  will  affect  the  budget  balance  and  tax  adjustments.  As  the 
extent  of  the  effect  of  wage  developments  on  production  costs,  aggregate  demand  and 
inflation  depends  on  the  fiscal  policy  and  the  change  in  employment,  we  monitor  the 
interaction  between  the rise  in  minimum  wages and  the fiscal  policy  closely.  Our  medium-
term  projections  are  based  on  an  outlook  that  tax  adjustments  and  administered  prices, 
excluding those already announced in January, will not exceed the inflation target and will 
remain consistent with automatic pricing mechanisms. The medium-term fiscal policy stance 
is  based  on  the  Medium  Term  Program  projections  covering  the  2016–2018  period. 
Conditional on this outlook, we expect inflation to improve gradually and reach the 5-percent 
target in the medium term. 
Inflation and the monetary policy outlook  
3. 
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  inflation  and  output gap forecasts  based  on  the  outlook  I 
have described so far. 
Given a decisive policy stance that focuses on bringing inflation down, the 5-percent target is 
expected to be achieved gradually; inflation is likely to stabilize around 5 percent as of 2018 
after  falling  to  7.5  percent  in  2016  and  to  6  percent  in  2017.  In  this  context,  inflation  is 
expected to be, with 70 percent probability, between 6.1 percent and 8.9 percent (with a mid-
point of 7.5 percent) at end-2016 and between 4.2 percent and 7.8 percent (with a mid-point 
of 6 percent) (Chart 20). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Chart 20.  
Inflation and Output Gap Forecasts 
 *Shaded region indicates the 70 percent confidence interval for the forecast. 
 We  revised  the  year-end  inflation  forecasts  for  2016  and  2017  upwards  by  1  point  and 
0.5 points, respectively, compared to the October Inflation Report forecasts. As I have just 
mentioned,  driven  mostly  by  oil  prices,  USD-denominated  import  prices  have  registered  a 
considerable  decline  since  October  2015.  When  analyzed  jointly  with  exchange  rate 
developments, the downward revision in the assumption for oil and import prices is expected 
to pull down the end-2016 inflation forecast by 0.6 points compared to the October Report 
forecast.  On  the  other  hand,  the  portion  of  January  2015  public  price  adjustments  which 
exceeds the inflation target, is likely to push the end-2016 inflation forecast up by 0.4 points. 
Another  influential  factor  on  forecasts  in  this  period  proved  to  be  the  rise  in  net  minimum 
wages.  Given  the  announced  support  by  the  government  and  the  effects  of  this  minimum 
wage rise on demand and costs to the employer, we revised the end-2016 inflation forecast 
upwards by 1 point. Considering the effect of the minimum-wage-rise, we attribute 0.3 points 
of this to the food inflation, which we raised from 8 to 9 percent for 2016. Lastly, we estimate 
that  a  higher-than-projected  actual  inflation  rate  at  end-2015  compared  to  the  October 
Inflation Report forecast coupled with the rise in core inflation indicators will push the end-
2016 inflation by 0.2 points. In short, of the total change in the year-end inflation forecast for 
2016 compared to the previous reporting period, 1 point stemmed from the minimum-wage-
hike, 0.4 points from administered price changes that are over and above the inflation target 
and 0.2 points from the rise in the underlying trend of inflation. Meanwhile, the revision in the 
assumptions for TL-denominated oil and import prices had a downward effect by 0.6 points.  
In addition to these forecasts, we discuss alternative scenarios on the inflation outlook and 
the global economy in the Risks section of the Inflation Report. You can examine the Report 
for details.  
While concluding my remarks, I would like to thank all my colleagues who contributed to the 
Report,  primarily  those  at  the  Research  and  Monetary  Policy  Department  as  well  as  the 
members  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  and  thank  every  one  of  you  for  your 
participation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
