  François Villeroy de Galhau: Europe at a crossroads – how to improve 
economic governance and growth performance of the Eurozone? 
Presentation  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
German Institute for Economic Research – DIW Berlin, Berlin, 8 June 2016. 
 I am delighted by the opportunity, kindly offered by DIW, to share some remarks on Europe 
here in Berlin. 
As  you  may  know,  I  have  strong  ties  with  Germany.  In  particular,  I  completely  share  the 
German culture about the importance of responsibility and long-term vision. 
At this juncture we probably all agree on two things – and my focus today will be that these 
two things are closely intertwined: 
• 
• 
I want to pay tribute to Helmut Schmidt, who said in October 2011: “There was a failure to set 
the  economic  rules  of  the  game  for  the  currency  union.  A  powerful  authority  with 
responsibility for fiscal and economic policy was not set up.”1 
I will first argue that monetary policy has been doing its fair share (I). I will then discuss the 
need for a “full coordination” of national economic policies in the Euro area, and discuss what 
concrete progress can be made (II). Finally, turning to private risk-sharing in the Eurozone, I 
will focus on the importance of building an efficient Financing and Investment Union (III). 
Monetary policy cannot be the only game in town. 
Although Monetary Union is a success, Economic Union remains to be built. 
Monetary policy is doing its duty, and has already done a lot 
I. 
I am well aware that some recent monetary policy decisions of the Governing Council are 
hotly debated in Germany. The expression of such criticism reflects, at a minimum, the need 
to  explain  our  monetary  policy  decisions  better.  However,  I’d  like  to  argue  that  our  recent 
monetary policy decisions are very much in line with the principles of stability that German 
culture incarnates so well. Let me elaborate on three of these principles. 
First,  independence.  The  divergent  inflation  performance  of  the  major  industrialized 
economies  after  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  had  a  profound  effect  on  the 
subsequent  conduct  of  central  banks.  On  the  practical  side,  Germany  was  seen  to  have 
navigated the so-called stagflation episode of the 1970s considerably better than others. The 
Bundesbank was role model for the independence of other central banks. 
Second,  a  clear  mandate  for  price  stability.  The  Eurosystem  was  built  on  these 
foundations  as  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  treaty.  We  also  adopted,  as  early  as  2003,  a 
transparent quantitative definition of price stability as an inflation rate close to but below 2% 
over the medium term – very close to the present definition of the US Fed, the BoE or the 
BoJ: so this is nothing new or specific to the ECB. 
From  1999  to  2011,  the  HICP  inflation  rate  averaged  2%  in  the  euro  area,  remarkably 
consistent with the objective. 
                                                
1  Helmut  Schmidt;  Remarks  at  the  Farewell  event  for  the  ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet;  October  19, 
2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   But since then, the Eurosystem has struggled to match this performance. Inflation has 
been well below 2% for 3 years now – with exactly the same phenomenon in Germany itself 
– and this fall cannot be explained completely by the decline in oil prices. At the same time, 
inflation  expectations  have  gradually  drifted  down  over  the  last  three  years.  Our  mandate 
imposes a duty to react, in order to protect the Eurozone economy – including the German 
one – from the lethal danger of deflation. 
Third, patience within a medium to long-term perspective. In this volatile world we live in, 
our  policy  reactions  are  not  the  result  of  short-term  economic  fluctuations,  market 
overreactions, media headlines or poll results. Our credibility is also symmetric. If we tolerate 
long  deviations  of  inflation  under  2%  now,  there  is  a  risk  that  in  the  future,  when  inflation 
wanders  above  2%,  our  determination  to  bring  it  back  to  close  to  but  below  2%  lacks 
credibility. As Romer and Romer, two US monetary economists, forcefully argued in a recent 
paper2, the most dangerous idea for central bankers is to indulge in the idea that monetary 
policy can do little against shifts in the output gap, be they negative or positive. In retrospect, 
there is sound evidence now that the Great Depression in the 30’s and the Great Inflation of 
the 70’s were sustained by this belief. Credibility and anchored inflation expectations require 
that we do not give credit to the past “toothpaste” view of monetary policy – contractionary 
policy cannot fight inflation once it is out – nor symmetrically to the current “string” view of 
monetary policy – whereby accommodative policy cannot fight deflation. 
So, our results have to be judged over the medium term. We are only fifteen months after 
the real start of QE in the Eurozone but we can already see some positive effects. According 
to  Eurosystem  staff  assessments,  without  the  APP  (Asset  Purchasing  Program)  inflation 
would have been negative in 2015, more than half of a percentage point lower in 2016, and 
around half of a percentage point lower in 2017. 
If  we  pursue  our  program,  what  should  we  expect  down  the  road?  The  US  Federal 
Reserve has shown us the way, taking a series of very important steps to increase monetary 
stimulus  even  after  it  brought  its  policy  interest  rate  to  zero.  The  Fed  issued  forward 
                                                
2  C.  Romer  and  D.  Romer  “The  Most  Dangerous  Idea  in  Federal  Reserve  History:  Monetary  Policy  Doesn’t 
Matter” American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 2013, 103(3): 55–60. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  guidance to signal a protracted period of low interest rates and began QE. The US logically 
leads the way as it was the first epicenter of the Great recession. 
The  US  QE  began  in  November  2008  and  core  inflation  troughed  in  October  2010. 
Unemployment has steadily fallen since then and the inflation rate has returned towards 2%, 
which is the Federal Reserve’s inflation target. Only then could the FOMC stop increasing its 
balance sheet, raise the Federal Funds rate from its floor and so initiate an exit strategy. 
Obviously we, in the Eurozone, are not at the same point of the business cycle but we are 
travelling along the same road for monetary policy. 
 Some  consider  these  unconventional  policies  in  the  euro  area  are  counterproductive 
because  ultra-low  interest  rates  hurt  savers  and  banks.  However,  we  have  monitored 
closely banks’ profitability and – taking into account ALL elements of monetary policy 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
– there is in 2015 no evidence that this is doing harm overall. Moreover, the global long-
term  real  rate  of  interest  has  been  falling  for  around  30  years  reflecting  an  imbalance 
between a strong desire to save and a relative scarcity of those willing to borrow to invest. As 
we all know, this imbalance is extremely acute in Germany where this surplus is in the order 
of 8 % of German GDP. 
Above all, we cannot base our decisions on their outcomes for particular groups but 
on  the  common  good.  Economic  activity  does  not  depend  only  on  savers  but  also  on 
entrepreneurs,  workers,  homebuyers  and  borrowers  who  benefit  from  low  interest  rates. 
Eventually, these policies will lead to levels of inflation more consistent with our mandate and 
will  call  for  higher  interest  rates  both  in  nominal  and  in  real  terms.  In  order  to  have 
sustainably higher interest rates tomorrow, we must have them low today. 
That being said, not all unconventional instruments are legitimate. There are limits on 
how  negative  interest  rates  can  go,  as  Mario  Draghi  stressed  it.  So  this  type  of 
unconventional  measure,  although  useful,  should  be  used  with  care.  And  I  think  that  so-
called “helicopter money” would bring more harm than good: we do not need it and it is 
not on the table. 
The real issue is that monetary policy cannot do everything. We have done our bit but cannot 
create the lasting economic growth which underpins prosperity, including for savers. For this 
we need other policy makers to act. 
At a time when the euro area is experiencing both a negative output gap and a large external 
surplus  –  i.e.  an  excess  of  savings  over  investment,  we  must  reflect  on  how  abundant 
European savings could be put to the most productive use for investment in Europe. 
Abundant Savings in the Euro Area
Current account balance
(% of GDP)
10,0
7,5
5,0
2,5
0,0
-2,5
-5,0
-7,5
-10,0
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009
2011
2013
2015
Source : Eurostat, Banque de France
Spain
France
Italy
Germany
Euro area
10,0
7,5
5,0
2,5
0,0
-2,5
-5,0
-7,5
-10,0
 This is why we need to foster more extensive private risk-sharing in the Eurozone, which 
requires a more integrated financing and investment framework. As the so-called Fratzscher 
report  on  Increasing  investment  in  Germany  puts  it:  “the  key  to  a  sustainable  recovery  in 
Europe  lies  in  faster  growth  that  must  be  bolstered  first  and  foremost  through  a  joint 
investment and modernization campaign “. I will come to this issue. 
But  we  also  need  to  achieve  better  coordination  of  public  policies.  To  that  effect,  we 
need to think through the concrete role of a euro area Finance Minister could play. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 II. 
Why we need a “full coordination” institution in the euro area, embodied by a 
finance minister 
 Clearly, monetary policy cannot be a substitute for economic policy coordination or for 
the lack of reforms. If only for that reason central bankers need to take part in this debate, 
although taking action will obviously remain a decision for political leaders. This is why our 
focus should be on the Eurozone economic governance and coordination. 
We  know  there  is  deep  political  resistance  to  sharing  fiscal  resources  and 
sovereignty, as well as a rising Euroscepticism. This is why we need to make the economic 
case.  This  discussion  is  not  about  “more  Brussels”,  but  it  is  very  concretely  about  more 
growth and jobs in Europe. 
The euro crisis has revealed how unprepared we were. The absence of coordination has 
indeed a genuine economic cost.  Several  approaches  point  to  a  significant  cost  of  non-
coordination, in the order of 2 to 5 % of GDP since the crisis, and therefore millions of jobs. 
To bring the debate forward, some principled choices have to be made. 
First:  making  parallel  progress  on  both  domestic  reforms  and,  [not  “or”],  European 
coordination. This is the cornerstone of, for instance, any French-German agreement: to be 
fair,  the  French  call  for  Germany  to  support  coordination,  and  the  German  doubt  about 
French  reforms,  have  been  and  are  still  well-founded.  This  requires  overcoming  distrust 
between countries and bringing together both aspects under the same umbrella, namely a 
common institution. 
Second, we must recognize that institutions with a mandate are superior to rules without 
institutions,  as  underlined  by  Mario  Draghi  while  discussing  the  fundamental  difference 
between  a  monetary  policy  institution  and  fiscal  rules.  To  bolster  policy  consistency  and 
coordination,  we  admittedly  need  simpler  rules.  But  they  should  be  supported  by  strong 
institutions with discretionary powers. 
Third, there is room for an intermediate level of integration, as shown  in a simple but 
illustrative matrix: 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
I  would  call  it  “full  coordination  of  national  policies”,  a  presently  missing  link  between 
integration, as we have for monetary policy decision-making, and rule-based surveillance, as 
it is currently the case for national fiscal policies in Europe and which is clearly lacking teeth. 
And I don’t think we are ready for a fully-fledged fiscal union with a common fiscal capacity 
and the great mutual trust it requires. 
In addition to the completion of banking union, the needed part of EMU reform is to set up a 
strong institution to fully coordinate national fiscal and structural policies. It would help 
to make the euro area more than the sum of its parts. Jean Monnet famously declared that 
“nothing is possible without men, but nothing lasts without institutions.” 
The idea of a Finance Minister of the Euro area is not new: Marcel Fratzscher and the DIW 
for  instance  recently  advocated  for  “a  joint  finance  minister”,  aware  that  a  single  currency 
“requires an economic convergence process and close coordination of economic policy with 
common rules”3. But let me specify her/his concrete tasks. I see four of them. 
First, the Minister would be in charge of preparing the euro area-wide collective strategy 
to  fulfill  its  sustainable  growth  mandate  and  collectively  agreeing  the  division  of  tasks 
through the setting of individual performance targets for Member States. Nobody seriously 
disputes  that  a  collective  strategy  involving  more  structural  reforms  in  some  countries 
including France, and more public investment in others including Germany would make for a 
better policy mix for sustainable growth and employment in Europe. 
Second, the Finance Minister would be responsible for supervising the implementation of 
the  collective  strategy,  using  adequate  instruments  to  provide  symmetric  incentives. 
Negative  incentives  would  include  the  existing  sanction  mechanisms,  and  could  be 
broadened  in  contractual  procedures,  already  put  forward  in  the  2013  Franco-German 
contribution  on  EMU,  or  in  Chancellor  Merkel’s4  “binding  reform  contracts”  proposal.  A 
positive  incentive  could  be  for  instance  the  access  to  a  euro  area  ”Convergence  Fund”, 
through which Member States could benefit from common funding. 
Third,  the  Finance  Minister  would  be  responsible  for  implementing  centralized  crisis 
management.  A  Finance  Minister  for  the  euro  area  would  naturally  be  in  charge  of 
overseeing European Stability Mechanism operations. 
Last, while moving towards further integration, the Minister could be given the authority for 
managing  a  euro  area  Convergence  Fund,  progressively  evolving  towards  a  euro 
budget. 
Further  integration  and  democratic  accountability  should  move  forward  in  parallel. 
These institutional changes obviously require a new Treaty. 
                                                
3  Marcel Fratzscher, Lessons for Europe from German Monetary Union, DIW Economic Bulletin 27.2015 
4  Angela Merkel’s first parliamentary speech of the third term, December 18 2013.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  A legitimate institution with genuine admin. capacity
Legitimacy:
Appointment
process and 
international role
Capacity:
Treasury
administration 
and advisory
councils
Accountability:
Stronger
democratic
control over  euro 
area affairs
 First, we need a legitimacy-enhancing appointment process. The Finance Minister could 
thus be appointed for a five-year period by the European Council acting by qualified majority 
on  a  proposal  from  the  president  of  the  EU  Commission.  The  new  appointment  would  be 
subject to the formal approval of the European Parliament, and the Finance Minister would 
be member of the Commission, as well as chair of the Eurogroup. 
Second, the euro area Finance Minister would need to be backed by a genuine Treasury 
administration.  Such  a  civil  service  would  also  benefit  from  the  public  advice  of  two 
independent bodies, the European Fiscal Board and the Competitiveness Council. 
Last, if we succeed in implementing further integration, we will need stronger democratic 
control over euro area affairs. To this end, we will need to consider a euro area format of 
the  European  Parliament.  Relationships  between  euro  area  MPs  and  national  parliaments 
will also need to be enhanced. 
As I said, not only do we need to better coordinate public policies, but we also have to foster 
private  risk-sharing  throughout  the  Eurozone.  To  recall  Wolfgang  Schaüble,  European 
leaders  need  to  show  “that  balanced  budgets,  growth  and  investment  are  not  mutually 
exclusive, but rather go hand-in-hand”5. 
 
                                                 
5  Wolfgang  Schaüble,  “Managing  Europe  –  What  is  Germany’s  responsibility?”,  speech  at  the  LSE, 
March 3 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Building an efficient financing and investment union for tomorrow 
III.  
We  need  to  improve  investment  financing  in  the  EU.  Our  efforts  should  be  directed 
towards financing growth and innovation, and towards finding the right mix between debt and 
equity financing, while still preserving financial stability and consumer protection. In the EU, 
the European Commission has launched the Investment Plan – so called Juncker Plan – and 
the Capital Markets Union (CMU). 
Until now, these initiatives have shown results, but they are not enough. A more ambitious 
approach would bring together the CMU, the Banking Union and the Juncker Plan. This is 
why I suggest to think of a Financing and Investment Union. It is essential to clarify two 
objectives: (i) the diversification of financing for firms, and (ii) the strengthening of the euro 
area. As we argued in our joint article with Jens Weidmann in February, this Financing and 
Investment Union – including more equity financing – seems to be the best way to match the 
abundance of savings and the lack of appropriate investment financing. 
First,  let’s  focus  on  the  diversification  of  financing.  The  starting  point  should  be  firms’ 
needs. New financing of business investment, which is one of the keys to innovation, must 
be enabled. There should be above all, more equity financing. 
    It is an essential fact that the equity share of corporate financing in Europe is half as 
large as in the United States: 52% of GDP in the EA, vs. 121% in the US. 
This  is  unfortunate  because  equity  financing  is  the  best  way  to  share  risks  and 
opportunities,  as  well  as  to  support  innovation.  “Catch-up”  growth,  as  in  many 
Emerging  Markets,  can  be  financed  by  debt.  But  an  economy  standing  at  the 
technological frontier, as in the U.S. or hopefully as in Europe, is better financed by 
equity: as innovation is more risky, its funding must have an upside. 
The Commission’s Innobarometer survey suggests that funding is the main barrier 
for  promoting  R&D  and  innovation  in  Europe.  What  can  we  actually  do?  Among 
others,  taxation  policies  could  be  revised  in  favor  of  equity  funding.  Innovative 
schemes also need to be developed at European level, such as European venture 
capital funds, in order to support the creation and growth of new businesses. 
Furthermore, a Financing and Investment union is about strengthening the euro area. 
Short term banking flows have risen after the introduction of the Euro, but the financial crisis 
demonstrated that the capital markets’ channel of risk sharing was still underdeveloped in the 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  euro  area.  From  the  reality  of  financial  fragmentation  and 
its  negative  economic 
consequences,  we  can  draw  one  obvious  conclusion:  equity  financing  is  clearly  the 
instrument that best allows to smooth asymmetric shocks in a Monetary Union. Its benefits 
are many (ECB Financial Integration Report 2016): it is less volatile that debt financing and it 
enhances the companies’ resilience to adverse conditions. 
The  integrated  US  equity  market  for  instance  cushions  about  40%  of  a  state-specific 
economic shock, as a company’s profits and losses are distributed to owners all over the US. 
In the euro area, this form of risk-sharing is virtually non-existent. 
  To conclude, let me quote Robert Mundell6, father of the theory of optimal currency areas. 
He  did  acknowledge  that  the  euro  area  was  far  from  optimal.  Yet  he  remained  confident, 
saying: “it will be achieved because, for Europe, it isn’t just the best game in town, it’s the 
only game.” Economic policy as a whole, not central banking alone, is indeed the only game 
in town. 
We  cannot  afford  another  missed  opportunity  for  Europe,  for  the  good  of  its  citizens,  
2016–2017 is a decisive time to act. 
                                                
6 
Interview  of  Robert  Mundell  by  Laura  Wallace,  «  Ahead  of  his  time  »  ,  Finance  and  Development,  IMF, 
September 2006, vol 43, n°3. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
