   François Villeroy de Galhau: Innovation and change 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Annual 
Exchange Conference “Innovation and change”, Paris, 19 January 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
It gives me great pleasure to respond to Stephane Boujnah’s invitation and take part in this 
annual conference, the subject of which is key to the French economy today. Our economy, 
which is at the frontier of technology, must be able to innovate continuously – and thus change 
– in order to improve its growth prospects. As a result, business investment, which is one of 
the keys to innovation, must be able to find new financing. This does not mean that traditional 
financing through bank loans is no longer necessary, far from it. It means that funding must 
become more diverse in order to meet companies’ financing needs, regardless of their size, 
age or sector. And of course, in this area, Euronext and the entire financial community have a 
vital  role  to  play.  But  before  addressing  in  more  detail  the  financial  levers  of  business 
investment,  I  would  first  like  to  talk  about  the  economic  levers  that  precede  the  need  for 
financing.  
I.  
In economic terms, how are France and the euro area currently faring, and 
how can we move things up a gear?  
2016  has  already got  off to  a  volatile  start:  weakness  in financial  and  commodity  markets, 
originating in China and the Middle East; political uncertainty in Europe, in southern Europe, 
in Eastern Europe, in north-western Europe with the British referendum, and even in central 
Europe with the refugee crisis. It is our duty to be vigilant, but we have two other imperatives: 
on the one hand, to separate the reality from the hype, the real challenges – and there is no 
shortage of them – from the sensationalist and sometimes excessive statements made early 
this year; on the other, to stick to our medium-term objectives in the face of the current volatility. 
This evening, I will not speak of monetary policy, since we are in the silent period before the 
Governing Council meeting on Thursday. But this long-term strategy must apply to economic 
policy as a whole, including the need for reform.  
a)  
Today a confirmed recovery is underway, with growth of over 1% in France in 2015 
and 1.5% in the euro area. In 2016, despite the uncertainties, all indicators point to higher 
growth.  Despite  the  weakening  of  large  emerging  countries,  the  French  and  European 
economies should continue to benefit from an exceptional combination of three trends: (i) the 
significant  drop  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  (–45%  and–31%  respectively,  in  dollar  terms, 
between 1 January 2015 and 14 January 2016); (ii) the downward trend in the exchange rate 
of the euro against the dollar (–10% over the same period); (iii) and very low interest rates 
(–80 basis points in bank lending rates since June 2014).  
The non-standard monetary policy that we have conducted in Europe since June 2014 has 
done  a  lot  for  our  economy.  We  now  have  reliable  and  concurrent  estimates  of  its 
effectiveness: it has boosted growth prospects in the euro area by about 1% for the period 
2015 to 2017, and those of inflation by 0.5 percentage point in 2016 and 0.3 percentage point 
in 2017. All this is a lot... and in this respect our growth performance remains insufficient, lower 
than what should be achieved thanks to these exceptional economic stimuli, and lower than 
the European average.  
b)  
We must now turn our too moderate economic recovery into strong, sustainable and 
job-creating  growth.  This  shall  notably  be  achieved  by  boosting  business  investment.  The 
problem does not lie with the amount of French investment, since the investment rate of non-
financial corporations, which stood at 22.9% in 2015, is slightly above its long-term average, 
i.e. 21.4% since 1980. The problem lies with its quality and productivity, which is insufficient to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   support growth:  a  large amount  of  construction, not  enough machinery  and  equipment  nor 
research and development.  
Boosting productive investment is not something that can be decided from above: it depends 
on the decisions of thousands of entrepreneurs. But all are above all sensitive to three levers. 
First, growth prospects, since order books, i.e. expected demand or GDP, are the main drivers 
of investment. To raise medium-term growth in France, structural reforms are essential. Today 
we  know  France’s  handicaps:  a  highly  indebted  public  sector,  declining  competitiveness, 
unwieldy  procedures.  We  also  know  the  solutions:  they  have  worked  in  other  European 
countries, Sweden in the 1990s, Germany in the 2000s, Spain in the 2010s. The second lever 
is confidence. Uncertainty is the enemy of investment. To reduce uncertainty, rules should be 
simplified, stabilised and made more visible. Finally, the third lever is profitability. This factor 
has  a  more  direct  effect  for  many  SMEs  which  are  sensitive  to  the  volume  of  their  self-
financing.  
II.  
However, while firms’ investment decisions are mainly influenced by 
economic levers, financial levers also have an important role to play.  
a)  
Today, companies need more appropriate financing: our challenge concerns 
equity  financing  more  than  debt  financing.  In  order  to  steer  investments  increasingly 
towards  innovation,  making  them  de  facto  more  and  more  risky,  financing  has  to  evolve. 
Innovative investments call for new modes of financing. European companies therefore need 
loans that are less secured, but also, for business start-ups and growing businesses, more 
equity capital. Indeed, equity capital has two advantages: it gives the entrepreneur access to 
long-term funds while also offering investors strong upside potential to reward the risk incurred. 
A catching-up economy – like Europe until the 1980s, and many emerging countries today – 
can finance its growth through debt. An economy at the technological frontier, which carries 
greater  risk,  must  rely  more  on  equity  financing.  However,  in  the  euro  area,  companies’ 
financing structure remains predominantly based on debt rather than equity. By comparison, 
the  net  equity  of  non-financial  corporations  represents  123%  of GDP  in  the  United  States, 
against 52% in the euro area. This transatlantic divide, which is hardly ever mentioned, is even 
larger than the gap in rates of debt disintermediation: the well-known figure of 20% of capital 
market financing in Europe compared with 75% in the United States.  
b)  
With  regard  to  debt,  France’s  situation  currently  appears  on  the  whole 
satisfactory.  Bank  financing  remains  easily  accessible.  Indeed,  in  terms  of  volume, 
outstanding bank loans to businesses are rising at a faster pace in France than anywhere else 
in Europe, posting growth of 4.5% year-on-year at end-November 2015, compared with +2.1% 
in the United Kingdom, +1.0% in Germany, 0.0% in Italy and an average of +0.9% for the euro 
area. Interest rates in France are also among the lowest in Europe: the average nominal rate 
on new bank loans is currently less than 2% compared with 5% in 2007. Lastly, SMEs generally 
have little difficulty obtaining investment loans: according to the Banque de France’s survey, 
in the third quarter of 2015, 92% of loan applications were accepted (i.e. at least 75% of the 
amount requested was granted), although there is still room for improvement in the case of 
VSEs.  
At the same time, bond financing is increasing. The trend towards the diversification of debt 
financing appears to be more marked in France than in neighbouring European countries, with 
companies  increasingly  turning  to  capital  markets  to  meet  their  funding  needs.  The 
disintermediation rate, that is the share of bond financing in overall corporate debt, has risen 
from 24.2% in 2008 to 38.6% in 2015, compared with respective rates of 14.1% and 13.5% for 
Germany and Italy. Nonetheless, in France, market financing is mainly the preserve of large 
corporations, accounting for some 70% of their total financial debt, compared with 25% for 
mid-caps and less than 5% for SMEs. Yet forcing them to switch to disintermediated financing 
would make little sense: this diversification of funding has to remain optional, driven by demand 
from companies themselves, rather than being imposed according to a set timetable and pre-
defined objectives.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
c)  
The priority of increasing equity funding can be achieved via several channels. 
With regard to “internal” equity, that is self-financing, the outlook is improving. For SMEs in 
particular, self-financing is crucial as it is still the method of choice for financing investment, 
even when companies have access to debt. The decline in French corporate profit margins 
since 2008 is a source of concern in this respect. However, the issue has been clearly identified 
and  steps  have  been  taken  to  tackle  it,  with  the  Tax  Credit  for  Competitiveness  and 
Employment or CICE, and the Responsibility and Solidarity Pact. These reforms are expected 
to boost the average corporate profit share from 29.5% in 2014 to over 32% in 2017.  
In terms of “external” equity, of course, here at Euronext you’re at the heart of the action. As 
the leading pan-European stock exchange, you have a central role to play in enabling firms to 
access capital market financing, in the form of debt, of course, but above all in the form of 
equity. In this respect, I’d like to acknowledge Euronext’s efforts – under the supervision of the 
AMF  with  which  the  Banque  de  France  has  an  excellent  working  relationship  –  to  draw 
investors back to the bourse, and to encourage firms of all sizes and all sectors to tap capital 
markets. In the first three quarters of 2015, Euronext helped 38 companies carry out an initial 
public offering, raising a total of EUR 82.9 billion of equity and debt capital in both primary and 
secondary markets. Its subsidiary EnterNext, which is dedicated to the financing and promotion 
of small and mid-caps, in turn enabled 26 companies to carry out IPOs, raising EUR 6 billion 
over the period. You are thus helping to bring about two important reconciliations: between the 
worlds of business and finance, and between France and its appetite for risk. What’s more you 
are  achieving  this  with  a  European  dimension.  I  can’t  stress  this  enough:  having  a  strong 
position in market infrastructure is vital for the French economy.  
I  would  like  to  look  beyond  Euronext  now,  and  focus  on  two  more  general  avenues  for 
promoting equity financing.  
First, the French public needs to adapt its savings behaviour to the current low interest 
rate environment. This is a chance to encourage a “riskier” and more long-term approach to 
investment, in the interest both of savers and our economy. Today, only 31% of households’ 
financial investments are made up of risky assets, compared with 45% in the euro area. This 
means  taking  action  in  two  areas:  first,  the  decrease  in  interest  rates  should  be  gradually 
passed on to risk-free investment returns – which is why I proposed lowering the rate on the 
PEL, the French housing savings plan, and why we must continue to lower the returns on life 
insurance savings invested in euro funds; second, we need to develop new products: less 
liquid, and with or without a long-term capital guarantee, and which allow savers to benefit from 
the higher returns offered by equities over the long term. A crucial point is to avoid any tax 
distortions  that  might  mean  these  products  are  penalised  more  than  liquid  and  risk-free 
investments. This level playing field in terms of taxation should also apply to the companies 
that are financed: in other words we need to avoid making debt financing more attractive than 
equity financing… and we know we have a long way to go on this.  
The  second  avenue  for  fostering  equity  financing  is  to  boost  cross-border  capital  flows 
within the euro area. One of the great paradoxes of the single currency bloc is that investment 
is too low while savings are generally in plentiful supply: the region has a high current account 
surplus, of more than EUR 300 billion per year, or over 3% of GDP for the 12 months up to 
end-September  2015.  The  problem  is  that  these  savings  cannot  circulate  freely  between 
member  states  due  to  financial  fragmentation.  This  situation  has  serious  consequences.  It 
generates a growth lag, as excess savings in core countries are unable to satisfy the demand 
for investment in the periphery. It also makes the euro area more fragile, as national shocks 
cannot be smoothed by fiscal transfers – due to the lack of a fiscal union – or by stable, long-
term private sector capital flows. By way of comparison, in the United States, 39% of shocks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   are absorbed by capital flows between federal states and only 13% by government transfers.1 
These are flows of equity, not of credit: the former are much more effective at absorbing shocks 
as they are a genuine means of cross-border risk sharing. 
A large part of the solution lies at European level, with the European Commission’s plan for a 
Capital Markets Union (CMU). However, the goals and ambition of this project need to be more 
clearly  defined  if  it  is  to  be  a  success.  I  prefer  to  talk  instead  about  a  Financing  and 
Investment Union, for two reasons: first, because capital markets are merely a tool – the main 
objective is the sound financing of investment; second, because our channels of funding need 
to remain diverse – capital markets must coexist alongside bank lending, as well as private 
equity funding from insurers and asset managers. This Financing and Investment Union should 
be a consolidation and synthesis of the CMU, the Banking Union and the Juncker Plan. It would 
allow us to foster even greater cross-border capital flows, and share the burden of risk through 
innovative mechanisms, such as European venture capital schemes.  
Let me conclude with a more general remark. It’s tempting sometimes to be fatalistic: to say 
our growth  depends  on China,  and  that  innovation  can  only  come from the  United  States. 
Admittedly,  the  international  environment  does  play  an  important  role;  but  our  economic 
destiny depends primarily on us, on our ability to innovate and to reform. Financing is merely 
a  part  of  our  current  transformation,  one  that  lends  support  to  the  economy  and  to  our 
businesses. But it is a vital part of that transformation, and I am pleased that this conference 
is giving it the consideration it deserves.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                
1   P. Asdrubali, B. E. Sorensen and O. Yosha, “Channels of interstate risk sharing: United States 1963–1990”, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, 1996, Oxford University Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
