  François Villeroy de Galhau: The challenge of an efficient European 
economic governance as a contribution to a prosperous global 
community 
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Emerging 
Markets Forum, Paris, 11 April 2016. 
 Dear friends and distinguished guests, 
Let us take the long view. This forum, thanks to Michel Camdessus and Harinder Kohli, is a 
rare opportunity to discuss what the global economy and its governance might look like two 
generations from now. In a moment, we will argue about global megatrends and alternative 
scenarios.  With  so  many  distinguished  participants  from  emerging  market  economies  and 
specialists of the international monetary system in the room, I would like to speak today as a 
European. As I see it, the European perspective is relevant in this Forum for at least three 
main reasons: 
• 
Regional integration may be one of the megatrends: how it will affect the delicate 
balance between sovereignty and international cooperation is a question that the EU 
has been mulling over since its inception. 
Many  of  the  global  and  coordination  challenges  we  are  facing  have  been 
confronted over the course of European integration, and are still at the core of the 
debate:  economic  spillovers  and  externalities,  monetary  stability,  and  effective 
governance. 
A  strong  Europe  is  all  the  more  necessary  in  a  multipolar  world,  as  a 
“balancing power.” By 2050, the divide will no longer be between emerging and 
advanced economies, but rather between who was prepared and who wasn’t. 
Ideas 
to  enhance  European  economic  governance  are  not  new.  Mobilization  and 
implementation have proved tricky however: this is what I would like to focus my remarks on 
speaking  of  the  motivations  (I)  and  then  of  the  concrete  tasks  of  a  Euro  area  Finance 
Minister (II). 
  Why we need a “full coordination” institution in the Euro area 
I. 
We  know  there  is  deep  political  resistance  to  sharing  fiscal  resources  and 
sovereignty,  as  well  as  Euroscepticism.  The  sad  example  of  the  refugee  crisis  illustrates 
how European countries so far have displayed little solidarity to find a common solution. This 
is why we need to make the economic case for a stronger governance of the euro area: it 
is not a theological issue and not solely a political one either. This discussion is not about 
“more  Brussels”,  it  is  very  concretely  about  more  growth  and  jobs  in  Europe.  Clearly, 
monetary policy cannot be a substitute for economic policy coordination or the lack of 
reforms. For that reason alone central bankers need to take part in this debate, while taking 
action will obviously be a decision for political leaders. This is also why our focus should be 
on the Eurozone economic governance. We should not fear different speeds in Europe. I am 
strongly in favor of the UK remaining within the EU; yet, irrespective of the outcome of the 
British referendum, the Eurozone can and should pursue further integration. 
The  euro  crisis  has  revealed  how  unprepared  we  were.  The  expected  dynamics  between 
peer pressure and market discipline did not work, as markets did not believe in the no-bail-
out  principle,  and  as  national  authorities  did  not  really  accept  peer  pressure,  nor  the 
implementation of the rules. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
The absence of coordination has a genuine economic cost. It includes the cost of crises 
and assistance programmes, as well as the impact on growth due to uneven compliance with 
budgetary  rules before the  crisis  and  rigidity  of the  rules  during  the  crisis.  Several  studies 
point to a significant cost of non-coordination, in the order of 2 to 5 % of GDP since the crisis. 
To  take  the  debate  forward,  three  principled  choices  have  to  be  made:  First:  making 
parallel  progress  on  both  domestic  reforms  and  European  coordination.  This  is  the 
cornerstone  of  any  French-German  agreement:  to  be  fair,  the  French  call  for  Germany  to 
support coordination, and the German doubt about French reforms, have been and are still 
well-founded. This requires overcoming distrust between countries and putting both aspects 
under the same umbrella, namely a common institution. 
Second, we must recognize that institutions with a mandate are superior to rules without 
institutions.  To  bolster  policy  consistency  and  coordination,  we  admittedly  need  simpler 
rules. But they should be supported by strong institutions with discretionary powers. Mario 
Draghi  pointed  out1  the  fundamental  difference  between  a  monetary  policy  institution  and 
fiscal rules, which are exemplified by the track records of the ECB and SGP respectively. 
Third,  there  is  room  for  an  intermediate  level  of  integration,  as  shown  in  a  simple  but 
illustrative matrix. 
 
 
I  would  call  it  “full  coordination  of  national  policies”,  a  presently  missing  link  between 
integration,  as  we  have  for  monetary  policy  decision-making,  and  rule-based  surveillance, 
such as is currently the case for national fiscal policies in Europe and which is clearly lacking 
teeth. 
                                                
1   Speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB, at SZ Finance day 2015, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
To be sure, the highest level of policy integration would logically involve building a genuine 
fiscal union, as well as completing the Single Market; but that would surely require more ex 
ante convergence and resolution of legacies from the past. My view is that we should leave 
the door open to further integration for countries that are willing and ready to consider it. Yet 
the most urgently needed part of EMU reform, is to set up a strong institution, led by a 
Euro area Finance Minister, to fully coordinate national fiscal and structural policies. 
In economic terms it would help internalize negative externalities (e.g. demand spillovers, or 
financial contagion) from asymmetric shocks across jurisdictions, as well as optimize positive 
externalities between fiscal and structural policies. In political terms it would help make the 
Euro area more than the sum of its parts. Jean Monnet famously declared that “nothing is 
possible  without  men,  but  nothing  lasts  without  institutions.”  The  mandate  of  this 
decision-making  institution  must  be  to  achieve  the  strongest,  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth. 
How we should define concretely the tasks for a Euro area Finance Minister 
II. 
I see four of them. First, the Minister would be in charge of preparing the euro area-wide 
collective  strategy  to fulfill  the  mandate  I  just  described.  It  would  be  essential  for  the 
euro area to collectively agree on overall economic policy objectives, and on the division of 
tasks  through  the  setting  of  individual  performance  targets  for  Member  States.  Such  an 
agreement could be reached following a two-step process: 
• 
A preparation phase would require assessing: (i) potential growth, with a quantified 
ambition  to  raise  it;  (ii)  the  euro  area  output  gap;  (iii)  the  sustainable  fiscal  and 
external stances for the euro area as a whole, as well as the sustainable distribution 
of these positions across countries. 
In  a  decision  phase,  the  euro  area  Finance  Minister  would  propose  a  strategy, 
consisting of the collective objective and – as far as necessary – its country specific 
translations  in  terms  of  reforms  and  policy  stance,  bearing  in  mind  of  course  the 
rationale for subsidiarity. This proposal, subject to formal opinions from the Fiscal 
and Competitiveness Councils, would then have to be adopted at simple majority by 
the Eurogroup, and further to be endorsed by the European Parliament. 
 Second, the Finance Minister would be responsible for supervising the implementation of 
the  collective  strategy,  using  adequate  instruments  to  provide  symmetric  incentives. 
Negative incentives would of course include the effective implementation of existing sanction 
mechanisms. They could be broadened in contractual procedures, already put forward in the 
2013  Franco-German  contribution  on  EMU,  or  in  Chancellor  Merkel’s2  “binding  reform 
contracts” proposal, and including positive incentives. One of them would be the access to a 
euro area ”Convergence Fund”, through which Member States could benefit from common 
funding.  In  addition,  conditioning  the  participation  in  economic  governance  on  compliant 
implementation could provide strong incentives. 
Third,  the  Finance  Minister  would  be  responsible  for  implementing  centralized  crisis 
management.  A  Finance  Minister  for  the  euro  area  would  naturally  be  in  charge  of 
overseeing European Stability Mechanism operations. 
Last, while moving towards further integration, the Minister could be given the authority for 
managing  a  euro  area  Convergence  Fund,  evolving  towards  a  Euro  budget.  We  are 
touching  here  on  the  issue  of  a  common  fiscal  capacity,  promoted  recently  by  Pier  Carlo 
Padoan3. As successfully done in the past, it could be built in three stages. In the first stage, 
                                                
2   Angela Merkel’s first parliamentary speech of the third term, 18th December 2013. 
3   Pier Carlo Padoan, A Shared European Policy Strategy for Growth, Jobs, and Stability, February 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Member  States  would  be  free  to  join,  and  the  Convergence  Fund  would  be  allocated  to 
financing common goods such as European infrastructure investment or refugee settlement. 
In a second stage, this budget could become a stabilisation instrument, centralising a well-
defined set of policy instruments, such as a European layer of unemployment insurance. The 
third and final stage of fiscal integration would only be achieved if agreement can be found 
both on financing (direct revenue-raising capacity and common debt issuance) and on the 
desirable  level  of  business  cycle  synchronization.  This  perspective  would  be  a  powerful 
incentive for national discipline and commitment as shown during the march to the Euro. 
How to set up a legitimate institution with a genuine administrative capacity? 
Further integration and democratic accountability should progress together, as discussed in 
my  recent  article  with  Jens  Weidmann.  We  need  to  enable  the  European  economic 
administration  to  be  more  efficient,  while  establishing  strong  enough  political  legitimacy  to 
ensure balance between liability and control. These institutional changes obviously require a 
new Treaty. 
First, we need a legitimacy-enhancing appointment process. The Finance Minister could thus 
be appointed for a five-year period by the European Council acting by qualified majority on a 
proposal from the president of the EU Commission. The new appointment would be subject 
to  the  formal  approval  of  the  European  Parliament,  and  the  Finance  Minister  would  be 
member of the Commission, as well as chair of the Eurogroup. The Minister would thereby 
have the legitimacy to represent internationally the euro area in Economic and Financial fora, 
alongside the President of the ECB. 
Second,  the  euro  area  Finance  Minister  would  need  to  be  backed  by  a  genuine  Treasury 
administration,  which  could  include  staff  from  the  Commission’s  Economic  and  Financial 
Directorate General, the ESM, and the Economic and Financial Committee Secretariat. Such 
a  civil  service  would  also  benefit  from  the  public  advice  of  two  independent  bodies,  the 
European Fiscal Board and the Competitiveness Council. 
Last,  if  we  succeed  in  implementing  further  integration,  we  will  need  stronger  democratic 
control over euro area affairs. To this end, we will need to consider institutionalising a euro 
area format of the European Parliament. Relationships between euro area MPs and national 
parliaments  will  also  need  to  be  enhanced,  through  an  inter-institutional  agreement,  or  by 
creating dedicated commissions. 
 To conclude, let me quote Robert Mundell4, father of the theory of optimal currency areas 
and a famous analyst of international spillovers. He did acknowledge that the euro area was 
far from optimal. Yet he remained confident, saying: “it will be achieved because, for Europe, 
it isn’t just the best game in town, it’s the only game.” Economic policy as a whole, not central 
banking alone, is indeed the only game in town. 
What the world will look like in 2050 will be partly shaped by the future of Europe; and the 
future of Europe depends on the decisions we take now. Of course, we always face the risk 
of  failure  when  conducting  far-reaching  reforms.  Yet  we  cannot  afford  another  missed 
opportunity and we have to act swiftly without losing a longer term view. For the Euro area, 
for its citizens, 2016–2017 is the decisive time to act. 
                                                
4  
Interview  of  Robert  Mundell  by  Laura  Wallace,  «  Ahead  of  his  time  »,  Finance  and  Development,  IMF, 
September 2006, vol 43, n° 3. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
