  Ignazio Visco: “Doing Business in a Fragmented World” 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor of  the  Bank  of Italy,  at the  Launch  of  the 
OECD  Business  and  Finance  Outlook  and  High-Level  Roundtable  “Doing  Business  in  a 
Fragmented World”, Paris, 9 June 2016. 
 I first wish to thank the Secretary General for his kind invitation to me to be here today. 
As  a  general  comment,  let  me  say  that  this  second  issue  of  the  Business  and  Finance 
Outlook  confirms  its  character  compared  with  other  long-standing  reports.  It  provides 
valuable in-depth analysis of many topical themes that are critical for a better understanding 
of  the  current  dismal  outlook  of  the  world  economy.  I  find  particularly  interesting  the 
relationship  between  corporate  finance  and  productivity,  the  role  of  R&D  expenditure,  the 
issue of stock market fragmentation, and the implications of heterogeneity of life expectancy 
across  socioeconomic  groups.  The  multifaceted  dimensions  of  the  cross-cutting  theme  of 
fragmentation  are  investigated  thoroughly.  The  analyses  are  backed  by  rich  and  original 
information. For all of these reasons, I wish to congratulate the OECD for this very interesting 
document. 
I  would  like  to  offer  some  remarks  on  a few  topics  that  caught  my  attention  most  greatly. 
Admittedly, this selection was not easy, given the abundance of issues and findings. 
The  report  singles  out  two  headwinds  to  global  growth:  the  reversal  of  the  commodity 
supercycle, against a backdrop of excess supply capacity and high corporate debt in some 
emerging market economies (EMEs); and the still modest recovery in advanced economies, 
associated with two key legacies of the crisis, deleveraging and high non-performing loans. 
On the policy front, the main challenge identified by the report remains – unsurprisingly – the 
same  as  one  year  ago:  how  to  revive  firms’  appetite  for  economic  risk-taking  –  the 
entrepreneurs’ “animal spirits” that drive long-term investment projects – so as to fill the gap 
with financial risk- taking, stimulated by strongly expansionary monetary policies. 
According to the report, what is needed is a phase of “creative destruction”, characterised by 
a  reallocation  of  resources  towards  productivity-enhancing  investment  and  a  reduction  of 
excess capacity in sectors such as energy and materials. Structural reforms are seen as the 
key policy measures with which to accompany this process in both advanced and EMEs. As 
a  result,  global  growth  would  accelerate  and  monetary  policy  would  normalise  “safely”. 
Absent sizeable structural reforms, the main risk would be what the report calls an “inflation-
first”  scenario,  where  a  rise  in  inflation  would  eventually  force  central  banks  to  increase 
monetary  policy  interest  rates,  which  in  turn  would  prevent  an  acceleration  of  economic 
activity. 
I  fully  support  the  report’s  emphasis  on  the  importance  of  structural  reforms  to  place  the 
global economy on a sound footing and to make markets work better. In fact, the crisis has 
clearly  shown  the  limits  of  the  self-regulatory  capabilities  of  markets,  particularly  financial 
markets, and their consequences on financial and, ultimately, macroeconomic stability. I also 
agree  with  the  report’s  main  policy  advice,  centred  inter  alia  on  investments  in  R&D  and 
incentives for equity financing over debt. 
However,  in  order  to  ensure  an  orderly  adjustment  of  the  global  economy  and  to  allow 
structural reforms to rapidly kick-start the real economy, appropriate macroeconomic policies 
are also needed. 
In this vein, I do not share the report’s negative assessment of the current monetary policy 
stance that would be “harming the prospects of a sustainable recovery”. This view – which 
appears not in line with the one expressed in other recent OECD assessments and policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
suggestions  –  seems  to  me  to  overlook  the  reasons  behind  the  current  monetary  stance, 
while focusing too much on the possible unintended consequences. 
In  a  context  of  very  low  commodity  prices  and  long-lasting  weakness  of  both  global  and 
domestic demand, in advanced countries disinflationary pressures and slack in the economy 
are  still  high,  although  with  differences  among  the  main  economies.  Under  these 
circumstances, a wait-and- see approach to monetary policy would be unwarranted: rather, 
central banks observe economic developments, ponder risks and may need to act forcefully. 
The current low level of policy rates is the appropriate reaction to current cyclical conditions, 
not an arbitrary choice of central banks; a less accommodative stance, particularly given the 
high debt levels as a consequence of the crisis, could lead to a deflationary spiral with severe 
consequences both for the real economy and the financial sector. 
This holds true in particular for the euro area, where unused productive capacity and labour 
are greater than in other advanced economies. Estimates by Banca d’Italia staff (which do 
not consider further possible non-linear effects) show that in the absence of the measures 
adopted  by  the  ECB  Governing  Council  between  June  2014  and  December  2015,  both 
annual inflation and GDP growth in the area would be lower by about half a percentage point 
in 2015–17. 
Of course, a very accommodative monetary policy for a protracted period involves risks that 
need  to  be  monitored  carefully.  The  report  considers  the  impact  of  low  interest  rates  on 
investors’ portfolio choices, noting the rising importance of private equity, hedge funds and 
real estate investment funds. This analysis highlights that too-low-for-too-long interest rates 
may spur asset price bubbles and may also stimulate short-termism among investors, i.e. by 
favouring companies that offer cash-like returns at the expenses of companies that focus on 
longer-term investment projects. In this respect, let me just observe that portfolio rebalancing 
that  would  encourage  a  higher  degree  of  risk  taking  is  one  of  the  intended  channels  of 
transmission of non-standard monetary policies and that currently there are no indications of 
a  generalised  overvaluation  of  financial  or  real  assets  in  advanced  countries.  Should 
excessive risks emerge, targeted macroprudential policies can be used as appropriate. 
Clearly,  monetary  policy  is  not  the  solution  to  structural  problems  (and,  as  we  often  say, 
cannot be the “only game in town”). But I do believe that an expansionary monetary stance 
creates  more  favourable  conditions  to  implementing  structural  reforms:  it  stimulates 
aggregate demand and may reduce the possible short-term macroeconomic costs of reforms 
while  helping  maintain  the  necessary  political  drive  and  foster  consensus  regarding  their 
adoption. In the same vein, monetary policy cannot be left alone in the effort to support the 
economic recovery; it must be complemented by an appropriate use of available fiscal space, 
with  appropriately 
in 
infrastructure. 
On  structural  reforms,  let  me  also  point  out  that,  while  increased  competition  in  product 
markets  and  more  flexibility  in  labour  markets  remain  important  for  the  enhancing  of  an 
economy’s  ability  to  withstand  shocks  and  recover  quickly,  when  designing  reforms,  it 
becomes critical to take into account issues such as those raised in the debate about secular 
stagnation,  as  well  as  the  structural  trends  triggered  by  innovation.  For  example,  it  is 
essential to consider the impact of the digital revolution on both labour demand, which has 
raised  fears  of  a  re-emergence  of  Keynes’  technological  unemployment,  and  income 
distribution,  as  highlighted  by  James  Meade  already  in  1964.  This  puts  a  premium  on 
measures  to  favour  investment  in  education,  life-long  learning,  training  and  active  labour 
market policies. 
Moving  on  to  the  fundamental  issue  of  productivity,  the  report  carries  out  a  very  detailed 
analysis of the somewhat puzzling fall in aggregate productivity growth in the aftermath of the 
crisis. This holds true for non-financial companies in both advanced countries and, above all, 
EMEs. The firm-level analysis highlights a structural change in the evolution of productivity 
across companies and sectors: from a single cutting-edge group of “incumbent” companies 
targeted,  growth-enhancing  measures,  such  as 
investment 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
displaying high levels – but low or negative growth rates – of productivity to the emergence of 
a second group of “high-growth” companies characterised by faster productivity growth. This 
finding suggests that it is critical to understand the drivers that underlie these changes. 
The  report  rightly  emphasises  the  impact  that  corporate  finance  decisions  may  exert  on 
productivity. Four financial strategies are identified that make a difference between high and 
low  productivity  growth  at  a company  level:  higher  spending  on  R&D;  lower  debt-to-equity 
ratio;  higher  free  cash  flow;  and  more  M&A  deals.  The  analysis  sheds  lights  on  critical 
macro-financial linkages. What I find very instructive is that these strategies are all part and 
parcel  of  the  structural  policies  that  are  called  upon  to  trigger  economic  risk-taking, 
investment and ultimately growth. 
As far as financial markets are concerned, two fundamental drivers of change are technology 
and regulation. This is well documented in the chapter of the report on stock markets, which I 
find  particularly  insightful.  Here,  there  seems  to  be  an  issue  of  finding  the  right  balance 
between the advantage of having more numerous and more specialised trading venues and 
the  disadvantage  of  fragmenting  trading  liquidity.  The  possibility  to  trade  a  listed  share  in 
various markets promotes competition among providers of financial services. The availability 
of “dark” trading venues (i.e. with little transparency in pre-trade information) seems to allow 
institutional investors and other large players to place sizeable orders without giving rise to 
adverse price changes. On the other hand, it is important that such “dark” trading pools do 
not undermine a level playing field and a correct handling of conflicts of interest. Putting the 
various  types  of  trading  venues  on  a  more  even  footing  is  the  objective  of  some  recent 
regulatory  initiatives  in  advanced  countries.  The  availability  of  consolidated  real-time  price 
and volume data to market participants is another important factor. 
The  report  also  considers  under  the  notion  of  fragmentation  issues  related  to  the 
fundamental  heterogeneity  of  economic  agents  and  conditions.  A  case  in  point  is  life 
expectancy, which varies greatly (both in levels and trends) across individuals depending on 
socio-economic factors such as education, income and occupation. The report argues that, in 
regulating retirement, such heterogeneity should be taken into account. The suggested policy 
implications  –  namely,  improving  the  measurement  and  management  of  longevity  risks, 
broadening the range of annuity products, and tailoring pension arrangements to the various 
segments of society – have actually long been advocated by the OECD and in other policy 
fora.  What  I  think  should  also  be  underlined  is  that  the  development  of  targeted  payout 
products  such  as  enhanced  annuities  would  also  alleviate  the  pension  adequacy  problem 
recently highlighted by the OECD Pensions at a Glance report. 
Let me conclude with a few thoughts on some broader trends that are of major interest for 
economists and policy-makers alike. Current demographic developments are widely seen to 
act  as  a  negative  labour  supply  shock  that  would  reduce  future  global  growth  via  lower 
investment  and  productivity;  this  could  also  result  in  further  downward  pressure  on  real 
interest rates. On the other side, growth is expected to benefit from technological innovation 
and its positive impact on productivity, although this view is itself disputed by the advocates 
of the supply-side version of the secular stagnation hypothesis. All these dynamics will also 
affect income distribution and may fuel already rising inequality. The interrelations among the 
above key variables may not be fully understood at this time, much less predicted; for sure, 
they are set to raise critical real and financial implications that require in-depth analysis in 
future reports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
