   Peter Praet: Remarks at the BNYM 20th anniversary dinner on the 
dynamics of TARGET2 balances and monetary policy implementation 
Dinner address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the BNYM 20th anniversary, Brussels, 15 September 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for assistance in preparing this speech and all other contributors for their input. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The focus of my talk this evening is TARGET balances – a relatively arcane topic that has 
been the subject of intense debate in the past.1 During the financial and sovereign debt crisis, 
TARGET balances rose sharply within the euro area linked to rising fragmentation and market 
stress. And today those balances are trending upwards again. But as I will explain, the current 
increases should be interpreted differently from those earlier episodes: they are largely a direct 
result of the asset purchase programme and do not signal renewed stress in financial markets. 
TARGET2 is the real-time gross settlement system owned and operated by the Eurosystem 
and TARGET balances are the net claims and liabilities of national central banks vis-à-vis the 
ECB  that  arise  through  cross-border  payments  settled  in  central  bank  money.  When  a 
country’s  banking  sector  experiences  a  net  cross-border  inflow  of  central  bank  money,  its 
TARGET claim increases if it has a positive balance, or its liability decreases if it has a negative 
balance. Net cross-border outflows of central bank money have the opposite effect, reducing 
TARGET claims or increasing TARGET liabilities. The total TARGET balance, which is the 
sum  of  all  positive  TARGET  balances  (or  equivalently,  the  sum  of  all  negative  TARGET 
balances), is only affected when cross-border flows occur between countries with the opposite 
TARGET position. For example, if a bank located in a country with a TARGET liability makes 
a cross-border payment to a bank located in a country with a TARGET claim, the TARGET 
liability  of  the  sending  country  increases  and  the  TARGET  claim  of  the  receiving  country 
increases. The total TARGET balance also increases.2 
As monetary policy has evolved during the crisis in an effort to ensure price stability and an 
effective transmission of the policy stance, so too have TARGET balances. The crisis, and the 
corresponding development of TARGET balances, can be broadly divided into three phases.3 
In  the  first  phase  which  followed  the  Lehman  collapse,  heightened  uncertainty  about 
counterparty credit risk triggered a seizing up of money markets that spread across borders. 
The Eurosystem responded to banks’ funding needs by introducing fixed-rate full-allotment 
tenders  and  extending  the  maturities  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  In  this 
environment, there was an over-proportional provision of central bank liquidity in jurisdictions 
where funding needs were more acute. In essence, collateralised liquidity provision by national 
central banks substituted for private sources of funding that had dried up. Accordingly, the total 
TARGET balance increased from EUR 100 billion in mid-2007 to around EUR 400 billion by 
end-2008, around which it fluctuated until the middle of 2011 [Figure 1].  
                                                
1   See for example Cour-Thimann, P. (2013), “TARGET balances and the crisis in the euro area”, CESifo Forum 
Special Issue, Volume 14, April 2013. 
2   For a more detailed discussion of TARGET balances, see ECB (2013), “TARGET balances and monetary policy 
operations”, Monthly Bulletin, May 2013. 
3   For further discussion on different phases of the crisis, see Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB and its role as lender of 
last resort during the crisis”, speech at the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation conference on the lender 
of last resort – an international perspective, Washington DC, 10 February 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The crisis progressed into its second phase with the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis in 
2010–12. This led to a renewed intensification of bank funding pressures, but in a much more 
country-specific  way  than  before.  As  redenomination  risk  surfaced,  entire  national  banking 
systems  lost  access  to  wholesale  funding  markets.  Liquidity  outflows  accelerated  from 
countries perceived as more vulnerable, like Spain, to those perceived as more stable, such 
as Germany. This triggered a precipitous increase in the total TARGET balance to a peak of 
over EUR 1 trillion by mid-2012. In the cases of Spain and Germany, their balances hit record 
highs in August 2012, when Spain had a liability of around EUR 435 billion and Germany had 
a claim of around EUR 750 billion. This compares with TARGET claims for both Spain and 
Germany of around EUR 20 billion and EUR 40 billion, respectively, in August 2007. 
The rise in TARGET balances during these first two phases of the crisis can be viewed as a 
consequence of severe tensions in funding markets where the Eurosystem accommodated 
banks’ ensuing liquidity needs. Importantly, however, the link between central bank liquidity 
provision  and  rising  TARGET  balances  was  indirect.  When  reserves  are  injected  via 
repurchase operations, as was predominantly the case in this period, TARGET balances are 
not directly impacted. The national central bank credits the current account of the borrower 
and records a loan on the asset side of its balance sheet. Only when private creditors withdrew 
their funding and banks used the funds obtained from the Eurosystem to replace their faltering 
volumes of private, mainly wholesale borrowings, did cross-border payments emerge, leading 
to rising TARGET balances. Not surprisingly, TARGET balances came to be viewed as an 
indicator  of euro  area financial  market fragmentation,  and  even  a  stress  indicator for  EMU 
itself. A whole literature emerged to understand and explain TARGET balances.4 
Following  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  in  mid-2012,  however, 
redenomination  risk  subsided.  Banks  increasingly  repaid  central  bank  credit  amid  active 
deleveraging  and 
the  Eurosystem’s 
intermediation role waned and TARGET balances began to decline from late 2012 onwards. 
But the bank deleveraging process also had another, more pernicious effect: it fed into the 
renewed macroeconomic downturn in the euro area to produce a vicious circle of contracting 
credit growth and weak demand dynamics, mirrored by a prolonged downward drift in inflation. 
This ushered in the third phase of the crisis. 
In this phase, monetary policy has evolved in response to very low inflation and the need to 
keep  credit  flowing  to  the  real  economy.  This  has  resulted  in  the  introduction  of  new 
instruments, including the asset purchase programme. March 2015 marked a turning point: 
before  that  date  the  injection  of  central  bank  reserves  had  been  primarily  demand-driven 
through temporary lending operations. Since then, the bulk of central bank liquidity provision 
has been via asset purchases rather than repurchase operations. 
The launch of these asset purchases has caused the direction of TARGET balances to reverse. 
Having fallen to around EUR 600 billion at the end of 2014, the total TARGET balance is now 
back  to  levels  of  around  EUR  1  trillion.  But  though this  upward  trend  in balances,  like the 
previous episode, is linked to the implementation of monetary policy, the link is now direct 
rather than indirect. Liquidity injection via asset purchases can immediately impact TARGET 
balances if it entails a cross-border payment by the purchasing central bank. And here lies the 
crucial difference to the rise in TARGET balances observed until mid-2012: under the asset 
purchase programme, TARGET balances are directly affected by the way the programme is 
implemented, which is independent of financial market stress.  
funding  conditions.  As  such, 
improved  market 
                                                
4   See for example Bindseil, U., P. Cour-Thimann and P.J. Kӧnig (2012), “TARGET and cross-border interbank 
payments  during  the  financial  crisis”,  CESifo  Forum  13,  Special  Issue,  83–92  and  Sinn,  H.-W.  and 
T. Wollmershäuser (2011), “Target loans, current account balances and capital flows: the ECB’s rescue facility”, 
International Tax and Public Finance, Volume 19, Issue 4, 468–508. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Given the integrated structure of European financial markets, in which the sale and settlement 
of securities is not confined to national borders, direct cross-border liquidity flows are occurring 
as a result of the asset purchase programme and the ownership and holding structure of the 
assets that are being purchased. During settlement, which usually takes place with a custodian 
or central securities depository, the purchasing central bank receives the security and makes 
a payment in the form of central bank money. And since cross-border flows of central bank 
money  are  what  impact  TARGET  balances,  the  location  through  which  counterparties 
participates in the TARGET2 payments system largely determines how the asset purchase 
programme affects the balances. 
Counterparties based in the euro area usually connect to TARGET2 using an account held 
with  their  national  central  bank,  while  non-resident  counterparties  in  countries  that  do  not 
participate in TARGET2, such as the United Kingdom, may access TARGET2 either directly 
through a branch in the euro area or indirectly through a correspondent bank. It follows that 
when a national central bank purchases securities from a non-domestic bank, the purchase is 
likely to give rise to a cross-border flow of central bank money.5 As around 80% of Eurosystem 
purchases  by  volume  have  been  carried  out  through  non-domestic  counterparties,  cross-
border flows of central bank money are happening on a large scale as a direct result of the 
asset purchase programme.  
Settlement  is  what  ultimately  explains  the  renewed  increase  in  TARGET  claims  for  some 
countries,  like  Germany,  and  in  TARGET  liabilities  for  others,  like  Spain.  Under  the  asset 
purchase  programme,  the  Eurosystem  buys  securities  from  a  range  of  counterparties, 
including  many  that  are  located  outside  of  the  euro  area  and  which  largely  participate  in 
TARGET2  via  the  Bundesbank,  leading  to  additional  inflows  of  central  bank  money  into 
Germany as a direct result of the asset purchase programme.6 So when Banco de España 
purchases  securities  from  a  German  counterparty,  or  from  a  UK-based  counterparty  that 
participates in TARGET2 via Germany, it can give rise to a flow of central bank money from 
Spain to Germany and affect TARGET balances [Figure 2]. ECB staff estimate that around 
60% of purchases by volume under the asset purchase programme have been made from 
counterparties that participate in TARGET2 via Germany, while only around 5% have been 
made  from  counterparties  that  participate  via  Spain.  It  is  in  this  context  that  Germany’s 
TARGET claim has increased by around EUR 200 since end-2014 while Spain’s TARGET 
liability has increased by around EUR 125 billion over the same time period.  
At its last meeting, the Governing Council underlined the need to preserve the very substantial 
amount of monetary support that is necessary in order to secure a return of inflation rates 
towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%. This translates into two mutually-reinforcing 
pledges on our policy course looking forward. First, we say that we expect our policy rates to 
remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of 
our net asset purchases. Second, concerning our asset purchases, we have clarified that we 
intend to maintain the pace at which we are adding in net terms to our portfolio at €80 billion 
per month until the end of March 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the 
Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation  consistent  with  its 
inflation aim. Hence, our measures will continue to underpin the momentum of the euro area 
economic  recovery  and  ensure  supportive  financing  conditions.  Against  this  backdrop, 
financial market fragmentation will recede further. At the same time, however, it follows from 
my  exposition  that  TARGET  balances  are  set  to  continue  increasing  alongside  the  asset 
                                                
5   Purchasing a security from a non-domestic counterparty does not always lead to a cross-border flow of central 
bank money. For example, if a national central bank buys a security from a London-based counterparty that has 
a TARGET2 account with the purchasing central bank, there will be no cross-border flow of liquidity stemming 
from the payment for the security – as it is de facto a domestic settlement. 
6   See  for  example  Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2016),  “The  impact  of  Eurosystem  securities  purchases  on  the 
TARGET2 balances”, Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report, March 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   purchase  programme. The  ECB  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  developments  in TARGET 
balances, but at the current juncture at least, the upward trend has little to do with the remaining 
fragmentation or with financial stress. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Total TARGET2 balance (EUR billion) 
Source: ECB 
Notes: The chart reflects the sum of all positive TARGET2 balances. 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Figure 2: Stylised illustration of how an asset purchase by a national central bank can 
affect TARGET2 balances 
Example 1: The bond is purchased by Banco de España from a domestic counterparty (no 
cross-border liquidity flow) 
Stylised balance sheet of Banco de España:  
Assets 
Security purchased under the APP 
Liabilities 
Deposits of banks at Banco de España 
 No impact on the TARGET2 balance of Banco de España. 
Example 2: The bond is purchased by Banco de España from a non-domestic counterparty 
located in Germany (cross-border liquidity flow from Spain to Germany) 
Stylised balance sheet of Banco de España:  
Assets 
Security purchased under the APP 
Liabilities 
TARGET2 liability of Banco de España 
Stylised balance sheet of Deutsche Bundesbank:  
Assets 
TARGET2 claim of Deutsche Bundesbank 
Liabilities 
Deposits of banks at Deutsche Bundesbank 
   Banco de España records a TARGET2 liability and Deutsche Bundesbank records a 
TARGET2 claim. 
The  total  TARGET2  balance  will  increase  because  the  flow  of  liquidity  is  from  a 
country  with  a  TARGET2  liability  (Spain)  to  a  country  with  a  TARGET2  claim 
(Germany).  
The  total  TARGET2  balance  would  have  remained  unchanged  if  the  sending  and 
receiving  central  banks had  the  same  net TARGET2  position  (e.g.  if  the flow  was 
between two countries with a net TARGET2 liability, like Spain and Italy). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
