  Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Akita, 9 June 2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial,  and  business  leaders  in  Akita  Prefecture.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
express my sincerest gratitude for your cooperation with the activities of the Bank of Japan’s 
Akita  Branch.  Today,  before  exchanging  views  with  you,  I  would  like  to  first  explain  the 
Bank’s  view  on  Japan’s  economic  activity  and  prices  and  then  move  on  to  the  Bank’s 
thinking on the monetary policy management. 
I. 
Recent developments in and outlook for economic activity at home and 
abroad 
Overseas economies 
Let  me  start  by  talking  about  overseas  economies.  The  Bank  somewhat  lowered  its 
projections  for  GDP  growth  in  the  April  2016  Outlook  for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices 
(Outlook Report) from its projections in the January Outlook Report, due mainly to weaker 
exports  reflecting  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  Overseas  economies  have 
continued  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace,  but  the  pace  of  growth,  especially  in  emerging 
economies, has decelerated somewhat. The Chinese economy, looked at from a somewhat 
longer-term  perspective,  is  in  the  process  of  transitioning  from  manufacturing  sector-  and 
investment-driven  growth  to  service  sector-  and  consumption-driven  growth.  While  this 
transition in itself is desirable, the Chinese economy in the process has decelerated due to 
downward  pressure  from  adjustments  in  excess  production  capacity  in  the  manufacturing 
sector.  Other  emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  as  a  whole  also 
have  remained  subdued,  reflecting  the  spread  of  the  effects  of  the  deceleration  in  the 
Chinese economy and the protracted decline in commodity prices. Against this background, 
global  financial  markets  –  especially  since  the  turn  of  the  year  –  have  been  volatile,  and 
given  the  temporary  but  significant  decline  in  stock  and  crude  oil  prices,  economies  – 
particularly commodity-exporting ones – have decelerated, and global trade has been weak. 
Reflecting  these  circumstances,  the  IMF  in  its April  2016  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO) 
revised  down  its  projection  for  global  growth  this  year  from  the  projection  in  the  January 
WEO (Chart 1). 
In contrast, advanced economies have continued to see firm growth. The U.S. economy has 
been  on  a  recovery  trend  on  the  back  of  household  spending  supported  by  a  favorable 
employment  and  income  situation.  The  European  economy  also  has  continued  to  recover 
moderately, supported by an increase in private consumption. Looking ahead, it is likely that 
advanced economies will continue to register firm growth. As for emerging economies, the 
Chinese economy is likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities proactively 
carry out both fiscal and financial measures to support economic activity, although the growth 
pace is expected to be somewhat slower than in the past. Other emerging economies and 
commodity-exporting  economies  are  expected  to  remain  subdued  for  the  time  being,  but 
growth rates are then likely to gradually increase, due mainly to the effects of the economic 
stimulus measures and the recovery in advanced economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
This is the baseline scenario for overseas economies, but risks are skewed to the downside. 
Developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  including  China  are  still 
particularly uncertain. The fact that volatility in financial markets has not yet been dispelled 
also warrants attention. Moreover, uncertainty over the timing of the next policy interest rate 
hike in the United States is affecting global financial markets, particularly emerging markets. 
In addition, there are various political risks such as the referendum in the United Kingdom 
later  this  month  regarding  a  so-called  “Brexit”  –  that  is,  whether  Britain  should  leave  the 
European  Union  (EU).  Going  forward,  the  Bank  will  need  to  continue  to  closely  monitor 
whether these uncertainties surrounding overseas economies will either clear up or grow. 
Corporate sector 
Next,  I  will  touch  on  Japan’s  economy.  First,  in  the  corporate  sector,  profits  are  at  record 
levels  (Chart  2).  This  is  attributable  to  the  fact  that  the  real  economy  is  improving  and  to 
factors such as the low crude oil prices and the past correction of the yen appreciation. The 
pace of improvement in corporate profits is expected to temporarily slow down, especially in 
the  manufacturing  sector,  mainly  because  of  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies. 
However,  corporate  profits  are  projected  to  follow  an  improving  trend,  given  that  the  past 
decline in crude oil prices  will continue to have positive effects and  the rise in demand at 
home and abroad is expected to raise sales volume growth. 
On the back of the high corporate profits, firms have maintained their positive stance toward 
fixed  investment.  Figures  on  business  fixed  investment  plans  in  the  March  2016  Tankan 
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) show that investment by large firms 
is likely to have increased by about 10 percent on a year-on-year basis in fiscal 2015 and 
that  by  small  firms  by  about  4  percent.  Moreover,  investment  plans  for  fiscal  2016  are 
vigorous for this time of the year. Going forward, business fixed investment is projected to 
continue to see a moderate uptrend, mainly due to continued high levels of corporate profits 
along  with  the  further  decline  in  real  interest  rates  under  “Quantitative  and  Qualitative 
Monetary Easing (QQE) with a Negative Interest Rate.” 
Household sector 
Next, I would like to explain developments in the household sector. The increase in economic 
activity  and  the  high  levels  of  corporate  profits  have  led  to  a  steady  improvement  in  the 
employment and income situation. With the number of employees increasing at a relatively 
high  pace,  the  active  job  openings-to-applicants  ratio  has  been  1.34,  marking  the  highest 
level seen since 1991, while the unemployment rate has been 3.2 percent, the lowest level 
seen since 1997 (Chart 3). Furthermore, the employment conditions DI in the March Tankan 
indicates that many firms feel that there is a shortage of labor. These labor market conditions 
mean that Japan’s economy can be regarded as being at full employment. Because of the 
continued tightening of labor market conditions, there is growing upward pressure on wages. 
This clearly can be seen in the relatively large increase in part-time employees’ hourly cash 
earnings,  which  tend  to  closely  reflect  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market. 
Moreover,  regarding  the  wages  of  full-time  employees,  annual  base-pay  increases  –  a 
practice  that  had  disappeared  during  the  period  of  deflation  –  were  observed  for  a  third 
consecutive  year  in  the  labor-management  wage  negotiations  this  spring.  Thus,  high 
corporate profits have continued to feed through to employee incomes. 
Against  this  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation, 
private  consumption  has  been  resilient.  Since  the  turn  of  the  year,  however,  consumer 
sentiment  has  become  cautious  against  the  backdrop  of  volatile  financial  markets, 
contributing to relatively weak developments in some indicators of private consumption. With 
the  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation  likely  to  continue,  the  current 
weakness in private consumption is likely to be temporary, but close attention needs to be 
paid to developments in private consumption, including by pensioners, who are less likely to 
benefit from the improvement in the employment and income situation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Outlook for Japan’s economic activity 
In sum, although exports and production are expected to remain sluggish for the time being, 
domestic  demand  is  likely  to  follow  an  uptrend,  with  the  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to 
spending remaining in place in both the household and corporate sectors, and exports are 
expected  to  increase  moderately  on  the  back  of  emerging  economies  moving  out  of  their 
deceleration phase. Japan’s economy is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend at a rate 
generally above its potential. 
Price developments in Japan and the outlook 
II. 
Let me now turn to the developments in and outlook for prices in Japan. 
Price developments in Japan changed significantly following the introduction of QQE in April 
2013. The year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh 
food), which had been minus 0.5 percent just before the introduction of QQE, increased to as 
high as 1.5 percent in April 2014, excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike (Chart 4). 
Since then, the year-on-year rate of change has declined and currently is around 0 percent. 
This is because private consumption continued to be relatively weak after the consumption 
tax hike in April 2014 and because there was a substantial fall in crude oil prices since the 
summer of that year. 
However, excluding the effect of the decline in energy prices, the underlying trend in inflation 
has continued to improve steadily. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items 
excluding fresh food and energy – which was negative before the introduction of QQE – has 
remained  positive  for  31  consecutive  months  since  October  2013,  and  has  been  about 
1 percent recently. This is the first time since the late 1990s, when Japan’s economy fell into 
deflation, that sustained price increases have been observed. 
Looking ahead, how the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food 
will develop in the short run depends on developments in import prices, which are influenced 
by changes in energy prices and foreign exchange rates, but the most important factor is the 
underlying trend in inflation. This trend is determined by the output gap of the economy as a 
whole and by medium- to long-term inflation expectations – that is, views on the outlook for 
prices.  Reflecting  sluggish  exports  and  production,  the  output  gap  is  more  or  less 
unchanged; going forward, however, with economic growth likely to be generally above the 
potential growth rate, the output gap is expected to move into positive territory and gradually 
increase further from the second half of fiscal 2016. Thus, upward pressure on wages and 
prices due to the tightening of supply and demand conditions is likely to steadily increase. 
Meanwhile, although medium- to long-term inflation expectations appear to be rising on the 
whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective, they have weakened recently. The results 
of various surveys on inflation expectations as well as developments in break-even inflation 
(BEI)  rates  –  calculated  using  the  yields  of  inflation-indexed  Japanese  government  bonds 
(JGBs) – imply that inflation expectations have been declining since end-2015. Nevertheless, 
when assessing developments in inflation expectations, it is necessary to also take account 
of  firms’  price-  and  wage-setting  stance  and  households’  spending  behavior.  In  particular, 
wage developments warrant attention. Past experience shows that wages and prices move 
roughly  in  tandem,  so  a  sustainable  rise  in  prices  is  unlikely  to  be  achieved  without  an 
increase in wages. As mentioned earlier, in the annual labor-management wage negotiations 
this  spring,  a  rise  in  base  pay  was  agreed  for  the  third  year  in  a  row.  Moreover,  wage 
increases have been spreading to small firms. Therefore, the mechanism in which inflation 
rises  moderately  accompanied  by  wage  increases  has  been  operating.  Consequently,  as 
actual  inflation  rises,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are  likely  to  follow  an 
increasing  trend  and  gradually  converge  to  around  2  percent  –  the  price  stability  target. 
Against this backdrop, firms’ wage- and price-setting stance is likely to shift further toward 
raising wages and prices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
Taking a closer look at the results of the annual labor-management wage negotiations this 
spring, however, the rise in base pay was somewhat less than that of last year, particularly in 
large  firms,  partly  because  confidence  on  the  side  of  both  labor  and  management  was 
affected by the heightened uncertainty regarding developments in overseas economies and 
by the volatility in financial markets since the turn of the year. The Bank will assess carefully 
how firms’ price-setting stance develops this fiscal year, given the results of the annual labor-
management wage negotiations. 
In  sum,  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  is  projected  to  continue  improving  steadily  as  the 
output gap is expected to move into positive territory and gradually increase further and as 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  will  follow  an  increasing  trend.  Therefore,  the 
year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food  is  likely  to  be  about 
0 percent  for  the  time  being,  but  the  rate  of  change  is  projected  to  accelerate  toward 
2 percent  as  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  energy  prices  dissipate.  The  Bank’s  April  2016 
Outlook  Report  –  taking  into  consideration  oil  prices  in  the  futures  market,  which  reflect 
forecasts by market participants – assumes that Dubai crude oil prices will rise moderately 
from the recent 35 U.S. dollars per barrel to the range of 45–50 dollars per barrel toward the 
end of the projection period, that is, fiscal 2018. Based on this assumption, the Bank projects 
that  the  timing  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  for  all  items  less  fresh  food 
reaching around 2 percent – the price stability target – will be during fiscal 2017. Comparing 
the  projections  in  the  April  Outlook  Report  with  those  in  the  January  Outlook  Report,  the 
projected  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  for  fiscal  2016  is  lower,  mainly  reflecting  downward 
revisions in projections for real GDP growth and wage increases. 
III. 
The Bank’s monetary policy management 
Effects of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
I would now like to turn to the Bank’s monetary policy management. 
The  Bank  introduced  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate”  at  the  January  2016  Monetary 
Policy Meeting (MPM). Global financial markets had been volatile since the turn of the year, 
and  there  was  an  increasing  risk  that  an  improvement  in  the  business  confidence  of 
Japanese firms  and  conversion  of  the  deflationary  mindset  might  be  delayed  and  that  the 
underlying  trend  in  inflation  might  be  negatively  affected.  “QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest 
Rate”  was  introduced  in  order  to  preempt  the  manifestation  of  this  risk  and  to  maintain 
momentum toward achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. 
“QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” continues with the QQE framework employed so far but 
enhances monetary easing effects by adding the new dimension of a negative interest rate. 
The basic concept of transmission mechanisms of the Bank’s policy has not changed. Let me 
explain in more detail. First, QQE raises inflation expectations through the Bank’s strong and 
clear commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and through large-scale 
monetary easing to underpin the commitment. Second, QQE puts strong downward pressure 
on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive purchases of JGBs. 
These two channels result in a decline in real interest rates. The decline in real interest rates 
boosts business fixed investment and housing investment through a decline in interest rates 
on  business  and  housing  loans.  The  boost  in  economic  activity  improves  the  output  gap, 
which together with rising inflation expectations, lifts prices. “QQE with a Negative Interest 
Rate” exerts stronger downward pressure on interest rates across the entire yield curve by 
lowering  long-term  yields  through  the  Bank’s  continued  massive  purchases  of  long-term 
JGBs as well as by  lowering short-term interest rates through applying a negative interest 
rate to part of the current account balances held by financial institutions at the Bank. This 
results in further lowering real interest rates and enhances the transmission of policy effects I 
just mentioned. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The  policy  has  already  exerted  the  intended  effects  on  interest  rates.  Following  the 
introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  a  large  part  of  the  JGB  yield  curve  has 
declined substantially, with rates up to a maturity of over 10 years having turned negative. 
Lending  rates,  including  interest  rates  on  housing  loans,  clearly  have  declined.  Issuance 
rates on CP and corporate bonds also have declined to a considerable degree. In the March 
Tankan,  financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes  as  perceived  by  firms  improved  further 
following the introduction of the negative interest rate policy, and those for all industries and 
enterprises were at a level last seen in the late 1980s. Firms’ perception of borrowing costs is 
that these have declined notably (Chart 5). 
Going forward, these policy effects on interest rates are likely to steadily spread to both the 
real  economy  and  the  price front.  However,  it  will  take  some time for the  monetary  policy 
effects to spread. In addition, global financial markets – partly due to uncertainties regarding 
the outlook for emerging and commodity-exporting economies – remain volatile, and this has 
become a headwind that has restrained the effects of accommodative financial conditions on 
economic activity and prices from being exerted. As I noted earlier, the projection of the CPI 
in  the  April  Outlook  Report  is  lower  than  that  in  the  previous  report,  mainly  reflecting  the 
downward revision of projections for real GDP growth and wage increases. Nevertheless, the 
Bank did not take additional monetary easing measures at the April MPM because, due to 
the  reasons I just  mentioned,  the  Bank judged  it  appropriate to  examine  the  extent  of  the 
penetration of policy effects. 
To avoid any misunderstanding, I would like to clarify that there has been no change in the 
Bank’s commitment to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible 
time. Transforming people’s deflationary mindset and raising inflation expectations through 
this commitment is itself the aim of overcoming deflation, and at the same time the starting 
point of the effects of QQE and “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate.” Firms’ and households’ 
inflation perceptions have changed markedly under this commitment. While the Bank at the 
April MPM judged that it would be appropriate to  examine  the extent of the penetration of 
effects of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” this does not preclude additional monetary 
easing if necessary. As for the outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices, risks – such 
as uncertainty over the global economy and volatility in financial markets – continue to be 
skewed to the downside. Therefore, the Bank will continue to carefully examine these risks at 
each MPM, and take additional easing measures in terms of the three dimensions – quantity, 
quality, and the interest rate – if it is judged necessary for achieving the price stability target. 
The aims of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
So far, I have explained the Bank’s thinking on the negative interest rate policy. However, I 
am aware that there has been a range of criticisms. While these are a variety of issues, I 
would like to talk about two in particular. 
The first criticism is that many do not feel the benefits of the negative interest rate policy. It 
certainly  is  true  that those  who  have  no  housing  loans  and  whose  financial  assets  mostly 
consist  of  deposits,  such  as  pensioners  and  the  elderly,  do  not  enjoy  benefits  from  the 
decline  in  borrowing  rates  and  instead  only  suffer  from  a  decline  in  interest  income.  As 
interest rates have been low for two decades, I have full sympathy for those who have been 
disadvantaged as a result. 
However, what I would like you to understand is that the effects of monetary policy should 
not be measured by the profits and losses arising from financial transactions with your bank. 
By pushing real interest rates below the natural rate of interest – that is, the interest rate at 
which  the  economy  neither  accelerates  nor  decelerates  –  and  stimulating  the  economic 
activities  of  firms  and  households,  monetary  easing  will  increase  aggregate  demand  and 
push up prices. To give you an example: if a drop in firms’ funding costs were to occur, they 
will undertake businesses and projects that otherwise would not have been profitable. In this 
case, firms’ fixed investment increases, and employment and wages will rise as well. Under 
QQE and “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,” firms’ funding costs are much lower than the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
expected  return  from  new  businesses  and  projects.  Looking  at  the  Financial  Statements 
Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly, for instance, firms’ return on assets (ROA) is 
somewhere  around  4  percent,  while  average  interest  payments  –  firms’  funding  costs  – 
amount to only about 1 percent (Chart 6). Firms’ ROA exceeds their funding costs by a larger 
margin than ever before. This means that if a firm borrows money now to start a business, it 
will gain a return from the business that far exceeds the interest of the loan to pay. The highly 
accommodative  financial  conditions  stimulate  investment  by  firms  in  new  businesses  and 
projects. If firms increase their investment, the benefits will also spread to households in the 
form of increases in employment and wages. As monetary policy affects the entire economy 
in the way I just described, it is necessary to consider its effects from the perspective of the 
economy as a whole. 
Meanwhile,  with  regard  to  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  I  am  often  asked  why  it  is 
necessary that prices rise year after year. To answer this question, let me ask you to recall 
that  more  than  15  years  of  deflation  have  stymied  the  dynamics  of  the  economy  like  a 
chronic  disease.  You  therefore  can  see  why  moderate  inflation  is  a  good  thing.  Under 
deflation, the economy fell into a vicious cycle in which a decline in prices led to a decrease 
in  firms’  sales  and  profits,  which  in  turn  resulted  in  wage  restraint,  a  downturn  in 
consumption, and a further decline in prices. If we can reverse the deflationary mindset and 
economic entities started behaving based on the premise that prices will rise moderately, the 
exact opposite would happen; that is, a virtuous cycle would arise in which firms’ sales and 
profits  increase  and  wages  also  rise.  What  the  Bank  is  aiming  to  achieve  is  this  kind  of 
virtuous cycle. This will likely benefit a broad range of economic entities. 
When I provide this explanation, I am sometimes asked: if we try to achieve a rise in prices 
and  prices  do  rise  but  wages  do  not,  won’t  this  be  bad  for  the  economy?  However,  as  I 
mentioned  earlier,  a  rise  in  prices  without  a  rise  in  wages  is  not  something  that  normally 
happens.  If  firms’  sales  and  profits  grow  through  increases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and 
services, wages paid to workers will increase accordingly. In fact, past data show that the 
rate  of  increase  in  hourly  wages  and  that  in  consumer  prices  have  generally  moved  in 
tandem (Chart 7). The Bank is aiming at a situation in which the economy expands on the 
basis of mild inflation accompanied by wage increases. After having experienced protracted 
deflation,  it  may  be  difficult  to  actually  imagine  such  a  situation  now  in  Japan.  However,  I 
would like you to recall that, until the mid-1990s, people conducted their economic activities 
on  the  premise  of  moderate  inflation  and  took  for  granted  that  wages  and  prices  would 
increase. 
With  this  in  mind,  overcoming  deflation  as  soon  as  possible  through  decisive  monetary 
easing  is  absolutely  essential  to  returning  Japan’s  economy  to  a  sustainable  growth  path, 
while the Bank will be watchful of the various effects of its low interest rate policy including 
negative interest rates. 
The impact on the JGB market 
The second criticism I often hear concerns the impact of “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” 
on financial institutions and financial markets. I recognize that the policy has various effects 
on  financial  institutions  –  not  only  in  terms  of  their  profitability,  but  also  on  their  trading 
practices  as  well  as  their  information  and  computer  systems.  Moreover,  in  terms  of  the 
impact on financial markets, I am also aware of concerns that, with the Bank continuing with 
large-scale  purchases  of  JGBs,  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  the  JGB  market  are 
becoming extremely tight, and that conducting the negative interest rate policy under these 
circumstances  would  have  distorting  effects  on  the  JGB  market  and  thereby  cause  great 
damage to liquidity and functioning of the market. I would like to talk about this second point 
today. 
Let me start by highlighting that the Bank makes its utmost efforts to ensure the stability of 
financial markets by conducting its market operations as flexibly as possible while engaging 
in  a  close  exchange  of  opinions  with  market  participants.  In  addition,  the  Bank  carefully 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
monitors the liquidity and functioning of the JGB market from a variety of angles. Last year, it 
started to conduct and publish the Bond Market Survey, which reports the results of surveys 
of market participants on the liquidity and functioning of the JGB market. Moreover, the Bank 
regularly  compiles  and  publishes  a  wide  range  of  JGB  market  liquidity  indicators  in  the 
futures  market,  the  cash  JGB  market,  and  the  repo  market.  Some  indicators  certainly 
suggest  that  there  has  been  a  decline  in  liquidity  since  the  start  of  this  year  (Chart  8). 
However, these indicators tend to fluctuate substantially and have shown large changes on 
occasion.  Moreover,  as  was  the  case  with  bid-ask  spreads,  there  are  indicators  that 
temporarily  widened  but  improved  thereafter.  The  JGB  market  is  a  mirror  of  market 
participants’ outlook for economic growth and perception on prices. There is no doubt that 
this  market  is  significantly  affected  by  the  unconventional  large-scale  monetary  easing; 
therefore, the Bank will continue to carefully monitor the developments in liquidity in and the 
functioning of the JGB market, so that the mirror will remain clear. 
Conclusion 
In concluding, let me touch on the economy of Akita Prefecture. 
The  economy  of  Akita  Prefecture  continues  to  recover  moderately  as  a  trend.  In  terms  of 
employment  and  income,  the  active  job-openings-to-applicants ratio  has  been  above  1 for 
17 months  in  a  row  –  the  longest  period  ever  –  and  labor  market  conditions  have  been 
tightening. Moreover, against the background of rising labor shortages, moves toward wage 
increases  are  continuing.  Under  these  circumstances,  private  consumption  has  been  firm. 
Although  some  weakness  in  firms’  production  activities  can  be  observed  due  to  the 
deceleration in emerging economies, looking at the Tankan results of the Akita Branch of the 
Bank  of  Japan,  corporate  profits  and  fixed  investment  plans  for  this  fiscal  year  have 
increased  for  four  years  in  a  row,  with  the  increase  particularly  strong  in  manufacturing, 
suggesting that corporate profits and fixed investment plans are resilient. 
That being said, business sentiment differs considerably depending on the industry and firm 
size, and business sentiment among small and very small nonmanufacturing firms has been 
slow  to  improve,  partly  because  such  firms  have  fallen  behind  in  capturing  demand  from 
outside the region. In addition, Akita Prefecture faces substantial structural changes, such as 
population  aging  and  decline,  which  is  more  severe  than  in  many  other  prefectures.  An 
urgent issue is to provide a necessary infrastructure that allows the young to be active and 
settle  in  the  prefecture.  Akita’s  comprehensive  strategy  for  the  future  formulated  by  the 
prefectural government in October last year contains measures to attract people to settle in 
the prefecture and to counter the falling birth rate, in addition to measures for the promotion 
of industry. 
Although Akita faces a variety of challenges, it is blessed with an abundance of resources 
that could become a key to regional revitalization; namely, important industrial clusters such 
as in the electronic parts and devices industry and the machinery industry, ample agricultural 
and  forestry  resources,  and  major  potential  tourist  attractions.  In  the  aviation  industry,  the 
prefecture and local firms are cooperating in efforts to establish business relationships with 
major aircraft manufacturers, and shipments have increased in recent years. In alternative 
energy, Akita now has one of the largest wind power generation capacities nationwide, and 
there have been moves toward the commercialization of biomass and geothermal electricity 
generation.  In  agriculture,  there  has  been  progress  in  developing  competitive  agricultural 
products to reduce Akita’s dependence on rice farming. And in tourism, it boasts a range of 
unique  festivals  and  events  in  the  various  regions  within  the  prefecture.  Apart  from  the 
Namahage Festival on the Oga Peninsula, which is well known throughout Japan, and the 
Omagari fireworks, Akita Prefecture offers a great variety of tourist attractions such as the 
historically valuable samurai residences in Kakunodate and the hot spring resorts of Nyuto 
Onsen and Tamagawa Onsen. In order for Akita Prefecture’s economy to develop further, it 
is of great importance to continue to effectively utilize these resources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
The  Bank,  centering  on  its  Akita  Branch,  hopes  to  contribute  as  much  as  possible  to  the 
initiatives in the prefecture to vitalize the region. In closing, I wish all the best for the further 
development of the economy of Akita Prefecture. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
    12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
