   Mark Carney: Enabling the FinTech transformation – revolution, 
restoration, or reformation? 
Speech by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability Board, at the Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London, 
Mansion House, London, 16 June 2016. 
 Given the tragic murder of Jo Cox MP on 16 June, at the Mansion House dinner in lieu of this 
speech, the Governor paid tribute to Ms Cox and the highest standards of public service she 
represented throughout her life.  
Introduction 
1. 
My Lord Mayor, Chancellor, My Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Let me begin by thanking Andrew Bailey for his outstanding record of public service during his 
31 years at the Bank of England.  
Andrew  is  an  extraordinary  public  servant  who  has  devoted  his  entire  professional  life  to 
serving the people of the United Kingdom. During his career, he has worked across all of the 
Bank’s policy areas, combining leadership and innovation to deliver consistently the Bank’s 
policy objectives. His work in helping to manage the crisis and then to develop the post-crisis 
regulatory framework has been exemplary. He has made the Prudential Regulation Authority 
(PRA) a highly respected and effective regulator and built a team of exceptionally dedicated 
colleagues. I would like to thank Andrew for his counsel and support since I joined the Bank 
and wish him every success in steering the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) at this vital time 
in its history. I admire his commitment to ensuring the UK’s financial system serves its real 
economy and I look forward to continuing to work closely with him in future.  
Although the Bank has placed itself in purdah, its duties never cease. The people of the United 
Kingdom,  via  parliament,  have  conferred  tremendous  responsibilities  on  the  Bank.  These 
remits must be pursued continuously, independently and transparently. 
The independence of the Bank of England is at the heart of the integrity of the financial system. 
And the Bank’s independent conduct of monetary policy is vital to ensuring price stability and 
to support strong, sustainable and balanced growth across the United Kingdom.  
Transparency is the hallmark of modern central banking and democratic accountability.  
Today, consistent with its statutory responsibilities, the nine-member independent Monetary 
Policy Committee (MPC) announced its latest monetary policy decision.  
The  published  minutes  of  that  meeting  contain,  as  they  should,  carefully  calibrated  and 
precisely  worded  descriptions  of  the  MPC’s  deliberations,  the  adjustments  to  our  outlook, 
including our assessment of the major risks to the economy. The minutes also note some of 
the wide range of contingency plans the Bank has put in place to support market functioning 
and financial stability around the referendum.  
If you have not already done so, I recommend you read them.  
Let  me  move  from  the  short  term  to  the  medium  term.  For  there  is  more  than  a  whiff  of 
revolution in the air. 
2. 
The promise of FinTech  
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive; but to be young was very heaven! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   To its advocates, the wave of innovation sweeping through the world of financial technology 
promises  nothing  short  of  revolution.  ‘FinTech’  heralds  the  dawn  of  narrow  banking  and 
portfolio optimisation. It will change the nature of money,1 shake the foundations of central 
banking and deliver nothing less than a democratic revolution for all who use financial services. 
Revolutions are not always abrupt, and sometimes their origins remain obscure. 
In  noting  the  possibilities  at  the  start  of  the  Twentieth  century,  Keynes  remarked  that  “the 
inhabitant of London could order by telephone, sipping his morning tea in bed … the various 
products  of  the  whole  earth  …  adventure  his  wealth  in  the  natural  resources  and  new 
enterprises of any quarter of the world…; [or] decide to couple the security of his fortunes with 
the good faith of the townspeople of any substantial municipality in any continent that fancy or 
information might recommend…”  
Such  global  portfolio  management  was  made  possible  by  technological  developments 
stretching back decades, ranging from the ‘pantelegraph’ of the 1860s – capable of transmitting 
signatures to verify bank deposits – to the cable buried deep beneath the Atlantic that could 
transmit eight words a minute. Such remote trade confirmation and low latency that made the 
Flash Boys of the day possible. 
The financial globalisation these innovations enabled was built on a much earlier, simpler, and 
more profoundly transformational development: the ledger. For there is no finance without the 
ability to record transactions, balances, and obligations.  
Money and credit, the universal instruments of commerce, could not exist without this most 
fundamental of financial technologies, which allows debits and credits to be netted off; debt to 
circulate as currency; money to replace memory; and with it, trade to expand exponentially.  
How much have we progressed since Keynes’ bed-ridden globalisation? 
Replace “telephone” with a “tablet” and “tea” with a “soy latteccino” and you have not the start 
of the Twentieth Century but the Twenty First, a century in which opportunities are no longer 
limited to men or denizens of the City. Nonetheless, finance continues to be arranged around 
a series of hubs like brokers, clearing houses and exchanges; whereas, in other domains, 
people form connections directly, instantaneously and openly, and this is revolutionising how 
they consume, work, and communicate.  
The  extent  to  which  finance  continues  democratising  and  transforming  depends  on 
superficially arcane, but fundamentally vital, enabling technologies. The emergence of mobile 
telephony,  the  ubiquity  of  the  internet,  availability  of  high-speed  computing,  advances  in 
cryptography, and innovations in machine learning could combine to enable rapid changes in 
finance – just as they have in other areas of the economy.  
The ledger, once stone, wood, or paper – and always centralised – is now digital and may 
become distributed. FinTech has the potential to deliver more resilient financial infrastructure, 
more effective trade and settlement, and new ways to encode, share and analyse data.  
For the financial sector, these could offer shorter, speedier transaction chains; greater capital 
efficiency; and stronger operational resilience. For consumers, they could mean more choice; 
better-targeted  services;  and  keener  pricing.  For  everyone,  FinTech  may  deliver  a  more 
inclusive  financial  system,  domestically  and  globally;  with  people  better  connected,  more 
informed and increasingly empowered.2  
                                                
1   Especially the balance between inside money (created by commercial banks) and outside money (created by 
central banks). 
2   FinTech could play a role in helping to address a worrying decline in the provision of correspondent banking 
services which support cross-border payment and settlement. Half of emerging market and developing economy 
jurisdictions,  three  quarters  of  large  banks  and  a  majority  of  local  and  regional  respondent  banks  recently 
reported a decline in such services. Know-your-customer utilities and potentially distributed ledger technologies 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   These benefits spring from FinTech’s potential to deliver a great unbundling of banking into its 
core  functions  of  settling  payments,  performing  maturity  transformation,  sharing  risk  and 
allocating capital. This would mean revolution, fundamentally re-shaping the financial system.  
At the same time, some financial technologies could make incumbent banks more efficient and 
profitable, reinforcing existing economies of scale and scope in banking. This would mean a 
restoration, reinforcing incumbents’ power. 
The balance of these forces may yield a third alternative – a reformation – a more diverse, 
resilient  and  effective  system  for  consumers.  One  where  large  banks  exist  alongside  new 
entrants who compete across the value chain. 
Tonight, I want to discuss how FinTech could affect the Bank of England’s policy objectives 
and our role in enabling FinTech to meet its promise for the people we serve. I will begin with 
the former. 
The Potential impact of FinTech on financial and monetary stability  
3. 
FinTech has the potential to affect monetary policy transmission, the safety and soundness of 
the firms we supervise, the resilience of the financial system, and the nature of shocks that it 
might face. 
It could also have profound implications for the Bank’s secondary objective, as supervisors, to 
facilitate effective competition between the firms we regulate.  
The impact on firms’ safety and soundness depends on several factors. By making wholesale 
and retail settlement faster and capital allocation more efficient, FinTech could boost banks’ 
returns and therefore viability.  
Already, FinTech is spurring new entrants including payments providers, peer-to-peer lenders, 
robo  advisors,  innovative  trading  platforms,  and  foreign  exchange  agents.  This  could,  with 
time, unbundle traditional banking models and deny banks their traditional economies of scale 
and scope. 
The  systemic  consequences  of  FinTech  are  even  more  complex.  More  diverse  business 
models and alternative providers are positives for financial stability. By allowing better credit 
screening  and  less  adverse  selection,  FinTech  could  improve  risk  assessment,  credit 
allocation, and capital efficiency. But if it encourages herding on common information, trading 
positions could become more correlated. And if switching costs in funding markets fall, liquidity 
risk could rise and systemic risks grow.  
Indeed,  sometimes  when  I  hear  of  democratising  finance,  spreading  risk  in  capital-light 
originate-to-distribute models, I think I haven’t been this excited since the advent of sub-prime. 
FinTech could also affect the conduct of monetary policy. Unbundled banking would change 
the roles of bank capital and funding costs in the credit channel of monetary policy. If FinTech 
enhances  participation  in  financial  markets,  the  wealth  channel  of  monetary  policy  could 
strengthen. 
More  broadly,  Big  Data  techniques  could  tell  us  about  the  state  of  the  economy  more 
accurately  and  promptly.  Forecast  performance  could  improve,  akin  to  the  forecast 
improvements that better measurement of atmospheric conditions has, over time, delivered for 
meteorologists. 
 may help to lower the compliance costs which major banks say have been a factor in their decisions to withdraw 
from  correspondent  banking.  And  in  time,  FinTech  may  broaden  the  pool  of  non-banks  able  to  provide 
individuals and companies with viable alternatives, but for now banks continue to act as gatekeepers to payment 
and settlement in central bank money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   My own forecast is that FinTech’s consequences for the Bank’s objectives will not become fully 
apparent for some time. Many of the technologies needed to deliver such transformations are 
nascent – their scalability and compatibility untested beyond Proofs of Concept. Moreover, the 
bar for displacing incumbent technologies is very high. Nor will the Bank of England take risks 
with the resilience of the core of the system. Disruption won’t come either easy or cheap. 
Enabling the FinTech Transformation 
4. 
We are actively exploring how new financial technologies could support our policy objectives. 
There are five ways the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation. 
The first is widening access to central bank money to non-bank Payments Service 
Providers, known as PSPs. 3 
As the internet revolutionised commerce, making trade faster and markets more competitive, 
payments technology lagged in many countries, although it is worth remembering that the UK 
has been a global leader on real-time retail payments. Faster Payments (FPS) was one of the 
earliest  real-time  retail  systems  introduced,  in  2008.  Now,  new  entrants  and  established 
players are seeking to provide payment services that are instantaneous, secure, reliable and 
accessible anytime from anywhere.4 
Retail consumers and firms are increasingly demanding payments completed in seconds, not 
hours or days.  
They expect payments to be seamless, reliable and cheap whether to recipients overseas or 
just up the street.  
And they expect to make payments without visits to a bank branch or even logging onto a 
desktop computer.  
Similarly, companies, financial intermediaries and governments want to process ever larger 
and more complex bulk payments covering multiple systems, countries and currencies. 
Central banks lie at the hearts of payment systems, giving households and firms the assurance 
that transactions have settled in the most secure form of payment: central bank money. To 
fulfil that role, our payments infrastructure needs to remain fit for purpose: reliable, resilient 
and robust. But we must also be responsive to changing payments demands. So earlier this 
year the Bank announced we would be drawing up a blueprint to replace our current real-time 
gross settlement (RTGS) system, now twenty years old.  
48 institutions currently have settlement accounts in RTGS. All other users of the systems that 
settle across RTGS access settlement via one of four agent banks.5 These users include over 
1000 non-bank PSPs serving customers’ increasingly demanding standards, and many rely 
on major UK payment schemes, particularly Faster Payments (FPS).  
As they grow, some PSPs want to reduce their reliance on the systems, service levels, risk 
appetite and goodwill of the very banks with whom they are competing. Re-selling services 
ultimately provided by banks limits these firms’ growth, potential to innovate, and competitive 
impact. 
                                                
3   These PSPs include firms granted the status of either an e-money or payment institution in the UK.  
4   Examples include From Stripe to Square, from Paypal to Ripple, from Applepay to Zapp. 
5  
Indirect access removes the need to build costly payments infrastructure – a potentially large fixed cost for 
young companies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   That is why I am announcing this evening that the Bank intends to extend direct access to 
RTGS beyond the current set of firms, allowing a range of non-bank PSPs to compete on a 
level playing field with banks. 6 
By increasing the proportion of settlement in central bank money, diversifying the number of 
settlement  firms,  and  driving  greater  innovation  in  risk-reducing  payments  technologies, 
expanding access should bring financial stability benefits. It should also enable more efficient, 
effective and inclusive payments, including in ways that we cannot fully anticipate. 
It is not a one-way street, however.  
As we extend access, we will safeguard resilience in three ways: by holding settlement account 
holders to the appropriate standards; by removing legislative barriers to non-bank access; and 
by designing the right account arrangements for new entrants. 
I am pleased that both the FCA and HMRC, who together supervise these institutions, are 
committed to developing a strengthened supervisory regime for those who apply for an RTGS 
settlement account, to give assurance that non-bank PSPs can safely take their place at the 
heart of the payment system. 
And  I  welcome  the  Chancellor’s  commitment  tonight  to  make  the  necessary  legislative 
changes to ensure that these new entrants can access RTGS safely and efficiently.7  
By  extending  RTGS  access,  our  objective  is  to  increase  competition  and  innovation  in  the 
market for payment services. To ensure that PSPs are not disadvantaged relative to banks 
offering equivalent payment services, the Bank intends to give appropriate remuneration for 
balances that PSPs will be required to hold overnight to support their payments activities.8 
The second way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by being open to 
providing  access  to  central  bank  money  for  new  forms  of  wholesale  securities 
settlement.  
Securities settlement is the lifeblood of modern wholesale financial markets – the associated 
payments account for fully half of RTGS’s daily settlement flows. 
However, as with retail payments, securities settlement is now ripe for innovation. A typical 
settlement chain can involve many different intermediaries, meaning securities settlement is 
comparatively slow. Transactions that take nanoseconds to execute settle in days. This also 
means large costs and operational risk. And, like in payment systems, economies of scale 
introduce concentration and create single points of failure. All of that ties up potentially tens of 
                                                
6  Another  key  enabler  of  PSP  access  to  major  retail  payment  systems  such  as  FPS  is  the  development  of 
aggregators that can provide direct technical connections to the infrastructure, reducing the costs of building 
this capability for newer entrants. The intention is that these aggregators could be used by PSPs without an 
RTGS  account,  but  under  this  arrangement  PSPs  would  still  need  an  agent  bank  for  settlement  of  their 
obligations across RTGS.  
7   The  legislative  changes  include  adding  Payment  Institutions  to  the  list  of  regulated  entities  to  whom  the 
Settlement Finality Regulations apply, modifying the Payment Services and Electronic Money Regulations to 
enable safeguarded funds held by E-Money Institutions and Payment Institutions to be posted with the Bank 
and amending the Banking Act to expand HM Treasury’s powers to grant the  
  Bank of England with the ability to supervise any relevant payments systems if they ultimately grow large enough 
to pose a systemic threat. The first is essential to enable these firms to benefit from the critical protections the 
Settlement Finality Regulations offer to users of major UK payment systems. The second is needed to enable 
these firms to deposit monies in RTGS on behalf of their customers. The final change provides assurance that 
any longer-term stability implications of these changes can be addressed under the Bank’s prudential remit. 
8   We do not intend, however, to extend facilities to PSPs for which they have no need. Non-bank PSPs will not 
therefore be eligible for membership of the Sterling Monetary Framework – and in particular the Bank’s credit 
facilities. That is because PSPs are not part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism or exposed to 
inherent overnight liquidity risk. The Bank may also take steps to limit PSPs’ capacity to hold unlimited overnight 
balances on their settlement accounts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   billions of pounds worth of capital. With the economics of wholesale banking under pressure, 
cutting inefficiencies is a high priority for industry. 
That is why it is welcome that FinTech innovators are exploring the potential of distributed 
ledger technology to simplify the settlement chain, reduce its cost, and raise its speed while 
increasing resilience. The instruments involved range from equities to bank loans. However, 
the  challenges  facing  such  projects  are  legion,  including  reliability,  resilience,  security  and 
scale. And fundamentally, how to prove technologies that are still nascent?  
One  challenge  an  otherwise  robust  system  of  sufficient  scale  would  not  face  is  access  to 
central bank money from the Bank of England. The Bank has for many years sought to ensure 
that, wherever possible, wholesale securities settlement occurs in central bank money.  
We  are  already  clear  that  we  stand  ready  to  act  as  settlement  agent  both  for  regulated 
systemically important schemes supervised by the Bank, and, on a case-by-case basis, for 
other  new  systems.9  The  Bank  will  use  this  to  enable  innovation  and  competition,  without 
compromising stability.  
The third way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by exploring the use 
of Distributed Ledger (DL) technology in our core activities, including the operation of 
RTGS.  
If distributed ledger technology could provide a more efficient way for private sector firms to 
deliver payments and settle securities, why not apply it to the core of the payments system 
itself? 
The  great  promise  of  distributed  ledgers  for  central  banks  is  their  potential  to  enhance 
resilience.  Distributing  the  ledger  means  multiple  copies  of  the  system.  It  can  continue  to 
operate if parts get knocked out. That removes the single point of failure risk inherent in a 
centralised system. 
But if we are to entrust the heart of our financial system to such technology, it must be robust 
and reliable. The payments system we oversee processes £½ trillion of bank transactions, 
equivalent to around 1/3 of annual GDP, each day. Disruptions are potentially costly. That is 
why, in payments and settlement, the Bank has an extremely low tolerance for any threat to 
the integrity of the economy’s ‘plumbing’. We won’t beta test RTGS.  
To help distinguish DL’s potential from its hype, the Bank has set up our own as a Proof of 
Concept. We have learned a great deal – about the opportunities and the challenges that need 
to be met before DL could be used in central banking.  
Some of those challenges are familiar to any payments system.10 Others are more specific to 
DL.  For  example,  we  would  need  assurance  that  DL  systems  can  be  scaled,  retain  data 
integrity, and operate at the speeds and volumes required by central bank infrastructure – day 
in, day out.  
And we need to be certain that the privacy of the data in those distributed copies cannot be 
compromised by cyber attack, not just today but in the future. One way this might be achieved 
is to limit the distribution of the ledger to existing trusted parties, such as other public sector 
entities. 
To move forward we are working with other central banks. Beyond this we are open to working 
with others to explore further possibilities, including alternative applications of the technology. 
                                                
9   The  criteria  are  publicly  available 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/paymentsystems/boesettlementaccounts.pdf. 
in 
the  Bank’s  Settlement  Account  Policy,  available  at: 
10   In particular, participants need to be identifiable; permissions need to be assigned; messaging must be secure; 
and  transactions  must  be  verified,  recorded,  and  stored.  Ownership  of  assets  must  be  capable  of  being 
determined with certainty, particularly in the event of a participant default. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In the extreme, a DL for everyone could open the possibility of creating a central bank digital 
currency. On some levels this is appealing. For example it would mean people have direct 
access to the ultimate risk-free asset. In its extreme form, it could fundamentally and perhaps 
abruptly re-shape banking.  
However, were it to co-exist with the current banking model, it could exacerbate liquidity risk 
by lowering the frictions involved in running to central bank money.11 These questions and 
others are why these topics are being examined as part of the Bank’s research agenda, with 
the prospect of a central bank digital currency for the UK, in my view, still some way off. We 
will work to make payments easier, and though cash may no longer be king it once was, its 
reign will endure for some time.  
The fourth way the Bank is enabling the FinTech transformation is by partnering with 
FinTech companies on projects of direct relevance to the Bank’s mission.  
I  am  announcing  tonight  that  the  Bank  is  launching  a  FinTech  Accelerator  to  work  in 
partnership with FinTech firms on challenges that we, as a central bank, uniquely face. The 
Accelerator will work with new technology firms to help us harness FinTech innovations for 
central banking. In return, it will offer firms the chance to demonstrate their solutions for real 
issues facing us as policymakers, together with the valuable ‘first client’ reference that comes 
with it. With time, the Accelerator will build a network of firms working in this space for the 
benefit of us and them alike.  
How will this help us? 
Consider  that  the  Bank  monitors  risks  that  threaten  the  operational  resilience  of  the  UK 
financial system.  
At the Financial Policy Committee’s instigation, we have been working with other authorities to 
encourage firms to improve their cyber defences. 
Over the past two years, twenty-three firms have undergone CBEST penetration tests, with all 
core banks expected to have completed tests by the end of this year. 
To complement these efforts, the Bank has begun examining how public data could be used 
to assess firms’ cyber resilience, including looking for malware on a firm’s systems, software 
vulnerabilities, or weak encryption that could be exploited by hackers.12 
As a proof of concept and good cyber hygiene, we are using data publically available on the 
web to assess our own resilience. Early results indicate these techniques could complement 
existing tests in our regular assessments of firms’ operational resilience.  
We  are  also  exploring  how  we  -  and  others  -  could  use  the  data  the  Bank  collects  more 
effectively. Big Data has the potential to help the Bank’s policy committees identify trends in 
systemic risk and the economy. Much of the data we collect is rightly subject to strict limits on 
confidentiality and sharing. For example, our regulatory mortgage contract data comes under 
strict control to guarantee personal data protection. We can’t just share the private data to 
which we have access with external researchers, foreign authorities or even across the Bank. 
But this means that, simply put, the people of the United Kingdom are not getting the most out 
of the data the Bank collects. 
                                                
11   For  further  discussion  see  Broadbent  (2016),  “Central  banks  and  digital  currencies”,  available  at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/886.aspx. 
12   This allows an efficient check of a firm’s cyber defences akin to the way a policeman could walk by a house and 
observe, from the outside, its security features – whether the gate is locked; whether it has an alarm; whether 
windows have been left open; what routes intruders might use to gain access to the property; and so on. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   That’s why we are investigating ways of anonymising and de-sensitising data – fully respecting 
privacy laws without losing analytical content – to allow wider sharing.  
Progress has been encouraging creating the prospect of better informed policy making.13  
These are just two examples of a bigger programme of collaboration between the Bank and 
technology innovators. We are open to further collaboration and tomorrow will provide details 
of the next steps.  
Finally, the Bank is calibrating its regulatory approach to FinTech developments.  
FinTech  should  neither  be  the  Wild  West  nor  strangled  at  birth.  The  Bank  is  devoting 
considerable resources to ensure whatever develops is sustainable, not ephemeral. 
If FinTech enables a great unbundling of financial services, risks will change in tandem. 
Our  interest  is  in  ensuring the safety  and  soundness  of banks,  the  protection  of  insurance 
policy holders and the resilience of financial ecosystem as a whole to these changing risks. It 
is about activities not labels. 
That is why the Bank has been engaging with FinTech firms to understand better the financial 
stability risks that could emerge as banking is re-shaped. We will monitor those that arise along 
the transition path and those that could endure. 
Where firms or activities become systemic and risks to the real economy grow, they will come 
within the purview of the Bank’s responsibilities for the stability of the system as a whole. The 
Financial  Policy  Committee  will  continue  to  monitor  the  scope  of  the  regulatory  perimeter. 
Adjustments will follow if necessary. 
When FinTech companies fall within our remits, we will monitor them in the same proportionate 
way that we approach other firms – backed by analytics and judgement, taking action where 
appropriate.  
We are building a system that allows for orderly failures. Not just to end the blatant unfairness 
of Too Big to Fail, but also to foster industry dynamism and better outcomes for consumers. 
After  all,  ease  of  exit  promotes  ease  of  entry.  We  won’t  discourage  avatars  by  preserving 
dinosaurs. 
Conclusion  
5. 
Will FinTech mean a restoration, reformation, or revolution for finance? 
Through  our  regulatory  approach,  widening  access  to  RTGS,  and  facilitating  technological 
development, the Bank is helping to enable a sustainable FinTech reformation. 
This will promote the UK’s monetary and financial stability and mean better financial services 
for firms and households. With time, FinTech could mean a more open, more transparent, and 
more democratic global financial system. As host to the world’s greatest financial centre, this 
room, this City, this country stand to gain tremendously. The Bank will play its role in enabling 
a blissful dawn to unfold; to set the budding rose above the rose full blown. 
                                                
13   More broadly, Sir Charlie Bean’s independent review of economic statistics highlighted the impact on economic 
data arising from inadequate sharing of data across the public sector, something that I am pleased that the 
Cabinet Office is taking steps to address. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
