   Yannis Stournaras: The EBRD’s Trade Facilitation Programme on 
financing foreign trade with Greece 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) information session on its Trade 
Facilitation Programme (TFP) on financing foreign trade with Greece, Athens, 15 September 
2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests,  
It is a great pleasure to welcome you all here today to this information session on the Trade 
Facilitation Programme of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. I would 
particularly like to welcome today’s speakers from the EBRD as well as representatives from 
the local banking community who will be participating in a panel discussion later on.  
The importance of the Trade Facilitation Programme for Greece cannot be over-emphasised. 
One of the features of the Greek economy on the eve of the crisis was its lack of openness. 
Economics textbooks talk about the economics of “small open economies” in contrast to that 
of “large closed economies”. Greece was best described as a “small closed economy” whose 
growth was largely driven by internal demand and, in particular, consumption. Exports and 
imports averaged 53 per cent of GDP in the period 2000-2009 compared to almost 70 per cent 
in the euro area as a whole. In 2008, the current account deficit had reached almost 15 per 
cent of GDP.  
This unsustainable growth model has been changing through the crisis. The competitiveness 
gap, which had opened up post entry into EMU, was eliminated through internal devaluation. 
The current account deficit is now close to balance. Whilst the majority of adjustment in the 
current account since 2008 has come about through a fall in imports, exports of goods and 
services (excluding shipping) have increased by 27 per cent in real terms. Moreover, Greek 
goods  export  shares  have  increased  significantly  since  2010,  especially  vis-à-vis  non-EU 
countries. Exports and imports as a percentage of GDP now stand at just over 63 per cent.  
Crucial to continued rebalancing of the economy in this fashion is the provision of finance and, 
in  particular,  trade  finance.  The  EBRD’s  Trade  Facilitation  Programme  was  developed 
precisely to facilitate international trade by providing guarantees to international commercial 
banks.  The  Programme  can  thus  help  to  support  Greek  companies  in  their  endeavours  to 
increase their exports to traditional markets as well as to open up new markets.  
I  very  much  welcome  this  initiative  by  the  EBRD  to  communicate  the  modalities  of  the 
Programme and how exporting and importing firms in Greece can benefit from it. I am sure 
that we will have a fruitful, informative and interesting discussion.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
