  Lesetja Kganyago: Overview of the South African economy 
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 96th 
annual ordinary general meeting of shareholders, Pretoria, 29 July 2016. 
 Governor’s address 
1. 
The  past  year  has  again  been  a  challenging  one  for  the  Bank  against  the  backdrop  of  a 
hesitant recovery in the global economy and a slowing domestic economy. While the recent 
decision by the UK to leave the European Union (Brexit) has raised the risks to the outlook, 
the extent of the spillover effects are still unclear. Much will depend on the speed and terms 
of the disengagement. At this stage we do not know which of a number of possible scenarios 
will unfold. 
The financial  markets  have  stabilised  following  the  initial  volatile  response  to  the  decision. 
However, it is likely that growth in the UK, and to a lesser extent in the EU, will be negatively 
affected, as a protracted period of uncertainty is expected to undermine both business and 
consumer confidence. As a consequence, growth forecasts have already been revised down. 
This  comes  at  a  time  when  the  eurozone  growth  prospects,  although  still  muted,  had 
improved  steadily  during  the  past  year,  partly  in  response  to  European  Central  Bank 
monetary stimulus. 
The  US  economic  recovery  appeared  to  be  more  sustained  during  the  past  year  with 
consistent  improvements  in  the  labour  market.  This  was  despite  a  slowdown  in  the  first 
quarter, which was viewed as temporary. The performance of the economy improved since 
then,  but  some  negative  spillovers  from  Brexit  are  expected.  Despite  sustained  fiscal  and 
monetary stimulus in Japan, economic growth was marginally positive. 
While the past year was slightly more favourable for advanced economies, the same cannot 
be  said  for  emerging  markets,  although  there  were  divergent  experiences.  The  growth 
slowdown  in  China  continued,  accompanied  by  increased  volatility  in  domestic  financial 
markets. This  was  partly  in  response  to  policy  changes  and  persistent concerns regarding 
the  stability  of  the  financial  sector.  The  slower  growth  continued  to  impact  negatively  on 
commodity  prices,  further  complicating  the  outlook  for  commodity-producing  emerging 
markets.  More  recently,  the  economy  appears  to  have  responded  to  renewed  stimulus 
measures,  and  risks  of  a  hard  landing  have  abated.  This  has  also  helped  to  stabilise 
commodity prices. Both Brazil and Russia slid into recession during this period and continue 
to  contract.  By  contrast,  India  experienced  high  growth  following  a  number  of  structural 
reforms. 
The  slowdown  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  in  response  to  lower  commodity  prices  and  severe 
drought conditions in the southern part of the region in particular is of some concern. In its 
recent World Economic Outlook update, the IMF downgraded sub-Saharan growth for 2016 
by  1,4  percentage  points  to  1,6  per  cent.  This  follows  a  number  of  years  of  growth  rates 
averaging around 5 per cent. The region has become a major export destination for South 
African  manufactured  goods,  and  a  growth  slowdown  could  impact  negatively  on  these 
exports. 
Global inflation has remained benign over the past year in response to weak global demand, 
declining oil and other commodity prices, and falling food prices. The downward trend in oil 
prices that began in mid-2014 continued amid a supply glut and weak demand. Prices have 
recovered  somewhat  from  multi-year  lows  of  below  US$30  per  barrel  in  January  following 
supply  disruptions  in  a  number  of  countries  and  curtailment  of  investment  and  output  in 
others. Although prices are expected to rise in the medium term, the trajectory is expected to 
be moderate, in line subdued global demand. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The second half of last year was dominated by speculation regarding the timing and speed of 
US monetary policy normalisation. This uncertainty continued to contribute to global financial 
market volatility as perceptions kept changing. Once it became clear that the first move was 
likely  to  be  in  December,  attention  became  focused  on  the  timing  of  the  next  moves. 
However,  uncertainties  regarding  the  state  of  the  US  labour  markets,  low  inflation  and 
heightened global risks led the US Fed to take a cautious approach, and no further tightening 
transpired.  More  recently,  in  the  wake  of  the  Brexit  decision,  market  expectations  of  US 
interest rates have been scaled down significantly. 
Whereas  the  UK  had  previously  been  expected  to  be  one  of  the  first  of  the  advanced 
economies to raise policy rates, disappointing growth outcomes and low inflation meant an 
unchanged  policy  stance  during  the  past  year.  Following  the  Brexit  vote,  there  are  now 
expectations that policy will be loosened in the near future. Monetary policies in the eurozone 
and Japan remained accommodative during the past year, and are expected to persist for 
some time. 
The changing expectations of US monetary policy in particular has had implications for the 
pattern  of  global  capital  flows.  The  delay  in  normalisation  and  global  search  for  yield  has 
seen  a  resumption  of  capital  flows  to  emerging  markets,  reversing  the  negative  trend 
observed during the second half of 2015. 
The rand exchange rate has been sensitive to these developments, with elevated levels of 
volatility. Since the time of the previous AGM the rand depreciated on a trade-weighted basis 
by about 8,5 per cent. However, it traded in a wide range of between  R12,70 and R16,90 
against  the  US  dollar.  This  volatility  was  not  only  externally  generated:  domestic 
developments, including the fallout from the political events in December last year; the risks 
of a sovereign ratings downgrade; the wide current account deficit and the declining growth 
were  important  contributors  to  these  trends.  Whereas  a  downgrade  was  avoided  in  June, 
similar  concerns  are  likely  to  re-emerge  later  in  the  year  when  the  next  reviews  are 
scheduled. 
The  domestic  economy  was  characterised  by  a  persistent  slowdown  during  the  past  year, 
driven by weak consumption and investment expenditure growth. The agricultural sector was 
particularly hard hit by the worsening drought. The economy grew by 1,3 per cent in 2015, 
and the outlook for the economy remains constrained, particularly following the contraction of 
1,2 per cent experienced in the first quarter of this year. Nevertheless we expect that to have 
been the low point of the current growth cycle. The Bank forecasts economic growth of zero 
per  cent  in  2016,  rising  to  1,1  per  cent,  and  1,5  per  cent  in  the  coming  two  years.  These 
growth rates are insufficient to make significant inroads into the deteriorating unemployment 
numbers.  The  direct  effect  of  the  Brexit  decision  on  domestic  growth  is  expected  to  be 
marginal in the short term, while the longer term impacts will depend on the outcome of the 
negotiations and the impact on global growth generally. 
Inflation averaged 4,6 per cent in 2015, and was within the target range in each month of the 
year, reaching a low point of 3,9 per cent in February. A large part of this favourable trend 
was driven by a temporary respite from lower international oil prices. Since January 2016, 
however, inflation has breached the upper end of the target range, and is expected to remain 
above  target  until  the  third  quarter  of  next  year.  In  the  absence  of  domestic  demand 
pressures, these adverse inflation trends have been driven primarily by supply side factors. 
These include the exchange rate, drought-induced food price increases, and a reversal of the 
favourable oil price shock. 
In response to these inflation pressures, the Monetary Policy Committee continued with its 
moderate  tightening  cycle  that  began  in  January  2014.  Since  July  2015  the  repo  rate 
increased by a cumulative 125 basis point, to 7,0 per cent in March 2016. The combination of 
a  steady  downward  growth  trend  with  upside  risks  to  inflation  compounded  the  dilemma 
facing  monetary  policy.  At  the  last  two  MPC  meetings,  in  May  and  July,  moderate 
improvements  in  the  inflation  outlook  and  a  moderation  of  the  upside  risks  to  the  inflation 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  outlook gave the MPC room to pause in the interest rate cycle. The MPC emphasised the 
continued data-dependence of future moves, as the factors that gave rise to the moderation 
of  these  risks  could  reverse  very  quickly.  Although  the  MPC  remains  ready  to  respond  to 
renewed  inflation  pressures,  it  remains  mindful  of  the  weak  state  of  the  economy  and  will 
continue to support the economy to the extent possible within its flexible inflation targeting 
remit. 
The expanded mandate of the Bank gives it responsibility for financial stability and this has 
been a key focus area during the past year. The Financial Sector Regulation Bill has been 
tabled in parliament, and it is expected to be promulgated during this year. The Bill assigns 
responsibility to the Bank to protect and enhance financial stability. The proposed Prudential 
Authority is taking shape, but pending finalisation of the legislative framework. This process 
has already had significant resource implications for the Bank. At the microprudential level 
there has been the successful resolution of the African Bank curatorship, and the creation of 
the “good bank” which commenced operations in April 2016. The domestic banking system 
remains sound and well capitalised. 
Whilst the Bank is an institution not driven by profit, the strength of the financial position of 
the Bank is important for its independence. I am pleased to report that the Group continued 
to be profitable in this past financial year. The Group recorded an after-tax profit of R1,58 
billion compared with a profit of R0,63 billion in the previous financial year. The bulk of the 
profit is attributable to the Bank with an after tax profit of R1,51 billion, up from R0.34 billion 
in the previous year. This improvement in the financial position of the Bank was attributable 
mainly  to  the  increase  in  accommodation  to  banks  and  unrealised  profits  due  to  declining 
global  bond  yields  and  the  depreciation  of  the  rand  against  major  currencies.  The 
depreciation  increased  the  rand  value  of  the  interest  earned  from  investing  the  country’s 
foreign-exchange  reserves.  Operating  costs  declined  due  to  a  reduction  in  the  banknote 
order which lowered the cost of new currency. This decline was partly offset by higher staff 
costs.  As  we  have  emphasised  in  the  past,  the  Bank  does  not  have  a  profit-maximising 
objective and its operations are conducted in the broader interests of the country, in pursuit 
of its mandate and responsibilities. Nevertheless, we will continue to implement strict internal 
financial controls to ensure economy and efficiency of the Bank’s operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
