   
Vítor Constâncio: Capital Markets Union and the European monetary and 
financial framework 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at 
Chatham House, London, 21 March 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,  
A well-functioning, diversified and deeply integrated capital market is of key relevance for the 
European Central Bank. This explains why we have supported the European Commission’s 
initiative to establish a capital markets union (CMU) from the very beginning.  
In my remarks, I will focus on the ways CMU could contribute to the achievement of the most 
important tasks of the Eurosystem and to enhance the economic and welfare effects of the 
euro area:  
First, financial integration and capital markets’ development can facilitate the transmission of 
monetary policy in the euro area.  
Second, a more diversified financial system with capital markets complementing bank-based 
financing  can  increase  the  shock  absorbing  capacity  of  the  European  economy,  thereby 
contributing to macroeconomic and financial stability.  
Third,  integration  of capital markets  increases the  private risk-sharing across countries, 
which  improves  the  response  to  asymmetric  shocks  by  allowing  income  and  consumption 
smoothing through cross-border holdings of equity and debt instruments.  
Capital markets and the transmission of monetary policy  
1.  
Achieving  the  CMU  requires  both  enhancing  financial  integration,  and  developing  and 
deepening financial markets. These developments affect the transmission of both standard 
and non-standard monetary policies. 
In many theories of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, information asymmetries 
and  other  credit market inefficiencies  play  a  central  role  in  amplifying  and  propagating  the 
effects of changes in interest rates on real activity, namely via their impact on lending rates.1 
This mechanism, which is often referred to as the credit view of monetary policy, could be 
interpreted  as  suggesting  that  reducing  those  inefficiencies  would  undermine  the  credit 
channel and decrease the impact of monetary policy on the real economy. 
Such theories, however, typically abstract from the effect of improved market efficiency on 
savers’ willingness to lend. If information disclosure is inadequate – to the extent that investors 
refrain from lending to borrowers – expansionary monetary policies can exert only a limited 
impact on the real economy through a compression of borrowing costs. Structural measures 
that increase the information flow and support the allocation of credit to productive activities 
can  therefore  contribute  to  accelerating  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  to  the  real 
economy.  
Recent evidence lends support to the idea of a positive relationship between the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy  and  the  efficiency  of  financial  markets.  For  instance,  a  cross-country 
comparison of the effects of the expansionary balance sheet policies implemented in the euro 
                                                
1   Bernanke,  B.S.  and  Gertler,  M.  (1995),  “Inside  the  Black  Box:  The  Credit  Channel  of  Monetary  Policy 
Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 9 (4), pp. 27–48; Peersman, G. and Smets, F. (2005), 
“The Industry Effects of Monetary Policy in the Euro Area”, The Economic Journal, Vol. 115 (503), April, pp. 319–
42. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   area between 2009 and 2012 shows that the impact on output was strongest in the countries 
with the most well-capitalised domestic banking systems.2 
A second set of measures which could be undertaken in the context of the CMU agenda relates 
to the harmonisation of legal systems. Evidence for the euro area suggests a strong link 
between the legal structure of a country and its financial architecture,3 and shows that cross-
country  differences  in  those  systems  are  a  source  of  asymmetry  vis-à-vis  the  monetary 
transmission mechanism.4 
The CMU debate has brought to light the importance of going beyond the harmonisation of 
financial legislation, and of tackling barriers resulting from taxation or corporate and insolvency 
laws.  
According to a recent study by the Association of Financial Markets in Europe (AFME), the 
current patchwork of insolvency frameworks is estimated to increase the cost of corporate debt 
by between 18 and 37 basis points. On the other hand, if all Member States were to reach a 
recovery rate of at least 85%, this could translate into an aggregate GDP gain of between 0.3 
and 0.55%.5 
By deepening capital markets, CMU implies a move towards a more market-based financial 
system that can facilitate the conduct of monetary policy through its effects on the transmission 
mechanism. It is a well-documented empirical regularity that yields and asset prices respond 
faster to changes in monetary policy decisions than bank lending rates.6 The slow adjustment 
of bank rates is thus a contributing factor behind the delayed impact of monetary policy on the 
real economy. Consequently, by improving access to market-based finance, the development 
of the CMU can help increase the speed at which monetary policy is transmitted to the real 
economy. 
CMU, financial stability and the scope of unconventional monetary policy  
2.  
The development of the CMU can also increase the economy’s resilience to large adverse 
shocks and limit the need for policy intervention in times of crisis.7  
Measures that promote more diversification of financing instruments revive the securitisation 
market and encourage a resilient form of financial integration, are particularly important in this 
respect. 
Fostering the development of more diverse financial instruments for borrowers, as well as 
facilitating 
from 
disturbances that may hit the banking sector, thereby enhancing financial stability and reducing 
the need for non-standard monetary policy measures aimed at restoring the flow of credit to 
their  substitutability,  contributes 
to  partially  shielding 
the  economy 
                                                
2   Boeckx, J., Dossche, M. and Peersman, G. (2014), “Effectiveness and transmission of the ECB’s balance sheet 
policies”, Working Paper Research Series, No 275, National Bank of Belgium, December. 
3   La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and Vishny, R.W. (1998), “Law and Finance”, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 106 (6), pp. 1113–55. 
4   Cecchetti,  S.G.  (1999),  “Legal  structure,  Financial  Structure,  and  the  Monetary  Policy  Transmission 
Mechanism”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July, pp. 9–28; Danthine, 
J-P., Giavazzi, F. and von Thadden, E-L. (2000), “European Financial Markets After EMU: A First Assessment”, 
CEPR Discussion Papers, No 2413. 
5   Association for Financial Markets in Europe (2016), Potential economic gains from reforming insolvency law in 
Europe, February. 
6   De Bondt, G., Mojon, B. and Valla, N. (2005), “Term structure and the sluggishness of retail bank interest rates 
in euro area countries”, Working Paper Series, No 518, ECB, September. 
7   De Fiore, F. and Uhlig, H. (2015), “Corporate Debt Structure and the Financial Crisis”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, Vol. 47 (8), pp. 1571–98. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   households and non-financial corporations. This does not imply that CMU would change the 
structure  of  the  European  financial  system  to  make  it  similar  to  the  American  one  where 
market-based  financing  dominates.  History  and  theory  do  not  demonstrate  that  a  system 
overwhelmingly dominated by financial markets is more efficient to promote long-term growth 
than a more bank-based structure. Developments since 1945 prove this assertion: Europe’s 
growth led to a substantial catching up with the US, keeping its different financial system. In 
spite of the role of capital markets in the US, SMEs continue to be financed mostly by banks 
with the significant help of guarantees provided by the US Small Business Association to the 
tune of USD 30 billion per year. 
Deeper equity markets however, constitute an unquestionable advantage to the US, notably 
in relation to the role of venture capital in promoting innovation. For the expansion of such an 
activity it is important to dispose of a deep equity market that can provide significant returns in 
successful IPOs (Initial Public Offers) that can offset losses incurred by failing risky projects. 
Overall, it is true that at this stage, Europe will benefit from a more balanced structure between 
market-based and bank-based financial system which CMU will help to develop.  
Looking forward, an important step in the establishment of the CMU is the revitalization of 
the  securitisation  market.  Early  measures  proposed  in  the  CMU  Action  Plan8  can  be 
conducive to capital relief for originators, thus contributing to freeing up banks’ balance sheet 
and increasing lending to the real economy. These actions help monetary policy to provide the 
necessary accommodative stance in crisis times, particularly when interest rates are close to 
the zero lower bound. In addition, improved functioning of the securitisation market increases 
the supply of high-quality collatera9 and expands the pool of eligible assets in the context of 
the ECB’s asset purchase programmes.  
CMU initiatives that promote a resilient form of financial integration by restricting fragile cross-
border  debt  exposures  can  reduce  the  emergence  of  financial  fragmentation  in  periods  of 
crisis, which in turn will contribute to a well-functioning single monetary policy.  
CMU fosters private risk-sharing and a more resilient financial integration 
3.  
CMU can lead to a more resilient EMU through promoting private risk-sharing mechanisms 
that allow income and consumption smoothing across countries, also known as risk-sharing. 
Risk-sharing can increase welfare by reducing sensitivity of income growth to output growth in 
a country. In a monetary union, risk-sharing is particularly important because monetary policy 
is unable to address asymmetric, country-specific shocks, whereby some countries are in a 
recession  while  others  may  be  booming.  The  effective  risk-sharing  in  the  United  States  is 
essential in making the US a successful monetary union. 
There  are  three main mechanisms that  risk-sharing  can  take  between  member  states  in a 
political and economic area. First, countries can share risk via cross-ownership of productive 
assets, a mechanism facilitated by developed capital markets. Second, a system of taxes and 
transfers  can  serve  as  a  vehicle  for  further  income  smoothing.  Third,  member  states  can 
smooth  consumption  by  adjusting  their  asset  portfolios,  by  lending  and  borrowing  in 
international credit markets, for example. 
                                                
8   European Commission (2015), “Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, 
the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions – Action plan on building a 
Capital Markets Union”, COM (2015) 468 final, September. 
9   Bank of England and ECB (2014), The case for a better functioning securitisation market in the European Union 
– A Discussion Paper, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The introduction of the euro has fostered risk-sharing – available estimates suggest that 57% 
of shocks to country GDP per capita were smoothed in 2008–2009.10 However, smoothing 
resulting  from  international  cross-ownership  of  assets  remained  at  low  levels.  By  way  of 
comparison, the United States has traditionally been characterised by a very high degree of 
income and consumption smoothing across states. Available evidence suggests that about 
75% of income shocks in individual states are smoothed, with 62% of state-specific shocks 
being  smoothed  through  market  transactions.  These  can  take  the  form  of  cross  regional 
holdings  of  financial  assets  or  direct  investments,  as  well  as  borrowing  and  lending  credit 
operations.11  
This  underlines  the  advantage  of,  in  the  context  of  CMU,  being  particularly  focused  on 
stimulating equity financing. Indeed, our upcoming report on financial integration12 finds that 
debt  finance  can  magnify  the  adverse  impact  of  negative  shocks  on  economic  growth.  In 
contrast, equity and foreign direct investment (FDI), and longer-maturity debt in general, are 
leading to a more resilient form of financial integration. One way to stimulate equity financing 
via the CMU agenda would be to reduce the existing bias towards debt in national taxation.  
It should be underlined that a substantial effect of risk sharing via cross border holdings of 
financial assets is predicated on attaining a fully fledged CMU. A genuine CMU would mean 
achieving a high level of financial integration in order to complete the Single Market in this 
area. Full integration is reached if market participants with the same relevant characteristics: 
(i) face a single set of rules for financial instruments and/or services; (ii) have equal access to 
a set of financial instruments and/or services; and (iii) are equally treated when they are active 
in  the market. This  level-playing field  would  contribute  to  stimulate  cross-border risk-taking 
between  EU  Member  States. In  the  last  two  decades,  European  financial  markets  have 
increased their role in financing the economy and became more integrated in terms of cross-
border holdings of financial instruments. However, the crisis impacted this tendency. In fact, 
the crisis revealed that part of this integration was driven by debt-based wholesale banking 
flows which were prone to sudden reversals in the face of shocks. In fact, a high degree of 
ambition and decisive legislative action is required to create the conditions for capital markets 
to develop and integrate. These actions are often in politically controversial fields such as in 
the areas of corporate law, financial product taxation and insolvency law. 
Altogether, the CMU has the potential to enhance private (as opposed to public), and cross-
border  (as  opposed  to  domestic)  risk-sharing,  which  could  increase  the  shock  absorbing 
capacity of the European economy as a whole, and thereby help to safeguard financial stability 
and the resilience of our monetary union.  
Challenges: New risks to financial stability 
Aside from these opportunities, financial integration and the further development of non-bank 
financing may also create new financial stability risks.  
At a general level, greater integration can exacerbate the size and speed of cross-border 
contagion. International risk-sharing and cross-border contagion can be two sides of the same 
                                                
10   Balli, F. and Sørensen, B.E. (2007), “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The Role of Capital Gains, 
Capital Income, Transfers, and Saving”, MPRA Paper, No 10223. 
11   Sørensen, B.E. and Yosha, O. (1998), “International risk sharing and European monetary unification”, Journal 
of  International  Economics,  Vol.  45,  pp.  211–38;  Afonso,  A.  and  Furceri,  D.  (2008),  “EMU  enlargement, 
stabilization  costs  and  insurance  mechanisms”,  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance,  Vol.  27  (2), 
pp. 169–87. 
12   ECB (to be published in April 2016), “Special Feature A – Financial integration and risk-sharing in a monetary 
union”, Financial Integration in Europe. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   “financial  integration  coin”.  This  explains  why  taking  a  macroprudential  perspective  on  the 
financial system, is extremely important for addressing potential new sources of systemic risks.  
In  the  first  place,  the  role  of  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  in 
coordinating with national authorities the effective harmonised implementation of all legislation 
relevant for CMU has to be strengthened. We need a single rule book for capital markets the 
same way it is being established for the banking sector.  
At the same time, the further development of capital markets increases competition for the 
banking  sector  and  incentivises  banks  to  take  on  more  risk  to  sustain  profitability.13,  14  To 
ensure  that  there  are  no  unintended  financial  stability  risks,  we  need  to  strengthen  the 
European macroprudential regulatory toolkit for banks under the CRDIV/CRR.15  
Moreover, the growth of market-based financing is accompanied by the strong growth 
of non-bank financing that creates new risks. Over the past few years, growth in total euro 
area financial assets has been primarily driven by non-bank financial entities, investment funds 
in  particular.  The  low  interest  rate  environment  has  also  played  a  role  in  this  growth,  with 
increasing  amounts  of  capital  being  allocated  to  investment  funds  in  the  search  for  yield. 
Between end-2009 and the first quarter of 2015, assets managed by investment funds other 
than money market funds almost doubled from EUR 5.4 trillion to EUR 10.5 trillion.16  
Importantly,  this  rapid  growth  comes  along  with  increased  risk-taking.17  In  addition,  the 
interconnectedness of the fund sector with the wider financial system, more widespread use 
of synthetic leverage and the increasing prevalence of demandable equity imply that potential 
for a systemic impact is increasing, should the investment fund industry come under stress. 
In short, financial stability risks increasingly extend beyond traditional entities such as banks 
and  insurers.  This  underlines  the  necessity  of  developing  the  macroprudential  framework 
beyond banking.  
Developing the macroprudential framework beyond banking  
Let me elaborate on three important aspects of this task. 
First,  we  need  to  develop  a  framework  to  better  control  the  leverage  of  alternative 
investment funds in the European Union. Given that the use of leverage by investment funds 
could create and amplify systemic risk, it is important that we ensure that leverage remains 
within acceptable limits.  
Second, we need to develop tools targeting liquidity in non-bank financial institutions. 
With regard to investment funds, “liquidity spirals” remain always a risk. Such spirals could be 
triggered  if  funds  were  to  be  confronted  with  high  redemptions  or  increased  margin 
requirements, as these could result in forced selling on markets with low liquidity. To address 
                                                
13   Keeley, M.C. (1990), “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking”, The American Economic Review, 
Vol. 80 (5), pp. 1183–1200. 
14   Kosuke, A. and Nikolov, K. (2015), “Financial Disintermediation and Financial Fragility”, CARF Working Paper, 
No CARF-F-374, November. 
15   This  requires  (i)  ensuring  that  the  instruments  currently  available  are  more  targeted  and  that  overlaps  are 
eliminated, (ii) broadening the toolkit with additional instruments (such as the net stable funding ratio, leverage 
ratio, 
risk  weights,  etc.), 
(iii) streamlining the process for notification or information procedures (both in the EU and within ECB Banking 
Supervision), and (iv) strengthening the macroprudential function of the ECB. 
ratio,  debt  service-to-income 
loan-to-value/loan-to-income 
ratio,  sectoral 
16   ECB (2015), Report on financial structures, October. 
17   Funds  have  shifted  their  asset  allocation  from  higher  to  lower-rated  debt  securities,  increased  the  average 
residual maturities of debt securities holdings and continued to expand their exposure to emerging markets. See 
the November 2015 edition of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   such risks, additional liquidity requirements, guided stress tests, minimum and time-varying 
load, and redemptions fees should be part of the macroprudential toolbox. 
Third,  macroprudential  authorities  should  be  given  the  power  to  change  margins  and 
haircuts on derivatives and securities financing transactions (SFTs) at the transaction 
level in a time-varying manner. The current margining and haircut setting practices by market 
participants stimulate the build-up of leverage in good times, and amplify de-leveraging in bad 
times. While a number of policy measures aimed at limiting the pro-cyclical effects of margin 
and haircut setting have been adopted or are underway, none of these steps envisage time-
varying  implementation  of  margin  requirements  and  haircut  floors  by  macroprudential 
authorities. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. I have explained how CMU has the potential to facilitate central banking 
tasks and thus to benefit our Monetary and Economic Union. 
The Commission initiated the legislative work on CMU by making proposals including creating 
a framework for simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisation. We support this 
work, and call on the co-legislators to make swift progress in the adoption of these proposals.  
To achieve CMU and reap the potential benefits that I have just highlighted, we will need to 
promote further harmonisation in areas that have so far been considered as long-term issues. 
We need to be ambitious in the pursuit of our objective. In fact, CMU should be seen as a 
“structural reform” by which the legislators and policy makers at the EU and national level, but 
also market participants themselves, dismantle existing barriers to the cross-border functioning 
of the single market in capital. In this regard, tackling differences in insolvency law, taxation 
and company law will be highly relevant. As long as these obstacles remain, there will be no 
cross-border capital markets union.  
Lastly, if CMU is successful in deepening and integrating capital markets, this development 
will need to be accompanied by macroprudential supervision to ensure that the potential new 
risks are limited. 
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
