   Andreas Dombret: Banking diversity and regulation – do we need more 
proportionality in banking regulation? 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Banking Industry Conference of the People’s Banks and Raiffeisen Banks, Berlin, 8 June 
2016. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
dear Mr Hofmann 
What do the Galapagos Islands and Germany have in common? Not the weather – that’s for 
sure. 
But both are hotbeds of diversity – areas in which a particularly diverse range of species live. 
Whereas the Galapagos Islands are a hotbed of biodiversity, Germany is a hotbed of banking 
diversity. 
Diversity is a decisive factor not only in biological evolution but also for economic development. 
It means  more  new  ideas, more  competition to find  the  best  approaches  –  and thus more 
choice. 
Diversity is one of the German economy’s selling points. During the past global economic crisis 
–  and  not  for  the  first  time  –  our  world-famous  Mittelstand  was  a  bedrock  of  strength  and 
constancy. Diversity can also be singled out as a feature which makes Germany a particularly 
healthy biotope. 
Diversity in the German banking system, in turn, is a pillar of the economy. And this diversity 
presents  many  potential  advantages:  reduced  vulnerability  to  crisis;  more  choice  for 
customers; a more refined range of financial products. 
Therefore, diversity is – and of this I am convinced – a key factor for the German economy and 
for its financial sector. It is therefore no surprise that, here in Germany, the debate on the 
burdens imposed by regulatory reform on smaller institutions is particularly heated. This is due 
to fears that the rules could overwhelm those banks, with only large banks being able to come 
to terms over the long run. The result, it is feared, will be more consolidation and thus less 
diversity. 
This  is  being  debated  under  the  label  of  proportionality  –  or,  more  precisely,  the  lack  of 
proportionality. I am here today to give you my opinions on this issue. 
Where do the problems lie? Complexity and compliance 
2.  
An expert opinion on proportionality1 commissioned by the Federal Association of German 
People’s Banks and Raiffeisen Banks can be singled out as a particular driver of the increased 
political attention being given to the debate on proportionality over the past few months. Both 
the  European  Commission  and  the  recent  joint  proposal  by  the  German  and  UK  finance 
ministries  to  review  the  relevant  EU  rules  have  recently  added  fuel  to  the  debate.  The 
discussions  are  currently  even  going  as  far  as  to  create  a  specific  set  of  rules  for  smaller 
institutions.  At  the  recent  Bundesbank  symposium,  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  the  deputy 
                                                
1   Hackethal, Andreas and Inderst, Roman (2015) Auswirkungen der Regulatorik auf kleinere und mittlere Banken 
am Beispiel der deutschen Genossenschaftsbanken. Expert opinion commissioned by the Federal Association 
of German People’s Banks and Raiffeisen Banks, 30 September 2015 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   chair of the Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks in Europe, voiced scepticism as to the 
feasibility of such a separate set of rules. 
What is this debate actually all about? To the management and staff of all institutions – small 
and large alike – it is about the work created by regulation. It is about the one-off costs of, for 
example, procuring new software. But it is also about the running costs, ie the costs of keeping 
systems operational or of personnel. And it is about the time that needs to be devoted to these 
matters – which is time no longer available to deal with clients, to conduct credit analysis or to 
develop investment strategies. 
Why does this take a greater toll on small institutions than on large institutions? After giving 
the  issue  some  thought,  we  at  the  Bundesbank  quickly  diagnosed  the  source  of  the  real 
problem. It is that the rules are becoming more and more complex and interconnected and that 
this is increasingly becoming too much for, in particular, small institutions with limited human 
resources  to  cope  with.  I  must  confess  that  I,  too,  am  sometimes  amazed  at  the  detailed 
structure of regulation created over the past few years. 
Where does this come from? There are three trends in particular which have made the rules 
more complex. Global harmonisation brought about by the Basel standards is one of these 
trends. These standards, created mainly for large international banks, are being applied to all 
institutions in Germany and the euro area. European regulation, which imposes an additional 
set of rules that need to be followed, is another source of complexity. And last, but not least, 
complicated rules are also an outcome of compromises that have to be made when developing 
regulation  –  especially  where  a  large  number  of  countries  with  a  wide  variety  of  banking 
landscapes are involved. Banks and saving banks, too, have often proposed changes which 
have not necessarily made the rules any more simple. 
But  what  exactly  is  behind  this  increase  in  complexity?  It  is  the  vast  number  of  rules,  the 
increase in the degree of detail, the expansion of the already-enormous technical specification 
and the growth in the multiplexity of regulation. This has made compliance with the rules an 
increasingly costly, time-consuming and unwieldy undertaking. Such a complicated set of rules 
is all but bound to lead to a considerable increase in the costs of compliance. 
A good example of this is the framework which governs remuneration systems. In Germany, 
we make a distinction here between general prudential requirements and specific prudential 
requirements  –  though  smaller  institutions  do  not  need  to  meet  the  specific  prudential 
requirements. According to the European Commission, however, pursuant to CRD IV2 a small 
bank is likewise required to meet both the general and the specific prudential requirements. 
The following example shall serve to show how complex this would be. One rule says that part 
of variable remuneration is to be paid in “instruments”, ie in shares or “share-linked instruments 
or equivalent non-cash instruments”. However, small institutions have no such instruments, 
which means they must go to great lengths to create such instruments in the first place. 
I think this approach is going too far and suggest amending it under this year’s CRD IV review. 
Small institutions should be exempted from the specific prudential requirements. 
What  burdens  are  complicated  rules  imposing  on  smaller  institutions?  One  of  the  most 
problematical areas lies in the human resource requirements and costs created by the need 
to regularly review whether the rules are actually being fully complied with. 
This means that the problem is not so much the minimum capital or liquidity requirements but 
instead the high operational burden imposed by implementing these rules and following them. 
This overhead is high for all institutions – regardless of their size. However, small institutions, 
owing to their smaller staff sizes, are less able to spread the costs of compliance across their 
                                                
2   Capital Requirements Directive IV. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   employees and have to either hire additional staff or enlist external aid. This tends to lead to 
relatively higher burdens. 
The problem, at its core, thus consists in the interplay of two aspects. The high operational 
requirements created by a multiplex set of rules, and the limited organisational capacity which 
is naturally at the disposal of smaller institutions. Intricate sets of rules thus cause particular 
duress for institutions with limited capacities. 
Ultimately,  the  debate  on  proportionality  is  leading us to the following question: should  we 
further simplify the rules for small institutions? I use the term “further” because the rules are 
already proportional to some extent. The design of the Basel framework, too, incorporates a 
sense  of  proportionality,  by  making  a  distinction  between  standardised  and  advanced 
approaches. But I will come to that later on. 
No place for general criticism 
3.  
There  is  no  question  that  the  cost  of  the  new  regulation  is  considerable.  However,  it  is 
necessary to weigh these costs against the benefits to society as a result of financial crises 
being prevented. In this context, I believe the cost of regulation to be justified overall. 
This means that, if you look at the proportionality debate from the perspective of society as a 
whole, it essentially goes beyond the burdens facing credit institutions. The crux of the matter 
is whether it is a viable option to graduate regulation relative to the size of a bank or savings 
bank without jeopardising the stability of the financial system. 
It is therefore important, despite all of the well-reasoned criticism, to be realistic. All too often, 
the proportionality debate is used to wrap general criticism of regulation in politically correct 
packaging. But this criticism clearly goes too far on three accounts. 
First, regulatory tightening in the wake of the financial crisis was the right move as (capital) 
requirements were too low prior to the crisis. At the same time, there was a high degree of 
deregulation – and we all now know where that led us. We must take care not to throw the 
baby out with the bath water in the face of justified criticism. 
Second, it is wrong to assume that small and medium-sized institutions pose no risks. Crises 
also emanated from medium-sized banks, even in Germany – particularly from institutions with 
business models  that  included  proprietary  trading  and  capital market funding, for  example. 
Even small banks, which all follow the same or very similar business models, pose risks to 
financial stability – that is to say, they are “too many to fail” instead of “too big to fail”. 
Third, there is already an extensive degree of proportionality in banking regulation. This is true 
of both regulation itself, in which there are gradations such as the standardised approach, and 
the  field  of  supervision,  in  which  the  application  of  the  Minimum  Requirements  for  Risk 
Management is largely proportional. 
General criticism will therefore be largely unsuccessful because it is not justified. Without laws 
and regulations, a community – much less an advanced economy – does not work. 
The form that “greater proportionality” should not take 
4.  
And yet, unfortunately, there are also a lot of less convincing ideas being put forward. Before 
I come to the good ideas, I would first like to talk about the form that “greater proportionality” 
should not take. 
Some proposals from the financial sector leave me wondering whether they actually represent 
the interests of the banks and savings banks, as well as their employees. This is because we 
see occasionally a contradiction in the proposals – the contradiction that institutions complain 
about  having  less  and  less  time  to  devote  to  retail  business  as  a  result  of  regulatory 
requirements, on the one hand, while the lists of demands that they present largely focus on 
reducing minimum capital and liquidity requirements, on the other. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Instead, the proportionality debate ought to tackle the issue of operational burdens. In my view, 
this is the appropriate starting point for all other considerations. 
Consequently, the concept of “greater proportionality” should not morph into an opportunity for 
institutions to present their wish lists. This means that we should systematically examine the 
areas in which regulation is not sufficiently proportionate and that we must consider how we 
can systematically improve this. What this does not mean, however, is that a patchwork of wish 
lists should be incorporated into existing regulation. Notably, simplifications of minimum capital 
and liquidity requirements cannot and will not be granted. In contrast to what is commonly 
argued, lower capital requirements do not automatically lead to elevated growth, nor do they 
only result in increased lending. 
Furthermore,  simplifications  must  never  endanger  financial  stability.  Medium-sized,  highly 
systematically interconnected institutions – those referred to as “too interconnected to fail” – 
and those institutions with risky business models should not benefit from any simplifications. 
The recent financial crisis, during which many insolvent institutions had to be bailed out, is still 
fresh in all of our minds. 
Additionally, institutions – irrespective of their size – must not be given systematic scope for 
regulatory  arbitrage.  In  other  words,  exceptions  to  the  rule  must  not  create  incentives  for 
smaller  institutions  to  conduct  a greater  volume of  risky  transactions.  Proportionality  is  not 
intended to make it easier for small institutions to use highly complex procedures and adopt 
risky business strategies as a result of being shown leniency. 
With that in mind, I would like to provide you with an example that applies to many institutions. 
Some institutions, despite being quite small in terms of their total assets and workforces and 
therefore running a relatively straightforward business, use advanced credit portfolio models 
that are complex in methodological terms. As you know, extensive expertise and compliance 
with high regulatory standards are required to apply such models. These requirements have, 
quite rightly, actually been tightened further in recent years. And this is precisely what some 
institutions and their associations are now rallying against. 
Truth be told, I have little sympathy for such complaints. Why? Because there are simple and 
transparent procedures that are perfectly suitable for smaller institutions. Either an institution 
adopts a simple and transparent procedure – which is perhaps somewhat more conservative 
but easier to handle – or it must comply with stricter requirements for riskier transactions and 
complex  approaches.  The  fact  that  solutions  are  provided  by  associations  for  internal  risk 
measurement that institutions might wish to use for a variety of reasons need not be of any 
consequence  to  regulators  and  supervisors.  Thus,  if  an  institution  wishes  to  pursue  risky 
business strategies and apply highly complex processes, it should gladly do so – but it should 
not expect regulators and supervisors to support these endeavours by relaxing the rules and 
showing leniency during inspections. The upshot is either risk and complicated rules or less 
risk and simplicity – risk and simplicity together is, by contrast, a pipe dream. 
In summarising, I would like to make two things very clear. First, only those institutions that are 
both small and have, above all, a sound risk profile, may be granted simplifications. Second, a 
reform would not only provide a range of simplifications; instead, it would also be accompanied 
by  corresponding  obligations  –  for  example,  a  two-tier  regulatory  system  with  simplified 
requirements for smaller institutions would probably go hand in hand with increased capital 
requirements. 
The  Bundesbank  will  then  be  able  to  agree  to  greater  proportionality  in  regulation  if  two 
principles  are  respected:  no  wish  lists  and  no  weakening  of  supervision  that  could  be 
hazardous to banking stability. 
The form that “greater proportionality” could take 
5.  
There is no doubt that sweeping reforms were essential in the wake of the financial crisis. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   However, now that such far-reaching reforms have been implemented, we need to honestly 
ask ourselves the following questions. Do they still make sense when considered altogether? 
Are  the  individual  components  of  reform  working  together  as  a  whole?  This  process  of 
reflection has been ongoing for several months now. Politicians and authorities have started 
to examine the impact of and interaction between these individual components. And assessing 
the proportionality of the rules with respect to smaller institutions is a focal point of this review. 
Against this background, I would like to briefly outline what I believe greater proportionality in 
banking regulation could look like. 
Any true expansion of proportionality nowadays must begin at the European level. That’s why 
I wholeheartedly condone the proposal recently put forward by the German and British finance 
ministries to review the relevant EU regulations – mainly the CRR and CRD IV,3 but also other 
legal regulations. That review is lined up in the next two years. So you see, it’s worth talking 
about good ideas. 
Simplifications can primarily be granted to smaller institutions in two ways. The first is a details-
driven  approach  that  involves  introducing  special  exceptions  or  adjustments  for  individual 
rules. A good example of this would be my proposal to do away with special requirements for 
remuneration systems. 
Another, more radical approach would be to redraft the rules from scratch, thereby establishing 
new legal bases that introduce simplifications for smaller institutions in the case of all or a 
multitude of rules. 
It’s  worth  noting  here  that  the  details-driven  and  the  basic  approaches  are  not  in  any  way 
mutually  exclusive.  However  –  lest  I  wear  out  my  welcome  –  I  will  address  the  basic 
approaches in three areas. 
One  option  would  be  to  establish  a  set  of  EU-level  rules  which  make  a  stronger  case  for 
proportionality  while  legislation  and  standards  are  still  on  the  drawing  board.  Additional 
proportionality clauses could, for instance, be built into the wording of legislation. This would 
give  the  EBA  and  Commission  a  legal footing that makes  it  easier for them to  incorporate 
simplifications into guidelines and technical standards.4 Of course, this can only be achieved 
if clearly defined objectives are put in place. 
Another option worth considering is the creation of an improved review process as part of the 
legislative  procedure  –  a  mandatory  due  diligence  process,5  if  you  will.  This  is  already 
anchored in law in a number of countries including the USA and UK. So why can’t we do it 
here in the euro area, too? 
In this scenario, checks would have to be carried out whenever regulations are introduced or 
revised  in  order  to  assess  whether  the  principle  of  proportionality  has  been  given  due 
consideration. Such checks could be performed before adopting a new regulation or after a 
trial period. The process-related requirements could be drawn up in the form of a joint directive 
passed by all of Europe’s supervisory authorities.6  
                                                
3   Capital Requirements Regulation and Capital Requirements Directive IV. 
4   According to the EU institutions’ reading, they are not authorised to make far-reaching exceptions to strengthen 
the principle of proportionality if those exceptions are not specifically provided for in the relevant part of the CRR, 
CRD IV etc. In this case, the subsidiarity and proportionality provisions of the EU Treaties are ineffective (since 
the CRR, being a lex specialis, takes precedence over the general legislation of the EU Treaties). 
5   See  also  the  BVR  paper  (cited  in  footnote  1) and  European  Banking  Authority  Banking Stakeholder  Group 
(2015), Proportionality in banking regulation (pages 52–53) 
6   The legal basis for this and for the Commission’s work could be inserted in the CRR (and in the CRD IV, too, if 
appropriate). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   The second area in which improvements need to be made for small banks is in the field of 
reporting and disclosure. Let me be honest, ladies and gentlemen: these days, you are being 
asked to report a very great deal of information, and I think it’s right and appropriate to question 
just why that is. But we shouldn’t forget that supervisors aren’t the only recipients of those data 
– the bodies tasked with monetary policy and financial stability duties also expect to be kept 
abreast of the latest developments. 
But let’s confine ourselves to banking supervision and consider the best modus operandi going 
forward. I would propose a systematic approach that questions what information supervisors 
and other recipients really need and compares the findings with the data which institutions are 
currently required to report. This might also impact on the Implementing Technical Standard 
on Supervisory Reporting. Any excess reporting requirement identified would then need to be 
reduced in a targeted manner. 
Another starting point would be to abolish disclosure requirements that have been rendered 
obsolete by the co-existence of European and German rules. I think unnecessary duplications 
in the collection of data should be eliminated by amending the German rules. Viewed from this 
angle,  I  see  Germany’s  Liquidity  Regulation  one  of  the  pieces  of  legislation  that  can  be 
scrapped. 
Yet  another  point  I  think  is  worth  considering  is  to  confine  reporting  duties  for  smaller 
institutions to a minimum data package which could then be used to monitor compliance with 
the minimum standards. 
Disclosure is another field where requirements could be eased. We should investigate just how 
often  disclosure  reports  need  to  be  published,  and  we  should  ask  how  conducive  this 
instrument really is to achieving the goal of market control and supervisory and adminstrative 
board control in the case of smaller regional institutions. In addition, we need to make sure that 
the  disclosure  reforms  which  were  debated  by  the  Basel  Committee  and  are  now  being 
discussed in the EU bodies do not introduce any intrayear disclosure duties. 
The third area is probably the most far-reaching of all. What I have in mind is the creation of 
separate regulatory regimes for smaller institutions on the one hand and large multinational 
banks on the other. This two-tiered proposal has met with a rather muted response so far, and 
I don’t think it has much hope of being adopted at the political level. But I nonetheless think it 
is worth considering as a fundamental approach – one that would systematically address the 
excess burden placed on smaller institutions’ operational capacities. 
A two-tiered system could be put into practice by grading the Basel Standards for institutions 
that  are  neither  multinationals  nor  large  in  size.  A  broadly  similar  set-up  has  been  up  and 
running in the United States ever since the Basel II regime was implemented. Any institution 
that exceeds a balance sheet threshold is subject to the Basel rules. However, it would only 
be possible to do the same here in Germany by creating rules at the European level. 
In  that  scenario,  only  banking  multinationals  would  be  subject  to  the  fully  loaded  Basel  III 
requirements in the EU. That would be appropriate from a risk perspective: global banking 
institutions would be regulated according to a harmonised set of global rules, while smaller 
institutions and those operating within a certain region would be governed by graduated rules 
which do justice to their different business models and risk profiles by setting less complex 
requirements. 
Now there are some who claim that transitioning to that kind of system is a flight of fancy. What 
these doubting Thomases mainly ask is where exactly the line should be drawn. I’ll be the first 
to  admit  that  this  is  a  challenge,  but  it’s  anything  but  impossible.  One  way  of  tackling  this 
problem would be to use a smart combination of selection criteria – for instance, combining a 
balance sheet threshold below which institutions would be subject to the simpler regime with 
a prudential decision based on the institutions’ risk profiles. 
But there are still many crucial details and potential pitfalls that need to be addressed before 
we can even begin devoting serious thought to an option of this kind. This is something I think 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   we  should  consider  with  an  open  mind.  A  systematic  approach,  assuming  it’s  feasible,  is 
usually superior to an approach based on workarounds and emergency repairs. 
The proposals in the three areas I have just spoken about – first, incorporating proportionality 
clauses  in  EU  legislation,  second,  easing  reporting  and  disclosure  standards,  and  third, 
creating a two-tiered system – are just some of the options that are available. I feel we should 
explore these ideas, and others, in an even-handed and open-minded manner. 
6.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
A loss of biodiversity can have grave repercussions for the world. In biological terms, this can 
even  go  as  far  as  to  increase  the  prevalence  of  infectious  diseases  in  less  biodiverse 
ecosystems because they support the transmission of pathogens.7 [7] This can pose a risk to 
the health of humans, animals and plants. 
I think we’ve already made much more progress towards curbing these risks in the world of 
banking regulation than in the field of environmental policy. So we should proceed to review 
the points I have raised today in the calmest and most objective manner possible. 
The reforms embraced in the wake of the last crisis were the right thing to do, but looking 
particularly at the needs of smaller institutions, now is the right time to review them. 
In essence, it is all about reducing the burden on their operational activities. Wish lists are just 
as pointless as proposals that risk destabilising the system as a whole. Institutions with risky 
profiles shouldn’t benefit from any simplifications, nor should we create any loopholes that end 
up being used by so many institutions that smaller credit institutions run into difficulties. 
Whether and how the more complex rules should be balanced out by introducing simplified 
regulations for smaller institutions is a matter than now needs to be explored while the EU rules 
are being revised. Fundamental approaches should take precedence over purely details-driven 
initiatives. 
I  would  say  to  bank  representatives,  bank  board  members  and  employees:  step  beyond 
general criticism and put forward the most specific proposals you can. Say exactly how the 
operational strains arise and how the day-to-day burden for smaller banks and savings banks 
can be mitigated in a way that does not weaken the regime as a whole. If we succeed in striking 
this balance, simplifications will be possible – that’s something I firmly believe. 
I now look forward to a lively and stimulating discussion with you. Thank you very much for 
your attention. 
                                                
7   F  Keesing  et  al,  Impacts  of  biodiversity  on  the  emergence  and  transmission  of  infectious  diseases,  in 
Nature 468, No 7324, 2010, pages 647–652. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
