  Jon Cunliffe: A 21st century approach to dealing with failed banks 
Speech by Sir Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability of the Bank of England, 
at the1st Single Resolution Board Annual Conference, Brussels, 29 April 2016. 
 It  is  hard  now  to  think  of  a  time  when  there  was  ever  much  sympathy  for  the  owners  of 
banks. The years following the financial crisis have been marked by a scarcely diminishing 
public anger about the bailing out of banks by the taxpayer; the ‘heads I win, tails you lose’ 
privatisation of bank profits and socialisation of bank losses. 
That has not always been the case. When the City of Glasgow Bank failed in 1878 there was 
a great outpouring of sympathy for the hardship faced by the bank’s shareholders. A relief 
fund  to  help  them  was  established,  raising  nearly  £400,000  from  members  of  the  public  – 
around £35 million in today’s money – including through a public recitation of the works of 
Shakespeare. The government did not step in.1 
The world, of course, was very different then. The shareholders of the City of Glasgow Bank, 
like the shareholders of many other British banks at the time, stood to lose much more than 
the value of their shares in the bank. They had unlimited liability for the losses of the bank. 
And the losses were large – about 50% of the bank’s assets. The holder of a single share 
would have been liable for the equivalent of four times the salary of a teacher of the time. 
It  is  not  surprising  therefore  that  within  about  a  decade  unlimited  liability  had  all  but 
disappeared  from  the  British  banking  scene,  to  be  replaced  with  regimes  that  limited  the 
liability of shareholders in one way or another.2 
I would not propose that we go back to a system of unlimited liability for bank shareholders. 
But the City of Glasgow Bank episode is interesting because it shows that the public policy 
challenges of dealing with failing banks are not new. 
When a bank fails, the money has gone. Someone has to pay for the losses, however. The 
question  is  ‘who  pays?’  This  question  has  probably  be-devilled  public  policy  since  banks 
were invented. 
‘Who pays?’ – the past 
It goes back much further than late Victorian Britain. The Code of Hammurabi – written by 
the King of Babylon in around 1,800BC – included a provision that if the harvest failed due to 
adverse  weather  then  the  ‘debt-tablet’  would  be  washed  in  water  and  interest  on  the  loan 
would be cancelled for that year. 
The public authorities of 14th century Barcelona hit upon a novel policy approach to the liability 
of bank owners – not only would bankers who failed be publicly vilified by the town crier, they 
would be forced to live on bread and water until they repaid their creditors.3 
How to deal with failed banks is of course only part of a much larger public policy issue – 
how to deal with the failure of commercial enterprises generally. Arguably, the development 
of  the  limited  liability  corporate  body  –  in  which  the  owners’  liability  is  limited  to  their 
                                                
1 See Button et al (2015).  
2 There was a reluctance from banks and from depositors to limit shareholder liability.  Unlimited liability, it was thought, 
reassured depositors and noteholders that their claims were safe.  So hybrid solutions were established in which shareholders’ 
liability was capped at some multiple of the capital they had invested, or in which they were subject to a call for extra capital if 
the bank got into trouble.     
 
3 See Usher (1943). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  investment – and corporate insolvency, is one of the most important foundations of modern 
capitalism. 
But  banks  are  different  for  two  reasons.  First,  their  underlying  business  of  maturity 
transformation  means  they  depend  on  confidence.  Loss  of  confidence  in  one  bank  can 
quickly become a run on all banks. And given their leverage and interconnectedness, failure 
of one bank can lead to failures of others. 
And second, as banks have developed they have increasingly become the main providers of 
money in modern economies – 96% of money in the UK is in the form of claims issued by 
banks. Failure can mean that large numbers of people lose most of their access to money – 
if not their money itself – and to the financial system while the bank goes through insolvency. 
As  banks  developed  and  grew  larger  in  the  twentieth  century,  the  question  of  ‘who  pays 
when the bank fails?’ continued to challenge policy makers. 
Once the liability of a bank’s shareholders was increasingly limited the emphasis shifted to 
the  bank’s  creditors,  including  its  depositors.  However  the  dangers  of  exposing  short-term 
creditors, like ordinary depositors, to losses were demonstrated in the early twentieth century 
in the US. Bank failures leading to depositor losses led to numerous bank runs making the 
whole  system  unstable  and  liable  to  runs  at  the  first  sign  of  bad  news.  The  episode 
demonstrated the costs of bringing into doubt the ‘moneyness’ of banks’ deposit liabilities. 
As a result, policymakers realised that depositors were not best placed to absorb losses and 
federal deposit insurance was established in the US with the creation of the FDIC in 1933. 
The answer then to the question of ‘who pays?’ was first the shareholders, then unprotected 
depositors  and  finally  the  surviving  banks  that  as  a  whole  funded  the  insurance  –  with 
bridging loans from the taxpayer if necessary. 
Interestingly,  industry-funded  deposit  insurance  was  not  adopted  in  the  UK  until  50  years 
later; the Bank of England preferred to rely on the ‘Governor’s eyebrows’ for both supervision 
and for dealing with failing banks – using suasion to get the industry as a whole to provide 
support, such as the ‘Lifeboat’ which was created in 1973.4 
With  the  liberalisation  and  globalisation  of  banking  at  the  end  of  the  last  century,  banks 
became  larger,  more  complex  and  more  interconnected.  It  became  increasingly  unclear 
whether the longer-term creditors could be made to pay and whether large banks could be 
allowed to fail. 
The case of Continental Illinois demonstrated that deposit insurance was not enough. The 
danger of loss of confidence and contagion made the authorities reluctant to bail in longer-
term uninsured creditors. It was in giving evidence on the subsequent bailout – which cost 
over $1bn – that the then Comptroller of the Currency admitted that the largest eleven banks 
in the US were ‘too big to fail’. 
The  market  got  the  message.  For  the  largest,  most  complex  banks,  the  answer  to  the 
question  ‘who  pays?’  was  likely  to  be  the  taxpayer.  Despite  central  banks’  attempts  to 
engender  uncertainty  over  whether  banks  would  be  bailed  out,  despite  the  cases  of  BCCI 
and Barings in the 1990s in which two medium-sized banks were allowed to fail, expectations 
that banks would be bailed out became entrenched. 
The  impact  has  been  identified  and  quantified;  the  bailout  of  Continental  Illinois  in  1984 
artificially reduced the funding costs of all other banks that were considered ‘too big to fail’ by 
                                                
4 The ‘Lifeboat’ was a Control Committee of the Bank of England and the English and Scottish clearing banks, consisting of 
senior  representatives  of  each  under  the  chairmanship  of  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank,  which  first  met  on  28th 
December 1973. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  more than a quarter of a percentage point (32bps).5 And while fluctuating over time, these 
‘implicit subsidies’ remained sizable throughout most of the 1990s and 2000s. 
And indeed, expectations of bailouts were generally right. Very few banks were allowed to go 
into  insolvency  in  the  global  financial  crisis.  Lehman  was  very  much  the  exception  that 
proved the rule. The impact of Lehman’s failure revealed that things had not moved on since 
Continental  Illinois;  the  official  machinery  in  most  jurisdictions  was  completely  unable  to 
handle the failure of a large – or in the UK case even a medium-sized – banks in a way that 
did not pose risks to the financial system. 
So in most cases banks were bailed out. The risks of contagion, loss of confidence in the 
system and disruption to the provision of banking to the economy were simply too great. But 
the  costs  had  grown  since  the  Continental  Illinois  episode  of  the  1980s.  In  the  UK,  for 
example, the banking sector had grown from around 100% of GDP to more than 500% of 
GDP in 2008. And the UK government had to inject 13 times more money into RBS than had 
been injected into Continental Illinois.6 
Is too big to fail inevitable? 
The post-crisis period has seen a vast amount of work to come up with a better way to deal 
with a failed bank and a better answer than ‘the taxpayer’ to the question of ‘who pays?’ 
Some have argued that it cannot be done. The crisis, they argue, showed that large, complex 
banks do indeed have to keep operating. They are too interconnected and provide too large 
a share of essential services to the economy to be allowed to abruptly stop operating. 
This line of argument leads to the conclusion that if we want to end too big to fail, we need to 
end being big itself. We need to go back to a world of small, less complex banks. With the 
help  of  deposit  insurance,  these  could  be  wound  up  quickly  and  simply  without  great 
disruption to the economy and society as a whole. 
A  world  of  smaller,  simple  banks  may  appear  tempting.  But  something  important  would  I 
think be lost. As the Independent Commission on Banking argued in their Report, splitting up 
banks would reduce diversification benefits.7 While the cost of failure of small banks may be 
lower,  these  banks  may  hence  be  more  likely  to  fail.  And  a  large  number  could  fail 
simultaneously if they take on correlated risks, as was the case in the US Savings and Loans 
crisis in the 1980s. Something else might be lost: banking relies on information. Large, multi-
national  banks  can  use  their  existing  customer  knowledge  to  offer  a  customer  services 
across the globe and across different business lines. This allows information to flow freely 
across borders and products and supports international trade and investment. 
I think it is possible to have a world in which large banks can fail in an orderly way – without 
the contagion and damage to the economy that in the past has forced the taxpayer to come 
in and absorb losses. But there is no single, silver bullet to achieve that; rather it requires the 
application of a comprehensive set of policy and powers. It requires a major change in the 
regulatory landscape and the transition will be difficult. 
Progress on resolution 
The good news is that there has been very substantial progress towards this new world. In 
the UK certainly we are now in a much stronger position in terms of dealing with bank failures 
                                                
5 See Morgan and Stiroh (2005).   
6 The FDIC had injected a total of $2.5bn as subordinated debt and equity into Continental Illinois (around $5bn in 2009 money).  
This compares to at least $66.7bn (contingent) capital injections into RBS (using 2009 exchange rates).  
7 See Independent Commission on Banking (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  than  we  were  in  2008.  Internationally,  we  have  agreement  on  key  minimum  standards  for 
dealing with large globally systemic banks. 
But the hard work of implementing the new powers, policies and standards is just beginning. 
Banks have to make the transition to the new world. This will require sustained effort on the 
part of the regulatory and of the political authorities. 
It will not be costless. And as the costs of ensuring orderly failure of large banks in bad times 
will fall on those banks in normal times, there will be pressure to skimp on what is necessary. 
I  want  next  to  review  briefly  the  progress  we  have  made  on  the  five  main  planks  of  this 
programme of work. 
(i) Improved resilience 
The first  plank  is to keep  banks  out  of  trouble  in  the first  place. This means  ensuring that 
banks  have  sufficient  resilience  as  going  concerns  to  absorb  losses  without  getting  into 
trouble  or  having  to  cut  back  lending  to  the  economy  in  times  of  stress.  For  the  larger, 
systemic banks, it means having even higher resilience, not so much because of the extra 
risks  they  run  but  because  of  the  greater  damage  they  can  do  to  the  economy  if  they  go 
wrong. 
I  do  not  want  to  go  into  great  detail  on  this  today,  but  some  headline  numbers  are  worth 
highlighting. UK banks have roughly doubled the proportion of assets they fund with equity 
since the end of 2007, and they have cut the share of total funding accounted for by short-
term wholesale funding from nearly 30% in 2007 to 10%. They have tripled their liquid asset 
holdings.  Trading  assets  have  been  reduced  by  a  third  and  inter-bank  exposures  have 
shrunk by two thirds. 
In addition, the major UK banks have demonstrated they are resilient to severe but plausible 
hypothetical stress tests designed by the Financial Policy Committee and PRA Board, and to 
recent real stresses in global financial markets – which saw UK bank debt spreads increase 
by much less than in previous episodes of stress. 
(ii) Resolution tools and powers 
The second plank is making sure the authorities have the necessary powers and machinery 
to manage the failure of a bank. 
Astounding though it may seem, the UK went into the crisis with no single institution formally 
responsible  for  dealing  with  failing  banks.  It  was  assumed  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
England’s eyebrows would deal with such problems as they had done it in the past. But the 
Bank had always relied on informal methods – it had no statutory powers in this area. 
Nor  was  there  any  special  insolvency  regime  for  banks  that  gave  priority  to  the  needs  of 
depositors and ensured they did not lose access to their accounts for an extended period. 
As  a  result,  when  Northern  Rock  got  into  trouble  and  a  buyer  could  not  be  found,  the 
Government  had  no  alternative  but  to  nationalise  it  –  shareholders  were  wiped  out  and 
subsequently the Government was forced to inject £1.4 billion of capital into the bank. A year 
later,  when  faced  with  the  much  bigger  challenges  of  RBS  and  HBOS,  the  Government 
likewise had to step in.8 
The situation was similar in other countries. While the US had a resolution regime, this only 
covered the insured deposit-taking entities within a banking group and proved unable to deal 
with the failure of large, interconnected groups. Similarly, SEC-regulated investment banks 
were outside of the scope of resolution regimes. While some European countries had bank-
                                                
8 Existing shareholders were not fully diluted in either RBS or HBOS.  In the case of RBS, for example, they retained 16% of 
RBS’s total share capital (30% of voting shares). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  specific insolvency regimes, they too did not have regimes that satisfy modern standards for 
bank resolution that would have guaranteed the continuity of critical economic functions. 
The shortcomings in terms of public institutions and powers have now been addressed in the 
key jurisdictions. We have, of course, yet to see how the new resolution powers operate in 
practice.  But  we  now  have  a  crucial,  far  reaching  capability  that  we  lacked  entirely  eight 
years ago. 
We  need  to  be  clear  at  this  point  what  we  mean  by  ‘resolution’  powers  and  authorities. 
‘Resolution’  does  not  mean  ‘resurrection’  of  a  fallen  bank.  Rather,  it  means  stabilising  the 
bank so that, over time as far as is necessary, it can be either split up, restructured or parts 
of it put into insolvency in an orderly way. 
These  new  responsibilities  and  powers,  crucially,  do  not  only  cover  what  happens  when  a 
bank can no longer carry on operating; they also cover how a bank organises and finances 
itself when it is operating normally. 
A key lesson of the crisis is that the structure and financing of a bank when it is operating 
normally can make it impossible to deal  with its failure in an orderly way. If banks are not 
structured and financed in a way that supports orderly resolution before they run into trouble, 
the authorities’ options can be very constrained when the bank fails. 
(iii) Bank structures 
This brings me to the third plank of ending too big to fail. Banks before the crisis were not 
organised to be resolvable. 
The third plank is to ensure that banks are structured in a way that supports resolution and 
that barriers to resolvability are removed. This can be a daunting challenge – the average 
number  of  separate  legal  entities  at  G-SIBs  is  around  1,000  and  in  some  cases  is  much 
higher.9 
This may seem a rather gruesome business. It is not usual for a firm to spend a huge amount 
of time planning for its demise. It is certainly an onerous business for all concerned. In the 
UK, the Bank has to prepare resolution plans for around 200 banks and building societies, 
based  on  information  provided  by  the  firms.  But  it  is  a  necessary  business.  Non-financial 
firms  can  fail  and  go  into  insolvency  without  widespread  damage  to  the  economy  and 
financial system. Banks, once they get above a certain size, cannot. 
(iv) Loss absorbency 
The  fourth  plank  is  to  ensure  in  advance  that  banks  are  financed  in  a  way  that  supports 
resolution. This is perhaps the most difficult part of the puzzle as it goes to the heart of that 
ever difficult question of ‘who pays?’ 
Clearly, the shareholders stand first in the line. And by strengthening bank capital we have 
ensured that the shareholders can absorb a much greater amount of loss.10 But, unless we 
go  back  to  the  concept  of  unlimited  liability  we  must  assume  that  if  a  bank  is  unable  to 
continue operating, the shareholders’ capital has effectively been exhausted. And clearly, the 
insured depositors – whose losses are covered by the rest of the industry – stand last in line. 
In  between,  there  is  an  army  of  bank  creditors,  ranging  from  unprotected  depositors, 
corporates, interbank liabilities, repos, and derivatives, to trade creditors, pension liabilities, 
contingent  liabilities,  tax  liabilities,  and,  of  course,  the  unsecured  wholesale  funders  of  the 
bank who have bought longer-term bank debt. 
                                                
9 See Herring and Carmassi (2014). 
10 See Brooke at el (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The lesson of the crisis was that it can be very  difficult to bail in some of this group for a 
number of reasons. It is not simply the risk of contagion. Some of the liabilities are linked to 
the continuing operation of the bank, and bailing them in would mean bringing the bank to an 
abrupt  stop.  Some  are  politically  difficult  or  would  cause  greater  economic  damage  than 
others. And this army of creditors tends, in most jurisdictions, to be a single class that has to 
be treated equally in insolvency and it is impossible to separate them out. 
The lesson of the crisis is clear. If the bank that fails on Friday evening has to be stabilised 
so  that  it  can  be  back  in  operation  on  Monday  morning,  it  must  have  sufficient  creditors 
whose claims can credibly and quickly be converted to equity over the weekend. If it does 
not,  the  authorities  will  have  only  the  options  of  insolvency  –  with  all  the  disruption  that 
entails – or a bailout by the taxpayer. In that case, history will be likely to repeat itself. 
A prompt and sufficient recapitalisation that restores solvency should enable a bank to regain 
authorisation requirements. It should also enable a bank, if needed, to access central bank 
liquidity  on  the  same  terms  as  other  banks.  Provision  of  central  bank  liquidity  to  solvent 
banks is not a bailout. It is part of what central banks do when necessary. In essence what is 
needed is to settle the question of ‘who pays’ unambiguously and in advance. We need to 
pre-position a specific type of creditor who can absorb loss if the bank fails. 
Clearly, getting a creditor to accept this in advance has a cost; there will be a premium for 
carrying  such  an  explicit  risk.  That  cost  is,  however,  simply  the  counterpart  of  the  hidden 
subsidy being given to banks by the implicit taxpayer guarantee that applies if they cannot be 
resolved in an orderly way. 
We now have international agreement on the minimum amount and nature of this type of loss 
absorbing  instrument  –  which  goes  under  the  unlovely  name  of  ‘TLAC’  –  that  the  largest, 
globally systemic banks should issue.11 
And  in  the  EU,  under  the  Banking  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),  resolution 
authorities will need to set in advance, for each firm, the overall amount and nature of the 
resources that can absorb loss both when the firm is a going concern and when it can no 
longer operate – this goes under the equally unlovely name of MREL. 
(v) International co-operation 
The final plank is international cooperation. The hardest challenge in ending too big to fail is 
dealing  with  the  failure  of  systemically  important  banks  that  operate  in  a  number  of 
jurisdictions.  The  crisis  proved  beyond  doubt  that  we  did  not  have  the  international 
machinery to handle this. 
We  have  invested  considerable  effort  into  addressing  these  shortcomings  by  increasing 
coordination  between  authorities  and  ensuring  that  national  authorities  also  have  the  right 
incentives to cooperate in a crisis. For example: 
• 
We  have  developed  firm-specific  cooperation  agreements  (CoAgs)  to  increase 
cross-border  coordination  and 
information-sharing  between  home  and  host 
authorities. 
We have set up Crisis Management Groups (CMGs) to agree resolution plans for 
globally systemically important banks. The UK is involved in CMGs for four G-SIBs 
as  home  authority  and  14  as  a  host  authority.  Through  CMGs  we  are  making 
concrete changes in the set-up of firms that will help ensure that when faced with a 
crisis, authorities will stick to their ex-ante agreements. So-called ‘internal TLAC’ is a 
notable  example  –  it  enables  losses  to  be  passed  up  to  the  relevant  part  of  the 
group. 
                                                 
11 See Financial Stability Board (2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In  the  European  Union,  resolution  colleges  have  been  established  in  accordance 
with  the  BRRD  for  cross-border  firms  that  have  operations  in  more  than  one 
Member  State,  and  the  UK  expects  to  be  involved  in  around  20  as  home  or  host 
authority. 
 Impact of reforms to date 
This multi-pronged programme of measures to address too big to fail is already having an 
effect.  Ratings  agencies  have  started  to  reduce  their  ‘government  support’  uplifts  for  big 
banks.  Spreads  between  senior  and  structurally  subordinated  debt  of  UK  G-SIBs  also 
suggests that resolution regimes are gaining credibility. 
The realisation is setting in that bank creditors are at risk if the bank gets into trouble. There 
certainly  appears  to  have  been  a  jump  in  awareness  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  The 
average  spread for  senior  debt  issued  by  European  G-SIBs  increased  by  over  25%  within 
little more than a week. 
In  part,  this  is  a  result  of  the  entry  into  force  of  the  BRRD,  and  in  the  UK  the  Bank’s 
consultation paper on the setting of MREL.12 But it has almost certainly been reinforced by 
other events that have brought the issue into sharper relief. 
As a result, perhaps not surprisingly, there have been calls to amend the regime before it has 
even been implemented, on the grounds that it will raise costs for banks and make them less 
able to lend to the real economy and that it is politically impossible to bail in bank creditors. 
There  are  clearly  some  very  important  and  difficult  transitional  issues  here.  And  no  major 
shift  in  preventative  regulation  is  ever  universally  welcome.  But,  it  is,  however,  possible  to 
view  this  greater  awareness  of  the  new  regime  in  a  more  positive  light.  I  have  mentioned 
already evidence that expectations of taxpayer bailouts have diminished. 
Perhaps,  even  more  important,  one  of  the  key  benefits  of  ensuring  that  certain  creditors 
know they can be bailed in is that those creditors have a much stronger incentive to monitor 
and, if necessary, constrain the risks banks are taking.13 
 
Transition to new resolution regime 
Moving  to  an  effective  resolution  regime,  including  for  the  largest  cross-border  banks,  will 
require a major transition. Many larger banks will need to make changes to their structure 
and financing. There will inevitably be higher costs as the implicit public subsidy is removed. 
There is no free lunch. 
This  transition  needs  to  be  carefully  managed.  So  in  conclusion,  I  want  to  set  out  the 
principles  that  the  Bank  of  England  is  following  to  guide  the  implementation  of  the  new 
regime. 
Proportionality 
First and perhaps most important is proportionality. The resolution requirements for a bank 
should be what is necessary to deliver the resolution strategy for that bank – no more and no 
less. 
                                                
12 See Bank of England (2015).   
13 The Financial Stability Board has calculated that a withdrawal of government guarantees could reduce banks’ probability of 
failure by a third.  This draws on evidence in IMF and Fed NY working papers that evaluate the relationship between the 
‘government support assumptions’ that rating agencies express and measures of bank risk-taking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  Large banks cannot be allowed abruptly to cease operating. They have to be stabilised and 
resolved. Resolution is not resurrection. It takes time. So the bank has to have enough debt 
that can be bailed in to restore its capital so it can continue to operate as an authorised firm 
while it is being resolved. 
Smaller  banks  can  be  more  easily  separated  into  the  parts  that  provide  critical  economic 
services  and  that  can  be  sold  and  those  that  do  not  and  can go  into  insolvency.  Only  the 
critical parts would be recapitalised in resolution. They need less bail-in debt. 
The very smallest institutions do not need to be kept in operation. Their abrupt cessation of 
activity  should  not  generate  contagion  or  damage  the  economy.  Insolvency  rather  than 
resolution is the proportionate strategy here. They do not need bail in debt. 
Gradualism 
The  second  key  principle  is  gradualism.  The  Bank  is  proposing  to  allow  the  full  four-year 
transition period for banks to meet their MREL requirements. This will allow the market for 
MREL-eligible debt to develop and allow banks to smooth out their debt issuance, minimising 
issuance and interest costs. 
Clarity 
The third is clarity. Banks and their creditors need to have clarity – clarity in relation to the 
requirements of the new regime and clarity as to their liability if things go wrong. So we need 
to avoid uncertainty and get on and implement the EU requirements that came into force at 
the beginning of this year. 
Bank creditors need to know where they stand if things go wrong. This is not just a case of 
making  sure  that  those  that  buy  bank  debt  that  can  be  bailed  in  realise  the  risks  of  the 
instruments they have purchased. It also means making sure that creditors understand the 
resolution strategy of the institution to which they have lent money. Unprotected depositors in 
institutions that have no bail-in debt should be clear that in the event of trouble, they stand 
next in line after shareholders when it comes to absorbing losses. 
Conclusion 
As I’ve tried to show, the question of how to deal with failing banks and who pays is not new. 
But  the  answers  have  changed  over  time. We  no  longer think  we  should  rely  on  a  diet  of 
bread  and  water,  unlimited  liability,  Shakespearian  recitals,  ordinary  depositors  or  the 
taxpayer to bear the burden of failed banks. 
Our success can never be absolute. We can’t expect to insulate fully all institutions from all 
external  shocks,  however  large.14  We  have,  however,  in  my  view,  put  in  place  the  legal, 
financial and practical arrangements to resolve banks of all sizes. 
But it will only be true if we implement the new regime on resolution fully. Both regulators and 
industry have an incentive to do so. If, next time there is a crisis, authorities face the same 
unenviable choice as in the crisis, if taxpayer bailouts cannot be avoided, then the case for 
breaking up banks and making them much, much simpler will be very hard to resist. 
We  have  made  very  significant  progress  on  a  resolution  regime  for  the  21st  century.  The 
powers,  international  standards  and  institutions  are  all  in  place.  The  authorities  and  the 
banking system have strong and common incentives to complete the implementation. It is in 
all our interests that we do so. 
                                                
14 See Carney (2014). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  References 
Afonso,  G,  Santos,  J  A,  and  Traina,  J  (2014)  ‘Do  'Too-Big-To-Fail'  Banks  Take  on  More 
Risk?’, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 20(2). 
Bank of England (2015) ‘The Bank of England’s approach to setting a minimum requirement 
for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL)’,  Consultation  on  a  proposed  Statement  of 
Policy, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/resolution/mrelconsultation2015
.pdf. 
Brooke M, Bush O, Edwards R, Ellis J, Francis B, Harimohan, R, Neiss, K and Siegert, C 
(2015)  ‘Measuring  the  Macroeconomic  Costs  and  Benefits  of  Higher  UK  Bank  Capital 
Requirements’, Financial Stability Paper 35. 
Button, R, Knott, S, Macmanus, C and Willison, M (2015) ‘Desperate adventurers and men of 
straw:  the  failure  of  City  of  Glasgow  Bank  and  its  enduring  impact  on  the  UK  banking 
system’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin Q1. 
Carney, M (2014) ‘The future of financial reform’, Monetary Authority of Singapore Lecture. 
Financial Stability Board (2015) ‘FSB issues final Total Loss-Absorbing Capacity standard for 
global 
at 
http://www.fsb.org/2015/11/tlac-press-release/. 
Financial  Stability  Board  (2015)  ‘Assessing  the  economic  costs  and  benefits  of  TLAC 
implementation’. 
Herring, R J and Carmassi, J (2014) ‘Complexity and systemic risk’, The Oxford Handbook of 
Banking, 77. 
Independent Commission on Banking (2011) ‘Final Report Recommendations’. 
Marques, L B, Correa R and Sapriza H (2013) ‘International evidence on government support 
and risk taking in the banking sector’, International Monetary Fund Working Paper no 13/94. 
Morgan, D P and Stiroh, K J (2005) ‘Too big to fail after all these years’, FRB NY Staff Report 
no 220. 
Usher, A P (1943) The Early History of Deposit Banking in Mediterranean Europe, Harvard 
University Press. 
 
systemically 
important 
available 
release, 
banks’, 
Press 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
