   Jens Weidmann: A look at the euro area from a central bank perspective 
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman 
of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Second Finance 
Forum Liechtenstein, Vaduz, 23 March 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Head of Government Hasler 
Your Serene Highness 
Esteemed ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for inviting me to the Principality of Liechtenstein. I am very glad to be 
here with you today. 
A  reporter  at Germany's  Süddeutsche  Zeitung  daily  once  wrote,  with  a slight  undertone of 
sarcasm: "Those who have the joy of spending part of their lives at banking congresses will 
frequently be confronted with words ending in '-ation' and '-ing'." The prime examples listed by 
the journalist included "regulation", "capitalisation" and "digitalisation". 
Rest assured that, at today's event, you, too, will be confronted with a great many words ending 
in  "-ation"  and  "-ing",  especially  since  two  of  the  aforementioned  words  were  already 
mentioned  in  the  invitation.  There's  also  a  good  chance  that  you  will  hear  terms  such  as 
refinancing and implementation, positioning and focusing, standardisation and stabilisation or 
even the optimisation of bookkeeping and accounting bandied about today. 
Some years ago, the German language critic Bastian Sick complained, in his book Der Dativ 
ist dem Genitiv sein Tod – literally, The dative is to the genitive its death – of the "overweening 
dominance of words ending in -ation" and "-ing". Admittedly, the literary merits of this noun-
heavy  style  of  writing  are  not truly  existent  –  but  at  a financial  industry conference,  that  is 
probably  not  what  counts.  Let  me  therefore  focus  on  content  and  not  on  the  linguistic 
packaging. 
In my remarks today, I would like to take a look at the situation in the euro area. 
Liechtenstein  borders  on  the  euro  area,  and  not  just  geographically.  There  are  also  close 
economic  and  legal  ties  with  the  EU,  especially  since  the  Principality  is  a  member  of  the 
European  Economic  Area  and  thus part  of the  internal  market.  Liechtenstein's  banks  have 
been among the major beneficiaries. And the sharp appreciation of the Swiss franc against the 
euro last year weighed not only on Switzerland's industrial sector but also on Liechtenstein's 
exporters. 
The ECB Governing Council's monetary policy decisions are therefore just as relevant to the 
Swiss  franc  zone  as  financial  market  regulation  and  the  institutional  stability  of  European 
monetary union. 
Before I delve deeper into these topics, I would like to lay out three core talking points. 
1. 
First, European monetary policy has ventured deep into uncharted territory, and there 
is a growing risk of it being subjugated to fiscal policy. In what is admittedly currently 
a difficult monetary policy environment, risks must not be underestimated, nor should 
the capabilities of monetary policy be oversold. 
Second,  in  order  to  stabilise  monetary  union  over  the  long  run,  its  institutional 
framework needs to be reformed. The balance between actions and liability for their 
consequences needs to be restored. 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 3. 
Third, significant progress has been made in financial market regulation; our banking 
system  is  thus  more  robust  today  than  before  the  financial  crisis.  However,  the 
regulatory agenda has not yet been fully concluded for the banks and shadow banks 
alike. 
  Monetary policy in the euro area 
2. 
Let me begin with monetary policy. 
As you know, at its meeting nearly two weeks ago, the Governing Council of the European 
Central Bank (ECB) adopted an even more accommodative monetary policy stance. 
The move that gained the most public attention was the renewed cut in the ECB's policy rates. 
The main refinancing rate is now at 0%, and the interest rate on deposits with the Eurosystem 
was cut further to the current level of -0.40%. But on top of that, the Governing Council also 
adopted a rather extensive package of measures: 
beginning  in  June,  the  Eurosystem  will  be  providing  a  further  set  of  targeted  longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTROs) with which banks can acquire liquidity for a term of four years 
at extremely favourable conditions – usually at the 0% main refinancing rate throughout the 
entire term. Banks that grant additional loans – except for loans for house purchases – will 
even  get  something  back:  in  the  most  favourable  case,  the  difference  between  the  main 
refinancing rate and the deposit rate in effect at the time of allotment. 
In addition, the volume of monthly bond purchases was raised from €60 billion to €80 billion. 
The idea here is to also purchase, within this overall volume, non-financial corporate bonds 
issued in the euro area. At the same time, the Governing Council stated that it did not intend 
to raise its central bank rates for a relatively long period of time. Not even once the asset 
purchase programme has already been concluded. 
This package of measures was the Governing Council's response to the very subdued price 
outlook in the euro area. It may be assumed that, over the forecasting horizon, the inflation 
rate will only very gradually approach the norm for price stability; at the end of 2018, inflation 
will stand at 1.6%. 
In addition, the ECB staff projections show that the gradual economic recovery in the euro area 
will continue, but at probably a somewhat weaker pace than had been envisaged as recently 
as last December. The sluggish growth of the global economy is also impacting on the euro 
area. 
Now, a gloomier price outlook need not necessarily translate into a monetary policy response 
– especially if price movements have been caused primarily by a sharp drop in oil prices. 
For an indication of how the strong fluctuations in energy prices impact on the forecast, one 
need only consider that the projection of the inflation rate based on the current oil price, which 
is around 20% higher than the price used in the projection, would be in and of itself around 0.2 
percentage point higher in 2016. 
Core inflation, ie the inflation rate excluding volatile components, such as energy or food prices, 
also dropped unexpectedly recently. Despite a projected slight increase over the forecasting 
horizon,  core  inflation, which  is  used  to  approximate  domestic price  pressures,  will  remain 
below the definition of price stability in 2018 as well. 
However, I believe it is still too early to say with any degree of certainty whether this decline in 
core inflation is temporary or of a permanent nature. That is not the only reason why uncertainty 
surrounding inflation projections is currently very pronounced. 
Monetary policymakers can also come under particular pressure to take action if a relatively 
prolonged period of persistently very low inflation sharply diminishes the longer-run inflation 
expectations, as that could be a factor in keeping future inflation rates too low as well. At last 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   report, market-based longer-run inflation expectations, at a value of 1.4%, were indeed well 
short of our definition of price stability. 
This finding does not, however, represent evidence of their de-anchoring and thus of the risk 
of  an  excessively  low  inflation  rate  taking  hold.  Indeed,  these  values  could  also  be  the 
consequence of the liquidity effects of government bond purchase programmes and negative 
inflation risk premiums. This, at least, is what we can gather from a comparison with survey-
based  inflation  expectations,  which  at  last  report  fell  only  a  very  little  or  not  at  all  and  are 
running  much  closer  to  the  definition  of  price  stability.  However,  the  risk  of  de-anchoring 
naturally increases, the longer economic agents observe an inflation rate which they perceive 
as being sustainably below the definition of price stability. 
The new forecast picture therefore certainly did present quite a monetary policy challenge and 
exposed a need for action to be taken. On this topic, there was agreement within the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB.  But  taken  as  a  whole,  I  think  the  decisions  went  too  far,  and  the 
comprehensive package of measures didn't win me over. 
My  reservations  concerning government  bond  purchases  in the  euro  area  are  well  known. 
Similarly, the latest downturn in the outlook for prices and growth still leaves me unconvinced 
of  the  alleged  need  to  use  this  instrument,  one  that  I  regard  purely  as  an  emergency 
instrument. For this will ultimately lead to a dangerous commingling of monetary and fiscal 
policy. Even after taking note of the latest forecast revisions, I still see a very remote risk of a 
deflationary spiral. 
It is a fact, however, that the Governing Council of the ECB is striving for an inflation rate of 
below, but close to, 2% in the medium term in order to fulfil its mandate of price stability. 
One reason why the central banks of the major currency areas generally aim for an inflation 
rate of just under 2% is because slightly positive rates of price increase provide a certain safety 
margin to the lower bound on interest rates. As we now know, this bound is not exactly at zero, 
nor is it significantly below that level. If the inflation target is too low, a central bank's scope for 
stimulating the economy using conventional instruments can quickly be exhausted. 
Naturally, the target ought not be too high, either, as we all know that inflation is costly. And 
not  just  when  inflation  rates  hit  the  double  digits. Which  is  precisely  the reason  why  many 
central banks across the world now have the mandate to safeguard price stability. 
Maybe a comparison with a ship will help to illustrate the situation. A ship ought to have enough 
water below its keel at all times in order not to run aground. At the same time, too much water 
would prevent the ship from casting its anchor. 
It is important to emphasise that our target is a medium-run one. The medium run does not 
mean "sometime in the distant future", nor does it mean "as fast as possible and at all costs". 
The term "medium run" thus  consciously  contains  a  certain  degree  of  vagueness  over  the 
precise time horizon. This gives monetary policy the flexibility it needs to respond appropriately 
to a myriad of different types of macroeconomic shock. Monetary policy would surely be unable 
to cope with the expectation of always being able to guarantee an inflation rate of just under 
2%, for alongside the justified desire to steer inflation back towards the 2% mark, monetary 
policy must also keep in mind that there are risks associated with the protracted low-interest-
rate policy and the non-standard monetary policy measures. One expression of this is that the 
ECB Governing Council is having to fend off increasingly absurd demands – such as showering 
the population with "helicopter money". 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Telling you lots and lots about the risks and side-effects of monetary policy would probably be 
akin to  "carrying  coals to  Newcastle".  You  all know  that  an  ultra-accommodative  monetary 
policy brings with it long-term risks to the stability of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   First, because of the mounting risk of financial market bubbles. This is why some euro-area 
member states have now also taken what are known as macroprudential measures in order, 
for instance, to counteract excesses in real estate markets. 
Of course, whenever such financial stability risks are looming, this represents a challenge, 
above all, to macroprudential policy. And a stability-oriented central bank should not seek a 
trade-off between monetary stability and financial stability; this will soon lead to monetary policy 
arbitrariness.  However,  a  monetary  policy  which  is  intended  to  ensure  longer-term  price 
stability cannot completely ignore these risks, for at the end of the day, financial stability risks 
generally also threaten price stability – as was clearly shown by the financial crisis. 
Second, because profitability in the banking sector can take a hit, the severity of which rises 
the longer the period of low interest rates persists and the flatter the yield curve is. As central 
bankers, our concern here is naturally not the profits generated by the banks per se; instead, 
it is the banks' ability to transmit monetary policy stimuli. And this capability is not independent 
of capital adequacy, as the latter plays a major role in shaping banks' ability to cushion shocks. 
It  is  all  the  more  important,  then,  for  banks  to  gear  their  operations  towards  sustainable 
profitability.  To  achieve  this,  they  need  to  review  their  business  models,  get  their  balance 
sheets in order and harness any available scope for consolidation in order to cut costs. Failing 
this, they may find it difficult during a protracted phase of low interest rates to retain profits with 
a view to further strengthening their capital base. 
Institutional framework of monetary union 
3. 
Another risk of the ultra-accommodative monetary policy is that the low interest rates and the 
extensive asset purchases will ease the pressure on member states to consolidate and reform. 
But that's not all. These bond purchases are increasingly fusing monetary policy and fiscal 
policy. For a significant share of sovereign debt, government financing costs have become 
decoupled  from  capital  market  conditions:  since  the  purchases  ultimately  increase  banks' 
surplus  liquidity,  when  all  is  said  and  done,  governments  are  obtaining  this  share  of  their 
funding at the – currently negative – deposit rate. 
With regard to the assets purchased by central banks, interest rates are quite simply no longer 
being  geared  to  the  soundness  of  a  country's  public  finances,  which  is  a  far  cry  from  the 
principle of capital market funding. However, bonds held outside central bank balance sheets 
are also affected indirectly. On the whole, this undercuts market discipline, the intent of which 
is to secure not only compliance with fiscal rules but also sustainable budgets. 
The recent waning of the euro-area countries' enthusiasm for consolidation is no surprise. If 
the cyclical improvements are factored out of the euro-area countries' budget deficits, adjusted 
for interest expenditure, for the past two or three years the relevant primary surpluses have 
either been treading water or have even been receding. 
The opportunity opened up by the low interest rates to bring down budget deficits particularly 
quickly was thus squandered. And this could mean repeating a mistake that was already made 
by many member states in the early days of monetary union. 
A recent comment in the Italian daily newspaper Corriere della Sera said it all: 
"At  the  beginning  of  the  new  millennium,  Italy  wasted  a  golden  opportunity  created  by  the 
narrowing of yield differentials, the notorious spread. The advantage afforded by accession to 
the single currency led instead to an expansion of government spending, the productivity of 
which was extremely low with respect to investment and jobs. It would not be desirable for this 
opportunity to be squandered, either, for that is something we would deeply regret." 
This quote, through referring to Italy, is certainly applicable to other countries. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   In fact, stricter fiscal rules for the euro-area member states had been agreed in response to 
the financial and debt crisis; however, their binding effect has proven to not be as strong as 
was promised. 
This is due not least to the fact that the European Commission, in its dual role as the guardian 
of the Treaties and a political institution, has made compromises time and again at the expense 
of fiscal discipline. But in fact the whole point of stricter fiscal rules was to ensure sounder 
public finances over the long term. That was the basis for creating the permanent ESM firewall 
in return. 
As  part  of  the  measures  to  contain  the  crisis  in  the  euro  area,  however,  risks  were  then 
communitised  not  only  through  the  euro  rescue  shield  but  also  through  the  Eurosystem's 
balance sheet.  
These measures undoubtedly stabilised monetary union during the crisis. Yet they have also 
upset the balance between actions and liability for their consequences. The increase in joint 
liability, however, has not gone hand in hand with an increase in joint action. This is a bit like 
opening a joint account with your neighbour but not being able to influence your neighbour's 
spending. It can work, but that is by no means certain. 
This equilibrium needs to be restored in order to stabilise monetary union once and for all. In 
the  euro  area,  the  principle  of  independent  national  responsibility  is  currently  in force. The 
Maastricht Treaty, with its "no bail-out" clause, even explicitly ruled out mutual liability among 
member states. 
However, that does not mean that each country can run up debt at will. On the contrary: sound 
public finances are a key prerequisite for a monetary policy based on price stability and for 
keeping the euro area stable over the long term. Therefore, additional rules were put in place 
to protect the single currency: the debt rules, which were fleshed out in the Stability and Growth 
Pact,  and  the  ban  on  the  monetary  financing  of  the  public  sector,  ie  the  ban  on  financing 
government deficits by printing money. 
At the same time, many proposals for institutional reform are aimed at increasing risk-sharing 
still  further,  yet  they  remain  vague  when  it  comes  to  surrendering  sovereign  rights  to  the 
European level. That comes as little of a surprise. After all, willingness among member states 
to relinquish sovereignty is not particularly pronounced. 
As  long  as  member  states  cling  to  national  decision-making,  increased  risk-sharing  in  the 
policy fields affected will undermine the stability foundations of the euro area. 
Let me give you a specific example. As long as member states can have a major say on the 
quality  of  bank  balance  sheets,  such  as  through  national  insolvency  legislation,  then  a 
European  deposit  protection  scheme  would  not  only  be  premature  but  would  also  create 
incentives to shift risks to the banking system; these would then have to be borne by all. 
A European deposit protection scheme, moreover, would be justifiable only if banks were less 
dependent on the solvency of their home countries. However, since the banks are currently 
holding large quantities of their own countries' sovereign bonds, a European deposit protection 
scheme would be tantamount to communitising sovereign debt. 
Without the  willingness  to  extensively  relinquish  sovereign  rights,  there  is  only  one  way  to 
weatherproof  the  structure  of  the  euro  area:  we  need  to  reinforce  individual  national 
responsibility  by  making  the  "no  bail-out"  clause  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  more 
credible. After all, the only way this "no bail-out" clause can exert its disciplining effect is if 
financial market players also believe it to be in force. 
In order to lend credibility to the "no bail-out" rule, sovereign debt restructuring would need to 
be possible without jeopardising financial stability. As things now stand, were one euro-area 
member state to become insolvent, this would threaten the entire euro-area financial system 
owing to the close nexus between sovereigns and banks. Member states, fearing contagion 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   effects,  were  therefore  willing  to  provide  fiscal  assistance  to  Greece  and  other  euro-area 
countries in crisis. 
But it's not just the recipient countries that benefit from the ESM firewall, the private creditors 
are,  too,  as,  thanks  to  the  ESM  loans,  they  get  back  all  the  funds  they  lent  to  the  crisis 
countries, for which they will, in most cases, have collected a sizeable risk premium. Only in 
Greece have private creditors taken a voluntary haircut, but that wasn't until 2012, two years 
after the first fiscal assistance was granted. 
This practice is not compatible with the liability principle propounded by Walter Eucken ("Those 
who enjoy the benefits must also bear the costs"). 
Against this background, the Bundesbank presented a relatively simple proposal a number of 
years ago that is designed to prevent private investors being let off the hook at taxpayers' 
expense. This idea would require the bond terms and conditions to be changed such that the 
paper  automatically  rolls  over  by,  for  instance,  three  years  if  a  country  applies  for  ESM 
assistance. 
During this period, it would need to be determined whether the country was only temporarily 
illiquid or actually insolvent. Should the latter be the case, private creditors could then be bailed 
into the necessary restructuring. This would minimise the risks to taxpayers since the required 
volume of assistance loans would be lower from the outset. 
Creditor  liability,  of  course,  presupposes  the  creditors'  ability  to  bear  the  resultant  losses. 
Ensuring this is, not least, a task for financial market regulation, which brings me to my third 
and final topic. 
Financial market regulation 
4. 
I  have  already  mentioned  two  flaws  in  the  existing  institutional  framework:  the  weakened 
binding effect of the fiscal rules and the lack of credibility afflicting the "no bail-out" rule. A third 
flaw – in effect, an Achilles' heel of monetary union – turned out to be the banking system 
during the crisis. 
Many banks are still suffering from legacy risks in their balance sheets to this very day. Large 
volumes of distressed loans have been taking their toll on poorly capitalised and insufficiently 
profitable  euro-area  institutions,  in  particular.  Although  the  cleansing  of  balance  sheets  is 
making progress, it will not be completed for the foreseeable future. 
Bearing this in mind, it is, moreover, little wonder that euro-area bank lending is still mired in a 
slump despite the extremely accommodative monetary policy. 
This state of affairs likewise shows that the expansionary monetary policy is reliant on actions 
by  other  agents  as  well  as  by  policymakers  in  order  for  its  full  effects  to  materialise.  This 
explains, for instance, why Japan suffered at least a "lost decade" while  the United States 
overcame the financial crisis very quickly. 
However,  significant  strides  have  been  made  towards  a  less fragile  banking  system  in the 
seven  and  a  half  years  that  have  passed  since  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed.  Misguided 
incentives  were  reduced  and  institutions'  resilience  has  been  strengthened.  Important 
regulatory measures have been implemented or are currently being finalised. A case in point 
is Basel III, which has already increased the quantity and quality of capital being carried on 
banks' balance sheets. 
In Germany, the average tier 1 capital ratio was languishing at just 9.1% at the beginning of 
2008. By mid-2015, though, it stood at 15.6%, while the quality of own funds had improved 
perceptibly at the same time. 
The revamping of the Basel framework is scheduled for completion before the end of this year. 
A further significant tightening of the capital adequacy requirements, in the sense of a "Basel 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   IV", is not on the agenda, however. I think this is an important message, as the banking system 
should not be additionally burdened by unnecessary regulatory uncertainty. 
Global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), which are generally regarded as being "too big 
to fail", will have to demonstrate their total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) going forward. But 
the other EU banks, too, will be asked to hold capital instruments which, in a resolution event, 
can be converted into liable capital. 
Bail-in will take precedence over bail-out in future. It needs to be possible to resolve distressed 
banks in an orderly fashion, with the taxpayer only footing the bill as a last resort. 
Naturally, this implies higher risks to investors, who also witnessed this first-hand in the past 
few months. However, those now calling into question, yet again, the liability of owners and 
creditors should also step forward and say who  should pay for the losses of a failed bank 
instead. This must not be the taxpayer, at any rate, for that would jeopardise the standing of 
our free market economic system in society at large.  
Ladies and gentlemen 
The creation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) for banks in Europe has been a 
significant step – the most important step, even, since monetary union was launched. The SSM 
has remedied an inherent flaw in economic and monetary union, consigning the occasionally 
rose-tinted glasses of national supervisors to the history books. 
Much has been done, then, to make the banking system more robust. Yet a banking system 
can only ever be truly stable if banks' reliance on the solvency of their national sovereigns is 
effectively reduced as well. 
Too little has been done in this regard thus far. On the contrary: banks in some euro-area 
countries have invested heavily in their domestic government bonds in the past few years, 
making  them  even  more  reliant  on  the  health  and  wellbeing  of  their  governments'  public 
finances. Italian banks have pumped nearly all their capital into domestic government bonds, 
and the situation is similar in Spain. 
The preferential regulatory treatment of sovereign borrowers is one of the primary reasons for 
this.  Unlike  private  sector  borrowers,  governments  are  not  subject  to  the  cap  on  large 
exposures. In addition, virtually no capital is required to be held by banks against government 
bonds  since  such  bonds  are  permitted  to  be  given  a  zero  risk  weight.  The  European 
Commission's own think tank has therefore written quite rightly in a recent paper that "zero-
risk  weighting  of  sovereign  debt  in  the  EU,  as  well  as  the  exemption  from  existing  large 
exposure requirements, are a source of vulnerability." 
I have therefore been advocating, for quite some time, the abolition of the preferential treatment 
of sovereign borrowers and welcome the fact that this issue is now also on the agendas of the 
relevant regulatory forums. 
There has been opposition to this proposal and that's hardly surprising. It ought to be clear that 
such rules could only be phased in gradually, as countries would need time to adjust to the 
new regime. But it is equally clear that only if banks can deal with a sovereign default will the 
restructuring of a highly indebted sovereign's debt emerge as a realistic option. 
Financial markets are, by their very nature, crisis-prone as they tend towards exaggerations. 
Smart regulation is therefore indispensable. 
Appropriate capital adequacy requirements are the best and most important contribution that 
financial market regulation can make towards the stability of the banking sector. The better a 
bank's capital base, the more readily that bank will be able to withstand losses and a period of 
low profitability brought about by the low-interest-rate setting, say. And this is a point where 
some  people  see regulation  as  an  impediment  because,  in  their  view,  it imposes  limits  on 
banks or creates costs. In this sense, regulation always walks a fine line between too strict and 
too lenient. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   In addition, care has to be taken to ensure that bank regulation does not lead to undesirable 
evasive action on the part of banks. I am thinking here, in particular, of business being shifted 
into what is known as the shadow banking sector, the importance of which has grown in the 
past few years. 
In Europe, especially, this trend is not problematical in and of itself. Given the major importance 
of bank lending for corporate finance, enhancing the role of alternative, market-based sources 
of funding could well be quite conducive to financial stability – provided, that is, the potential 
risks are adequately and consistently regulated. 
This is an area where significant progress has been made globally and at the European level 
over the past few years. Examples include the regulation of managers of alternative investment 
funds  or  the  rules  governing  securitisation.  However,  a  number  of  items  on  the  regulatory 
agenda still need to be wrapped up. 
At the global level, for instance, liquidity rules for investment funds need to be developed in 
order to prevent excessive maturity transformation. And, at the European level, it would make 
sense, during the process of creating a capital markets union, to regulate credit funds in an 
adequate and consistent manner in order to avert risks to financial stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
You might have heard the tale about the client that goes up to a bank teller and says, "Tell me 
how much money's in my account – and hurry up, you fool," whereupon the teller goes to the 
manager to complain about the cheeky client. The manager then asks him, "How much does 
the guy have in his account?" "Three million," the teller replies. The manager then says, "Tell 
him how much is in his account – and hurry up, you fool." 
Quite apart from the fact that, in times of negative central bank deposit rates, large sums of 
customer funds are possibly no longer all that welcome, this anecdote also seems a bit dated 
in the light of digitalisation. I mean, who still goes to a bank these days to check the balance 
on their account? 
The  current  wave  of  digitalisation  sweeping  through  the  financial  sector,  in  fact,  goes  far 
beyond internet banking, which is now standard operating procedure. It is in the process of 
revolutionising the banking industry. 
Highly  specialised,  innovative  financial  technology  enterprises,  also  known  as  fintechs, 
represent  a  new  group  of  competitors  to  traditional  bricks-and-mortar  banks.  Blockchain 
technology,  originally  developed  for  the  virtual  currency  known  as  the  bitcoin,  has  a  wide 
variety of uses for financial services, such as in securities trading. 
At the same time, increasing digitalisation is making the financial system ever more reliant on 
technical infrastructures. Cyber risks have grown considerably in the past few years. 
There's  no  need  to  elaborate  on  this  issue  here,  all  the  more  so  as  these  topics  will  be 
discussed  on  several  occasions  in  the  course  of  today.  It  is  clear  that  digitalisation  and 
cybersecurity are a major challenge not only for banks but also for supervisors. 
We should not stifle the innovative power of fintechs, yet we need to keep an eye on potential 
risks to financial stability. To quote Felix Hufeld, the head of the German financial supervisor, 
"It is not a firm's 'coolness factor' which is decisive, but the type of business it conducts and 
the risks it takes in doing so." 
Ladies and gentlemen 
There is no question that banks are currently facing major challenges. However, I have no 
doubt whatsoever that banks will also continue to play a crucial role in the European financial 
system going forward.  Since  the  economic  structure features  a  large  number  of  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises, the financial system will remain primarily bank-based. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Conclusion 
5. 
I would like to conclude with a few remarks. 
At the beginning, I quoted a journalist who, at banking conferences, always heard all those 
words ending in "-ing" and "-ation." As you will have noted, my speech, too, was teeming with 
nouns ending in "-ing" and "-ation" 
I started with monetary financing of the public sector, continued with fiscal consolidation and 
interest  rate  differentiation,  the  disciplining  effect  of  the  markets  and  the  restructuring  of 
sovereign debt, the finalisation of regulation, the "deprivileging" of government bonds, and I 
ended with digitalisation. 
The Canadian-born economist John Kenneth Galbraith, who passed away nearly ten years 
ago, is credited with the caustic remark that "meetings are indispensable when you don't want 
to do anything." 
With regard to the Finance Forum Liechtenstein, that's most certainly not a view that I would 
espouse. Quite the opposite, in fact – exchanging views and refreshing contacts is certainly 
doing something, and will ultimately also benefit your firms. 
I would therefore like to wish you a rewarding conference and thank you for being such an 
attentive audience. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
