  Andrew G Haldane: The Great Divide 
Speech by  Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director and Chief Economist of the Bank of 
England, at the New City Agenda Annual dinner, London, 18 May 2016. 
 I would like to thank James Antwis, Andrew Bailey, Jeremy Franklin, Jonathan Fullwood, Andrew Hauser, Andrew 
Hebden, Alex Holmes, Leanne Leahy, Emma Murphy, Ben Nelson, Laurie Roberts, May Rostom, Pedro Santos, 
Minouche Shafik, Emma Sinclair and Paul Robinson for their comments and contributions, and to Gillian Stamp 
for conversations on these issues over many years. 
In November last year, the Bank of England hosted a so-called Open Forum. This was a new 
departure. For the first time in its 300-plus year history, the Bank brought together all of the 
main  stakeholders  in  the  financial  sector:  not  just  policymakers,  banks  and  investors,  but 
politicians,  civil  society,  businesses,  regional  representatives,  religious  groups  and  the 
media.  This  was  a  deliberately  broad  church,  with  an  eclectic  congregation  comprising 
religious zealots, high priests, regular church-goers, agnostics and atheists. 
The  aim  of  the  Open  Forum  was  to  discuss,  in  an  unscripted  way,  the  progress  made 
towards fixing the financial sector. The Open Forum was an opportunity to hear a different 
set of views from a different set of voices: from the customers and users of finance, as well 
as the producers and investors; from the often-silent majority of outsiders to finance, as well 
as the often-vocal minority of insiders. This made for a very different dialogue.1 
Since the crisis, there have been hundreds of conferences on the future of finance. Typically, 
these  are  full-to-bursting  with  bankers,  central  bankers,  regulators  and  academics.  And, 
typically, they are in transmit mode. These are conversations among the elite in the language 
of the elite. The Open Forum was a different animal, its cast much wider, its language much 
plainer. Attendees were in receive mode. 
The most important and compelling message the Bank received at the Open Forum came in 
the first session. The Bank had conducted some polling of perceptions of the financial sector 
–  for  example,  by  asking  people  what  one  word  best  described  the  future  of  financial 
markets. Among the Bank’s usual contacts, including those in the financial sector, the most 
used word was “regulated”. Many of us will have heard that message from financial insiders 
concerned about the perils of over-zealous regulators. 
For  me,  the more revealing  responses came from  the general  public, from  the  customers, 
rather  than  the  producers,  of  financial  services.  The  word  most  used  by  them  when 
describing financial markets was a rather different one: it was “corrupt”. Not far behind were 
words  like  “manipulated”,  “self-serving”,  “destructive”  and  “greedy”. I  am sure many  of  you 
have heard those messages too. They are certainly ones I have encountered frequently on 
my visits around the country. 
Chart 1 shows the “word clouds” from the two samples. For the Bank’s usual contacts, 69% 
of the most-used words were either positive or neutral. For the general public, by contrast, 
only 40% were positive or neutral. This is only one poll. And I am not, at this stage, making 
any  value  judgement  on  which  faction  is  right. But  if  nothing  else,  these  results  suggest a 
yawning  gap  in  people’s  perceptions  of  finance.  It  seems  very  unlikely  these  word-clouds 
form part of the same nephological formation. 
To  borrow  from  the  title  of  a  recent  book  by  Nobel  Laureate  economist  Joe  Stiglitz,  these 
results suggest to me a Great Divide:2 a Great Divide between the views of financial insiders 
                                                
1  Videos of the Open Forum are available at www.boeopenforum.co.uk. 
2  Stiglitz (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  and  outsiders,  between  the  perceptions  of  producers  and  consumers  of  financial  services, 
between  the  silent  majority  who  buy  and  the  vocal  minority  who  sell  financial  products, 
between  the  echo  chamber  of  the  elites  and  the  voting  chamber  of  wider  society.  They 
underscore just how far finance still has to travel to regain its social licence.3 
This “Great Divide” is my jumping-off point. I want to discuss the crucial role finance plays in 
society and why. I want to discuss the progress made, so far, in restoring trust in finance. 
And I want to discuss what further progress might be needed to narrow that trust deficit. That 
may call for the financial sector to seek new ways to define and communicate its purpose, its 
contribution to wider society, to act as an antidote to the short-term demands of shareholders 
and executives. 
Yet  it  would  be  easy,  too  easy,  to  point  the  finger  at  finance  alone.  For  this  Great  Divide 
exists not just between the financial elites, but between elites generally and wider society. It 
is not just bankers who have suffered a loss of public trust. In varying degrees, this is also 
true of big business, government and, yes, politicians and central banks. These lessons for 
bankers may be relevant to some of us in this room too. 
The role of finance in society 
Let me start by discussing why closing the trust deficit in finance matters to the economy and 
to society. Whisper it quietly, but a large and well-functioning financial sector is an essential 
foundation for a growing and well-functioning economy. That is not an ideological assertion 
from the financial elite; it is an empirical fact. Most of the time and in most countries, finance 
is a growth-booster not a growth killer.4 
The  economic  textbooks  do  not  get  everything  right,  but  on  this  they  are  clear  and 
compelling. Banks and capital markets help finance investment by companies. And that, we 
know, is the seed-corn of future growth.5 They also help insure against risk by companies 
and households. And that, we know, is the seed-corn of stability.6 In a nutshell that is why, 
over long periods of time and across wide ranges of countries, well-functioning finance has 
supported wealth-creation and well-being. 
The other, more obvious, way of capturing why finance matters is to see what happens when 
it goes  wrong. Then  it  can quickly  take  large  chunks  out  of  the  capital our  societies  have, 
over  time  and  at  great  cost,  painstakingly  accumulated.  That  crumbling  of  capital,  in  its 
broadest  sense,  is  the  reason  financial  crises  have  been  about  as  costly  as  any  event 
societies have ever faced historically, war and revolution excepting. 
Capital, for these purposes, has more than one face. The collapse of capital during financial 
crises  shows  up,  most  obviously  and  immediately,  in  measures  of  financial  capital  (the 
values  of  bonds  and  shares)  and  physical  capital  (the  accumulation  of  buildings,  houses, 
plant  and  machinery).  And  because  we  assign  monetary  values  to  these  concepts,  and 
obsess about them in the media, these losses of capital are clear and visible. 
Yet it is another form of capital that may matter every bit as much to wealth and well-being in 
society  –  social  capital.  There  is  neither  a  standard  definition,  nor  a  simple  means  of 
measuring,  social  capital.  In  general,  social  capital  refers  to  the  relationships,  trust  and 
                                                
3  Carney (2015). 
4  For example, Levine (2005) and Beck (2012). There is also evidence finance fosters entrepreneurship (Guiso 
et  al  (2004))  and  reduces  poverty  and  inequality  (Beck  et  al  (2007).  This  evidence  is  not,  however, 
uncontested (for example, Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012)). 
5  For example, Beck et al (2000) show evidence that finance has an important impact on growth by fostering 
productivity growth and resource allocation rather than capital accumulation. 
6  For example, Froote et al (1993). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  co-operation forged between different groups of people over time. It is the sociological glue 
that binds diverse societies into a cohesive whole.7 
The global financial crisis of the past few years provides a case study of how these capitals, 
plural, can be decimated by crisis and the toll taken by society. Consider financial capital. At 
their peak, the world’s 100 largest banks had a market capitalisation of around $4.9 trillion. 
That was around 8.5% of annual global GDP. At its trough, this had fallen to $1.4 trillion – a 
destruction of financial capital of $3.5 trillion. 
Banks  have  subsequently  recovered  some  of  their  poise.  Nonetheless,  the  market 
capitalisation  of  the  world’s  20  largest  banks  today  remains  around  half  its  value  in  2007. 
Their market value lies well below the book value of their assets, with the ratio of so-called 
“price  to  book”  currently  around  0.8.  Put  simply,  that  means  many  banks  are  a  value-
destruction machine for investors. 
Yet these losses pale by comparison with the losses felt by the wider economy as a result of 
the  financial  crisis.  In  the  UK,  eight  years  on,  GDP  is  still  tracking  around  15  percentage 
points below its pre-crisis trend. Assuming this pre-crisis trend was a reasonable one8, this is 
a  cumulative  income  loss  of  over  one  year’s  worth  of  pre-crisis  GDP  or  £1.8  trillion.  For 
advanced  economies,  the  corresponding  cumulative  loss  of  income  is  also  close  to  one 
year’s worth of pre-crisis GDP or $32 trillion. These are simply mind-boggling sums. 
And the clock, of course, is still ticking. These losses are unlikely ever to be fully recovered. 
Quite  how  we  value  the  net  present  value  of this  continuing  stream  of  losses  depends  on 
how much we discount the income of future generations and how sustainable pre-crisis rates 
of  growth  were  believed  to  be.  But  even  on  conservative  estimates,  it  seems  possible  the 
eventual cumulative losses of income could total multiples of annual pre-crisis GDP. 
One reason these losses may have endured is because crises have a deep, and irreversible, 
scarring  effect  on  an  economy’s  growth  potential.9  That  may  arise  because  credit-starved 
companies are unable to invest or indeed start-up in the first place. Or it may be because 
financial  crises  act  as  a  permanent  drag  on risk-taking  and  entrepreneurship,  as  was  also 
evident after the Great Depression of the 1930s.10 Either way, perhaps it should come as no 
surprise that productivity has flat-lined since the crisis. 
Yet it is perhaps along the third dimension – social capital – that the losses arising from the 
crisis may prove most enduring. Social capital is inextricably linked to trust. And banking is 
quintessentially  a  trust  business.  At  root,  it  involves  swapping  promises  to  pay.  These 
promises rely on trust. It also involves, in John Kay’s words, “other people’s money”.11 It is a 
fiduciary function. 
It  is  these  two  features  that  make  any  loss  of  trust  in  banking  particularly  damaging  and 
worrying. And as the New City Agenda’s research makes clear, there has been a significant 
loss  of  trust  in  banks,  and  hence  an  erosion  in  social  capital,  since  the  financial  crisis.12 
Despite a modest recovery over the past few years, it remains at low levels both by historical 
comparison and relative to most other industries. 
                                                
7  For example, Putnam (1995, 2002) and Field (2003). 
8  The pre-crisis trends here are calculated using the average annual growth rate between 1997 and 2007. 
9 
10  Friedman and Schwarz (1963). 
11  Kay (2015). 
12  New City Agenda (2014). 
IMF (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  The latest survey by Edelman puts trust in financial services at 51% at a global level. That is 
well above the low-water mark of 43% in 2012.13 But it means banking is still not trusted by 
around half the population. It leaves financial services at the bottom of the industry league 
table of trust. Here in the UK, the fraction of the population trusting banks is lower still, at 
around 41%.14 
Other  surveys  of  the  public  tell  essentially  a  similar  tale.  An  Ipsos-MORI  survey  in  2015 
found that little more than a third of those polled believed bankers told the truth.15 A far-larger 
fraction believed bankers did not tell the truth. That leaves banking nursing a “trust deficit” of 
around  20%.  Only  estate  agents,  journalists,  government  minsters  and  politicians  fared 
worse, with trust deficits of 40–50%. 
A  survey  by  the  Chartered  Institute  for  Securities  and  Investment  (CISI)  earlier  this  year 
found that over half of respondents believed it would take over a decade for the culture of 
banking  to  be  restored  in  the  eyes  of  the  public.16  And  looking  at  actual  complaint  cases 
taken  to  the  Financial  Ombudsman  by  the  public,  there  has  been  a  relentless  rise  from 
around 100,000 prior to the crisis to more than triple that number today17. 
At least until recently many economists like me, when faced with this evidence, might have 
shrugged our shoulders. Social capital had no real role in our models of economic growth, 
unlike  physical  capital  and  human  capital.  Trust  did  not  butter  our  parsnips  and  nor  did  it 
enter  our  production  functions.  Recently,  however,  that  orthodoxy  has  changed  and  the 
importance of trust has become clearer. 
Evidence  has  emerged,  both  micro  and  macro,  to  suggest  trust  may  play  a  crucial  role  in 
value creation. At the micro level, there is now ample evidence the degree of trust or social 
capital within a company contributes positively to its value creation capacity.18 At the macro 
level, there is now a strong body of evidence, looking across a large range of countries and 
over long periods of time, that high levels of trust and co-operation are associated with higher 
economic growth.19 Put differently, a lack of trust jeopardises one of finance’s key societal 
functions – higher growth. 
Those  social  capital  effects  appear  to  be  particularly  potent  when  it  comes  to  financial 
decisions.  Evidence  suggests  that  a  lack  of  trust  leads  people  to  retreat  from  the  stock 
market and banks and to move towards cash holdings and informal sources of credit, such 
as payday lenders and loan sharks.20 That jeopardises the second key benefit of finance to 
society – improved risk-sharing by households and companies. 
So a lack of trust in finance potentially hobbles both economic growth and financial stability. 
That lack of trust is the mirror-image of the perception gap between the financial sector and 
wider society, the Great Divide. The Great Divide matters because it signals a pronounced 
                                                
13  2016  Edelman  Trust  Barometer.  For  more  information,  see  http://www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-
property/2016-edelman-trust-barometer/global-results/. 
14  2016 Edelman Trust Barometer.  For more information, see  http://www.slideshare.net/EdelmanInsights/2016-
edelman-trust-barometer-financial-services-results. 
15  For more details, see Ipsos-MORI Veracity Index 2015. 
16  For more details, see Chartered Institute for Securities & Investment  (CISI) news release ‘Bankers pessimistic 
about culture change…’ (February, 2016). 
Service. 
17  Financial  Ombudsmen 
For  more 
ombudsman.org.uk/publications/complaints-data.html. 
18  For example, Bloom et al (2012), Guiso et al (2015).  
19  For example, Knack and Keefer (1997), La Porta et al (1997) and Boulila et al (2006). 
20  Guiso et al (2008) and Zingales (2015). 
information 
please 
see 
http://www.financial-
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and protracted erosion of social capital. It puts finance on notice for losing its social licence. 
And, unaddressed, that jeopardises future wealth and well-being. 
The trust problem 
If this trust in finance problem is to be tackled, it needs first to be understood. Why trust is 
important, and what determines it, are issues that have occupied the world’s greatest minds 
for  centuries,  perhaps  millennia.  The  philosopher  Baroness  O’Neill  from  Cambridge 
University  often  draws  an  important  distinction  between  “trust”  and  “trustworthiness”.21 
Although this may sound subtle, it carries important implications. 
Seeking  to  maximise  trust  may  be  an  unrealistic  and,  indeed,  undesirable  objective  for 
society.  In  a  world  of  risks  and  uncertainties,  including  about  individuals’  trustworthiness, 
people need sometimes to mistrust if they are to avoid bad choices. If the principle of caveat 
emptor – buyer beware – is to work effectively, not just in financial services but more broadly, 
it  requires  a  constructively  sceptical  public.  Like  cholesterol,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  too 
much trust, as well as too little. 
A  plausible  objective  of  public  policy,  then,  is  not  to  maximise  trust  among  consumers  of 
financial  services,  but  to  maximise  trustworthiness  among  its  producers.  Yet  the  words 
“corrupt”, “self-serving” and “greedy” are hard to square with “trustworthiness”, as are opinion 
polls  putting  bankers  at  risk  of  relegation  from  the  trust  league  table.  Opinion  polls  of  the 
public  are  not  an  objective  truth  and  talk  can  sometimes  be  cheap.  But  it  appears  these 
concerns are not confined to financial outsiders: financial insiders appear to harbour serious 
doubts about their trustworthiness and culture too. 
As survey in 2013 of financial professionals found, rather remarkably, that over half believed 
their competitors engaged in illegal or unethical behaviour.22 A smaller, but still high, fraction 
of 24% believed their own company engaged in such practices. Similar percentages believed 
their industry did not fulfil its fiduciary function of putting clients’ interests first. 
The significance of these findings is not the precise percentages, as striking as these are. 
More fundamentally, it is because of what they reveal about finance’s perception of itself, the 
mirror  it  holds  to  the  social  identity  of  finance.  Psychologists  and  economists  have,  over 
recent years, begun to recognise the importance of social identities in explaining otherwise 
puzzlingly irrational behaviour.23 
A  now-famous  study  examined  the  academic  performance  of  Afro-Caribbean  boys  in  US 
schools,  which  was  systemically  weak  almost  irrespective  of  ability.  A  large  part  of  the 
explanation was found to lie in social identities. Specifically, the social identity of young black 
boys was defined by doing poorly in class.24 For reasons of self-image and social identity, 
these boys systematically underperformed relative to their ability, not wishing to be seen to 
be “acting white”. 
Some of the self-same social identity problems may exist in banking. An experimental study 
in  2014  looked  at  the  incidence  of  cheating  in  different  groups.25  It  found  not  only  that 
bankers were more likely to cheat, but that this cheating was more prevalent when people 
were  reminded  that  they  were  bankers.  They  then  “acted  banker”.  In  other  words,  social 
                                                
21  O’Neill (2014). 
22  Labaton Sucharow (2013). 
23  For example, Akerlof  and Kranton (2010). 
24  Fryer (2006). 
25  Cohn et al (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  identity  mattered. If that  social  identity  is  defined  by  cheating  or  by failing to fulfil fiduciary 
functions, these behaviours will become self-reinforcing and self-fulfilling. 
If  this  evidence  is  right,  it  suggests  that  the  culture  problem  in  banking  may  be  deeply 
ingrained, psychologically and sociologically. That still begs the question, however, of what 
happened to change the social identity of banking in the first place. The crisis alone is not a 
sufficient  explanation.  Complaint  cases  taken  by  the  public  to  the  Financial  Ombudsman 
were rising prior to the crisis, despite bankers riding a reputational high over that period. The 
erosion of trust in banking appears to have been secular. 
In  making  sense  of  these  trends,  a  useful  distinction  is  between  personalised  trust  and 
generalised trust.26 Personalised trust refers to mutual co-operation built up through repeated 
personal  interactions  –  for  example,  like  visits  to  the  doctor  or  hairdresser.  By  contrast, 
generalised trust is attached to an identifiable, but anonymous, group – for example, trust in 
the rule of law, or government or Father Christmas. 
For most of its history, banking has been a relationship-based business. Banks were local. 
The  local  branch  manager  was  a  pillar  of  the  local  community,  serving  as  part  financial 
counsellor, part psychological counsellor. Service was customised and personalised. Without 
wishing to be misty-eyed about this model, which was far from perfect, what it did deliver was 
repeated interactions with customers. This imbued banking with personalised trust, just like 
doctors  and  hairdressers.  Meanwhile,  its  very  mystique  meant  banking  maintained  a  high 
degree of anonymous, or generalised, trust among the public too. 
Over time, however, this business model was changed fundamentally. Local branches went 
into retreat. Between 1997 and 2013, their numbers in the UK fell by over 25%.27 The local 
branch  manager  began 
from  view.  Service  became  centralised  and 
transactional.  With  personal  connections  loosening,  banking  began  to  lose  personalised 
trust, falling behind doctors and hairdressers. Banking came to rely for its legitimacy, to an 
ever-greater degree, on generalised trust. 
That  was  the  pre-crisis  story.  But  when  the  crisis  came,  it  dealt  a  hammer  blow  to 
generalised  trust  in  banking  too.  Anonymity  gave  way  to  ignominy,  blissful  ignorance  to 
blistering  resentfulness.  In  the  trust  league  table,  banking  plummeted  from  mid-table 
mediocrity  to  relegation-threatened  remorse.  Trust  in  banking  had,  by  turns,  suffered  a 
double-whammy: first a slow puncture of personalised trust as banks retreated from the high 
street, then a high-speed blow-out of generalised trust as the crisis broke. 
That loss of generalised trust is not confined to the financial elite. Many other entities rely on 
generalised  trust  on  the  part  of  the  public,  from  governments  to  businesses  to  the  media. 
They  too  appear  to  have  suffered  a  loss  of  generalised  trust  over  recent  years,  joining 
banking at the bottom of the league table. Their crises have been different – from expenses 
to remuneration to mis-reporting – but the result the same. 
These trust-busting events have generated, as in finance, a growing perception gap between 
the elites and the general public. In 2016, the trust gap between the “informed public” and the 
“mass population” hit a new high of 12 percentage points at a global level. The UK results 
were even more striking. Not only was the trust gap, at 17 percentage points, higher than in 
any other country, bar the US. But this gap has widened progressively since 2012, when it 
stood at only 7 percentage points.28 
to  disappear 
                                                
26  Sapienza and Zingales (2011).  
27  European Central Bank Statistical Warehouse, available at: https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/  
28  2016  Edelman  Trust  Barometer.  For  more  information,  see  http://www.edelman.com/insights/intellectual-
property/2016-edelman-trust-barometer/global-results/. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The Bank of England has not been immune to this generalised loss of trust. While in general 
it fares pretty well relative to others, the Bank’s net trust rating currently stands at 28%.29 The 
Bank has a positive trust rating of more than 80% among some members of the public, but 
among  others  it  has  a  trust  deficit  of  more  than  50%.  As  for  banks, governments  and  the 
media, this too is quite a Great Divide. 
It  was  writer  Norman  Douglas  who  said  that  “distrust  of  authority  should  be  the  first  civic 
duty”.30 And as someone sometimes described as an iconoclast, I have sympathy with that 
sentiment. But, again rather like cholesterol, it is possible to have too much of a good thing. 
Taken too far,  distrust  can  be  corrosive  rather than  regenerative.  Sometimes  bridging  that 
Great Divide can be a bridge too far. 
Progress so far 
That begs the question of what can be done to close the gap, to restore trust in the financial 
sector, to  alter  the  social  identity  of  banking. There  has  been  no  shortage  of  ink  spilled  in 
crafting  a  response  to  the  crisis.  That  includes  regulatory  response  where  there  has  been 
root-and-branch reform of both banks’ prudential standards – their safety and soundness – 
and consumer protection – their offering to customers and clients. 
The prudential regulatory reform agenda has been covered extensively elsewhere, including 
in speeches and consultation documents by the Bank of England, over the past few years.31 
So I shall confine myself to three points. First, this regulatory reform effort has, to my mind, 
moved the financial system onto a materially securer footing. That was essential, of course, 
given the serious risk of global banks sliding into a financial black hole back in 2008. 
There is no single metric that captures this improvement in banks’ resilience. One is that the 
equity capital of the global banking system has more than doubled to $6.1 trillion since 2007. 
Another is that the five largest UK banks’ liquid assets are around £100 billion higher than 
they  were  pre-crisis,  a  rise  of  more  than  50%.  A  third  is  that  the  proportion  of  financial 
markets  participants  citing  bank  failure  as  the  biggest  risk  to  the  UK  financial  system  has 
fallen by an order of magnitude from its peak.32 
Second,  are  these  new  and  higher  prudential  standards  sufficient  to  prevent  a  repeat 
performance? Truth be told, we cannot know for sure. What is certain is that an academic 
debate still rages on this question. A couple of months ago, the Bank hosted a conference 
among  academics  and  policymakers  to  assess  progress  on  prudential  standards.  Many  of 
the academics doubted whether sufficient progress had been made to protect against future 
crises.33 The prudential bar, while higher, had still they felt been set too low. 
Whatever  the  right  answer,  I  very  much  welcome  this  academic  challenge.  This  challenge 
was  sadly  missing  ahead  of  the  crisis  when  prudential  regulation  was  a  niche  academic 
issue. In my view, this absence of academic debate and challenge contributed, in no small 
measure, to international prudential standards being set at levels which were, with the benefit 
of 20/20 hindsight, not just too low but ridiculously too low. We must not repeat that same 
mistake. 
                                                
29   Results from a poll conducted by Populus for the Bank of England in March 2016 of around 2,000 adults. 
30  Douglas (1945). 
31  For  example  see  Bailey  (2015)  on  prudential  regulation,  Cunliffe  (2015)  on  macroprudential  policy,  Carney 
(2015) on markets and Bank of England (2016) on buy-to-let underwriting standards. 
32  Bank of  England  Systemic  Risk  Survey  2015  H2,  available  at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Pages/other/srs/srs2015h2.aspx. 
33  Armstrong and Davis (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  So academic challenge, challenge which causes policymakers to think, and possibly rethink, 
their calibration of prudential standards, is an essential ingredient of a healthy financial and 
regulatory system. The academic debate about prudential standards for banks is not closed; 
it has only just opened. And one of the Bank’s public policy responsibilities is to help nurture 
that policy challenge. Indeed, this was one of the prime motivations behind the Bank’s new 
research agenda, launched last year. 
Third, there is a clear and obvious complementarity between improved prudential standards 
for banks and protecting bank customers. Since January 2011, UK banks have paid out more 
than £23.3 billion to customers in redress for mis-sold Payments Protection Insurance (PPI) 
alone.34  These  are  astonishingly  large  sums.  On  this  scale,  misconduct  towards  bank 
customers clearly has the potential to cause lasting damage to banks’ prudential safety and 
soundness. 
Given  those  spillovers,  what  progress  has  been  made  since  the  crisis  in  better  protecting 
consumers?  Here  too  there  have  been  a  slew  of  initiatives  over  the  past  few  years  to  re-
shape standards within the financial sector, partly in response to episodes of mis-selling and 
market-rigging. This  has  been  a  collective  effort  by  legislators, regulators,  standard-setters 
and, ultimately, banks themselves. 
The report by the Parliamentary Commission on Banking Standards (PCBS) in 2013, which 
involved a number of people here tonight, laid out a very comprehensive reform road-map. 
Among  its  recommendations  was  to  make  senior  bankers  personally  responsible  for  their 
actions, aligning rewards with responsibilities. The good news is that this recommendation is 
now embedded in statute through the Senior Managers and Certification Regime in the UK. 
Just  two  weeks  ago, the  extension  of  that  regime  to  all  authorised financial  services  firms 
was given Royal Assent. I think that can be chalked up as a big win. 
The PCBS also made recommendations in the area of professional standards and culture in 
banking.  In  response  to  that,  and  following  a  review  by  Sir  Richard  Lambert  in  2014,  the 
Banking Standards Board (BSB) was established in the UK last year. As one of its first tasks, 
the  BSB  assessed  banks  against  their  own  internal  standards  and  sent  them  confidential 
reports on their compliance. The main themes from that exercise were outlined in the BSB’s 
first Annual Review published earlier this year.35 
Following  several  episodes  of  misconduct  in  wholesale  capital  markets,  the  Fair  and 
Effective  Markets  Review  (FEMR)  was  launched  in  2014  to  assess  their  functioning, 
overseen by the Bank, HM Treasury and the FCA. It reported last year, making a number of 
recommendations including the establishment of a FICC Markets Standards Board (FMSB).36 
The  FMSB  came  together  last  year  with  a  remit  to  provide  guidance  on  appropriate 
standards  of  conduct  in  wholesale  markets.  Encouragingly,  most  of  the  major  players  in 
wholesale markets have joined the FMSB. Regulators will use these standards to inform their 
judgements under the expanded Senior Managers Regime. 
At an international level, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) agreed in early 2015 a work-plan 
to  reduce  misconduct  risk,  including  in  the  area  of  key  market  benchmarks.37  Following  a 
recommendation  in  FEMR,  work  is  underway  to  develop  a  global  code  of  conduct  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market.  Also  in  2015,  the  G30  issued  a  report  on  Banking  Culture  and 
                                                
34  For 
protection-insurance/refunds.   
further  details  see  http://www.fca.org.uk/consumers/financial-services-products/insurance/payment-
35   See BSB (2016).  
36   See FEMR (2015). FICC here refers to Fixed Income, Currency and Commodity markets. 
37  FSB (2015). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conduct.38 And in the same year, the New City Agenda published its assessment of progress 
towards improving culture among UK banks.39 This is good progress. 
The road ahead 
These initiatives are important down-payments towards closing the trust deficit. Yet even if 
these initiatives are necessary steps, are they likely to be sufficient? The Bank’s Open Forum 
suggested that would be an optimistic conclusion. So too would the evidence from various 
opinion polls and, indeed, from banks’ own assessments of their culture. If so, what further 
initiatives might help in closing the Great Divide? 
It may be tempting to conclude that the trust gap can be closed by simply having a better-
educated public, one which better appreciates the important role finance plays in supporting 
the  economy  and  wider  society.  On  this  diagnosis,  closing  the  Great  Divide  would  call  for 
enhanced  public  understanding  of  finance,  perhaps  through  a  targeted  public  education 
programme. 
Yet  as  Gillian  Guy,  CEO  of  Citizen’s  Advice,  perceptively  pointed  out  at  the  Bank’s  Open 
Forum, the perception gap may as much reflect the lack of understanding of the public on the 
part of those inside finance as a lack of understanding of finance on the part of the public. I 
think that is spot on. Closing the perception gap calls for a two-sided effort. 
Enhancing public education 
(a) 
A great many people find financial issues difficult and boring. That is a weak foundation for 
making good financial choices. At least some of those problems originate in the mental block 
many  people  encounter  when  it  comes  to  mathematics.  Finance  is  a  numbers game.  And 
research  by  the  Department  for  Business,  Innovation  and  Skills  suggests  there  are  an 
incredible 17 million adults in the UK  whose standards of mathematics are no higher than 
those of a primary school child.40 
The  way  maths  is  taught  may  be  part  of  the  problem  here.  For  many,  maths  is  a  turn-off 
because it seems unrelated to their everyday lives; it lacks real-world relevance. Sad to say, 
payday lenders have a greater resonance to many people than Pythagoras’s theorem. The 
abstract  nature  of  mathematics,  as  taught,  leads  many  children  to  tune  out  or  switch  off 
entirely. Others conclude that they simply do not have “a maths brain”. This is an educational 
scar that can last a lifetime. 
Part of the solution may come from making maths relevant to people’s lives, to link it to real-
world decisions. And what better set of real-world decisions than financial ones: how to draw 
up a monthly budget of debits and credits; how to make sense of an Annual Percentage Rate 
on  a  loan;  how  to  decide  between  competing  savings,  pensions  and  mortgage  products. 
These  are  big financial  decisions  that,  if flunked,  can  have  big  social,  as  well  as  financial, 
consequences. 
Re-orienting the school curriculum in this, more practical, direction might help in bridging the 
information gap. So too would making available courses which help adults, all 17 million of 
them,  make  better  financial  decisions.  As  one  example  of  that,  the  Open  University  has 
recently made available on-line a set of three modules for helping adults better understand 
                                                
38  G30 Working Group (2015). 
39  New City Agenda (2014). 
40  See BIS (2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  financial  matters  and,  ultimately,  make  better  financial  choices.41  Charities  like  Citizens 
Advice are also doing fantastic work in this area. 
Of course, part of the reason so many members of the public find finance difficult is because 
it is difficult – and, sometimes at least, it is made deliberately so. There is plenty of evidence, 
including from the financial crisis, of financial products being made more complex than was 
necessary and consumers being charged a premium for buying them.42 This damaging cycle 
persists because of the difficulties consumers understandably face when trying to compare 
these products. 
To give a personal example, I consider myself moderately financially literate. Yet I confess to 
not  being  able  to  make  the  remotest  sense  of  pensions.  Conversations  with  countless 
experts and independent financial advisors have confirmed for me only one thing – that they 
have no clue either. That is a desperately poor basis for sound financial planning. 
This problem is one which, if anything, is becoming more acute over time. More of the risk 
associated  with  financial  decisions  is  these  days  being  shouldered,  not  by  the  state  or 
companies, but by individuals. Take pensions. Over the past twenty years, we have seen a 
secular shift away from defined-benefit towards defined-contribution pension schemes. That 
places  the  investment  risk  of  pensions  squarely  on  the  shoulders  of  the  individual,  rather 
than companies. 
Whatever  the  merits  of  these  shifts,  they  underscore  the  importance  of  simple,  easily-
understood financial products for the public if they are to manage these new risks. They also 
underscore the importance of adequate information on these products. In 2010, the Money 
Advice Service was set up to help provide this information. Following a review last year, this 
service is in the process of being replaced. A new body is also being established to provide a 
single  point  of  contact  for  advice  on  pensions,  replacing  the  existing  Pensions  Advisory 
Service and Pensions Wise. 
Just  yesterday,  the  Competition  and  Markets  Authority  (CMA)  proposed  that  a  new  price 
comparison website be set up, funded by the banks, to better enable bank customers to pick 
the best deal for them.43 They also suggested greater transparency around bank charges. If 
implemented, these measures would be good news for retail customers. Alongside the move 
to a Faster Payments service in 200844, these are among the two biggest improvements to 
bank customer service in the past decade. 
But here’s the rub. Both of these improvements were the result of regulatory intervention by 
the  competition  authorities,  not  market-led  initiatives  by  industry.  They  resulted  from 
regulatory  push,  not  customer  pull.  This  suggests  fiduciary  concerns  still  may  not  course 
through the banking bloodstream as freely and easily as would be ideal. They help explain 
why that Great Divide remains so wide. 
The  Bank  of  England  itself  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  public  education  effort. 
Decisions made on interest rates in the economy and on credit provision by banks have an 
important bearing on the general public’s financial decision-making. To that end, one of the 
Bank’s  strategic  priorities  over  the  next  few  years  is  to  increase  public  awareness  of  the 
Bank’s thinking and actions, using new methods such as videos, cartoons and social media, 
to help the general public’s financial decision-making. 
                                                
41  For  more details  on  the  Open  University’s  ‘You  and  your money: personal  finance  in  context’  modules see 
http://www.open.ac.uk/courses/modules/db123. 
42  For example, Zingales (2015). 
43  For  further  details,  please  see  https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-wants-banks-to-work-harder-for-
their-customers.  
44  For further details, please see http://www.fasterpayments.org.uk/about-us/.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Creating “purpose” in banking 
(b) 
Regulation and education can only take us so far. Culture cannot be regulated or educated; it 
has to be inculcated among financial firms themselves. As social identity theory reminds us, 
it is the sociology and psychology of banking and bankers that needs to change, as much as 
their finances. In thinking about how best to achieve that re-orientation, it is worth returning to 
the  two  dimensions  of  trust  –  personalised  and  generalised.  In  banking,  both  have  been 
casualties. How best are they to be restored? 
Since the crisis, it is clear that some banks have re-oriented their business model with an 
explicit eye to recreating personalised trust with their customers. For example, some banks 
have  consciously  expanded  their  branch  network  and  extended  opening  hours  to  include 
evenings and weekends. For example, Handelsbanken has opened more than 140 branches 
–  growing  its  UK  network  by  nearly  four  times  –  since  the  height  of  the  financial  crisis.45 
Metro  Bank  now  has  over  40  ‘stores’,  having  arrived  in  the  UK  less  than  six  years  ago.46 
Other challenger banks are following hard on their heels. 
The  aim  here  is  to  create,  or  re-create,  the  local  bank.  It  is  a  back-to–the-future  model  of 
banking,  one  in  which  “knowing  your  customer”  is  a  business  prerogative,  not  a  legal 
imperative. Some have argued this is a valiant but ill-fated attempt to hold back the tide, as 
other retail businesses retreat from the high street. And perhaps that is right. 
Or perhaps banking, or at least parts of it, is different. As a trust-based service, perhaps a 
banker is more like a high-street doctor or hairdresser than a clothes retailer. Time will tell. 
For what it is worth, early indications – including from the New City Agenda’s own research – 
offer some grounds for encouragement that some of the new entrants may be breaking the 
cultural  mould  of  banking.47  Some  are  certainly  scoring  highly  in  terms  of  customer 
satisfaction. 
The alternative business model for banking is to retreat from the street, but to seek new ways 
to nurture generalised, or anonymous, trust on the part of the public. Technology may be a 
great enabler here, allowing a customised and personalised service even if it is not a person 
actually  delivering  it.  Indeed,  it  is  striking  that  it  is  often  technology  companies  that  are 
towards the top of the industry trust league table. 
I  am  a  long-standing  supporter  of  alternative  business  models  for  banking,  ones  which 
connect end-savers and end-borrowers directly, peer-to-peer. Their offering to consumers is 
often  a  different  one,  challenging  both  the  product  and  the  pricing  of  incumbents.  It  is 
disruptive  innovation.  Many  of  these  challengers  are  growing  fast  and  have  high  levels  of 
customer  satisfaction.  Innovation  never  occurs  in  a  straight  line,  nor  without  bumps,  but 
these new entrants bring welcome diversity to the banking market. 
Whatever business model is adopted, success will hinge on whether the public have faith in 
banks  pursuing  a  purpose  aligned  with  their  needs,  that  they  are  fulfilling  their  fiduciary 
function.  There  is  a  mountain  to  climb  on  this  front,  not  just  for  banking  but  for  business 
generally. If not at an all-time low, public trust in big business is plumbing the depths. And the 
chorus of criticism of business is not confined to the general public. It is shared by politicians, 
academics,  investors  and  indeed  sometimes  by  companies  themselves.48  For  a  growing 
body of opinion, the short-term, shareholder-centric model of public companies is failing to 
satisfy the wider needs of society. 
                                                
45  Handelsbanken 2016 Fact Book, available here. 
46  Metro Bank news release, ‘Metro Bank brings the revolution to the King’s Road’, available here. 
47  New City Agenda (2014). 
48  For example, Mayer (2013), Haldane (2015), Lazonick (2014). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  re-examining 
this  shareholder-centric  model  was  one  of 
There  is  at  least  some  evidence  that  companies  themselves  may  be  reaching  the  same 
conclusion,  seeking out alternative  models  of governance  than  the  public  company.  It  is a 
striking,  and  troubling,  fact  that  the  number  of  companies  quoted  on  London’s  main  stock 
exchange has roughly halved since 2000, while IPOs has fallen by around 50%. In the US, 
many of the fastest-growing companies, such as Google, eBay and Apple, either remain in 
private hands or have alternative share structures, such as dual-class listings.49 
Interestingly, 
the  key 
recommendations of the PCBS back in 2013. I quote: “The Commission recommends that 
the Government consult on a proposal to amend section 172 of the Companies Act 2006 to 
remove shareholder primacy in respect of banks, requiring directors of banks to ensure the 
financial safety and soundness of the company ahead of the interests of its members.” Yet 
progress on that recommendation has, to date, been rather limited. 
Take  an  issue  like  executive  pay.  This  has  been  topical  recently,  with  a  number  of  high-
profile cases of executives being paid amounts which do not obviously align well with their 
company’s performance. Some investors have expressed discontent at these pay packages 
and some have even gone so far as to vote against them. Investors have had their “Say on 
Pay”.50 And, as is often the case at this time of year, as the pollen count has picked up there 
has been talk of a “shareholder spring”. 
Ultimately,  however,  these  investor  votes  are  binding  on  neither  management  nor  boards. 
They are a “Say on Pay”, but not a “Stay on Pay”. With very few exceptions, no differences 
were  made  to  executive  compensation  packages  as  a  result  of  investor  action.  And  the 
cases of investors actively voting against pay packages have in any case been rather rare. 
The “shareholder spring” may be as ephemeral as that pollen. 
Yet high executive pay-outs potentially have implications, adverse ones, for value-creation by 
companies  and  thus  longer-term  returns  to  investors.  Monies  paid  out  to  executives  are 
monies  not  being  re-invested  in  the  company,  reducing  investment  in  physical  and  human 
capital. They also drive a wedge between management and their employees – a wedge that 
has  widened  to  over  150  times  median  wages  in  the  UK  and  over  300  times  in  the  US.51 
That,  in  turn,  erodes  social  capital.  A  company,  like  a  country,  whose  physical  and  social 
capital is being eroded is one whose wealth-creation capacity is being impaired. 
What applies to pay-outs to executives applies, with equal force, to pay-outs to shareholders. 
Whether as dividends or buy-backs, these too have been on a steadily rising tide over recent 
decades:  from  around  10%  of  profits  in  the  1970s,  to  60–70%  today,  as  short-term 
shareholder demands have risen steadily.52 Yet monies paid-out to shareholders are monies 
also failing to be re-invested in future value creation by the company. In short – too short – 
the shareholder-centric model may have become a recipe for depleting long-term company 
wealth-creation and, thus, societal well-being.53 Or that, at least, is the contention. 
So what to do about it? Earlier this week, an interim report was issued on “The Purposeful 
Company” by the Big Innovation Centre.54 I should declare an interest here, as I and others 
at  the  Bank  have  been  involved  in  putting  together  this  report.  The  report  serves  two 
                                                
49  Big Innovation Centre (2016). 
50  “Say on pay” is a term used to describe a rule in corporate law where a firm’s shareholders have the right to 
vote on the remuneration of executives. 
51  See High Pay Centre (2015) and Economic Policy Institute (2015). 
52  Haldane (2015). 
53  For example, Asker et al (2014) and Davies et al (2014) show, for the US and UK respectively, that private 
companies invest more than otherwise-equivalent public companies. 
54  Big Innovation Centre (2016). 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  purposes.  First,  it  sets  out  the  evidence  base  on  the  benefits  and  costs  of  the  current 
shareholder-centric  model  of  companies.  Second,  it  makes  some  tentative  suggestions for 
reform which might tackle some of these costs. 
There  are  possible  remedies  on  the  table.  Part  of  the  solution  to  the  shareholder  short-
termism problem may come from mobilising and catalysing what is at present a dispersed, 
and  too  often  disinterested,  long-term  investor  base.  The  falling  share  of  institutional 
investors  in  equity  ownership,  together  with  the  rise  of  passive  investment  strategies,  has 
exacerbated the trend towards “ownerless corporations”. This is a particular problem in the 
UK, given its relative lack of block shareholding.55 
Under  the  auspices  of  the  Investment  Association,  an  Investor  Forum  has  been  set  up 
following the recommendations of John Kay’s review.56 And, internationally, an initiative by 
asset managers called “Focussing Capital on the Long Term” is seeking some of the same 
objectives.57 Ultimately, however, it is simply too soon to say whether any of these initiatives 
will mobilise and catalyse long-term investors sufficiently to exercise leverage over company 
management in ways which support long-term value creation. 
A second, complementary strand would be to seek to reinforce and broaden the “purpose” of 
companies,  to  better  reflect  their  broader  societal  role  –  their  role  in  serving  stakeholders 
plural (employees, customers, clients) as well as shareholders. Some companies have been 
able  to  do  so  voluntarily  by  defining  clearly  their  societal  purpose  and  sticking  with  it. The 
evidence  is  that,  so  purposed,  companies  create  extra  value,  not  just  for  their  staff  and 
customers, but for their shareholders too; it is win-win-win.58 Indeed, it is win-win-win-win if 
you throw society into the mix. 
Other  companies,  including  perhaps  some  in  banking,  may  need  a  helping  hand  in  this 
journey.  One  option  here  would  be  to  revisit  the  UK  Companies  Act.  At  the  time  it  was 
introduced  in  2006,  the  Companies  Act  envisioned  an  “enlightened”  model  of  shareholder 
interest  which  weighed,  albeit  secondarily,  the  claims  of  a  wider  set  of  stakeholders, 
including employees and customers. 
The experience since has been rather different.  Most academics would put the UK at one 
end of the spectrum in the primacy it gives to shareholders. The model has, judged at least 
by public opinion, failed to be sufficiently “enlightened”. That begs the same question begged 
by  the  PCBS  report  back  in  2013:  would  a  more  plural,  less  shareholder-centric,  statutory 
definition of companies’ objectives, the like of which exists in a number of other countries, 
help in better serving investors’, customers’ and ultimately society’s needs? 
There is no off-the-shelf corporate model that suits all seasons. But there may be value in a 
plurality of corporate structures. For example, so-called “Benefit Corporations” have recently 
begun springing up in the US.59 “B-corporations” redefine the fiduciary responsibilities of a 
company  to  embrace  a  much  wider  range  of  stakeholders.  The  time  may  be  ripe  for 
appraising, or re-appraising, these options and others besides, especially in banking where 
shareholder tensions and short-termism may be particularly acute. 
Communicating “purpose” in banking 
(c) 
Actions  to restore  trust and  purpose,  in  banking  and  elsewhere,  speak  louder  than  words. 
But words matter too – indeed, they may never have mattered more. Many banks these days 
                                                
55  Haldane (2015), Big Innovation Centre (2016). 
56  See Kay (2012) and http://www.investorforum.org.uk/. 
57  See http://www.fclt.org/en/home.html. 
58  Big Innovation Centre (2016). 
59  Big Innovation Centre (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
  can no longer rely on personalised interaction to generate trust. Instead, they are reliant on 
arms-length interaction, on generalised trust among the public. That trust is likely to be easier 
to restore and maintain if banking can communicate its objectives and purpose in ways which 
are understood by all. 
It  could  be  argued  that  there  is  no  shortage  of  words  by  which  to  judge  the  actions  and 
intentions of the banking system. Both are set out in great detail in banks’ annual reports. 
Indeed, the detail in these reports has never been greater. Chart 2 plots the page length of 
annual reports by the big four UK banks since 1990. This has risen from under 100 pages 
then  to  anywhere  between  300  and  600  pages  now.  While  all  companies’  annual  reports 
have risen in length at the same time, banking tops the tree-felling league table. 
Clearly, then, there has been a rapidly rising tide of banking information. Or has there? The 
Godfather of information theory, Claude Shannon, defined information in terms of its ability to 
reduce  our  uncertainty.60  But  page  length  and  certainty  are  not  synonyms.  As  even 
professional  investors  find  banks’  annual  reports  somewhere  between  undigestible  and 
unfathomable, it seems possible more banking information, in the conventional sense, may 
have made for less banking information, in the Shannon sense. 
One interesting diagnostic comes from looking at the nature of the information provided by 
banks’  annual  reports,  rather  than  its  quantum.  Linguistic  analysis  provides  a  range  of 
metrics for determining the complexity of a language, including word and sentence length.61 
By taking a range of measures of linguistic complexity, and applying them to banks’ annual 
reports, we can get a window on Shannon’s measure of information-content. 
Chart 3 plots six metrics of linguistic complexity, as applied to the annual reports of the four 
largest UK banks.62 It compares them with a series of alternative publications, specifically a 
UK broadsheet newspaper, a UK tabloid newspaper, a set of recent Bank of England reports, 
a  selection  of  my  own  speeches,  and  a  selection  of  speeches  by  the  leaders  of  the  UK’s 
main political parties. These comparators have no significance beyond the fact that they are 
examples of material written for a general audience. 
What this demonstrates is that banks’ annual reports rank highly on the linguistic complexity 
scale,  well  above  even  a  broadsheet  newspaper.  That  means  they  are  unlikely  to  be 
accessible to the vast majority of the general public. It is communication among the financial 
elite in the language of the financial elite. Perhaps that is no more than confirmation of what 
we already knew. Nonetheless, it means these communications are, by themselves, unlikely 
to have helped build, or rebuild, generalised trust in banking. 
It also begs the question of what more could be done to make banking more accessible to 
the wider public to help build trust. One option might be for the banking industry to conduct 
events  similar  in  spirit  to  the  Open  Forum  –  events  which  seek  to  engage  with,  and  take 
messages  from,  the  general  public.  These  might  be  one  means  of  accreting  personalised 
trust  with  customers  –  “Trust  Town  Halls”.  To  be  successful,  these  would  need  to  be 
repeated rather than one-off events, as personalised trust arises from repeat interactions. 
Another idea is to consider whether there was scope for something akin to an annual report 
for  customers,  rather  than  investors.  This  might  be  (considerably)  shorter  in  length, 
(considerably) simpler in language and (considerably) easier to digest in a 5 minute sitting. It 
would be part of banks’ contract, social rather than legal, with their customers. A third idea 
                                                
60  Shannon (1948). 
61  DuBay (2004). 
62  These include the Coleman−Liau, ARI, SMOG, Gunning fog, Flesch−Kincaid and Coleman correct completion 
measures. These measures consider not only sentence length but also the number of polysyllables (words of 
three syllables or more) and the average number of syllables per word. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  might  be  for  banks  in  future  to  begin  publishing  self-assessments  of  their  culture,  so  that 
customers could have some better sense of the progress being made. 
If these are important communications lessons for financial services serving society, they are 
no less important for public policymakers serving society. Let me take my home institution as 
a case study here. That is not because I believe it is an outlier – if anything, I think the Bank 
is at the frontier of central bank best practice on transparency and openness. It is simply the 
example I know best. 
The Bank has made considerable efforts to improve its openness and transparency over the 
past  few  decades,  including  through  published  reports  of  its  analysis  and  decisions, 
published  minutes  of  those  decisions,  speeches  and  Parliamentary  appearances. To  bring 
that point home, consider a simple measure of transparency as it applies to monetary policy: 
the number of words used to describe a policy decision. 
Back  in  1989,  when  I  first  joined  the  Bank,  monetary  policy  decisions  were  made  by  the 
Treasury.  Their  public  communication  typically  took  the  form  of  a  press  release,  usually 
comprising no more than a few hundred words. Ten years on, the monetary policy world had 
changed.  Decisions  were  now  taken  by  the  Bank’s  MPC  and  were  accompanied  both  by 
published minutes of MPC meetings and a quarterly Inflation Report. This pushed the word-
count per decision up to around 20,000. 
Fast  forward  to  today.  Monetary  policy  decisions  are  still  made  by  the  MPC  and 
communicated through Minutes and the Inflation Report. But there have been additions. A 
Monetary Policy Statement now accompanies every policy decision. And, after a lag of eight 
years, transcripts of the policy meetings themselves will in future also be published. By my 
rough  estimates,  that  will  push  the  word-count  per  monetary  policy  decision  up  to  around 
30,000 to 35,000. 
These  are  big  steps  forward  from  an  openness  perspective.  The  key  question,  from  a 
Shannon perspective, is how far they have helped understanding of monetary policy by the 
general public. The evidence here is mixed. On the upside, around 60% of the general public 
believe the Bank has a good understanding of the economy. On the downside, despite the 
raft of transparency initiatives, only around a third believe the Bank operates with openness. 
And, perhaps most tellingly of all, only around a quarter believe the Bank explains its actions 
and decisions in terms they can understand.63 
What explains this mixed message? Perhaps, as with banks, some of the explanation lies in 
the  nature  of  communications,  rather  than  their  quantity.  Chart  4  puts  Bank  of  England 
reports  and  speeches  on  the  linguistic  complexity  map.  They  occupy  a  position  in  the  top 
right  hand  corner,  with  levels  of  complexity  higher-even  than  commercial  bank  annual 
reports. This suggests the vast majority of the Bank’s publications may be inaccessible to the 
vast majority of the general public. 
Having  assessed my  own  speeches,  including this  one,  the  conclusion  is  much  the  same. 
They,  too,  are  likely  to  be  impenetrable  to  most.  These  linguistic  issues  are  not  merely 
matters  of  careful  drafting.  They  are  important  at  a  substantive  level  when  it  comes  to 
building social capital, accreting generalised trust, closing the Great Divide. Plainly, there is 
further still for us all to go, myself very much included, in simplifying our communications to 
enable us to speak clearly to those we serve. 
Set-piece communications, in the form of written reports and speeches, are only one aspect. 
There are different methods and media which can be used to reach different audiences using 
different voices. Last year’s Open Forum was an example of such an initiative.64 The Bank’s 
                                                
63  Results from a poll conducted by Populus for the Bank of England in March 2016 of around 2,000 adults. 
64   For further details, please see Bank of England Open Forum (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
  enhanced  public  understanding  programme  is  another.  A  third  would  be  to  seek  different 
means of engaging more directly with the general public around the country. 
Along with other MPC, as well as FPC and PRA Board members, I undertake regular visits 
around  the  country  organised  by  the  Bank’s  network  of  regional  agencies  to  better 
understand  the  economy.  They  provide  an  extremely  important  window  on  the  world,  one 
that data and analysis alone is rarely able to provide. Traditionally, these visits focus on the 
Bank’s company contacts – in other words, the visits provide, first and foremost, a corporate 
window on the world. 
But not least in the light of the Open Forum, I have recently reconfigured those visits. Now, 
as well as the Bank’s business contacts, I speak to local schools, colleges and universities 
and  to  local  voluntary  organisations,  charities  and  community  groups.  This  has  opened  a 
completely new window on the world for me. It is different voices – from the third sector, from 
trade unions, from students and educators – with different perspectives. 
There  is  probably  scope  to  expand  the  reach  of  these  visits  in  the  years  ahead.  I  am 
attracted to the idea of “Trust Town Halls”. These would enable me to engage more directly 
with  as  wide  a  spectrum  of  the general  public  as  possible,  in  a  language  that  is  hopefully 
non-elitist, in a format that means I am listening as much or more as I am speaking. It is a 
move  out  of  the  echo  chamber,  an  attempt  to  begin  the  process  of  building  personalised 
trust, bridging that Great Divide. 
Conclusion 
The Great Divide is a problem for banking, but not just banking. There are good steps being 
taken  to  re-build  trust  with  the  general  public,  both  within  banking  and  more  broadly.  This 
effort will not only take time but may require some quite different approaches to pursuing and 
communicating purpose – purpose in banking and indeed in central banking. Social capital is 
an elusive asset. But having seen it eroded, it now falls to us all to rebuild it, brick by brick, 
bank by bank, policy by policy, word by word. 
 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Appendix 
Chart 1  
Word clouds from the Open Forum 
  Source: Bank of England Open Forum (2015). Notes: The size of the text in each word cloud 
indicates the number of times each word was reported back. The poll was conducted online in 
2015  Q3  and  via  the  Bank  of  England  Agency  network.  It  included  over  2000  people,  and 
included those from all regions of the UK, all age groups (from school children to retirees) and 
employment sectors (including those not employed). 
Chart 2  
Annual Report Lengths 
Length of Report 
(Pages)
Barclays
HSBC
Lloyds
RBS
1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
Year
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
 Source: Bank calculations based on published Annual Reports by Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds, 
RBS. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
  Linguistic complexity measures for a set of publications 
Chart 3 
       Source: Bank calculations. Notes: A dataset of around 600 paragraphs from each of the following sources was 
used. Banks – a mixture of terms and conditions and various reports from Barclays, RBS, HSBC and Lloyds. 
BoE  –  a  mixture  of  Bank  of  England  speeches,  reports  and  news  content.  AH  –  a  selection  of  my  recent 
speeches. Political speeches – the Leaders’ speeches from Conservative, Labour and Liberal Democrat party 
conferences  in  2012  and  2014.  One  Tabloid  and  one  Broadsheet  newspaper  were  also  included.  These 
measures consider not only sentence length but also the number of polysyllables (words of three syllables or 
more) and the average number of syllables per word. In general a lower number signifies lower complexity, apart 
from the Flesch-Kincaid reading grade level and Coleman correct completion measures where a higher number 
implies lower complexity. For further details please see DuBay (2004). 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Average sentence and word length across publications 
Chart 4 
Sentence length 
/ words
 Banks
Broadsheet
BoE
Tabloid
AH
Political 
speeches
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
Word length / letters
 26
24
22
20
18
16
14
Source: Bank calculations. Notes: A dataset of around 600 paragraphs from each of the following 
sources was used. Banks – a mixture of terms and conditions and various reports from Barclays, 
RBS,  HSBC  and  Lloyds.  BoE  –  a  mixture  of  Bank  of  England  speeches,  reports  and  news 
content.  AH  – a  selection  of my  recent  speeches.  Political  speeches  –  the  Leaders’ speeches 
from  Conservative,  Labour  and  Liberal  Democrat  party  conferences  in  2012  and  2014.  One 
Tabloid and one Broadsheet newspaper were also included. The chart shows simple sentence 
length and word length figures. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  and 
visual 
videos 
available 
summary 
highlights 
documents, 
References 
Akerlof, A, and Kranton, R (2010), ‘Identity Economics: How Our Identities Shape Our Work, 
Wages, and Well-Being’, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. 
Armstrong,  A  and  Davis,  E  P  (2016),  ‘Financial  regulation:  not  yet  an  efficient  outcome’, 
VoxEU, available at: http://voxeu.org/article/financial-regulation-not-yet-efficient-outcome. 
Asker,  J,  Collard-Wexler,  A  and  De  Loecker,  J  (2014),  ‘Dynamic  Inputs  and  Resource 
(Mis)Allocation’, Journal of Political Economy, vol 122. 
Bank  of  England  Open  Forum  (2015),  ‘An  Open  Discussion  of  the  Role  of  Markets  in 
Society’, 
at: 
www.boeopenforum.co.uk. 
Bank of England (2016), ‘Underwriting standards for buy-to-let mortgage contracts’, Bank of 
England Consultation Paper 11/16, available at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/ 
publications/cp/2016/cp1116.aspx. 
Bailey,  A  (2015),  ‘Progress  on  prudential  regulation  and  three  areas  to  complete’,  speech 
given  at  the  City  Banquet,  Mansion  House,  available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Pages/speeches/2015/854.aspx. 
Beck,  T,  Levine,  R,  Loayza,  N  (2000),  ‘Finance  and  the  source  of  growth’,  Journal  of 
Financial Economics vol 58. 
Beck, T, Demirgüç-Kunt, A and Levine, R (2007), ‘Finance, inequality and the poor’, Journal 
of Economic Growth 12 (1), 27–49. 
Beck,  T  (2012),  ‘The  Role  of  Finance  in  Economic  Development  –  Benefits,  Risks,  and 
Politics’, in the Oxford Handbook of Capitalism. 
Beck, T, Levine, R, and Loayza, N (2000), ‘Finance and the Sources of Growth’, Journal of 
Financial Economics 58: 261–300. 
Big  Innovation  Centre  (2016),  ‘The  Purposeful  Company  (interim  report)’,  available  here: 
http://www.biginnovationcentre.com/media/uploads/pdf/The%20Purposeful%20Company%2
0Interim%20Report.pdf. 
BIS (2012), ‘Skills for life survey: a survey of literacy, numeracy and ICT levels in England’, 
Department for Business Innovation and Skills, available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/36000/12-p168–2011-skills-for-life-survey.pdf. 
Bloom,  N,  Genakos,  C,  Sadun,  R,  Van  Reenen,  J  (2012),  ‘Management  practices  across 
firms 
at: 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w17850. 
Boatright, J (2011), ‘Trust and Integrity in Banking’, Ethical Perspectives 18 no 4: 473–489. 
Boulila, G, Bousrih, L and Trabels, M (2006), ‘Social Capital and Economic Growth: Empirical 
Investigations on the Transmission channels’, International Economic Journal Vol 22 Issue 3. 
BSB 
‘Banking  Standards  Board:  First  Annual  Review’,  available  at: 
http://www.bankingstandardsboard.org.uk/banking-standards-board-publishes-first-annual-
review/. 
Carney,  M  (2015),  ‘Building  real  markets  for  the  good  of  the  people’,  speech  at  the  Lord 
Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, 
London, 10 June 2015. 
Cecchetti,  S  and  Kharroubi,  E  (2012),  ‘Reassessing  the  impact  of finance  on  growth’,  BIS 
working paper no. 381, available at: http://www.bis.org/publ/work381.pdf. 
countries’,  NBER  Working  Paper  No 
available 
(2016), 
17850, 
and 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  at: 
Nature 
13977, 
(2015), 
available 
‘Fair  and  Effective  Markets  Review:  Final  Report’,  available  at: 
Cohn, A, Fehr, E and Marechal, M (2014), ‘Business culture and dishonesty in the banking 
industry’, 
http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/ 
vaop/ncurrent/full/nature13977.html. 
Cunliffe,  J  (2015),  ‘Macroprudential  policy:  from  Tiberius  to  Crockett  and  beyond’,  speech 
given  at  TheCityUK,  London,  available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
Pages/speeches/2015/836.aspx. 
Davies,  R,  Haldane  A,  Nielsen  M  and  Pezzini  S  (2014),  ‘Measuring  the  costs  of  short-
termism’ Journal of Financial Stability, vol 12, pages 16–25. 
Douglas, N (1945), ‘An Almanac’, Chatto & Windus with Martin Secker & Warburg Ltd. 
DuBay, W (2004), ‘The principles of readability’, Impact Information. 
Economic  Policy  Institute  (2015),  ‘Top  CEOs  make  300  times  more  than  typical  workers’, 
Issue  Brief  #399,  available  at:  http://www.epi.org/files/2015/top-ceos-make-300-times-more-
than-typical-workers.pdf. 
FEMR 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/Documents/femrjun15.pdf. 
Field, J (2003), ‘Social Capital’, London: Routledge. 
Friedman, M and Schwartz, A (1963), ‘A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960’, 
ISBN: 9780691003542. 
Froot,  K,  Scharfstein,  D,  Stein,  J  (1993),  ‘Risk  management:  Coordinating  corporate 
investment and financing policies’, The Journal of Finance 48 (5), 1629–1658. 
Fryer,  R  (2006),  ‘Acting  White:  The  social  price  paid  by  the  best  and  brightest  minority 
students’, Education Next 6 (1) 53–59. 
FSB  (2015),  ‘Financial  Reforms  –  Finishing  the  Post-Crisis  Agenda  and  Moving  Forward’, 
letter  from  the  FSB  Chairman  to  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors, 
available 
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/FSB-Chair-letter-to-G20-February-
2015.pdf. 
G30  Working  Group  (2015),  ‘Banking  Conduct  and  Culture:  A  Call  for  Sustained  and 
Comprehensive  Reform’,  available  here:  http://group30.org/images/uploads/publications/ 
G30_BankingConductandCulture.pdf. 
Guiso,  L,  Sapienza,  P  and  Zingales,  L  (2004),  ‘Does  local  financial  development  matter?’, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 929–969. 
Guiso, L, Sapienza, P and Zingales, L (2008), ‘Trusting the stock market’, Journal of Finance 
Vol LXIII, No 6. 
Guiso,  L,  Sapienza,  P  and  Zingales,  L  (2015),  ‘Corporate  Culture,  Societal  Culture,  and 
Institutions’,  NBER  Working  Paper  No  20967,  available  at:  http://www.nber.org/ 
papers/w20967.pdf. 
Haldane, A, (2015), ‘Who owns a company?’, speech at University of Edinburgh Corporate 
Finance  conference,  available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/ 
speeches/2015/833.aspx. 
High  Pay  Centre  (2015),  ‘Pay  ratios:  Just  do  it’,  available  at:  http://highpaycentre.org/ 
files/Pay_Ratios_-_Just_Do_it.pdf 
IMF  (2015),  ‘World  Economic  Outlook,  April  2015:  Uneven  growth  –  short  and  long-term 
factors  –  Where  are  we  headed?  Perspectives  on  potential  output’,  available  at: 
https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/01/pdf/c3.pdf. 
Knack,  S,  Keefer,  P  (1997),  ‘Does  Social  Capital  Have  an  Economic  Payoff?  A  Cross-
Country Investigation’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1251–1288. 
at: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  U.S. 
Survey, 
Industry 
Services 
available 
Financial 
Kay,  J  (2012),  ‘The  Kay  review  of  UK  equity  markets  and  long-term  decision  making’, 
available  at:  https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/ 
253454/bis-12–917-kay-review-of-equity-markets-final-report.pdf. 
Kay, J (2015), ‘Other people’s money: masters of the universe or servants of the people?’, 
ISBN: 978–1781254431. 
La  Porta,  R,  López-de-Silanes,  F,  Shleifer,  A,  and  Vishny,  R,  (1997),  ‘Trust  in  Large 
Organizations’, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings. 
Labaton  Sucharow  (2013),  ‘Wall  Street  in  Crisis:  A  Perfect  Storm  Looming’,  Labaton 
Sucharow’s 
at: 
http://www.labaton.com/en/about/press/Wall-Street-Professional-Survey-Reveals-
Widespread-Misconduct.cfm. 
Lazonick,  W  (2014),  ‘Profits  without  prosperity’,  in  Harvard  Business  Review,  September 
2014, available at: https://hbr.org/2014/09/profits-without-prosperity. 
Levine,  R,  (2005),  ‘Finance  and  Growth: Theory  and  Evidence’,  in  Handbook  of  Economic 
Growth, ed. Aghion, P and Durlauf, S, 865–934. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Mayer,  C  (2013),  ‘Firm  Commitment: Why  the  corporation  is  failing  us  and  how  to  restore 
trust in it’, Oxford University Press. 
New  City  Agenda  (2014),  ‘A  report  on  the  culture  of  British  retail  banking’,  available  at: 
http://newcityagenda.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Last-ever-version.pdf. 
O’Neill, O (2002), ‘A Question of Trust’, BBC Reith Lectures. 
O’Neill, O (2013), ‘What we don’t understand about Trust’, TED talk. 
O’Neill,  O  (2014),  ‘Trust,  Trustworthiness,  and  Accountability’,  in  Morris,  N  and  Vines,  D 
(ed.): Capital Failure: Rebuilding Trust in Financial Services. 
PCBS  (2013),  ‘Parliamentary  Commission  on  Banking  Standards  –  Changing  Banking  for 
Good’, available at: http://www.parliament.uk/bankingstandards. 
Putnam,  R  (1995),  ‘Bowling  Alone:  America’s  Declining  Social  Capital’,  Journal  of 
Democracy. 
Putnam,  R  (2002),  ‘Democracies  in  Flux:  The Evolution  of  Social  Capital  in  Contemporary 
Society’, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sapienza, P and Zingales, L (2011), ‘Trust and Finance’, NBER Reporter 2011 Number 2: 
Research 
http://www.nber.org/reporter/2011number2/ 
paola&luigi.html. 
Shannon,  C  (1948),  ‘A  Mathematical  Theory  of  Communication’,  Bell  System  Technical 
Journal, 27 (3) 379–423. 
Stiglitz, J (2015), ‘The Great Divide: Unequal societies and what we can do about them’, New 
York: Norton & Company. 
Zingales,  L  (2015),  ‘Does  Finance  Benefit  Society?’,  NBER  and  CEPR  Working  Papers, 
available at: http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/luigi.zingales/papers/research/finance.pdf. 
Summary, 
available 
at: 
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
