  Elvira Nabiullina: Structural reform, banking system challenges and 
global developments affecting the Russian financial system 
Statement by Ms Elvira Nabiullina, Governor of the Bank of Russia, at the 25th International 
Financial Congress, Moscow, 30 June 2016. 
 Good afternoon, distinguished colleagues! 
This year we are hosting the 25th jubilee forum and at the same time the first one. We have 
changed its name, i.e., the banking congress became the financial one, and expanded the 
range of discussed topics in intention to embrace all the sectors of the financial market. 
On the one hand, this transformation was about to happen since the central bank functions 
as a mega-regulator and we are seeking to have a constructive dialogue with all the sectors 
of the financial market. On the other hand, this is a reflection of the global trend: the non-
bank financial sector starts playing an ever greater part in global markets and regulation of 
this sector draws ever more attention from regulators throughout the world to minimise risks 
and ensure its stable development. 
Financial stability is coming to the fore in central bank policies. As you might remember, The 
Black  Swan  by  Nassim  Taleb  enjoyed  popularity  a  few  years  ago.  It  should  be  noted  that 
despite  the  fact  that  there  are  a  great  number  of  world  experts  and  analysts  studying  the 
situation and possible risks, the ‘black swans’ are not uncommon in the financial markets. 
Three  years  ago,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  decision  to  curtail  the  quantitative  easing  policy, 
quite unexpected for the market, became such a ‘black swan’. 
Two  years  ago,  both  the  market  and  experts  witnessed  quite  an  unprecedented  fall  in  oil 
prices. 
Last year saw a rather high market volatility caused by the reassessment of risks related to 
the situation in China. 
This year is not yet over but a ‘black swan’ has already flown out. I mean Brexit, which has 
also turned out to be quite unexpected for the market. 
We should try to foresee risks. However, it is not always possible. 
That  is  why  it  is  important  to  ensure  resilience  of  the  system  facing  various  risks,  even 
unexpected  ones,  and  have  tools  to  stabilise  the  financial  markets  and  the  economy  as  a 
whole. 
As far as Brexit is concerned, in our estimates, its explicit impact on the Russian economy 
and  financial  system  will  be  rather  limited.  We  have  already  seen  that  Russian  markets 
withstood the surge of volatility in global markets caused by the outcome of the referendum 
in  the  United  Kingdom.  Long-term  implications  will  depend  upon  specific  arrangements 
between the UK and EU and their influence on the global economy and financial markets. 
Brexit,  however,  can  be  seen  in  a  wider  context,  i.e.,  as  a  manifest  of  public  appeal  for 
changes related not only to politics, but also largely to the economy, since the low growth 
rates of the world economy lead to a loss of confidence and dissatisfaction among people in 
many countries. 
Increased public discontent being actively exploited by populists is mainly linked to the non-
dynamic development of the global economy over this decade. 
The  reasons  are  different:  ageing  of  the  population  and  the  reduction  of  the  economically 
active population; low growth rates in countries used to be the powerful drivers of growth in 
previous years, such as China; the lack of new breakthrough technologies; accumulation of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  various structural imbalances; the on-going reduction of debt burden accumulated before the 
2008 crisis (so-called deleveraging) and so on. 
The problem is that low growth rates affect the poor more adversely than the rich. Income 
disparity in the world has soared since the mid-1980s. The latest OECD report emphasises 
this  fact.  The  Gini  coefficient  in  OECD  countries  grew  by  almost  10%  to  32.  According  to 
World Bank estimates, in 2000–2012 the Gini coefficient in Russia increased from 37 to 41.5. 
It  would  not  be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  a  vicious  circle  is  being  shaped:  low  rates  of 
economic  growth  strengthen  centrifugal  and  disintegration  forces  and  provoke  events  like 
Brexit, which downgrade the outlook for world economic growth even stronger. 
A  growing  demand  for  ‘easy’  economic  decisions  has  also  been  observed  in  Russia.  For 
example, giving promises that the printing of 1–2-3 trillion rubles and their issue as cheap 
loans  will  ensure  sustained  acceleration  in  economic  growth  rates  without  serious  inflation 
implications. This is even based on pseudo-scientific foundation. Another example of such an 
‘easy’ decision is the proposals to forcedly reduce the exchange rate. I should note that the 
implications of ‘easy’ decisions will run counter to the promises made. Russia had such an 
experience in the 1990s suffering a deep economic recession accompanied by high inflation. 
That is why we should treat such recipes very cautiously. 
And  what  is  more  important  –  they  do  not  allow  to  respond  adequately  to  internal  and 
external challenges facing the Russian economy. 
As far as global challenges affecting Russia are concerned, we should first of all highlight a 
long-term  reduction  in  hydrocarbon  prices  and  the  slowing  economic  growth  in  China. 
These challenges nourish each other with regard to having an adverse impact on commodity 
prices. 
As a result of the ‘shale revolution’ OPEC has lost its opportunity to influence oil prices. The 
latter started to be determined by the profitability threshold of the majority of shale projects. 
Moreover, energy-saving technologies and an active use of alternative  energy sources will 
also affect oil prices in the long run. One cannot brush aside this prospect the way it was with 
the ‘shale revolution’. 
A quick return to high oil prices is not expected, so the Russian economy must learn to live 
amid low prices for oil and gas. Overall, we should abandon the habit of connecting optimistic 
target forecasts with growing oil prices, rather than own efforts to restructure the economy. 
The second external challenge facing Russia is the changed growth model and the slowing 
economic  growth  in  China,  which  also  affect  the  Russian  economy  due  to  the  downward 
pressure  on  commodity  prices.  According  to  our  estimates,  1  percentage  point  of  China’s 
slowing GDP may cause a loss of almost 0.5 percentage points in annual rates of economic 
growth  in  Russia  in  the  medium  term.  It  should  be  noted  that  this  is  true  if  the  current 
structure of our relationship and the current structure of trade turnover persist. 
The Chinese economy now ranks second in the world and the role played by that country in 
the  global  economy  and  financial  markets  has  increased  considerably.  The  challenge  for 
Russia  is  to  reorient  to  the  fast  growing  sectors  of  the  Chinese  economy  related  to 
consumption and post-industrial economy (the so-called tertiary sector). 
Low  growth  rates  of  the  world  economy  intensify  the  need  to  carry  out  structural  and 
institutional reforms in many countries to remove the obstacles to a faster economic growth. 
Insufficient attention was paid to such transformations over the past decade. It seemed that 
nothing should be changed and the global economy showed a confident growth. 
Structural reforms are a formidable challenge. They are often painful, infringe on somebody’s 
interests, and face counteraction. Each country should judge for itself what structural reforms are 
the most important ones and which of them may be implemented with due account of political, 
cultural and other factors. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
A  special  emphasis  should  be  made  on  monetary  policy  challenges  facing  the  central 
banks  throughout  the  world.  Easy  monetary  policies  helped  stabilise  the  situation  in 
advanced countries, but the quantitative easing programmes were introduced as short-term 
interim measures allowing to gain time for structural reforms. As you know, however, nothing 
is more permanent than the temporary and structural reforms show little progress, while the 
easy monetary policy now involves more risks than benefits due to its longevity. 
Monetary  policy  in  itself  is  not  able  to  set  the  economies  of  advanced  countries  back  to 
resilient growth, since there are structural limits and there is no room for reducing interest 
rates any further, i.e., they have already been negative in many countries. Nonetheless, low 
interest rates in advanced countries were conducive to fast accumulation of external debt in 
the emerging market economies subjected to capital inflow and bubble formation. 
On the one hand, we realise that an exit from the easy monetary policy is fraught with an 
about-turn  in  capital  flows  and  consequently  the  need  to  tighten  monetary  policies  in 
emerging market economies. This may bring down the global economy’s growth rates even 
further.  Moreover,  as  a  result  of  a  quick  monetary  policy  normalisation  holders  of  these 
countries’ bonds may incur losses and financial stability risks cannot be ruled out. 
On the other hand, a refusal to normalise monetary policy may lead to stagflation. Thus, as a 
matter  of  fact,  the  central  banks  of  major  countries  will  have  to  repeat  the  exploit  of 
Odysseus: to pass between Scylla and Charybdis. 
This  situation  is  fraught  with  mounting  volatility  in  global  markets  and  the  Bank  of  Russia 
takes this into account while pursuing its monetary policy. 
We  are  moving  consistently  towards  our  target:  annual  inflation  of  4%  in  late  2017  and 
further. 
Why do we need low inflation? (Although 4% inflation is low only for Russia, it is much lower 
in the overwhelming majority of countries). 
First,  low  inflation  abates  macroeconomic  uncertainty  and  risks  for  business.  Second,  it 
stabilises  household  incomes,  in  particular  those  of  the  lowest-income  families,  and  third, 
contributes  to  development  of  long-term  lending  and  long  money  in  the  economy.  As  a 
matter of fact, low inflation is an integral part of the investment type of economic growth. 
Considering  all  the  external  and  internal  challenges,  a  very  cautious,  moderately  tight 
monetary policy needs to be pursued to achieve the inflation target. This is not the only one. 
Decreasing  inflation  expectations  of  households  and  businesses  are  largely  conducive  to 
inflation reduction. Therefore, confidence in Bank of Russia policy is very important. We are 
open for dialogue. We try to explain our actions, show how they influence interest rates and 
the economy as a whole, and to convince people, proceeding from facts, that Bank of Russia 
forecasts  on  inflation  are  coming  true.  Inflation  has  slowed  down  to  about  7%  (as  we 
predicted a year ago) and inflation expectations also gradually abate. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  have  switched  from  measures  to  prevent  the  inflation  spiral  from 
unwinding to the policy of persistent reduction of inflation and inflation expectations and we 
are sure that our consistent and smooth actions will help us reach the 4% inflation target in 
late  2017  without  having  an  adverse  impact  on  economic  growth.  The  consistent  and 
predictable  monetary  policy  is  a  factor  of  reducing  general  uncertainty  for  business  and, 
hence,  the  best  environment  for  decision-making,  i.e.,  the  best  conditions  for  growth  in 
lending and investment activity. 
A desire to help the economy through premature cutting interest rates may have an opposite 
effect.  We  should  stick  to  sound  conservatism  here.  In  order  not  to  reproduce  unstable 
imbalanced  growth  output  and  labour  productivity  should  grow  faster  than  income  and 
demand. This will provide incentives for businesses to optimise costs and look for profitable 
segments. Our policy is spearheaded precisely at this. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  It goes without saying that a more responsible fiscal policy (given the smaller budget deficit 
we will be able to cut rates faster) and competition development would be conducive to faster 
inflation reduction. 
Now,  let  me  say  a  few  words  about  current  issues  of  monetary  policy:  they  are  more 
technical,  but  no  less  important,  since they  are  related to  the  transition from the  structural 
liquidity  deficit  to  its  structural  surplus.  I  would  like  to  emphasise  once  again  that  this 
transition does not affect the central bank’s ability to manage the money market rate and with 
its  help  to  influence  all  the  other  rates  in  the  economy,  lending  and  deposit  activity,  the 
economy, and inflation. 
However,  in  order  to  ensure  this  ability  the  Bank  of  Russia  should  change  its  operational 
activity and start to actively mop up liquidity. These operations comprise deposit operations, 
issue of Bank of Russia bonds and sale of assets, for example, the OFZ portfolio. Given the 
expected structural surplus growth, we have also decided to raise the required reserve ratio 
by  0.75  percentage  points  from  1  August.  In  order  to  stimulate  deposit  dedollarisation  we 
decided  to  leave  the  difference  between  the  ratios  on  ruble-  and  foreign  currency-
denominated deposits intact. We also have plans to cancel ineffective exceptions to this ratio 
with regard to exemption from provisioning of legal entities’ deposits and bonded loans with 
maturities of more than three years but with built-in options for early redemption. 
Our monetary policy allows us to flexibly respond to external and internal challenges, though 
its impact on the economy is limited. 
The central bank is compelled to touch upon the structural reform topic. Why so? 
First, unlike some countries we cannot afford fiscal or monetary stimulus for growth due to 
the persistently high inflation (against the target) and budget deficit. 
Second,  even  if  we  could  implement these measures,  they  would  not  result  in  sustainable 
growth, because it is potential growth rates that are currently low – about 1.5–2%, according 
to our estimates – following structural restrictions. 
Third, many structural reforms directly impact the way we will move to our inflation target. For 
example, with better competition or tighter regulation of natural monopolies’ tariffs, we may 
avoid triggering inflationary pressure while cutting rates more dramatically. 
Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  may  ensure  macroeconomic  stability,  but  it  is  insufficient  for 
sustainable economic growth. The most important structural reform is improvement of 
business  climate,  primarily  measures  to  promote  competition,  deregulate  the  economy, 
reduce the share of state-owned and state-controlled companies, and protect property rights 
and minority shareholders. 
The quality of business climate is the reason for insufficiently developed equity financing and 
capital market in our country. Let me remind you that by debt burden Russia is in the upper 
range  in  the  list  of  peer  countries,  but  lags  considerably  behind  them  in  terms  of 
capitalisation. 
If  corporate  governance  and  protection  of  minority  shareholders’  interests  are  challenged, 
shares of such companies will be hardly sold. The fact that our companies earn profits but 
abstain from investing them in their own business comes from macroeconomic uncertainty, 
including  tax  regime,  while  investments  in  other  businesses,  including  through  financial 
mediators, are constrained by high risks arising not only from the vague prospects of these 
business projects, but also poor protection of such interests. 
In  fact,  budget  consolidation  is  an  important  structural  reform  that  impacts  the  monetary 
policy.  We  need  a  budget  rule  to  ensure  sustainably  low  inflation  and  stable  real  ruble 
exchange  rate  amid  wobbling  oil  prices  and  commodity  cycles.  In  this  respect  we  are 
absolutely at one with the Ministry of Finance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Although the dependence of the Russian economy and the exchange rate on oil prices has 
been  down  recently,  it  is  still  high.  A  budget  rule  (accumulation  or  spending  of  budget 
reserves when oil prices exceed or fall short of a certain benchmark, say, $50 a barrel) would 
allow us to reduce the economy’s dependence on oil price fluctuations to a greater extent. 
Certainly,  a  medium-term  budget  balancing  programme  is  very  important  to  us. 
Uncertainty  over  budget  expenditures,  deficit  and  its  future  funding  sources  trigger 
considerable  inflation  risks.  Importantly,  the  budget  rule  and  the  medium-term  budget 
balancing programme would mitigate inflation risks and allow the Bank of Russia to pursue a 
looser monetary policy, all else being equal. 
Indexation of tariffs for utility and natural monopoly services below the inflation target of 4% 
would help mitigate fiscal and, consequently, inflation risks. 
facilitating 
industries, 
recruitment, 
Structural reforms designed to increase mobility of working population, vocational training 
and conversion courses are important for dragging inflation down and boosting efficiency in 
the  economy.  They  will  allow  accelerating  employees’  movements  between  companies  of 
different 
reducing  unemployment  and  shadow 
employment.  In  its  turn,  that  would  drive  economic  growth  and  drag  down  inflationary 
pressure inflicted by wage growth. 
Thereby, there is a set of structural measures which are not only important for the economic 
growth, but also may have a positive impact on inflation and, consequently, rate reduction in 
the economy. 
I  would  like  to  dedicate  the  second  part  of  my  statement  to  development  of  banking 
regulation  and  supervision  and  announce  some  important  changes  the  Bank  of  Russia 
intends to introduce shortly. 
Let me begin with banking system challenges, the global developments affecting the Russian 
financial system and requiring new solutions. 
All  over  the  world,  the  banking  sector  is  going  through  a  serious  transformation  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  latest  global  crisis:  regulation  has  been  tightened;  capital  burden  has 
increased,  making  banks  in  many  countries  unattractive  for  investments.  Despite  soft 
monetary policies in the leading economies, the banking system is wary of boosting lending. 
Disproportionate regulation made parallel banking, including asset management, more 
attractive. Thereby, banks transfer risks to other market participants, though it is not always 
clear. 
Moreover, if banks give up certain activities following the new regulation, it may result in a 
loss of liquidity, among other things, in such an important sector as bond market. As a result, 
possibilities of bond offering shrink and the market becomes more volatile and exposed to 
shocks. 
Another challenge for the banking sector is a rapid fintech evolution that transforms relations 
between  customers  and  financial  institutions.  New  players  (e.g.,  retailers)  launch  financial 
products  and  services.  New  technologies  add  elevated  threats  of  cyber-frauds  and  cyber-
attacks to traditional banking risks. 
These are global challenges. 
Meanwhile, the Russian banking system also faces specific challenges, namely: 
– 
– 
– 
slack economic dynamics which shrinks banks’ earning capacity; 
high debt burden of traditional borrowers; 
persistently restricted access to external financial markets; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
     weak  players  (some  players  faced  difficulties  following  the  worsened  economic 
environment adding to the problems accumulated in the financial sector and not yet 
solved.  The  Bank  of  Russia  has  to  stick  to  active  supervision  to  check  these 
problems); 
another challenge is priority funding of financial institution owners’ businesses rather 
than competitive projects; 
unavailability  of  long  money  in  the  economy  due  to  underdeveloped  collective 
savings (pension funds, unit investment funds, life insurance). 
The challenges I have mentioned affect not only banking, but the whole financial system and 
require different approaches in regulation and supervision. 
We  shall  restore  a  healthy  financial  market,  clear  from  weak  and  unscrupulous  financial 
institutions. This is an ongoing process, but it still takes time to be completed. 
I  would  say  that  the  Russian  banking  sector’s  higher  resistance  to  serious  external 
shocks is among our most important achievements in bank regulation and supervision. The 
banking  system  is  stable,  has  a  good  capital  stock  and  does  not  need  regular  easing  to 
function  efficiently.  Stress  tests  held  by  the  Bank  of  Russia  and  major  credit  institutions 
confirm that. 
However,  the  banking  system’s  relative  well-being  does  not  mean  that  the  banking  sector 
resolution is over. Problems accumulated by banks turned out to be more significant than we 
expected. 
As  I  have  mentioned,  here  belong  sizeable  loans  to  companies  connected  with  banks’ 
owners. Not all of these companies are successful, and their projects remain unimplemented 
for years. 
Similar to owners, large creditors often use their funds deposited with banks to fund projects 
of their owners or chief executives, shifting all the risk to the banks. 
Complications in obtaining relevant information from a foreign jurisdiction by the supervisor 
allowed  banks  to  accumulate  sizeable  assets  abroad  (loans  to  non-residents,  large 
correspondent account balances with foreign banks, securities in foreign depositories, letters 
of credit and other transactions outside the RF jurisdiction). A detailed inspection reveals that 
most transactions with non-residents are of fiduciary nature, and a foreign company or bank 
is not the ultimate recipient of funds. As a result of such transactions, funds are ultimately 
used for loans to owners or fictitious increase in the bank’s capital. 
Currently,  the  supervision’s  main  objective  is  to  timely  reveal  such  fiduciary  transactions 
which undermine financial stability of credit institutions. 
Today,  we  are  completely  rebuilding  the  whole  system  of  bank  supervision,  accelerating 
supervisory decision-making, and, moreover, striving to enhance the proactive nature of the 
supervision. 
The  development  provides  for  a  shift  from  post  factum  analysis  of  banks’  statements  and 
periodical  sampling  analysis  of  some  assets  to  online  analysis  of  all  bank  operations  and 
analysis of bank business model with account taken for stress-testing. For this purpose an 
up-to-date  unified  supervisory  IT  system  and  a  centralised  data  storage  capable  of 
accumulating information about all bank transactions and operations will be created. 
The key element of supervision reorganisation is separation of the risk assessment centre 
from the centre for supervisory decision-making. 
Stress tests conducted by both the Bank of Russia and credit institutions are to play a special 
role  soon.  They  will  cease  to  serve  only  monitoring  purposes  and  their  outcome  will 
determine bank requirements. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Preventive measures (i.e., when banks do not violate prudential ratios, but are exposed to 
elevated risks of future violations) will first be applied to large banks with assets exceeding 
500 billion rubles. 
First inspections of major banks are to start next year in the context of implementation of the 
second  pillar  of  Basel  II.  The  Bank  of  Russia  will  assess  the  quality  of  internal  capital 
adequacy assessment procedures worked out by banks and their application in 2016. 
If  the  Bank  of  Russia  inspection  reveals  insufficiency  of  the  available  capital  to  cover  the 
risks  assumed  taking  account  of  stress-testing  outcome,  or  that  the  low  level  of  risk-
management  procedures  does  not  allow  banks to  assess  the risks  assumed  correctly  and 
they may face capital shortage in future, the Bank of Russia will establish targeted elevated 
capital adequacy requirements for such banks. 
So far, stress tests conducted by banks shall meet basic requirements, but we are adjusting 
parameters  of  stress  scenarios  and  stress-test  requirements.  Their  outcomes  will  be 
progressively taken into account in supervisory decision-making. 
The outcomes of banks’ stress-testing are supposed to be taken into account in assessing 
possibilities  of  bank  mergers,  agreeing  on  a  resolution  plan,  and  taking  other  significant 
supervisory decisions. 
Another important line of our activity is improving the system of bank resolution. 
Our  resolution  analysis  (and  over  the  past  three  years  we  took  28  resolution  decisions) 
shows  that  investors  usually  do  not  invest  in  capital  of  banks  under  resolution,  do  not 
develop their business and sometimes use the balance sheet of banks under resolution for 
bad  debts  while  forwarding  a  sizeable  share  of  funds  for  resolution  purposes  to  their  own 
projects. 
That is why we have tightened control over the ongoing financial resolution. Supervision will 
be focused on all the transactions between the bank designated as a turnaround manager 
and  the  bank  under  resolution.  The  turnaround  manager  will  be  prohibited  to  deteriorate 
financial position of the bank under resolution with its bad assets. We are also establishing 
stricter requirements for financial standing of turnaround managers. 
However,  stricter  control  does  not  remove  systemic  deficiencies  of  financial  resolution, 
namely: 
– 
longtime presence in the market of undercapitalised banks under resolution (up to 
10 years); 
high  cost:  the  current  lending  scheme  provides  for  allocation  of  1.6-fold  more 
resources than  acquiring  a  share  in  the  capital,  that  also  has  indirect  implications 
and aggravates structural liquidity surplus; 
consolidation  of  banks  under  resolution  is  impossible  as  they  have  different 
turnaround managers appointed under bankruptcy proceedings; 
insufficiency of financially sound turnaround managers; 
higher DIA debt burden; 
long loan maturities; 
and  the  last  one  is the above-mentioned  use  of  banks  under resolution  as  a  ‘bad 
asset depot’ by turnaround managers. 
   Also, all of these are indeed systemic shortcomings of our mechanism, the one that has been 
around for many years. This resolution mechanism has seen no change since the time it was 
set  up.  It  is  still  grounded  in  long-term  soft  credits  extended  in  large  amounts  to  entities 
wishing to take part in a financial turnaround. 
It is time for us to make the next step – the one to enable us to overcome these problems. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  The  Bank  of  Russia  stands  ready  to  assume  broad  responsibility  for  the  impact  of  bank 
resolutions, acting, in addition to its role of the main funding source, as a central enabling 
facilitator to this process. 
In  the  run-up  to  the  coming  autumn  Duma  session  we  will  come  up  with  a  package  of 
amendments to legislation to allow the Bank of Russia to set up a special-purpose Banking 
Sector  Consolidation  Fund.  This  fund  would  be  a  participant  in  the  equity  of  banks  under 
resolution. Also, a dedicated management company would be created to provide operational 
management to a bank under resolution. 
In  such  a  scheme,  the  central  bank  would  oversee  the  bank  turnaround  programme. 
Capitalisation  support  would  come  in  quickly,  available  immediately;  where  necessary, 
resolution would involve both reorganisation and merger. Either of these would be followed 
by sale of banks, recovered to a satisfactory financial condition. 
Thanks to the new model to migrate to, the processes of bank resolution are sure to become 
less  inexpensive,  faster,  more  manageable  and  overall  more  effective.  We  will  see  banks 
under resolution being reorganised so as to ensure that financial recovery yields maximum 
results  and  raises  investment  appeal  of  such  banks.  Concurrently,  this  will  predetermine 
optimisation of the banking sector’s structure. 
Both commercial banks and private investors would be able to enjoy the outcomes as they 
acquire well performing banks and those with capital top-up. 
Apparently,  the  mechanism  will  be  the  subject  for  discussion  with  the  bank  community. 
Looking forward, I would like to tell you that we have looked into potential risks this approach 
involves. 
Here are our key findings. 
The risk of banking sector becoming nationalised. 
In our understanding, we are running no such risk, for two reasons. First of all, because of 
the minor role of the banks under resolution in the total banking sector. The 28 banks that 
became  subject  to  resolution  accounted  for  a  mere  4  per  cent  of  the  banking  sector’s 
liabilities. And we do not expect their importance to become any stronger. 
Further,  as  I  have  noted,  resolution  should  result  in  the  sale  of  banks  in  the  market; 
therefore,  we  expect  there  to  be  no  significant  impact  from  the  new  approach  on  the 
correlation of public to private participation in bank capital. 
Further on, on conflict of interests, that is, the risk that the quality of supervision over banks 
reorganised  by  the  Bank  of  Russia-controlled  institution  may  deteriorate.  With  a  view  to 
avoiding  this  risk,  we  intent  to  construct  a  ‘Chinese  wall’  to  separate  Bank  of  Russia 
supervision  activities  from  the  Fund’s  management  company.  We  would  draw  on  our 
experience  with  such  ‘Chinese  walls’,  for  example,  the  one  between  monetary  policy  and 
supervision – a fully working arrangement. But, most importantly, the banks under resolution 
in  the  new  model  –  once  their  capital  is  restored  –  would  be  obliged  to  comply  with  all 
regulations, and they should expect no easier ride. In such a way, we would get unprivileged 
supervision, that is, the one that grants no special status-related discounts to banks under 
resolution. 
Let  me  now  pass  on  to  regulation,  where  we  plan  to  implement  a  number  of  meaningful 
initiatives. 
As you know, our efforts to implement Basel standards are ongoing. This year, for the first 
time ever, we have passed the Basel Committee test that recognised Russian legislation as 
fully  compliant  with  Basel.  This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  Russia-specific  risks  and 
challenges fall outside of our focus. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We seek to spare banks the burden of unjustly excessive regulations, sustaining balanced 
regulatory  change  with  the  purpose  of  excluding  the  negative  impact  on  credit  institutions’ 
capital adequacy and their capacity to lend to the economy. 
In our opinion, the present moment is the right time for proportionate regulation to be rolled 
out  in  the  banking  sector,  that  is,  the  extent  of  regulatory  requirements  for  banks  should 
match the set of banking activities and the volume of risks a bank assumes. 
To this end, we suggest that a new credit institution type be identified – a regional bank. This 
category  would  cover  rather  small  lenders  with  a  limited  range  of  most  standard  banking 
operations. 
These  banks  should  build  their  operations  on  the  business  model  of  attracting  funds  from 
individuals and legal entities in a specific region so these funds are placed with minimal risks 
and convert into loans to households and businesses (mainly medium and small) in the same 
region. 
Such  banks  would  be  authorised  to  place  funds  in  the  interbank  market  only  through  a 
central  counterparty.  Regional  banks  would  also  be  prohibited  from  making  cross-border 
transactions; neither would they be able to open branches / structural subdivisions outside 
the region wherein the bank is registered and outside its adjoining regions. 
We deem it appropriate to discuss with the bank community the possibility to considerably 
streamline  regulation  for  such  banks  so  they  are  exempt  from  compliance  with  technically 
complicated international standards. 
Importantly,  this  suggestion  is  not  about  softening  the  regulation  for  regional  banks  –  it  is 
about its simplification. 
Concerning the other banks (save for systemically important) which we call banks of federal 
importance,  the  plan  is  to  increase  the  minimum  required  capital  to  1  billion  rubles,  with 
international standards to be rolled out subsequently. 
By  the  way,  from  the  slide  here  you  can  see  that  minimum  capital  requirements  in  our 
EurAsEC  partner  countries  are  higher  than  in  Russia.  And  even  once  the  billion-rule  is 
implemented, in three countries they will still be above this one billion. 
The introduction of proportionate regulation comes with a transition period of up to two years, 
in which time banks would be able to decide how they see their future; a similar transition 
period will certainly be required to implement the increased minimum capital requirement. 
We propose to discuss details at the congress. 
Now  with  regard  to  consolidated  supervision.  The  current  supervision  and  inspection 
extend to more than individual credit institutions and cover banking groups. At the same time, 
the  Bank  of  Russia  still  lacks  the  mandate  for  supervision  over  bank  holding 
companies  and,  in  a  wider  sense,  over  financial  groups  made  up  of  non-state  pension 
funds,  insurance  companies,  and  the  so-called  parallel  banks  –  which  have  the  same 
owners. 
The lack of supervision over such associations, together with the lack of their responsibility to 
comply with prudential standards, is behind the current concealing of problems, which gives 
rise  to  an  incentive  for  their  owners  to  structure  associations  of  finance  companies,  in  an 
arrangement allowing them to escape compliance with required ratios, internal control or risk 
management requirements. 
The Bank of Russia believes it is time to do away  with the unequal regulatory field that is 
subject to an association’s organisational structure. 
As  a  result,  it  would  make  no  difference  to  owners  of  financial  institutions,  whether  their 
financial  institution’s  parent  company  is  under  Bank  of  Russia  supervision  or  whether  a 
holding’s parent company is established by the owners. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  for 
requirements 
requirements 
reporting  consolidation, 
Our position is that financial groups should have regulatory standards and requirements to 
enable control of risk and capital management systems, as well as requirements for business 
reputation of a parent organisation’s Board members and executives. 
There  are  good  reasons  to  enable  the  central  bank  to  take  corrective  actions  against  a 
parent organisation or participants in financial groups if they violate regulations. 
Where  the  operations  of  a  bank  /  financial  holding  company  also  include  non-finance 
companies  (industrial,  construction,  commercial),  such  holding  would  need  to  set  up  (or 
designate) a management company, which will  consolidate the statements of the holding’s 
financial institutions and to which the powers to manage such companies would be assigned. 
A similar management company for bank and financial assets would need to be created by 
owners  of  parallel  financial  institutions,  as  well  as  by  holdings  and  associations  where  the 
parent organisation is located overseas. 
It is important to us that this management company should be in the Russian jurisdiction. We 
envisage no need for any separate licensing of its activity, as long as it would be covered by 
the 
for  consolidation-based 
calculation  of  required  ratios  and  their  observance,  as  well  as  those  for  risk  management 
systems, internal controls and the composition of management as are currently applicable for 
regulated financial institutions. 
The  Bank  of  Russia  should  be  authorised  to  take  regulatory  action  against  such  parent 
organisation. 
We  will  detail  our  plans  for  regulation  of  banking  and  financial  holding  companies  in  a 
separate consultation report to be released shortly for public discussion. We will be ready to 
discuss the report in detail with all market participants. 
On a final note on the banking sector, I would like to announce another initiative, which is 
perhaps of a minor scale than those announced today, but still very topical. I have said that 
the  banking  business  is  undergoing  a  rapid  new  technology-caused  transformation  as  we 
see the emergence of new areas in the banking business. Therefore, undoubtedly, both the 
regulator and the bank community need to be abreast of all recent trends and best business 
practices. 
This  is  the  reason  we  have  decided  to  launch  an  establishment  that  would  be  akin  to  a 
corporate university. This facility will operate on a permanent Bank of Russia-based platform, 
inviting  global  and  Russian  industry  leaders  to  enable  opinion  exchange  on  development 
trends. My hope is that the bank community will assist us in developing the agenda for this 
platform. 
Given that I have presented today a fairy large volume of innovations in banking regulation, 
we decided to cover the other financial sectors separately in tomorrow’s session. Today, let 
me only guide you through our key priorities. 
One, advancement of the bond programme. 
Two, generation of long money sources through retirement savings and life insurance. 
Three,  improvement  of  corporate  governance,  which  is  essential  in  capital  market 
development. 
Four, efforts to better quality of financial consumer protection, a field with a lot of room for 
improvement, as well as improvement of interaction with us as a regulator, including through 
the Bank of Russia online reception. 
On  a  separate  subject,  let  me  note  the  need  to  counter  unfair  practices  in  the  financial 
market, the drive to strengthen managerial responsibility in the industry and tighten business 
reputation  requirements.  The  global  challenges  to  the  financial  system  I  mentioned  at  the 
beginning  include  rapidly  advancing  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  the  emergence  of 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  new types of financial intermediaries. These spell the need for a cross-sectoral approach of 
the  regulator.  And,  developing  such  cross-sectoral  approaches  is  one of  our  priorities. We 
plan for our tomorrow’s discussion to centre on this first cross-sectoral document of ours – 
the Guidelines for the Development of the Russian Financial Market. The document is sure 
to be of interest to representatives of all financial institutions. 
And,  to  conclude,  I  would  like  to  brief  you  on  the  current  efforts  to  develop  the  national 
payment  infrastructure.  You  will  know  that  this  autumn  we  are  launching  Mir,  the  national 
payment card, full scale. It is essential that this payment instrument is easy to use. Hence 
our  objective  to  ensure  that  of  all  cards  it  is  Mir  that  would  enable  the  operation  of  social 
media  applications  as  developed  in  many  regions.  In  this  connection  I  am  pleased  to 
announce that in a few minutes on this stage the Bank of Russia and the Government of St 
Petersburg are going to sign the agreement for Mir to operate as a platform for the citizen of 
St Petersburg card. 
And that brings me to the end of my presentation. I appreciate your time. Let me wish all of 
you every success in your endeavours. 
Presentation by Bank of Russia Governor Elvira Nabiullina 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
