   R Gandhi: Rural cooperatives – repositioning 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  R  Gandhi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
“National Conference of Cooperative Banks – Regaining Leadership in Agricultural Finance”, 
held at the Bankers Institute of Rural Development (BIRD), Lucknow, 9 February 2016. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Ajaya Gopal Ray is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. I am glad to be addressing you all at this National Conference on Cooperative Banks – 
Regaining Leadership in this historic city of Lucknow. It is a very contemporary issue. Actually, 
it is an ever-green issue for the past over a century or so. You only need to recall the famous 
saying by the All India Rural Credit Survey of 1951 “Cooperation has failed. But, cooperation 
must succeed”. That showed that cooperation had a chequered history in India, with several 
ebbs and flows. That is why we are talking about “Regaining Leadership” as the organisers of 
this Conference have chosen to put it and “repositioning” as I have preferred to reflect upon. 
Part I – Rural cooperatives: current status 
2. Rural credit cooperatives came into existence essentially as an institutional mechanism to 
provide credit to farmers at affordable cost and address the twin issues of rural indebtedness 
and  poverty. With  its  phenomenal  growth  in  outreach  and  volume  of  business,  rural  credit 
cooperatives have a unique position in the rural credit delivery system. Through the short and 
long-term structures, they continue to play a crucial role in dispensation of credit for increasing 
productivity, providing food security, generating employment opportunities in rural areas and 
ensuring social and economic justice to the poor and vulnerable. Several committees, from the 
All India Rural Credit Survey Committee to the Vaidyanathan Committee have stressed the 
relevance and importance of cooperative credit societies to the development of agriculture and 
rural economy. 
3.  Today,  short  term  cooperative  credit  structure  has  32  state  cooperative  banks  and 
371 district  central  cooperative  banks  operating  through  14907  branches.  There  were 
92,996 Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) as on March 31, 2014 at the grass root 
level  catering  to  the  credit  requirements  of  the  members  but  also  providing  several  non-
financial services like input supply, storage and marketing of produce, supply of consumer 
goods, etc. 
4. The journey has not been smooth for the cooperative banking structure. There were legal, 
structural and organisational rigidities which created conflicts and challenges in the functioning 
of cooperatives. 
5. Reserve Bank of India as regulator of banks is mandated to maintain a sound and stable 
banking system. Since banks are highly leveraged entities and accept unrestricted amount of 
uncollateralised public deposits, it is important to ensure that banks operate on sound lines, 
are well regulated and supervised and public faith in these institutions are sustained. 
6.  Economic  and  financial  reforms  initiated  in  early  1990’s  were  focussed  mainly  on 
commercial banks which have pan-India and international operations. Cooperative banks were 
kept outside the reforms since these banks had limited area of operations, simple banking 
products, low volume of business and insignificant share in the total assets and liabilities of the 
Indian banking system. The regulatory regime continued to be less rigorous for the cooperative 
banks. Capital adequacy and other prudential norms were not applied to cooperative banks. 
However, as commercial banks continued to make significant strides in expansion of business, 
product  diversification  and  technology  adoption,  weaknesses  in  the  cooperative  system 
became more  and more  conspicuous  and  posed  a  threat  to  their  survival.  Particularly, the 
relevance and existence of cooperative banks came into question since a large number of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   state and central cooperative banks were operating without banking license even after 40 years 
from the date of bringing them in the ambit of Banking Regulation Act. 
7. A major initiative for reforming the short term cooperative credit system (STCCS) came from 
the Government of India when it constituted a Task Force in August 2004 to suggest an action 
plan  for  reviving  rural  cooperative  credit  institutions  and  legal  measures  necessary  for 
facilitating this process. The Task Force, chaired by Prof. A. Vaidyanathan has recommended 
that any financial restructuring without addressing the root causes of the weaknesses of the 
system would not result in its sustained revival. The Task Force made several suggestions 
including  a  financial  package  for  cleaning  up  the  balance  sheets  of  STCCS,  legal  and 
institutional reforms necessary for cooperatives to function as democratic institutions. One of 
the major recommendations was on capital adequacy norms for the three tiers of STCCS. 
Regulatory initiatives 
8. The Committee on Financial Sector Assessment recommended that all banks should obtain 
a license before March 31, 2012 and those who failed to obtain a license should be phased 
out of a cooperative space in a non-disruptive manner. 25 State Governments signed the MoU 
for  the  financial  assistance  under  the  Government  of  India  Revival  Package  for  STCCS 
announced as per the recommendations of the Task Force. Reserve Bank, as a major policy 
measure,  relaxed  the  licensing  norms  for  state  and  central  cooperative  banks.  The  twin 
initiatives resulted in licensing of a large number of banks starting from 2008. 
  
9. The position of CRAR in respect of state and central cooperative banks as on March 31, 
2013 revealed that 23 out of 31 state cooperative banks (StCBs) and 278 out of 371 central 
cooperative banks (CCBs) had CRAR above 7%. Six StCBs and 48 CCBs had CRAR between 
4%  and  7%.  We  felt  that  the  time  was  appropriate  to  introduce  Basel  I  capital  adequacy 
framework to these banks. Hence, the banks were placed under phased implementation of 
Basel I norms with a target of 7% CRAR by March 31, 2015 and 9% CRAR by March 31, 2017. 
The  banks  were  allowed  to  raise  the  additional  capital  resources  through  Long  Term 
(Subordinated) Deposits and Innovative Perpetual Debt Instruments. As on March 31, 2015, 
30 StCBs and 301 CCBs had CRAR of 7% or above. 
10. Pursuant to the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act 2012, CRR to be maintained by non-
scheduled StCBs and CCBs and SLR to be maintained by all StCBs and DCCBs were brought 
on par with commercial banks from the fortnight beginning July 12, 2014. Eligible assets for 
SLR  were  also  brought  on  par.  With  a  view  to  enabling  the  banks  to  meet  the  revised 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   requirements, a roadmap was provided to phase out the existing SLR term deposits by March 
31, 2017. 
11. Regulatory functions related to urban and rural cooperative banks have been brought under 
a  single  department  within  RBI  with  effect  from  October  1,  2014.  Erstwhile  Urban  Banks 
Department was bifurcated and rechristened as Department of Cooperative Bank Regulation 
(DCBR) and Department of Cooperative Bank Supervision (DCBS). While supervision of UCBs 
is  vested  with  DCBS,  supervisory  functions  in  respect  of  StCBs  and  CCBs  remain  with 
NABARD.  The  new  arrangement  is  aimed  at  achieving  synergy  and  harmonization  in 
regulation of cooperative banks without losing sight of the structural differences in rural and 
urban cooperative credit systems. 
12. Some of the recent policies aimed at harmonisation of regulation of cooperative banks are 
related to increase in gold loan bullet repayment limit from ₹ One lakh to ₹ Two lakh, guidelines 
on opening of branches / extension counters by state cooperative banks, issue of ATM / Debit 
cards, guidelines on setting up mobile / off-site ATMs and internet banking and permission to 
StCBs / DCCBs for investment in Market Infrastructure Companies like NPCI, CCIL, etc. With 
a view to speeding up approvals, we have delegated powers to our Regional Offices in most 
of these areas. 
Financial performance of state and central cooperative banks 
13.  Today  the  StCBs  and  DCCBs  display  a  reasonable  financial  strength.  Their  combined 
capital and reserves stood at  ₹ 20.1 thousand crores for the StCBs and  ₹ 51.04 thousand 
crores for the DCCBs as on March 31, 2015. The combined balance sheet, as on March 31, 
2015, of all state cooperative banks stood at ₹ 1.98 lakh crore and that of the district central 
cooperative banks at ₹ 4.06 lakh crore. Their Gross NPA stood at 4.8% and 9.1% respectively 
as  on  March  31,  2015.  Their  combined  Net  Profits  were  ₹  1,005  crore  and  ₹ 793 crore 
respectively. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
  4 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14. Asset quality of StCBs / DCCBs have improved over the last three years as may be seen 
from the fall in the percentage of NPAs between 2013 and 2015. However, the percentage of 
recovery to demand is a concern since it is showing a declining trend. There are wide variations 
region-wise too. In 2014, NPAs of StCBs varied between 1.93% in northern region and 17.12% 
in north-eastern region. In respect of CCBs, it was 5.27% in northern region and 10.98% in 
eastern region. During the same year, percentage of recovery to demand was 97.9 in northern 
region  and  49.10  in  north-eastern  region  for  StCBs.  Recovery  to  demand  was  83.16%  in 
northern region and 67.23% in eastern region in respect of CCBs. 
   Issues and challenges 
15. Some of the major issues to be addressed by the cooperative banking sector relate to 
governance, management, sound capital base, technology, risk management and frauds. We 
have prescribed fit and proper criteria for Chief Executive Officers of StCBs and CCBs. The 
Constitution  (97th  Amendment)  Act  mandates  appointment  of  at  least  two  professional 
directors in the Boards of cooperative banks. The Act has also covered other issues aimed at 
improving  governance  and  autonomous  functioning  of  cooperative  societies  such  as 
engagement of professionally qualified auditors, tenure of Board, conditions for supersession 
of Board, active participation of members in annual general meetings, etc. Implementation of 
these directions in their true spirit is critical for ensuring good governance and management 
practices. 
16. The Constitution (97th Amendment) Act requires that audit of a cooperative society to be 
conducted by qualified auditors or auditing firm to be appointed from the panel prepared by the 
State Government. NABARD has requested RCS of all states to provide chartered accountants 
for conducting statutory audit of StCBs / DCCBs. We come across large divergence between 
audited  financial  parameters  and  that  assessed  by  NABARD,  particularly  in  respect  of 
reporting  of  NPAs  and  provisioning.  Since  audited  financial  statements  are  relied  upon  for 
granting various regulatory approvals and assessing compliance standards, quality of statutory 
audit  needs  to  be  improved.  For  achieving  this,  we  have  planned  to  conduct  workshops  / 
seminars for statutory auditors to familiarise them with our instructions. We will be taking the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   help  of  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  for  preparing  a  standard  audit  report  format  for 
cooperative banks. 
17.  Cooperative  banks  should  improve  their  bottom  line  through  internal  accruals  without 
relying on frequent bouts of capital infusion by the government. They should review their pricing 
policies on deposits and loans, appraisal systems, recovery procedures, major expenditure 
items and devise suitable action plan to plug leakages and augment income. Implementation 
of effective loan appraisal policies at the approval stage will ease the pressure on recoveries 
at  a  later  date  and  help  to curtail  expenditure  on  litigations.  Continuous monitoring  of  loan 
accounts with give signals on creeping sickness and delinquencies and effective steps aimed 
at  recovery  at  an  early  stage  will  prevent  deterioration  of  asset  quality.  Further,  higher 
provisioning towards NPAs severely erodes profitability. Banks should look for more fee-based 
activities to supplement their earnings. 
18. Another area of persistent and serious concern to us and NABARD is that cooperative 
banks are unable to prevent frauds. Most of the times, the frauds have been perpetrated by or 
in collusion with the banks’ own staff. As on March 31, 2015, state and central cooperative 
banks have 2589 cases of frauds with outstanding amount of ₹ 877.7 crore. If the banks are 
unsuccessful in recovering the amount, the losses have to be absorbed by them. Cooperative 
banks need to think whether frauds are really non-preventable. 
19. Technology adoption is an imperative in today’s banking. Implementation of CBS in StCBs 
and DCCBs which was started in 2012 has been completed in all 32 StCBs and 347 licensed 
DCCBs.  These  banks  can  now  offer  RTGS  and  NEFT facilities  to  their customers  through 
direct or sub-membership route and also participate in Direct Benefit Transfer Scheme. RBI 
has already circulated the criteria for offering mobile and internet banking facilities by these 
banks. Since the technology brings its own risks, cooperative banks should have proper risk 
assessment and risk mitigation policies in place. Sound internal control system is critical to 
prevent  frauds,  data  integrity  and  leakage  of  customer  information.  Banks  should  develop 
wherewithal  to  handle  the  liabilities  that  would  devolve  on  them  due  to  failures  in  internal 
controls. Any lapses on this count will not only impose cost in terms of money but also loss of 
customers’ faith. 
20.  Rural  cooperatives  have  enormous  potential  to  deliver  financial  inclusion  to  remote 
locations  leveraging  technology.  NABARD  extends  support  to  cooperative  banks  in 
implementing  the  technology  assisted  banking  platform  and  setting  up  Financial  Literacy 
Centres  and  Common  Service  Centres  with  ICT-enabled  kiosks  to  create  awareness  and 
demand for products and services. Financial assistance is provided from Financial Inclusion 
Fund for implementation of CBS in cooperative banks, data migration from PACS to DCCBs, 
issue  of  RuPay  and  KCC  cards  and  meeting  expenditure  towards  micro-ATMs  and  POS 
terminals. Cooperative banks should join hands with NABARD to reach financial products and 
services to the unserved. 
21. Implementation of mobile and internet banking will facilitate anywhere banking without any 
necessity  for  the  customers  to  visit  banks’  premises.  Since  physical  interactions  with 
customers will be limited or nil, banks should pay attention to adequate KYC checks. Proper 
care should be taken at the time of engaging the services of third party service providers for 
managing the IT systems and outsourcing database management activities. 
22. With the adoption of technology and liberalisation of regulatory policies, cooperative banks 
are foraying into new business activities where they have no familiarity. Training and capacity 
building assumes importance in the present context. Adequate training should be imparted to 
people  at  all  levels  including  employees,  Board  of  Directors  and  auditors  to  improve 
productivity, efficiency and professionalism. Cooperative banks should make use of financial 
assistance for capacity building provided by NABARD from Cooperative Development Fund 
and  under  Scheme  of  Financial  Assistance  for  Training  of  Cooperative  Banks  Personnel 
(SOFTCOB).  Cooperative  banks  may  avail  of  training  facilities  available  in  the  training 
establishments of RBI, NABARD and various cooperative training institutions. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   23. Today’s customers have more awareness about their rights and demand transparency in 
our banking system. Leveraging the technology, every cooperative bank should provide on its 
website  where  customer  can  access  information  about  products,  procedures, forms, fees  / 
charges, annual reports, etc. Customers should have the facility to communicate to the bank 
through e-mails. Transparency will improve confidence of customers, bank’s image and reduce 
complaints. 
24. Cooperative banks are now functioning in a highly competitive environment. Entry of more 
players in the banking arena and technology have increased options to customers and banks 
have  both  opportunities  to  grow  and  challenges  for  survival.  Cooperative  banks  with  their 
intimate knowledge of customers and familiarity with the area of operation can attract new 
customers and retain the existing clientele with their unique selling proposition. However, this 
can  be  achieved  only  with  suitable  changes  in  outlook,  processes,  business  model  and 
strategy. 
Part II Rural cooperatives: re-positioning 
Exalted status 
25. Co-operatives are an exalted position in India. How and why do I say so? There are very 
many  types  of  economic  entities  like  a  proprietary  firm,  partnership  firm,  society,  trust, 
company, body corporate, beside the cooperative. Of these, which one has got mentioned in 
the Constitution of India? It is cooperatives. That too, not just a passing mention; but, a full 
section on how cooperatives have to be formed, governed and operated has been incorporated 
as a part of our Constitution, thanks to 93rd Amendment. 
26. Not only that, you look at the very many Five Year Plan documents – they are replete with 
strong  references  to  the  contribution  of  cooperatives,  the  role  and  expectations  from 
cooperatives. To quote a few of them – The Second Five-Year Plan (1956–1961), emphasized 
“building up a cooperative sector as part of a scheme of planned development” as being 
one of the central aims of National Policy. The Third Five Year Plan (1961–1969) stressed 
that “Cooperation should become, progressively, the principal basis of organization in 
branches  of  economic  life,  notably  agriculture,  minor  irrigation,  small  industries  and 
processing, marketing, distribution, rural electrification, housing and construction and provision 
of essential amenities for local communities. Even the medium and large industries and in 
transport an increasing range of activities can be undertaken on cooperative lines”. The Eighth 
Five Year Plan (1992–1997) laid emphasis on building up the cooperative movement as a self-
managed, self-regulated and self-reliant institutional set-up, by giving it more autonomy 
and democratizing the movement. 
27.  Pandit  Jawaharlal  Nehru,  who  had  a  strong  faith  in  the  cooperative  movement,  while 
opening an international seminar on cooperative leadership in South-East Asia, had said “But 
my outlook at present is not the outlook of spreading the cooperative movement gradually, 
progressively, as it has done. My outlook is to convulse India with the Cooperative Movement 
or rather with cooperation to make it, broadly speaking, the basic activity of India, in 
every village as well as elsewhere; and finally, indeed, to make the cooperative approach the 
common  thinking  of  India....Therefore,  the  whole  future  of  India  really  depends  on  the 
success of this approach of ours to these vast numbers, hundreds of millions of people”. 
28. Why this kind of attention, belief and expectations on cooperation? Is it because, it is more 
than 100 years old? Or is it because of the innate features that go to define a cooperative? Or 
is it because of the socio-economic Utopia of tranquility, mutual understanding, bonding and 
support and thereby growth that it promises for its members? Let us explore more. 
Some historical perspectives 
29. Cooperatives came on the scene in India, in a big way, around the turn of 19th century into 
20th century. In the first 50 years of its history, it is reported to have reached as high a number 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   of  more  than  two  lakh  cooperatives  registered  by  mid  20th  century.  They  had  permeated 
across all spectrums of economic activity chain. Be it credit, mortgage, production, marketing, 
storage, sales, distribution, consumption, wholesale, retail, services, advisory, research, etc. 
etc. – you name it, the cooperatives were everywhere. Be it agriculture, allied services, rural 
industries,  manufacturing  –  small,  medium  and  large,  services,  you  name  any  segment  of 
economic activity, they were there. Such a wide swathe of the presence of cooperatives could 
not have happened without the magnitude and depth of the contribution of cooperatives. Or 
was it so? Or was it because of its status as socio-political unit and its grand belief of rendering 
marvelous Utopia? Let us probe a bit further. 
30. We are from the financial sector and hence most of my comments will be with reference to 
the financial sector, more specifically to the banking sector. Credit cooperatives were the first 
to come within regulation. The proposal for agricultural banks was first mooted as long back 
as in 1858. Several Committees had been recommending constitution of Agricultural banks. In 
1901 the Famine Commission recommended the establishment of Rural Agricultural Banks 
through the establishment of Mutual Credit Associations, and such steps as were taken by the 
Government  of  North  Western  provinces  and  Oudh.  The  underlying  idea  of  a  number  of 
persons  combining  together  was  the  voluntary  creation  of  a  new  and  valuable  security.  A 
strong association competent to offer guarantees and advantages of lending to groups instead 
of  individuals  were  major  advantages.  The  Commission  also  suggested  the  principles 
underlying agricultural banks and land banks. Based on the recommendations of the Edward 
Law  Committee,  the  Cooperative  Credit  Societies  Act  was  passed  in  1904.  As  its  name 
suggests, the Cooperative Credit Societies Act was restricted to credit cooperatives. It was 
only subsequently, a more comprehensive legislation called the Cooperative Societies Act was 
enacted. This Act, inter alia, provided for the creation of the post of registrar of cooperative 
societies and registration of cooperative societies for various purposes and their audit. 
31. “The underlying idea of all Mutual Credit Associations, such as we recommend, is that a 
number of persons, by combining together, create a new and valuable security, which none of 
them previously possessed as individuals. Co-operation substitutes for isolated and helpless 
agricultural units a strong association competent to offer guarantees and capable of inspiring 
confidence.  The  advantages  of  lending  to  groups  instead  of  to  individuals  need  no 
demonstration. It is simpler for a creditor to deal with a group of fifty or a hundred associated 
cultivators than with the same number singly; it is simpler for him to obtain repayment from the 
group than from each of the members composing it; it is simpler for the group to make its own 
arrangements with each member than for the lender to try to do so”. 
32. What I just now read is from the Report of the Famine Commission 1901. Doesn’t ring 
several bells? Our modern day Self Help Groups (SHG), Joint Liability Groups (JLG), Micro 
Finance  Institutions  (MFI)  were  all  in  the  thought  process  some full  hundred  years  before. 
Perhaps, they were the ideas well ahead of their times. 
Cooperatives in the first half of 20th century 
33. The first half of the 20th century saw phenomenal growth of cooperatives in general and 
the number of credit cooperatives in particular had reached more than two lakh. But what was 
their contribution? The All India Rural Credit Survey, in their Report in 1954, brought forth the 
stark  reality  that  cooperatives,  despite  all  the  widespread  presence  in  villages,  and  the 
attention and encouragement received, did achieve pretty little. They just contributed to 3.1% 
of the credit needs of the villagers, as can be seen from Table 1 below: 
 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
34. This led them to conclude, with the famous saying, “Cooperation has failed; but it must 
succeed”. 
Cooperatives in second half of 20th century 
35. The next half century received quite a lot of rhetoric. I had quoted them before viz., about 
making  the  cooperative  approach  the  common  thinking  of  India,  dependence  of  the  whole 
future of India on the success of cooperative movement, building cooperative movement being 
the central aim of National Policy as a part of planned development, cooperatives to be the 
principal basis of organising economic activity, etc. 
36. What has been the effect? Of course, there was impact. Cooperatives did deliver. As can 
be seen from Table 1, their contribution to rural credit increased gradually from the 3.1% in 
1951 to an impressive 27.3% in 2002. And, as I mentioned in Part I, today, the short term 
cooperative credit structure has 32 state cooperative banks and 371 district central cooperative 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   banks operating through 14907 branches and there were 92,996 Primary Agricultural Credit 
Societies (PACS) as on March 31, 2014 at the grass root level. The combined balance sheet, 
as on March 31, 2015, of all state cooperative banks stood at ₹ 1.98 lakh crore and that of the 
district central cooperative banks at ₹ 4.06 lakh crore. Their Gross NPA stood at 4.8% and 
9.1% respectively as on March 31, 2015. Their combined Net Profits were ₹ 1,005 crore and 
₹ 793 crore respectively. 
37.  Are  we  satisfied  with  this?  Of  course  not.  Why?  First  of  all,  these  numbers  hide  wide 
variation among the 32 StCBs and the 371 DCCBs, whether in terms of financial strength, 
profitability, efficiency or asset quality. Secondly, there are variations among regions as well, 
be it in terms of the number, growth, strength, performance and asset quality. Thirdly, as on 
March 31, 2015, there were as many as 13 StCBs and 163 DCCBs with Capital to Risk Assets 
Ratio (CRAR) below the prescribed 9%. Their governance position has added to the worry. 
Cooperatives, which are to be fundamentally socio-economic entities, are being operated as 
socio-political entities. 
Opportunities lost 
38. These weaknesses of the cooperatives have caused certain serious opportunities slip by 
the cooperative system. What do I mean by this? Please recall the recommendations of the 
Famine Commission 1901 which I quoted earlier. They had recommended that micro finance, 
self-help groups, joint liability groups, etc. as a part and parcel of cooperative banks. Where 
are they today? Not with the cooperatives. They are with the Micro Finance Institutions (MFI). 
We are trying to bring them within the commercial banking segment. 
39. Rightfully, the MF, SHG, JLG etc. concepts should have been gainfully employed by the 
cooperatives. Just visualise – if only we had leveraged the 95000 physical infrastructure of the 
primary agricultural cooperative societies, with the financial backing of the DCCBs and StCBs! 
Will we be still talking about how to reduce financial exclusion? Could we have not shown the 
world how to achieve financial inclusion? 
40. We have to introspect about why are we discussing about organising SHGs, Village level 
SHG federations, district level SHG federation and state level SHG federations, when a time 
tested PACS-DCCB-StCB model, not just model, a functioning infrastructure is available. 
Questions for introspection 
41. In my opinion, the reasons are the perceptions about the cooperatives as being financially 
weak,  being  a  socio-political  structure  and  being  reluctant  to  change.  Added  to  these 
perceptions are the inabilities and indifference to capture the imagination and acceptance of 
the minds of the Gen-Next. 
42. I would urge, you all, the veterans of the cooperative movement and the other stakeholders 
on  the  subject,  to  seriously  reflect  on  the  following  questions,  in  order  to  re-position  rural 
cooperatives to sub-serve, shall I say, the original function for which it was thought of viz., the 
micro finance: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
How to re-position Cooperatives as Socio-Economic entities? 
How to adopt SHG movement within cooperative movement? 
How to leverage the physical infrastructure available in PACS? 
How to sub-serve financial inclusion by becoming a Business Correspondent (BC) for 
banks? 
How to capture the minds of Gen-Next? 
e. 
43. It is in your hands whether we should say “Cooperation has failed”. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
