  Lynn Patterson: Adjusting to the fall in commodity prices – one step at a 
time 
Remarks by Ms Lynn Patterson, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Edmonton 
Chamber of Commerce, Edmonton, Alberta, 30 March 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me here today. 
It’s a pleasure to be in Edmonton and speaking to the Chamber of Commerce. 
When I accepted this invitation, it took me all of about 10 seconds to decide what my topic 
would be: the impact of lower commodity prices on Canada’s economy, which is important to 
all of us. 
As business leaders in Alberta, you know this better than most because you are experiencing 
it first-hand. 
At  the  Bank  we  have  committed  a  lot  of  resources  to  understanding  the  impact  on  the 
economy  of  the  drop  in  prices,  and  so  I  thought  it  would  be  helpful  to  share  some  of  our 
insights, from a macro perspective, into the adjustment we are facing. 
Oil prices alone are down by well over 60 per cent since the highs we experienced in mid-
2014. Given the supply dynamics that we are currently faced with, it is highly unlikely that we 
will see those levels again in the coming years. 
While this price drop is affecting all Canadians, it is being felt most acutely here in Alberta 
and other oil-producing regions. We at the Bank are well aware of the toll this is taking on 
firms  and the  hardship  it means for many  individuals  and families.  Yet the  message  that I 
want to share with you today is that Canada’s economy is diverse and dynamic enough to 
achieve, in time, a new balance of economic growth. 
While  energy  and  other  commodities  will  continue  to  play  a  very  important  role  in  the 
domestic economy, we don’t expect that they will account for as large a share of our exports 
as they did in the recent past.1  
I  want  to  focus  on  three  key  questions  that  are  top  of  mind  for  us  at  the  Bank  and,  most 
likely, for many of you. 
First, how do we assess the impact of this shock? 
Second, how will the economy adapt and how long will it take? 
And third, what will the economic landscape look like when it’s done? 
In answering these questions, I will highlight a simulation of the commodity price shock that 
we ran through one of our economic models to help us understand the implications for the 
economy. I will also describe in some detail the insights into the adjustment process that the 
model gave us. 
Let me begin with some context. 
                                                
1  As of 2015Q4, commodities accounted for 41 per cent of our exports, roughly one-third of which were energy 
products. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Context: Impact of the commodity boom on Canada 
A broad-based boom in global commodity markets began in the early 2000s. It was fuelled 
by growing demand from emerging-market economies. Canada was a big beneficiary of the 
rising prices. Our terms of trade – the price of our exports relative to that of our imports – 
improved substantially. So did our real gross domestic income (GDI), which is a measure of 
the purchasing power of income generated in Canada. The terms of trade directly boosted 
GDI  by  approximately  7  per  cent  between  2002  and  2013.2  Rising  commodity  prices  also 
boosted economic activity, particularly business investment, which generated job growth in 
the natural resource sector. In 2014, business investment in the oil and gas extraction sector 
peaked at almost $80 billion. 
As  commodity  prices  and  Canada’s  terms  of  trade  improved,  the  Canadian  dollar 
strengthened. From a low of about 62 cents U.S. in 2002, the dollar rose to average around 
parity between 2010 and 2013. This increase was not merely coincidental. In addition to the 
improvement  in  our  terms  of  trade,  other  factors,  such  as  international  interest  rate 
differentials and safe haven flows, were at play. All of these elements influenced the level of 
the Canadian dollar.3  
In  this  environment,  Canada’s  flexible  exchange  rate  helped  to  prevent  the  economy  from 
overheating. As the Canadian dollar appreciated, it became a headwind for some industries 
in the non-commodity export sector. This, in turn, reinforced incentives for capital and labour 
to  shift  to  commodity-producing  sectors  and  regions.  Indeed,  workers  migrated  in  large 
numbers  to  regions  of  the  country  that  were  benefiting  from  job  creation  in  the  natural 
resource sector. The oil boom in Alberta provides the strongest example. Between 2002 and 
2013, more than a quarter of a million people moved here from other provinces. We also saw 
the number of workers commuting to Alberta double during this period, rising to about 8 per 
cent of the province’s workforce. 
Assessing the magnitude of the shock 
I’m  sure  many  of  you  felt  the  benefits  of  higher  commodity  prices.  You  likely  witnessed 
changes in your neighbourhoods and city. But, by late 2014, you may have begun to feel a 
cold wind blowing. 
With  the  significant  decline  in  commodity  prices,  the  economy  was  faced  with  a  material 
shock. 
Let me turn to my first question: how we assess a shock such as this. 
The  Bank  uses  a  variety  of  analytical  tools  and  sources  of  economic  intelligence  to  better 
understand and assess the impact of shocks like this one. Some of our tools, such as our 
Business Outlook Survey, help us identify near-term impacts, including changes in business 
investment. Others help us look at a longer horizon. 
                                                
2  Growth  in  real  gross  domestic  income  reflects  both  growth  in  real  GDP  and  improvements  in  the  terms  of 
trade. Between 2002 and 2013, GDI increased by about 30 per cent. Of that increase, 7 percentage points are 
attributable to the direct effects of changes in our terms of trade. The remainder reflects growth in real GDP. 
Of course, higher commodity prices also contributed to GDP growth during this period. Thus, the improvement 
in the terms of trade indirectly raised GDI through this channel. 
3  The changes in our terms of trade fuelled the increase in demand for Canadian dollars through two channels 
in particular. Firms that sold their Canadian-produced commodities on world markets were paid in U.S. dollars, 
some  of  which  they  used  to  purchase  Canadian  dollars  to  pay  for  wages,  dividends,  inputs  and  capital 
expenditures.  In  addition,  higher  commodity  prices  increased  foreign  investor  interest  in  the  securities  of 
Canadian  firms,  most  of  which  are  denominated  in  Canadian  dollars.  For  a  more  detailed  discussion,  see 
S. S. Poloz,  “Life  After  Liftoff:  Divergence  and  U.S.  Monetary  Policy  Normalization”  (speech  to  the  Mayor’s 
Breakfast Series, Ottawa, 7 January 2016). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The recent oil price drop merited particular attention, not only because of the size and speed 
of the decline, but also because of the relative importance of oil production and investment. 
As oil prices began to fall, we closely monitored announcements of capital expenditures. We 
also analyzed the impact of past oil price shocks on investment and we talked with firms in 
the energy sector to understand how they were responding to the price decline. The picture 
that emerged was of a sizable contraction of investment in the oil and gas sector in the near 
term.4 And so in January 2015, and again in July, concerned about the impact of lower oil 
prices  and  the  risks  to  inflation,  and  to  facilitate  the  economy’s  adjustment  to  its  new 
circumstances, we lowered our policy rate. 
For insights into the longer horizon, we ran a simulation of the shock in our workhorse model, 
the Terms-of-Trade Economic Model (ToTEM).5 A paper that we released with our January 
Monetary  Policy  Report  has  all  the  details.6  ToTEM  is  designed  to  capture  the  impact  of 
terms-of-trade shocks, which is a necessity for analyzing an economy such as Canada’s that 
is so heavily engaged in international trade.7  
ToTEM  is  fed  data  on  everything  from  consumer  spending  to  household  wealth,  labour 
markets,  wages,  imports  and  exports,  long-  and  short-term  interest  rates,  business 
investment  and  government  spending.  The  model  helps  us  understand  how  these 
components interact in response to shocks. It also allows us to explore the linkages between 
the commodity and non-commodity sectors, as well as how the exchange rate and monetary 
policy facilitate adjustment to shocks. 
The ToTEM simulation provided insight into how a fall in commodity prices would affect the 
broader economy. The shock is complex because it sets in motion several, seemingly non-
synchronous forces: on the one hand, it indicated that our resource sector would shrink and 
we would earn less income from the rest of the world; on the other hand, the non-resource 
sector  would  gradually  begin  to  expand.  At  the  same  time,  the  Canadian  dollar  would 
depreciate. 
A front-loaded restructuring of the resource sector 
By convention, we assumed for the simulation that commodity prices would remain roughly 
where they were at the time (the third quarter of 2015), when West Texas Intermediate was 
trading at about US$46 per barrel, almost 60 per cent below its peak in June 2014.8  
Our simulation suggested that, by the end of 2015, the commodity price decline would cause 
GDP to be 1 per cent lower than it otherwise would have been. 
And that’s what happened. As investment fell, firms cut their workforces. You all likely have 
friends, neighbours or colleagues who were affected by the cuts. By December of last year, 
about  30,000  jobs  had  been  lost  in  the  mining,  oil  and  gas  extraction  sectors  in  Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador, a decline of almost 20 per cent from the 
                                                
4 
5  The  simulation  looked  at  the  adjustment  process  over  a  5-year  period,  unlike  our  forecasts,  whose  typical 
Indeed, around $28 billion in oil and gas sector investments, or over 35 per cent, evaporated in 2015. 
projection horizon is 18 to 24 months. 
6  J. Champagne, N. Perevalov, H. Pioro, D. Brouillette and A. Agopsowicz, “The Complex Adjustment of the 
Canadian Economy to Lower Commodity Prices,” Staff Analytical Note 2016–1, Bank of Canada, 2016. 
7  P.  Fenton  and  S.  Murchison,  “ToTEM:  The  Bank  of  Canada’s  New  Projection  and  Policy-Analysis  Model,” 
Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Autumn  2006):  5–18;  and  J.  Dorich,  M.  Johnston,  R.  Mendes,  S.  Murchison  and 
Y. Zhang,  “ToTEM  II:  An  Updated  Version  of  the  Bank  of Canada’s  Quarterly  Projection  Model,”  Technical 
Report No. 100, Bank of Canada, October 2013. 
In  fact,  our  research  shows  that  this  simple  “no  change”  assumption  is  generally  about  as  good  as  those 
produced by sophisticated models or futures markets. However, we believe that, over the medium term, there 
are upside risks to this assumption. 
8 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  employment peak in 2014. But supply-chain linkages and spillovers to other sectors meant 
that the losses were much broader: almost 70,000 jobs disappeared in these provinces. 
Regional divergences also emerged. While employment in these energy-producing provinces 
fell,  it  grew  in  the  rest  of  Canada.  As  a  result,  unemployment  rates  rose  by  roughly  2  to 
3 percentage  points  in  the  three  provinces  while  remaining  flat  or  declining  in  British 
Columbia, Ontario and Quebec. 
The  employment  decline  in  the  resource  sector  also  had  an  outsized  impact  on  national 
aggregate earnings. Not only do these jobs pay well, they also tend to call for longer work 
days  and,  therefore,  a  greater  number  of  hours  worked.  For  example,  in  2014,  average 
hourly earnings and average hours worked in the resource sector were, respectively, about 
40 per cent and 25 per cent higher than the national average. Our simulation suggests that 
the commodity price shock will cause aggregate earnings to be almost 2 per cent lower than 
they otherwise would have been by the middle of this year. 
Broader income and wealth effects 
The retrenchment in the commodity sector is the first and most visible step in the adjustment 
process. Over time, the losses in income and wealth associated with the price decline  will 
spread across the country. 
As I mentioned earlier, our terms of trade improved substantially in the 10-year period before 
commodity  prices  began  to fall. We have  now  lost  about  half  of those gains.  Measured  at 
annual  rates,  this  represents  a  loss  of  more  than  $60 billion  in  national  income,  or  about 
$1,800 for every Canadian. 
This  drag  on  household  spending  was  initially  small,  because  the  restructuring  in  the 
commodity sector has been fairly concentrated and the monetary stimulus from the Bank’s 
interest rate cuts last year helped support the broader economy. But the impact of lower real 
incomes is gradually building. We expect it to become the dominant source of drag on the 
economy by 2017. As their wealth and incomes decline, households will likely restrain their 
spending and we will see lower, but still positive, consumption growth. 
How is the economy adapting? 
Now that I have given you some numbers around the impact of the oil price shock on the 
Canadian  economy,  let’s  turn  to  my  second  question:  how  long  and  what  form  the 
adjustment will take. 
It is difficult for us to be precise about the timing of the underlying shifts in the economy. But 
our best guess is that the full adjustment will take longer than two years, our normal forecast 
horizon. Having said that, we have a few clues that can help us to frame the timeline. 
First, in examining labour markets, we see an interesting development that suggests we may 
be adjusting to the economic shift more quickly than we have historically. 
In the past, regional shocks would have led to a persistent divergence in employment rates 
across  provinces.  Between  1976  and  1997,  the  average  difference  between  employment 
rates in any one province and the national rate was 5.5 percentage points. This was much 
higher than the corresponding gap in the United States. 
But  the  gap  in  Canada  has  now  shrunk  to  U.S.  levels,  below  4  percentage  points,  as  we 
explain in a staff analytical note posted on our website today.9 While this is just one indicator 
of labour mobility, the convergence suggests that Canadians have become more willing to 
                                                
9  D. Amirault and N. Rai, “Canadian Labour Market Dispersion: Mind the (Shrinking) Gap,” Staff Analytical Note 
2016–3, Bank of Canada, 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  move to where the jobs are. That may mean that regional labour markets will adjust more 
quickly to the decline in commodity prices. Indeed, we are already seeing shifts in migration 
patterns. Net interprovincial migration to Alberta reversed in the fourth quarter of 2015. At the 
same time, over the past two quarters, Ontario registered the largest inflow of interprovincial 
migrants since 2002. 
In addition, the flow of workers who were commuting from their homes in other provinces to 
Alberta has fallen sharply.10  
A second clue is the close but imperfect link between our terms of trade and the value of our 
currency.  It  is  no  surprise  that  the  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  has  fallen  along  with 
commodity  prices.  Since  late  2011,  when  some  commodity  prices  first  began  slipping,  the 
Canadian  dollar  has  lost  almost  one-third  of  its  value.  While  many  factors  influence  the 
exchange  rate,  its  depreciation,  which  will  certainly  hurt  some  businesses,  is  a  necessary 
part of the adjustment process. 
The weaker dollar acts as a buffer for Canada’s exporters. It offsets part of the drop in U.S.-
dollar commodity prices, softening the blow to the Canadian-dollar revenues of commodity 
exporters. Similarly, the depreciation boosts the Canadian-dollar revenues of non-commodity 
exporters that price their goods in U.S. dollars.11  
The weaker dollar also makes Canada’s exports more competitive. We are already seeing 
some evidence of this increased competitiveness. In particular, export categories sensitive to 
the  exchange  rate  have  performed  better  than  average.  These  categories  include  building 
materials, furniture, industrial machinery and equipment, and pharmaceuticals. The service 
sector  also  benefits.  Tourism  is  surging:  the  number  of  foreigners  travelling  to  Canada 
jumped 11 per cent in January compared with the same month last year. Film and television 
production is also enjoying a revival across the country – The Revenant was filmed here in 
Alberta.  And  in  Vancouver  more  than  350  productions  were  shot  last  year,  a  record  that 
surpassed 2014 by 40 per cent.12  
Estimates from ToTEM and other models suggest that it typically takes up to two years for 
the full effect of exchange rate movements to be felt. Since the loonie fell by roughly 15 per 
cent against the U.S. dollar in 2015, more gains are coming to the non-commodity sector, 
consistent with the notion of a two-track economy. What we are witnessing is a reallocation 
of productive resources to the non-commodity sector. 
And, of course, the resource sector is not standing still. We expect to see new efficiencies, 
further  innovation  and  shifts  in  investments.  For  example,  here  in  Alberta’s  industrial 
heartland, there are ongoing investments in upgrading and processing that will help diversify 
the mix of products from your natural resources. 
What will the landscape look like after the adjustment? 
Now, let me turn to the last question I posed at the outset: what the economic landscape is 
likely to look like after these adjustments have worked their way through. 
Again,  although  we  can’t  be  precise  about  the  timing,  we  expect  that,  several  years  from 
now, the Canadian economy will have found a new balance. Our simulation suggests that the 
share  of  the  commodity  sector  in  the  economy  will  decline  toward  its  pre-boom  level.  By 
2020,  the  sector  could  account  for  roughly  40 per  cent  of  exports,  compared  with  about 
                                                
10  In 2015, many of these commuting interprovincial workers returned to their home province. Chartered aircraft 
passenger traffic at Fort McMurray International Airport, a proxy for this trend, fell by half between 2014 and 
2015. 
11  S. S. Poloz, 7 January 2016. 
12  http://mayorofvancouver.ca/news/2015-record-year-television-and-film-vancouver. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  50 per cent in 2014. Similarly, the sector’s share of business investment could fall to 40 per 
cent, compared with 56 per cent in 2014. 
Lower commodity prices will lower incomes and are likely to lower the economy’s potential 
output.  This  is  the  result  of  a  number  of  factors,  primarily  the  drop  in  investment  in  the 
resource  sector,  but  also  the  rise  in  the  price  of  imported  capital,  which  negatively  affects 
investment in all industries. With less investment, the country’s stock of capital will be smaller 
than it otherwise would have been, lowering the economy’s productive capacity.13  
The extent to which potential GDP is permanently lower will depend on how much capacity is 
rebuilt in the non-commodity sector. As well, low oil prices could spur companies to innovate 
and achieve greater efficiencies in their production cycles. We are studying these questions 
now and will update our estimate of potential output in our April Monetary Policy Report. 
Assumptions and assessments 
While our modelling exercise laid out a plausible longer-term scenario for the economy, it is 
subject to many assumptions. Three are worth noting: (i) the magnitude – whether we have 
accurately assessed the extent of the declines in business investment; (ii) the timing – both 
with  respect  to  the  pickup  of  non-commodity  exports  and  the  reallocation  of  labour;  and 
(iii) our assumption of flat oil prices. 
Let me say a few words about our oil price assumption. 
In the near term, the risks to oil prices appear to be balanced. While elevated inventories still 
represent the main downside risk, we now have an upside risk in the form of a faster-than-
expected decline in U.S. oil production. 
In  contrast,  over  the  medium  term,  the  risks  remain  tilted  to  the  upside.  The  significant 
reductions in oil investment since late 2014 could leave future increases in global demand 
unmet, putting upward pressure on prices and drawing investment back into the sector. The 
level of prices that would balance the oil market in the medium term is still highly uncertain, 
particularly  since  technical  improvements  and  other  efficiency  gains  by  oil-producing  firms 
have lowered their costs of production. 
Moreover, as we highlighted in the January Monetary Policy Report, low oil prices make it 
more  likely  that  adverse  threshold  effects  on  economic  activity  may  occur.  If  prices  fell  to 
such  a  low  level  that  firms  struggled  to  cover  their  ongoing  costs,  consolidation  could 
accelerate, resulting in more-pronounced declines in production and weighing on the broader 
economy by hurting demand and confidence. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
Our  simulation  of  the  commodity  price  shock  is  just  one  example  of  how  we  assess  the 
various  factors  influencing  the  Canadian  economy.  Examining  the  shock  in  isolation 
enhances  our  understanding  of  its  potential  influence  on  our  outlook  for  inflation.  We 
consider this type of analysis, together with many other inputs, when we set monetary policy. 
As  we  note  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports,  we  conduct  a  rich  analysis  around  our 
projections and identify risks to the inflation outlook. This analysis acts as the foundation for 
                                                
13  The reallocation of labour across sectors will also have an impact on potential. The level of labour productivity 
in  the  commodity  sector  is  higher  than  the  average  for  the  rest  of  the  economy.  So,  in  the  near  term,  the 
reallocation  of  labour  away  from  the  commodity  sector  will  be  a  drag  on  productivity  growth.  However,  the 
non-commodity sectors of the economy have tended to have a higher rate of labour productivity growth. Thus, 
in the longer run, the reallocation may support productivity growth. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Governing  Council  to  assess  and  exercise  its  judgment  about  the  appropriate  stance  for 
monetary policy. 
Earlier this month, we left our policy rate unchanged at 0.5 per cent, since the economy was 
evolving  broadly  in  line  with  our  expectations  and  projections  set  out  in  January  –  about 
1.5 per  cent  GDP  growth  in  2016  and  2.5  per  cent  in  2017.  In  our  April  Monetary  Policy 
Report,  we  will  update  this  forecast  and  take  into  account  the  fiscal  measures  that  were 
announced last week. 
We are mindful that the changes to our economy that are under way  are, and have been, 
difficult,  particularly  here  in  Alberta.  Adjustments  to  large  negative  shocks  take  time. 
Although painful for many, the shifts are signs of a dynamic economy. 
We  are  fortunate  that  Canada’s  wealth  is  based  on  a  broad  set  of  natural  and  human 
resources and that the growth of our economy is powered by a wide range of industries. To 
make  the  most  of  our  opportunities  as  a  trading  nation,  we  need  to  let  the  adjustment 
process unfold as effectively as possible. It won’t be easy and it will take time. 
For the Bank, the best contribution we can make is to set policy that will help keep inflation 
low, stable and predictable, so that Canadians can plan and invest with confidence. And as 
business  and  community  leaders,  you  can  help  by  being  proactive  and  innovative  in  your 
respective fields. 
I would like to thank Rhys Mendes for his help in preparing this speech. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
