  Philip R Lane: Dual perspectives on the insurance sector – consumer 
protection and financial stability 
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Insurance Europe’s 
8th Annual Conference, Dublin, 25 May 2016. 
Acknowledgements: I thank Allan Kearns for his input into this speech. 
 Good  morning.  I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  Dublin  for  the  8th  Insurance  Europe 
conference.  This  event  also  marks  the  30th  anniversary  of  the  Insurance  Ireland  industry 
association. 
The  theme  of  today’s  conference  is  Serving  Our  Customer  in  Tomorrow’s  World.  As  the 
regulator of the insurance sector, the Central Bank of Ireland is continuously engaged with 
the  topics  to  be  discussed  in  today’s  panel  sessions.  In  addition,  from  a  central  banking 
perspective, the high degree of interconnectedness between the insurance sector and other 
parts of the European financial system means that we also monitor the insurance sector in 
relation to our financial stability mandate at both domestic and European levels. 
Let me share a few ideas in relation to the themes of the conference. 
The first  panel  addresses  the  impact  of  the  regulatory  environment  on  consumers.  A  well-
functioning  insurance  sector  is  essential  in  managing  the  risks  faced  by  households  and 
firms.  The  importance  of  the  insurance  sector  to  European  citizens  has  motivated  the 
introduction of a modernised regulatory framework in the form of Solvency II, with the twin 
goals of enhancing consumer protection and maintaining financial stability. 
An important property of Solvency II is that it is a maximum harmonisation regime, and so 
should  increase  supervisory  convergence  across  Europe.  In  view  of  the  high  degree  of 
cross-border  trade  in  insurance  products,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  strongly  supports 
convergence  in  supervisory  standards,  which  would  contribute  in  a  significant  way  to  the 
long-term resilience of the financial system in Ireland and Europe. 
Most of the policyholders of Irish-resident insurance firms are abroad; in the other direction, 
many Irish policyholders are covered by foreign European firms. Regardless of location, all 
customers  should  benefit from the  same  high standards  of supervision  and  should  all  rest 
assured  that  their  underwriters  are  unlikely  to  fail.  However,  much  work  remains  to  be 
completed  in  attaining  the  goal  of  consistent  supervisory  standards  across  Europe. 
Furthermore,  the  coordination  of  national  protection  schemes  for  policyholders  remains 
unsatisfactory: should an insurance firm fail, citizens are covered in full, in part or not at all, 
depending on where they are and where their insurers are regulated. Solvency II has also left 
untouched the processes, conditions and standards for authorisations. I can only encourage 
EIOPA  to  press  on  this  issue  and  ensure  that  firms  that  would  not  be  authorised  in  one 
country do not find a home in another. 
Two  of  the  panel  discussions  today  focus  on  the  customer  in  tomorrow’s  world.  Let  me 
comment  on  the  role  of  technological  innovation  in  distribution  channels.  First,  more 
widespread  deployment  of  online  distribution  channels  has  the  potential  to  reduce  costs, 
expand access to insurance products and improve consumer convenience. However, at the 
same  time,  online  distribution  requires  a  parallel  increase  in  attention  to  cyber  risk.  The 
International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  has  recently  discussed  this  topic, 
highlighting  that  the  foundation  of  the  insurance  business  is  trust,  and  that  trust  could  be 
irrevocably shaken if sensitive data were lost or claims payments disrupted. Our assessment 
at the Central Bank of Ireland is that cyber risks pose not only financial and reputational risks 
for  individual  insurance  firms  but  that  there  are  wider  consequences  for  prudential 
supervision, consumer protection and financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Second,  the  automation  of  advice  to  potential  customers  is  a  promising  development. 
However,  as  recently  highlighted  by  the  Joint  Committee  of  the  European  Supervisory 
Authorities,  there  are  pros  and  cons  to  these  tools  from  a  consumer  perspective.  The 
potential  benefits  include  lower  costs,  increased  convenience  and  greater  consistency  in 
advice. The primary disadvantage is the risk of an unsuitable final recommendation due to 
the lack of a human advisor. To represent a net gain for consumers, the design of automated 
advice systems must ensure that consumers are provided with clear, accurate and relevant 
information and recommended suitable products appropriate to their needs. The properties of 
suitability  and  transparency  are  among  the  most  important  principles  underpinning  the 
Central Bank’s consumer protection framework and are increasingly important in this period 
of rapid technological innovation. 
One  of  the  panel  sessions  will  focus  on  global  and  European  financial  stability.  In  the 
international regulatory community, there is increasing interest in the inter-relations between 
the  insurance  sector  and  the  stability  of  the  broader  financial  system.  In  one  direction, 
excessive risk taking by insurance firms can be a source of financial instability, both directly 
and  indirectly  through  the  interconnections  between  the  insurance  sector,  other  financial 
intermediaries and financial markets. In the other direction, the insurance sector can make a 
positive contribution to financial stability, given the potential complementarities between the 
balance  sheet  structure  of  the  insurance  sector  and  the  balance  sheet  structures  of  other 
sectors. 
Much  of  the  current  risk  discussion  has  focused  on  the  implications  of  a  protracted  low 
interest rate environment for the insurance sector.1 The sector needs to reflect carefully on 
its strategic response to a prolonged low interest rate environment. For instance, for those 
firms within the life sector that have traditionally included guaranteed returns to policyholders, 
there  is  clearly  a  challenge  to  this  business  model.  In  terms  of  replacing  that  business  or 
earning returns to support legacy guarantees, it may be tempting to seek returns from non-
traditional and non-insurance activities. However, this strategy has clearly been a source of 
fragility for firms in the past. 
For  non-life  insurance,  buoyant  investment  returns  have  subsidised  the  pricing  of  core 
insurance  products.  The  response  to  a  lower-yield  environment  should  not  be  to  chase 
returns  by  investing  in  ever  riskier  assets.  Rather,  the  focus  should  be  on  earning  an 
appropriate return from core underwriting activity. 
There is much in the new Solvency II framework that should allow firms to better manage 
risks  associated  with  the  low  interest  rate  environment.  In  particular,  the  own  risk  and 
solvency assessment (ORSA) process should provide a framework for enhanced corporate 
understanding of interest rate and investment risks. For regulators, understanding how the 
insurance sector is likely to be affected by a prolonged low interest rate environment is also a 
priority. Indeed, the risk posed by the low interest rate environment is the core scenario that 
is contained within this year’s EIOPA stress test. 
Finally,  I  note  that  there  is  also  a  panel  session  on  the  global  economic  shift  towards 
emerging economies. Judging by the disparity in insurance penetration rates, there appears 
to  be  significant  medium-term  growth  opportunities  in  emerging  economies.  To  the  extent 
that  the  global  growth  in  the  insurance  sector  is  partly  served  by  an  expansion  in  the 
international  activities  of  European  insurance  firms,  the  scope  for  scale  economies  and 
diversification  need  to  be  balanced  by  appropriate  management  of  some  key  risk  factors. 
These include: the limits of managerial control over wide geographic spans; the complexities 
of  local  tax,  social  security  and  legal  systems;  and  the  correlations  between  underwriting 
returns  in  a  given  region  and  other  exposures  such  as  the  performance  of  various  asset 
                                                
1  The implications of climate risk for the insurance sector is another prominent topic. I do not address this issue 
today. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  classes and the sources of equity and debt funding. The insurance sector can learn much 
from the storied history of international banking in negotiating the opportunities and pitfalls 
associated with financial globalisation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
