  Dimitar Bogov: Economic and financial cycle spillovers – reconsidering 
domestic and cross border channels and policy responses 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
at  the  5th  Annual  Research  Conference  “Economic  and  financial  cycle  spillovers  – 
reconsidering domestic and cross border channels and policy responses”, Skopje, 7–8 April 
2016. 
 Dear Governors, Your Excellences, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Dear guests, 
Let me wish you a warm welcome to our fifth Annual Research Conference that we usually 
host  to  mark  the  anniversary  of  the  country’s  monetary  independence.  This  year’s 
Conference is a kind of a small jubilee considering the fact that for five consecutive years we 
have been inviting policy makers and researchers from the region and wider to discuss main 
policy  issues  and  research  questions,  creating  useful  interaction  and  mutual  knowledge 
increment, on which we are very proud. In addition, this year’s Conference coincides with yet 
another  great  anniversary  –  celebration  of  70  years  of  central  banking  activities  in  the 
Republic  of  Macedonia  and  the  conference  is  among  the  events  that  mark  this  immense 
anniversary throughout the year. 
As  you  probably  noticed,  this  year  we  have  chosen  quite  comprehensive  and  challenging 
Conference  topic:  Economic  and  Financial  Cycle  Spillovers:  Reconsidering  Domestic  and 
Cross Border Channels and Policy Responses. Although not a new issue, it has been fully 
indorsed  in  the  last  global  crisis  and  considered  to  be  one  of  its  main  lessons  that  is  still 
widely explored in the central banking and academic community. 
In dealing with global and domestic economic and financial cycle spillovers in the last years 
of turbulent global environment, central banks have broadened their objectives by including 
the financial stability goal, as well as many creative innovations in their toolkit. In a low or 
zero interest rate environment, the monetary authorities across the world turn to the use of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  and  obviously  now,  several  years  after  the 
outburst  of  the  crisis,  it  is  still  an  ongoing  practice  for  most  central  banks.  While  still 
examining their usefulness, it is difficult to discuss their exit dynamics, even in the case of the 
FED, although its monetary policy normalization started at the end of the last year. Anyway, it 
is still debated whether the unconventional instruments and tools created during the crisis will 
become  an  integral  part  of  the  conventional  monetary  policy  framework.  Probably  this  will 
depend on country specific circumstances and individual contribution of these newly created 
instruments and measures in fulfilling policy objectives on price and financial stability. Macro-
prudential tools have also been widely used for dealing with specific features of the financial 
cycles in the last period, aiming to boost financial soundness or provide positive feedback to 
the  economic  recovery  that  has  certainly  expanded  the  horizon  of  their  expected  impacts 
compared  to  the  past.  Policy  measures  aimed  to  support  lending,  especially  in  the 
economies with strong negative loop between private sector leverage and banks’ credit risk, 
will probably stay effective for a reasonable time span. The capacity of economies to cope 
with these headwinds related to the financial cycle recovery will rely upon providing resilient 
policy framework and keeping sufficient policy buffers in all segments of the economy. 
Obviously, many aspects on the economic and financial cycles have already been observed, 
with even more still awaiting to be explored. Our latest experience is mainly related to the 
bust of the cycles, however we need to know if the size of spillovers or effectiveness of our 
instruments will be the same in the boom stage of the cycle. The seminal work by Borio from 
2012,  has  already  provided  some  stylized  facts  regarding frequency,  duration  and  leading 
indicators of the cycles, incorporating the period of the last global crisis. However, we need 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
to disentangle country’s specific features of the cycles as a basis for the policy mix design. In 
analyzing  financial  cycle,  it  is  necessary  to  go  deeper  into  bank’s  balance  sheet,  and 
therewith to head towards data granularity as an important platform to better assess banks’ 
risk  attitude  as  well  as  to  appropriately  link  banks’  specifics  and  their  market  behavior. 
Consequently,  increasing  knowledge  of  economic  and  financial  cycles  requires  stronger 
modeling  abilities,  enlargement  of  the  analytical  base  and  combining  information  of  both 
domestic and cross border spillover channels, as a floor for adequate policy responses. 
Touching  upon  the  issue  of  economic  and  financial  cycle  spillovers  in  the  case  of 
Macedonian  economy,  I  could  refer  to  the  following  points.  Namely,  during  the  last  global 
crisis,  our  economy  followed  relatively  quick  and  steady  recovery  from  the  trough  at  the 
beginning of the crisis that was supported by the financial cycle pick up. The banking sector 
has  proven  to  be  sound  and  stable  all  these  turbulent  years,  with  slowdown  of  lending 
relative  to  the  pre-crisis  period,  yet  with  moderate  credit  growth  rates  supportive  to  the 
economic  rebound.  A  related  point  to  consider  is  the  solid  ground  of  the  banking  system 
taking into account not only the high capital adequacy and liquidity, but also the relatively 
moderate  level  of  non-performing  loans,  especially  compared  to  the  peer  countries  of  the 
region.  Besides  the  high  foreign  capital  in  the  banking  system,  cross  border  effects  have 
remained  contained,  mainly  due  to  the  simple  framework  of  banking  operations  and  strict 
banking  regulations.  Last  but  not  least,  sound  economic  recovery  also  transmits  positive 
spillovers  to  the  financial  sector  developments.  Regarding  the  economic  cycle  upward 
movements, we should underline the strong fundamentals of the Macedonian economy that 
have been obviously fighting off challenges from the trembling global environment as well as 
domestic  political  instability  since  the  beginning  of  the  previous  year.  The  main  reasons 
behind these economic performances were the structural changes in the economy in recent 
years,  which  supported  export  diversification  and  reduction  of  unemployment.  Improved 
country’s economic fundamentals are expected to continue providing support to the financial 
cycle picking up, although both domestic and external risks are still being present. Regarding 
policy implementation, besides monetary policy measures, we have also used non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  that  are  still  in  place,  and  additionally  in  several  occasions  we 
have modified some of the prudential measures for further strengthening of financial stability. 
Managing  economic  and  financial  cycle  spillovers  and  putting  them  on  the  right  track,  go 
beyond  monetary  policy  scope  of  operation  and  refer to the  overall  macroeconomic  policy 
mix.  Additionally,  international  developments  and  regulation  could  also  affect  domestic 
cyclical  movements.  Nowadays,  we  live  in  a  world  of  ongoing  recovery  of  the  advanced 
economies  from  the  long-lasting  crisis,  rising  vulnerabilities  of  emerging  economies, 
increasing  and  unpredictable  volatility  of  the  international  financial  markets  and,  on  top  of 
that,  quite  persisting  geo-political  risks. In  this  complex  environment,  we  need  to  continue 
with internal policy coordination and international cooperation. 
Therefore, we have been discussing here today quite comprehensive economic phenomena 
that require multiple angles of observation and profound analysis. Although I believe that the 
research papers that are going to be presented today will shed light on some of the issues 
that  I  have  mentioned,  this  will  definitely  be  a  challenge  for  the  researchers  in  the  period 
ahead, too. As policy makers, speaking today, many years after the onset of the global crisis, 
we can probably say that many policy challenges are already behind us, but still there are 
more to come. Therefore, we need to keep on building our institutional capacity and research 
skills and I believe that today’s conference, as a continuation of our previous conferences, 
will additionally contribute to this goal, not only for us, but also for the participating central 
banks and other institutions. 
I look forward to yet another successful conference, interesting discussions and useful policy 
messages! 
Thank you for the attention! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
