  Claudia Buch: Focus on micro data – potential benefits for the industry? 
Speech by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Eighth 
ECB  Statistics  Conference  “Central  bank  statistics:  moving  beyond  the  aggregates”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 July 2016. 
 I would like to thank Robert Kirchner and Marit Wehner for their valuable contributions. 
Focus on micro data: potential benefits for the industry? 
1. 
This session addresses two issues that are closely interlinked. The first concerns the costs 
and  benefits  of  using  micro  data  in  statistics  in  general  and  in  central  bank  statistics  in 
particular.  The  second  deals  with  the  benefits  of  micro  data  for  the  industry.  These  two 
questions  cannot  be  answered  independently  of  each  other.  Central  bank  statistics  are  a 
public  good.  Therefore,  the  costs  and  benefits  of  different  types  of  statistics  need  to  be 
assessed from the perspective of society as a whole. 
The financial industry is a key stakeholder in this process. The quality of the data reported 
hinges  on  the  reporting  mechanisms  employed  by  the  industry,  and  data  that  are  not 
regularly kept up to date by financial institutions may be of limited value for central banks, 
too. To a large extent, this aligns the interests of central banks and the reporting parties. 
But,  of  course,  public  and  private  interests  may  differ  when  it  comes  to  aspects  such  as 
reporting costs. While reporting costs need to be balanced against the benefits of statistics, 
some  costs  for  the  industry  are  inevitable  in  order  to  improve  monitoring  of  the  financial 
system and reduce the likelihood of costly financial crises occurring in the future. 
In  the  following,  the  traditional  statistical  compilation  process  is  compared  with  the  new, 
microdata-based approach. This sheds light on the large potential of micro data, not only for 
the creation of analytical benefits, but also for cost-savings. 
Central banking statistics from the traditional “value chain” to micro data 
2. 
In  the  system  of  official  statistics  that  has  evolved  over  time,  reporting  forms  are  used  to 
obtain information, which is used to compile specific statistics in a pre-defined aggregation 
form.  The  reports  are  collected,  checked  for  plausibility,  supplemented  by  estimates  for 
missing data, extrapolated if need be, and then consolidated across pre-defined dimensions. 
It is often neither legally nor technically possible to use the underlying micro data later on. 
Firms  whose  reports  have  been  included  in  these  calculations  can  use  the  aggregated 
statistics to analyse the macroeconomic environment, for instance. However, focused studies 
on specific market segments are generally not feasible. 
Micro  data  initiatives  are  based  on  a  fundamentally  different  concept:  data  should  only  be 
collected  once  and  be  used  to  compile  various  statistics.  This  approach  entails  initial 
investment costs – for example, investment in information technology and training staff – as 
well  as  current  expenditure  for  data  collection  and  program  maintenance.  However,  this 
information also has a much greater scope of use. Compared with traditional statistics, micro 
data offer a range of advantages for various user groups. 
What are the benefits of using micro data? 
3. 
Over  the  past  decade,  the  availability  and  use  of  micro  data  have  revolutionized  empirical 
work  on  financial  systems  (Deutsch  Bundesbank  2015a).  Technological  progress  has 
contributed  to  improved  access  to  micro  data  and  to  improved  handling  of  large,  granular 
datasets. Empirical methods that allow heterogeneity across suppliers and users of financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
services to be explored have become readily available. Researchers both inside and outside 
policy institutions are highly skilled and use these improved infrastructures for their research 
and day-to-day analytical work. 
This  work  has  shown  that  aggregate  developments  cannot  be  fully  understood  without 
exploring the rich sources of heterogeneity shaping the response of market participants to 
shocks  and  regulations.  Systemic  risk,  for  example,  is  defined  as  the  contribution  of  the 
distress of individual financial institutions (or a group of financial institutions) to overall stress 
in the financial system, with adverse repercussions on the real economy. The contribution of 
individual financial institutions to systemic risk is higher, the greater the risk of an individual 
institution, the larger an institution is (too big to fail), the more connected an institution is (too 
connected to fail), or the more financial institutions are exposed to common risk factors (too 
many to fail). This definition shows that systemic risk cannot be analyzed without making use 
of detailed and granular data on financial institutions (Deutsche Bundesbank 2015c). 
Similarly,  analysis  of  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  of  the  effects  of  monetary 
policy on risk taking has been changed fundamentally by the availability of micro data and 
the parallel development of empirical models that allow these data to be analyzed (Deutsche 
Bundesbank 2015b). These methods enable drivers of demand and supply to be identified 
and the heterogeneous responses to monetary policy shocks of different types of financial 
institutions (small versus large, domestic versus foreign) to be studied. New methods permit 
a much more detailed insight into the workings of financial and money markets than analyses 
using aggregate time series. 
An improved understanding of (risks to) financial stability and of the transmission of monetary 
policy  is  a  clear  benefit  that  the  use  of  micro  data  brings  to  central  banks.  This  enables 
central banks to better perform their core tasks – maintaining price stability and contributing 
to  financial  stability.  In  this  sense,  micro  data  benefit  both,  society  as  a  whole  as  well  as 
financial institutions that operate in a more stable environment. 
An additional advantage of an increased use of micro data is that these data can be used for 
multiple  purposes.  Traditional  statistics  tend  to  serve  specific  purposes,  such  as  the 
construction of aggregate indicators for statistics on the financial account. If new analytical 
questions arise, these (aggregate) data often do not fit the purpose. Analysis then has to rely 
on information which is not really targeted, or additional surveys have to be conducted. In 
addition to being costly, these surveys often have the disadvantage that they do not allow 
developments to be tracked over time and that they survey only a sample of firms or banks 
and are thus not very representative. Using micro data that have already been collected, it is 
comparatively simple to respond to a new request by carrying out an appropriate aggregation 
of the data. 
Looking  ahead,  the  microdata  approach  to  compiling  statistics  may  even  replace  the 
traditional one, leading to cost-savings on the side of the reporting agents. In the traditional 
system,  data  has  to  be  aggregated  and  reported  separately  for  each  dataset.  The  cost  of 
aggregation is borne by the reporting agent. According to the microdata approach, reporting 
agents  have  to  send  their  data  only  once.  Everything  else  is  done  by  the  central  bank. 
Hence, the costs of aggregation are passed on to the central bank. 
That is a considerable advantage for the industry, but is that everything? Is it not the case 
that  the  industry  not  only  benefits  from  cost  savings  but  can  also  make  direct  use  of  the 
micro  data?  Can  statistics  be  jointly  compiled  by  the  industry  and  the  central  bank  on  a 
voluntary basis in order to increase benefits and reduce costs? 
This is not a purely hypothetical question. The Bundesbank’s corporate financial statement 
statistics, which contains data on German non-financial corporations, are based on several 
sources, a key one being a data pool with financial statements provided on a voluntary basis 
by credit institutions and financial service providers. The individual institutions cannot access 
the micro data of the other parties. However, they receive a very wide range of statistics on 
key  ratios,  broken  down  by  sector  and  size  category,  which  they  can  use  as  part  of  their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
credit assessment of firms or for sectoral analyses. For this reason, industry representatives 
have  started  to  voice  concerns  about  the  collection  of  statistics  which  are  insufficiently 
comprehensive and that cannot be used for detailed market analysis. 
What are the challenges and the costs of using micro data? 
4. 
The above examples may suggest that the advent of micro data has moved us into a brave 
new  world  in  which  we  have  better  information,  better  analyses,  and  a  mutually  beneficial 
exchange  of  information.  But  any  cost-benefit  analysis  must,  of  course,  also  address  the 
challenges and the costs that are associated with the use of micro data. Among those, data 
confidentiality and the costs of upgrading and maintaining IT systems feature prominently. 
Data confidentiality and data protection 
a) 
The  traditional  “aggregate”  statistics  that  central  banks  use  and  produce  generally  do  not 
raise  data  confidentiality  issues.  Whenever  a  sufficient  number  of  observations  (typically: 
three) have been aggregated, the behavior of individual firms, households and banks cannot 
be tracked from specific data points. 
Micro  data,  by  contrast,  almost  always  raise  confidentiality  issues  that  may  differ 
substantially across jurisdictions. For the United States, information about the profitability and 
the  balance  sheets  of  commercial  banks  has  been  available  for  many  years  in  the  “Call 
Reports” that are published by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. These data have been 
used  for  many  important  studies  on  the  US  banking  industry.  It  would  not  be  possible  to 
publish such data in many other jurisdictions. “Feedback loops” to the industry or other users 
– which would allow the behavior of individual firms or competitors to be identified – are not 
permitted. Perhaps even more importantly, micro data cannot be merged across jurisdictions, 
which complicates comparisons of analytical work for different countries. 
In order to overcome this obstacle, new analytical and research networks have emerged that 
allow information and research results to be exchanged across countries without sharing the 
underlying (confidential) data. One example is the International Banking Research Network. 
Established in 2012, the IBRN brings together researchers from more than 20 central banks 
around the world – in addition to international organizations such as the BIS, the ECB and 
the IMF – in order to analyze current issues pertaining to international banking. The different 
country  teams  use  comparable,  country-level  data  on  cross-border  banking  activities  and 
common  methodological  tools  to  analyze  issues  such  as  the  transmission  of  liquidity  risk, 
spillovers of (macro)prudential policies, or the cross-border effects of monetary policy. As the 
studies use a common research methodology, the results are comparable across countries 
and can be analysed using meta-analyses (Buch and Goldberg 2015). 
In each national jurisdiction, additional technical solutions are available that facilitate the use 
of micro data without compromising on data confidentiality. The Bundesbank, for example, 
has  recently  established  a  Research  Data  and  Service  Centre  (RDSC),  which  provides 
researchers inside and outside the Bank with access to its micro data. 
In general, the more detailed the data are, the more restrictive is the data access offered by 
the  RDSC.  Outside  Bundesbank  premises  (off-site),  only  anonymised  data  specially 
prepared for academic research purposes (scientific use files) from the Panel on Household 
Finances study – a representative survey on the structure and composition of households’ 
wealth – may be used. 
Besides  the  Panel  on  Household  Finances,  the  RDSC  provides  anonymised  datasets  on 
banks,  securities,  investment  funds,  enterprises  and  households,  all  of  which  can  be 
accessed at dedicated researcher workstations inside the Bundesbank. For some datasets, 
remote  execution  is  possible,  too.  External  researchers  have  to  send  in  their  syntax  files, 
which will be processed by the RDSC staff. For both of these means of access, the RDSC 
staff screen the output files, preserve anonymity, and send them to the external researcher. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
 
The range of methods for access to data satisfies researchers’ need for the rapid provision of 
high-quality  data,  while  at  the  same  time  keeping  sensitive  information  confidential.  The 
Bundesbank is thus adhering to an established global standard: it is ensured that analytical 
findings  that  are  to  be  published  are  anonymised  such  that  no  inferences  may  be  drawn 
regarding  particular  individuals  or  enterprises.  The  international  standard  may  be  briefly 
summarised  as  follows:  “Safe  People,  Safe  Projects,  Safe  Settings,  Safe  Outputs,  Safe 
Data”. 
Investment in (IT) infrastructure 
b) 
Investment in IT infrastructure is a part of the construction of every new statistics (Schubert 
2015).  The  procedures  for  processing  micro  data,  which  are  only  collected  once,  can  be 
standardised to a greater extent than is the case for the individual silo procedures used to 
date.  Accordingly,  the  multi-purpose  approach  will  make  it  easier  for  both,  data  collecting 
authorities and reporting parties, to develop integrated systems. Two initiatives of the ESCB 
should be mentioned in this context: 
The  Banks’  Integrated  Reporting  Dictionary  (BIRD)  is  a  document  which  helps  to 
1. 
develop  a  standardised  model  for  organising  the  banks’  internal  data  warehouses  in  an 
integrated way, and for applying the transformation rules in the reports banks have to submit. 
The dictionary can be used on a voluntary basis. The advantages are a higher data quality, 
more  efficient  production  of  reports,  more  consistent  data,  a  univocal  interpretation,  and 
clarity of regulations. 
2. 
The European Reporting Framework (ERF) should be of great significance for the 
data collecting authorities in helping to ensure that data only have to be collected once, using 
a  harmonised  procedure  for  different  purposes.  The  framework  will  cover  most  reporting 
requirements of the ECB and the European Banking Authority (EBA). The data reported in 
this framework will form a basis for harmonised production of secondary statistics. 
How to make better use of micro data 
5. 
The use of micro data in central bank statistics has many potential upsides, but providing and 
maintaining the necessary (IT) infrastructure also entails costs. As things stand, the optimal 
point of balancing costs and benefits has probably not yet been reached, and there are four 
key areas for improvement: 
1. 
Realigning  micro  data  with  existing  statistics:  It  will  be  possible  to  reap  the  full 
benefits  of  micro  data  in  terms  of  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  reporting  only  if 
there  is  close  coordination  between  the  scope  of  existing  statistics  and  newly 
collected  micro  data.  This  may,  in  some  instances,  require  the  scope  of  existing 
statistics to be adjusted, and it requires detailed planning when designing new data 
requirements. 
Improving the technical infrastructure: Statistical reporting systems can be costly if 
they  are  not  adequately  integrated  and  linked  to  existing  IT  systems.  Moreover, 
adjusting systems ex post is costly. The sooner potential uses for new statistics are 
known and the better reporting systems are aligned with existing IT infrastructures, 
the lower will be the costs of compliance and reporting. 
Improving feedback loops: Setting up and improving feedback loops not only require 
close  coordination  and  communication  between  central  banks  and  commercial 
banks supplying statistical information. It also requires close cooperation within the 
private sector, involving potential suppliers of data and users of information provided 
in feedback loops. To compare the firms’ own data to patterns in market data, firms’ 
reporting  entities  (for  example,  the  accounting  department)  and  analysts  need  to 
exchange  information.  In  particular,  the  quality  of  the  statistics  is  likely  to  be 
enhanced if the reported results are analysed by the enterprise itself. 
2. 
3. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 4. 
 
 
Improving  dialogue  with  the  industry  and  academia:  Efficient  designs  of  data 
requirements,  IT  systems,  and  feedback  loops  require  good  dialogue  between 
central  banks  and  data  providers  in  the  industry.  At  the  same  time,  fostering  the 
dialogue with academia can help improving analytical systems and exploit statistics 
to the best possible degree. 
References 
 
Buch, C.M., and L. Goldberg (2015), Mini-symposium on international banking, IMF 
Economic Review, Vol 63, No 3, pp 375–376. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2015a),  Microdata  –  paradigm  shift  in  central  banks’ 
statistics, Annual Report 2015, Frankfurt a.M., pp 47–59. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank (2015b),  Effects  of  monetary  policy  on  risk  taking,  Monthly 
Report, March 2015, pp 50–54. 
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2015c),  Micro  data  and  macroprudential  policy,  Financial 
Stability Review 2015, pp 80–81. 
Schubert,  A.,  (2015).  Data  as  a  core  central  banking  asset  –  The  strategy  of  the 
ECB,  Presentation  at  the  Big  data  workshop,  Sveriges  Riksbank,  9  September 
2015. 
 
 
The statistical value chain: traditional system 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
     