  Luis M Linde: Stability and recovery in the euro area 
Speech by  Mr Luis  M  Linde, Governor of the  Bank of Spain, at the opening of the Global 
Forum on Engineering and Public Works, organised by the Fundación Caminos (Association 
of Civil Engineers), Santander, 6 July 2016. 
 I would first like to thank the Association of Civil Engineers, the Fundación Caminos and its 
Chairman  for  kindly  inviting  me  to  take  part  in  the  opening  of  this  Global  Forum  on 
Engineering  and  Public  Works.  You  are  about  to  spend  two  days  debating  various  issues 
relating  to  a  sector  of  activity  as  important,  or  even  as  decisive,  for  economic  activity  and 
growth  as  that  of  investment  in  public  works  and  infrastructure,  this  being  all  the  more  so 
given the current state of the European economy. 
The result of the recent referendum in the United Kingdom illustrates the complexity of the 
present situation for the European Union and the euro area. 
Before this referendum, the macroeconomic outlook for the euro area was for stabilisation of 
economic growth at around 1.6% in 2016 and 1.7% in 2017 and 2018. The balance of risks, 
although  holding  on  a  downward  trend  given  the  existence  of  various  contingencies 
(including the UK referendum), also showed a somewhat better balance in anticipation of a 
pick-up  in  the  growth  and  inflation  outlook  on  the  back  of  the  latest  monetary  policy 
measures.  However  the  unexpected  referendum  result  in  favour  of  leaving  the  EU  has 
impinged strongly on the financial markets and it is still too early to gauge how the stability 
and recovery of the euro area will be affected. 
The global Great Recession and sovereign crisis combined to make the past decade that of 
the lowest growth of the euro area since the Second World War. It is what the International 
Monetary Fund has so graphically summarised with the expression “too slow for too long”. At 
the same time, inflation has remained far from the medium-term monetary policy target. 
The  exceptionality  and  nature  of  the  imbalances  built  up,  particularly  the  high  private  and 
public  indebtedness,  not  only  hinder  the  ability  of  economies  to  grow  and  reduce  their 
unemployment  levels,  but  also  limit  the  room  for  manoeuvre  of  countercyclical  economic 
policies,  at  least  within  their  conventional  framework.  This  has  led  the  European  Central 
Bank to assume leadership in the response to the crisis. 
The magnitude of the structural challenges facing the euro area is notable. Some are due to 
design  failures  in  the  current  operational  framework  of  the  Monetary  Union  and  of  the 
European Union itself, and others to the absence of a sufficient will to press for reform, all 
failures  and  absences  that  have  eroded  European  citizens’  confidence  in  the  integration 
process. Against this background, I would like to focus my comments on the difficulties facing 
economic policy as it attempts to put the euro area recovery on a firm footing. 
First, I feel that the ECB deserves recognition for having been the European institution that 
provided  the  quickest  and  the  most  ambitious  response  to  the  crisis.  It  assumed,  in 
exceptional circumstances, a key role in vanquishing doubts as to the continuity of the euro, 
in  underpinning  the  recovery  and,  subsequently,  in  combating  the  risks  derived  from  the 
current situation of near-zero or even negative inflation rates. Notably, the ECB’s unique role 
as the monetary authority of various states and economies did not weaken its resolve as it 
pressed ahead with its four broad lines of action: 
First,  key  policy  rates  were  reduced  almost  to  the  bottom  of  the  possible  range.  Thus  the 
marginal deposit facility rate, which had been negative since 2014, stood at –0.4% in March 
this year. In the current context of abundant liquidity, this rate is a key reference in monetary 
policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Second,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  strengthened  its  communication  policy  through  the 
publication of forward guidance. 
Third,  the  liquidity-providing  instruments  used  since  2008  were  adapted  to  the  new 
circumstances.  In  mid-2014  longer-term  refinancing  operations  were  commenced  with  the 
specific  objective  of  stimulating  credit  expansion,  i.e.  making  access  by  banks  to  very 
long-term funding from the ECB conditional on them granting credit to households and non-
financial corporations. In March it was decided to extend this instrument to 2017. 
And  fourth,  since  2014  the  ECB  has  been  implementing  a  quantitative  easing  programme 
entailing the large-scale purchase of private and public assets which, in its first two years of 
application, will reach an amount equivalent to 17% of total euro area GDP. 
At present the purchase of assets under this programme covers nearly the whole range of 
marketable securities eligible as collateral in Eurosystem operations: secured bonds issued 
by  banks;  securitisations  whose  underlying  assets  are  loans  to  the  non-financial  private 
sector;  public  debt  of  the  central  and  regional  governments;  supranational  agencies  and 
institutions; and, more recently, non-bank corporate bonds. Since April this year the ECB has 
been  purchasing  €80  billion  per  month  of  these  securities  and  the  total  amount  of  the 
portfolio built up for monetary policy purposes now exceeds €1.2 trillion. 
I think it pertinent to add three additional comments on the measures set in train by the ECB: 
The first is that they are no different from those adopted by other large central banks. Thus, 
for  example,  the  key  policy  rate  is  now  also  negative  in  countries  like  Japan,  Sweden, 
Denmark  and  Switzerland.  Also,  asset  purchase  programmes  and  the  strengthening  of 
liquidity provision are instruments shared with other G7 central banks, while the publication 
of forward guidance also forms part of the Federal Reserve’s toolkit. 
The second comment relates to potential undesirable side effects which these non-standard 
policies  may  have  on  financial  stability,  such  as  the  overvaluation  of  certain  assets  or 
downward  pressure  on  banking  sector  profitability.  In  this  connection,  it  is  advisable  to 
specifically  monitor  the  segments  at  risk  and,  if  necessary,  activate  macro-prudential 
measures. 
The third and last comment relates to the effectiveness of the measures adopted by the ECB 
over the last few years. Our latest Annual Report specifically devoted a chapter to analysing 
this matter. 
The Banco de España’s analysis concludes that monetary policy has contributed decisively 
to easing the credit conditions of euro area households and firms, improving the conditions of 
access  to  and  cost  of  bank  credit  and  significantly  reducing  the  degree  of  financial 
fragmentation reached during the sovereign debt crisis between 2011 and 2013. 
Bank lending rates have reached record lows. Surveys on access to financing by small and 
medium-sized enterprises, which are highly dependent on bank credit, reveal that these firms 
have benefited particularly from the improved credit conditions. 
Our estimates suggest that the package of monetary policy measures adopted by the ECB 
Governing Council since mid-2014 has had a cumulative effect in 2015–2016 for the whole of 
the  euro  area  of  1.4  percentage  points  on  GDP  and  of  1.2  percentage  points  on  prices. 
These figures are similar in Spain. 
However, these positive results cannot give rise to complacency. 
The risks of de-anchoring of inflation expectations remain a cause for concern. It is true that 
the sharp fall in oil prices since mid-2014 has exerted downward pressure on inflation, but it 
is  no  less  true  that  weak  domestic  demand  has  played  a  vital  role,  keeping  core  inflation 
below  1%  over  the  last two  years.  Inflation  expectation indicators  also remain  low  over  all 
horizons, far from the ECB’s 2% benchmark. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
However,  it  must  be  emphasised  that  monetary  policy’s  ability  to  address  the  challenges 
posed by a situation such as that we face today is not without limits. Laying the foundations 
for  a  sound  and  long-lasting  recovery  in  activity,  investment  and  employment  requires  an 
approach  in  concert  with  other  economic  policies,  especially  fiscal  policy,  along  with 
institutional  reform,  labour  and  product  market  reforms  and  strengthened  European 
governance. 
Thus, according to their individual circumstances, euro area countries should use the room 
for  manoeuvre  provided  for  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  to  bolster  aggregate  demand 
and growth in activity. 
Admittedly,  in  many  cases,  the  precarious  state  of  public  finances  leaves  little  room  for 
stimulus  measures,  such  as  tax  cuts  or  higher  public  spending,  especially  because  the 
countries  with  most  spare  capacity  are  also  those  with  the  highest  levels  of  public  debt. 
However,  fiscal  policy’s  contribution  to  growth  is  not  only  determined  by  revenue  and 
expenditure  levels,  but  also  by  their  composition.  In  that  respect,  there  is  some  scope 
(broader in some countries than in others) for a shift in the tax structure towards taxes that 
are less distortionary and more favourable to growth. 
A  further  objective  is  to  make  public  expenditure  more  efficient  and  direct  it  to  those 
components that are more favourable to growth. In particular, public investment should be 
boosted,  especially  in  infrastructure,  an  area  in  which  various  countries  that  have  fiscal 
space  have  built  up  a  considerable  investment  deficit  in  the  past.  Those  countries  could 
improve  their  potential  growth,  given  the  positive  correlation  between  this  type  of  public 
expenditure  and  productivity  (at  least  when  investment  projects  are  efficiently  selected, 
designed and implemented) and, at the same time, support the recovery in the euro area as 
a whole in the short term. 
All in all, the coordination of fiscal policies should be reinforced, to encourage the countries 
that have fiscal space to use it, while those that have higher debt levels continue with their 
fiscal consolidation. 
In  the  medium  term,  as  indicated  in  the  Five  Presidents’  Report  of  June  2015,  a  fiscal 
capacity  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  needs  to  be  developed,  to  prevent  overburdening 
monetary policy at times, such as now, of major economic difficulties. In the absence of more 
ambitious mechanisms, it would be advisable to reinforce the instruments already available, 
such as the European Investment Plan (the so-called Juncker Plan). 
Redirecting unused structural funds towards that Plan could help to launch projects that are 
unable  to  find  funding  in  the  present  uncertain  environment  and  to  trigger  productive 
investment, which continues to show signs of weakness in the euro area as a whole. 
In the more medium term, the combination of negative demographics, low productivity growth 
and  high  levels  of  public  and  private  debt  constrains  the  euro  area’s  ability  to  regain  pre-
crisis  growth  rates,  creating  a  breeding  ground  for  disillusionment  with  and  distrust  of  the 
European project. It is, therefore, essential that governments revive the reform momentum, 
to  optimise  the  working  of  production  factors  and  product  markets,  improve  the  business 
environment and complete the euro area governance framework. 
Important  labour  market  reforms  have  been  undertaken  in  recent  years,  especially  in  the 
countries hardest hit by the crisis. Empirical evidence shows the positive impact that those 
reforms have had on growth and employment. But preventing high unemployment rates from 
becoming entrenched and long-term unemployment from growing remain a priority. 
Where least progress is perceived is perhaps in reform of the product and service markets. 
Recent  experience  shows  that  it  is  important  to  implement  the  reform  agenda  in  the  right 
order, since early reforms, tending to enhance competition, may be vital to ensure that labour 
market reforms have the desired positive effects. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 remove  administrative  barriers  and 
 
 
In various euro area countries, product market reforms should aim to improve the business 
environment, 
increase  competition.  Revamped 
insolvency  proceedings  would  help  to  improve  management  of  the  loan  write-offs  that 
currently place such a heavy burden on banks’ balance sheets. Insolvency proceedings, if 
well designed, can be an efficient way to reallocate resources to sectors and firms that offer 
higher growth potential. 
In the case of services, European Commission studies suggest that full implementation of the 
Services Directive would deliver significant productivity gains and growth potential. Efficiency 
gains may also be achieved through the creation of a single energy market. Regarding the 
free movement of persons, we should be aware of the risk of the spread of an uncoordinated 
response that may ultimately fragment the Schengen area. 
The introduction of reforms and deepening of the single market are clearly crucial to achieve 
the  structural  convergence  needed  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  euro  area  and  make 
further progress towards a more robust monetary union. 
Our aim is to achieve sustainable activity and a recovery in employment, while maintaining 
the  essential  bases  of  the  welfare  state  which  is  naturally  one  of  the  pillars  of  the 
construction of Europe. Clearly the result of the referendum held on 23 June in the United 
Kingdom  is a  major  setback  along that  road,  with  consequences  for  the  medium  and  long 
term  that  are  still  difficult  to  gauge  but  which,  in  any  event,  obliges  all  of  us,  economic 
agents,  citizens  and  governments  to  reflect  on  the  future  of  the  European  Union  and  its 
governance. 
In light of the uncertainties unfolding in this new scenario, it is now more important than ever 
to  achieve  sufficient  and  sustainable  economic  growth  that  will  boost  income  and 
employment. 
The message reiterated by the ECB over the last two years at least is that monetary policy 
cannot be the only economic policy instrument. Monetary policy is no substitute for reforms 
designed to improve competition and the functioning of markets, nor can it directly help to 
improve the quality of fiscal policy or improve governance at the European institutions. 
Together with the continued need for reforms implemented in the right order, so as to take 
advantage  of  the  synergies  that  may  be  obtained,  for  instance,  from  a  combination  of 
structural reforms and monetary policy, political and institutional stability are clearly essential. 
In that respect, it must be admitted that the latest developments in the European Union have 
not been particularly favourable. However, it is also true that in recent years the European 
Union,  its  institutions,  and  most  certainly  the  ECB,  have  tackled  serious  difficulties  –  the 
sovereign debt crisis, the euro crisis and now the UK crisis are all fine examples – and this 
instils us with confidence that we will also overcome this situation and set the EU economy 
back on track for sustainable growth. 
Thank you very much. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
