  Mugur Isărescu: Transition – how to secure a stronger economic future 
for the constituency? 
Speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, in the panel on 
“Transition: How to Secure a Stronger Economic Future for the Constituency?”, during the 
annual meeting of the IMF and World Bank Constituency, Kyiv, Ukraine, 4 June 2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In my address I would like to focus on the challenges in conducting monetary policy in a way 
that will contribute to securing a stronger economic future for countries in our constituency. 
Obviously, my account is shaped by Romania’s experience, but I hope it will still keep you 
interested, as it may be relevant for other small to medium-sized emerging economies. 
Brief account of monetary policy regimes in Romania 
1. 
At the time when the National Bank of Romania had to choose a strategy for conducting its 
monetary policy, i.e. in the early nineties, monetary targeting was actually the only feasible 
option. Not only did the low forex reserves preclude a fixed exchange rate arrangement, but, 
even  if  possible,  the  alternative  was  not  suitable  given  the  widening  external  imbalance. 
However,  by  the  end  of  the  decade,  monetary  targeting  had  reached  its  operational  limits 
given the break in the relation between monetary aggregates and inflation, a phenomenon 
which matched developments elsewhere in the world. 
At that point, we took into account pegging the exchange rate, but neither the hard nor the 
soft  version  was  deemed  appropriate. On  one  hand,  a  crawling  peg  helps  control  inflation 
when it is brought down from 30%–40%, but it is less useful when a lower level is envisaged, 
since  the  crawl  incorporates  inflation  expectations.  On  the  other  hand,  exchange  rate 
flexibility was seen as an asset for an economy as big and rigid as Romania was at the time, 
especially given the upcoming stages of capital flow liberalisation. 
Against this background, Romania opted for inflation targeting as early as 2002, even though 
it  took  several  years  of  preparations  until  the  actual  adoption,  in  August  2005.  The  NBR 
chose the “light” version of the strategy, which meant retaining the managed float feature of 
the exchange rate regime. The actual form that inflation targeting took in Romania matched 
the “managed-floating plus” concept, considered the most suitable choice for an emerging-
market economy involved in the global capital market. This concept, introduced by Goldstein 
in 2002, combines the managed float part, allowing for FX market interventions in order to 
smooth out excessive volatility, with inflation targeting as a monetary policy strategy and an 
active pursuit of measures to limit the degree of currency mismatches in the economy. As a 
matter  of fact,  in  an IMF  paper  published  in  2003,  the  light  version  of  inflation  targeting  is 
found to be widely spread among emerging economies, where fiscal dominance continues to 
weigh  and  monetary  policy  cannot  set  aside  concerns  over  financial  stability  and  external 
equilibria. 
Light inflation targeting in Romania 
2. 
Drawing  the  line  after more than  a  decade  of  inflation  targeting, I  would  say  that  we  have 
managed  to  deliver  steady  disinflation  and  anchor  expectations,  even  though  the  frequent 
occurrence of exogenous shocks led to high volatility in inflation and the occasional missing 
of annual targets. All central banks are familiar with supply-side shocks related to a surge or 
fall  in  commodity  prices,  but  in  Romania  we  have  also  had  to  deal  with  large  (and  not 
necessarily predictable) adjustments in administered prices and frequent changes in indirect 
taxation. Some of the latter were inherent to EU membership (i.e. alignment of some excise 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   duties),  but  others  were  related  to  an  erratic  tax  legislation.  In  such  an  environment,  two 
features  of  the  inflation  targeting  framework  as  implemented  in  Romania  appear  as 
particularly relevant: 
• 
First,  the  focus  on  the  medium-term  achievement  of  the  inflation  objective,  rather 
than hitting the target all the time. This approach allows for sustainable price stability 
without incurring the cost of excessive volatility in output and employment. 
Second, the ex-ante definition of a set of escape clauses that limit the central bank’s 
responsibility in attaining the annual target: 
1.  Marked increases/decreases in commodity prices 
2. 
Natural disasters and other similar exceptional events that induce cost-push or 
demand-pull inflationary effects 
Large  fluctuations  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  leu  that  are  decoupled  from 
domestic  economic  fundamentals,  as  well  as  from  the  monetary  policy 
pursued by the National Bank of Romania 
3. 
4.  Major  deviations 
from 
the  administered  price  adjustment  programme 
announced  by  the  Government,  in  terms  of  both  magnitude  and  proposed 
calendar 
Divergence of the fiscal and income policies, in terms of implementation and 
outcomes, from the programmed coordinates 
5. 
Case in point: monetary policy under a string of VAT changes 
3. 
To give you a flavour of the environment the monetary policy has had to operate in lately, we 
had  three  VAT  rate  cuts  from  2013  to  2016,  after  a  hike  in  2010,  and  another  cut  is 
scheduled  for  2017.  Currently,  the  annual  inflation  rate  stands  at  –3.25  percent,  the  most 
negative value in the EU. Excluding the first-round effects of the VAT cuts in mid-2015 and 
early  2016,  headline  inflation  would  have  hovered  around  +1  percent.  Consequently,  the 
negative  inflation  we  are  dealing  with  now  is  not  at  all  a  condition  brought  about  by  a 
persistent  lack  of  demand,  as  economic  activity,  employment  and  wages  are  actually 
buoyant.  This  is  just  a  transitory  development,  induced  by  the  aforementioned  indirect  tax 
cuts. 
The  textbook  policy  choice  would  be  to  accommodate  the  temporary  deviation  from  the 
inflation target and focus on the VAT-adjusted inflation developments – especially since the 
latter paint a quite different picture. 
If I may be allowed a short digression, the very recourse to a VAT-adjusted inflation measure 
in our analysis and communication came under fire. This is by no means different in nature 
than the Eurostat’s HICP at constant taxes – just more refined, in the sense that we take into 
account the fact that the pass-through of a VAT change is below 100% for most CPI items. 
Coming  back  to  the  current  economic  context,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  behind  the 
“perfect  storm”  of  deflationary  exogenous  shocks  (low  energy,  food  and  metal  prices, 
successive VAT rate cuts), demand-side inflationary pressures are looming: a positive output 
gap is emerging, unit labour cost pressures are building up, fiscal policy is taking a strongly 
expansionary turn. 
As such, while medium-term prospects appear to call for a tightening bias of monetary policy, 
the  short-term  context  of  deeply  negative  inflation  makes  communication  with  the  public 
rather challenging. Specifically, we have to contend with the idea that the central bank should 
lower interest rates in response to VAT rate cuts. It proves more difficult than we thought to 
make people understand that the current negative readings in inflation are just transitory and 
reflect neither postponed consumption, nor sluggish wage growth one would associate with 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  negative inflation expectations – these actually remained anchored to the target. Therefore, 
none of the ingredients which make for a scary deflationary trap are present. 
Frankly, I understand that the general public is not familiar with concepts like overheating or 
positive output gap, but I believe that annual growth rates to the tune of 20% for retail sales 
and  in  excess  of  10% for  wages  are  more  than  self-explanatory.  Still,  with  all  the  obvious 
signs – even for non-economists – that the economy is growing fast, we are criticised for not 
fighting deflation. 
The  recent  experience  has  made  us  painfully  aware  that  –  despite  the  large  amount  of 
information provided through a wide range of communication vehicles – our messages get 
through  to  a  much  lesser  extent  than  we  had  thought.  Therefore,  we  should  enhance  our 
efforts in escaping the professional jargon and trying to be as accessible as possible when 
explaining to the public the rationale behind our monetary policy decisions. 
If  I  were  to  conclude  on  Romania’s  experience  with  inflation  targeting,  I  would  say  that  it 
worked  quite  well,  even  though  the  concept  of  inflation  targeting  has  not  been  immune  to 
criticism,  especially  in  the  post-crisis  period.  I  would  mention  here  Axel  Weber,  who 
suggested in 2015 that inflation targeting is a simplistic framework that could not stabilise the 
value of money in a complex and constantly evolving economic environment. 
However, his opinion is not shared by other well-known economists. For instance, in 2013 
Charles Wyplosz stressed that even though there are times when inflation targeting seems 
inconvenient and possibly counter-productive, the alternatives – monetary targeting, nominal-
GDP  targeting  or  no  explicit  strategy  at  all  –  would  probably  not  have  done  a  better  job. 
Along  the  same  lines,  Lucrezia  Reichlin  and  Richard  Baldwin  concluded  that  inflation 
targeting should continue to be refined, not replaced. Of course, since I come from a central 
bank practicing inflation targeting, I tend to agree with the latter line of thought, as I believe 
that,  whatever  its faults,  the  strategy  has  enough  intrinsic flexibility  to  enable  it  to  address 
them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
