  Haruhiko Kuroda: Innovations in payments and FinTech – the central 
bank’s perspective 
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Forum on Payment 
and Settlement Systems, Tokyo, 17 March 2016. 
 Introduction  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  today  to  our  Forum  on  Payment  and  Settlement 
Systems.  
Innovations in payments and FinTech  
I.  
Recent  years  have  seen  a  number  of  developments  in  financial  services,  including  in  the 
area of payments. Innovations that combine finance and new technology, called “FinTech,” 
have become a particular focus of attention.  
It  is  clear  that  there  are  both  supply-side  and  demand-side  factors  behind  such 
developments.  
On  the  supply  side,  the  advance  in  technological  innovations  related  to  information  and 
communications  is  progressing.  The  processing  power  of  computers  continues  to  grow 
rapidly, and computers can analyze huge amounts of data – that is, “big data” – in a relatively 
short period of time.  
There has also been a rapid spread of forms of infrastructure such as the internet and mobile 
terminals,  which  are  easily  accessible  to  a  wide  range  of  people.  In  other  countries  – 
particularly in emerging or developing nations where existing financial services provided by 
banks  have  not  penetrated  sufficiently  –  new  services  such  as  mobile  payments  are 
generating large expectations in terms of “financial inclusion” – or the promotion of access to 
financial services.  
On  the  demand  side,  globalization  of  the  economy  continues  to  progress,  and  more  and 
more  transactions  are  being  made  across  borders  as  well  as  time  zones.  New  forms  of 
economic  activities  have  arisen  both  here  and  abroad  –  such  as  “e-commerce”  and  the 
“sharing  economy”  –  while  lifestyles  have  diversified.  Reflecting  such  developments,  the 
needs  for  financial  services  are  growing  increasingly  diverse  and  complex.  For  example, 
there is an emerging need for payment methods that are compatible with internet shopping 
on weekends or at midnight as well as low-value cross-border remittances. There is also a 
growing need to use forms of information associated with payments by utilizing loyalty cards.  
As I just pointed out, we can judge that there are factors on both the supply and demand 
sides which are affecting developments in FinTech. If we consider that the financial business 
has  strong  characteristics  as  an  “information  industry,”  then  it  is  not  surprising  that 
developments  in  information  technology  have  a  large  influence,  especially  in  finance.  For 
example, credit, investment, and risk management are based on the accumulation of a great 
deal of information and analysis in which new technology has a large role to play. In these 
financial  services,  particularly  in  payments,  the  transmission  of  information  has  significant 
importance.  Thus,  it  is  natural  that  recent  developments  in  information  technology  are 
generating a number of innovations and services in the area of payments.  
Benefiting from the merits of innovation  
II.  
Innovations in financial services have the potential to improve efficiency and enhance access 
to financial services. They also bring a wide range of benefits to the economy as a whole.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  This happens in several ways. First, expansion of the frontier for financial services enlarges 
the  possibilities  for  new  economic  activities.  For  example,  if  people  who  lack  access  to 
financial services become able to use mobile payments, potential customer base for many 
businesses will expand and new businesses targeting these people might arise more easily. 
Moreover, if payment methods are fast, inexpensive, and have ubiquity, this will expand the 
frontier  of  businesses  that  use  them  –  for  example,  businesses  that  provide  e-commerce, 
music, or software by precisely taking into account customer needs.  
Second, new technologies arising from financial innovations will possibly be applied to other 
means. For example, distributed ledgers – a technology underpinning digital currencies – are 
receiving  considerable  attention  as  a  way  to  secure  the  accuracy  of  ledgers  through 
verification by their users, without relying on trusted third parties (that is, central operators 
such as government and central banks). And distributed ledgers are now under consideration 
for application to the recording of transfers of financial assets such as stocks as well as to 
the management of registry books for land and houses.  
To  sum  up,  innovations  in  finance  including  payments  that  are  backed  by  innovations  in 
information technology have the potential to boost economic welfare and revitalize economic 
activities  through  interaction  with  a  range  of  businesses.  Now,  I  would  like  to  emphasize 
three  points  that  I  consider  important  in  maximizing  the  benefits  of  these  innovations  and 
leading to further development of the economy.  
The  first  point  is  public’s  great  sensitivity  to  innovations  in  information  technology  and 
financial  requirements.  At  present,  information  technology  is  developing  rapidly  and  new 
types  of  businesses  are  emerging  one  after  the  other.  Accordingly,  those  involved  in 
providing  financial  services  –  including  financial  institutions  –  are  increasingly  expected  to 
pay close attention to changes in public’s requirements and development of technologies that 
can be applied, and to be sufficiently aggressive and flexible about using the new technology 
to provide concrete financial services.  
The  second  point  is  the  importance  of  communication  with  many  entities  across  business 
categories. To expand financial services by capturing diversifying needs and adapting new 
technologies,  it  is  useful  to  form  new  networks  composed  of  entities  such  as  financial 
institutions  and  high-tech  and  venture  companies  that  enjoy  advantages  in  information 
technology and data usage. It is also important to ensure communication, cooperation, and 
sound competition among these entities.  
The third point is acquiring public’s trust regarding financial infrastructure. Financial services 
using the internet and mobile terminal are spreading, but new types of threats to the financial 
infrastructure  –  such  as  hacking  and  cyber  attacks  –  are  gaining  prominence.  If  concerns 
spread that countermeasures against these threats are insufficient, this might lead to doubts 
about  the  innovative  financial  services  themselves.  Therefore,  providers  of  new  financial 
services  should  prepare  sufficiently  against  new  risks  and threats. In  this  regard,  it  will  be 
important  to  draw  on  technologies  that  help  to  enhance  security  such  as  encryption 
techniques and biometric authentication.  
The central bank and Innovations in payments  
III.  
Lastly, I would like to talk about the Bank of Japan’s involvement in payment and settlement 
systems and our perspective on innovations in payments.  
The  Bank  issues  banknotes,  which  are  the  most  familiar  type  of  payment  instrument.  We 
also operate the Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or BOJ-NET, which enables the 
settlement  of 
financial 
institutions.  Considering  the  fact  that  all  funds  are  ultimately  settled  using  central  bank 
money  –  that  is,  cash  or  the  central  bank’s  current  account  deposits  –  the  settlement 
infrastructure  provided  by  the  Bank  serves  as  the  essential  infrastructure  of  the  Japanese 
economy.  
funds  and  Japanese  government  bonds  among 
large-value 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  is  also  crucial for the central  bank to maintain  stability  and  improve  the  efficiency  of  the 
payment  and  settlement  systems,  including  those  provided  by  the  private  sector.  In  this 
regard,  the  Bank  –  through  oversight  of  private-sector  payment  and  settlement  systems  – 
monitors,  communicates  and,  when  necessary,  encourages  these  systems  to  achieve 
stability and improve their functionality.  
Concurrently, the Bank has been enhancing its BOJ-NET. In Oct 2015, the new BOJ-NET 
was fully launched. It is a highly flexible system that uses the latest information technology 
and offers enhanced accessibility, and thus it provides a powerful base for the development 
of  innovations  in  payment  and  settlements  and  the  provision  of  new  financial  services. 
Furthermore, in February 2016, the BOJ-NET extended its operating hours to 9 p.m. (Japan 
Standard Time) to achieve an overlap with almost all Asian markets during the day and with 
European markets until about noon.  
In addition, by taking part in a number of forums that discuss issues related to payment and 
settlement  systems  –  including  the  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  of 
the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  –  the  Bank  actively  participates  in  international 
discussions on innovations in payments and payment and settlement systems.  
From the standpoint of a central bank, the Bank is monitoring closely and with great interest 
the developments in innovations in payments and payment and settlement systems, from a 
range  of  perspectives.  These  include  the  safety  of  payments,  the  efficiency  of  payment 
services and the convenience to users, stability of the financial system, and the influence on 
finance intermediation and the economy.  
To make the innovations in payments that are taking place due to innovations in information 
technology truly useful for the users of financial services and the economy, it is important to 
develop  a  network  and  win-win  relationships  with  a  wide  range  of  entities  beyond  the 
traditional financial industry. The Bank, as the nation’s central bank, is firmly committed to 
being a catalyst in fostering such developments. Moreover, I am pleased to announce that 
the  Bank  will  soon  establish  a  “FinTech  Center”  in  its  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems 
Department. We aim to reinforce our efforts in which the new wave of FinTech will contribute 
to enhancing financial services and achieving sustainable growth of Japan’s economy.  
I  would  like  to  close  my  remarks  now  by  wishing  that  today’s  Forum  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems will generate new knowledge and perspectives, and that the stimulating 
discussions here will lead to further development of the financial markets and the vitalization 
of economic activities.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
