   Sheila M’Mbijjewe: Launch of the 2016 FinAccess Household Survey 
Speech by Ms Sheila M’Mbijjewe, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch 
of the 2016 FinAccess Household Survey, Nairobi, 18 February 2016. 
  1. 
I am delighted and honoured to join you today at this launch of the Key Findings 
of the 2016 FinAccess Household survey that also marks the 10th anniversary of the 
FinAccess Surveys in Kenya. 
2. 
Policy Goal: The creation of a vibrant, efficient, stable and globally competitive and 
inclusive  financial  system  to  drive  savings  and  investments  necessary  to  achieve  our 
development agenda as outlined in Kenya’s Vision 2030 is crucial. 
• 
There cannot be meaningful financial sector development if finance is not accessible 
and inclusive. 
Financial inclusion in terms of Access, Usage, Quality and Welfare remains one of 
the priority areas for the Government. 
3. 
Financial  Inclusion  Landscape:  I  am  pleased  to  be  part  of  this  financial  inclusion 
agenda  of  improving  the  measurement,  understanding,  tracking  progress  and  its 
dynamics  overtime.  This  has  been  done  mainly  through  undertaking  FinAccess  Suite  of 
Surveys since 2006. 
4. 
Key  Findings: The results we are releasing today reflect developments in the 
wider  economy,  infrastructural  facilities,  technological  innovations,  financial  sector 
developments, policy and regulatory reforms as well as financial markets innovations. 
I am delighted to announce that Kenya has made a lot of progress towards the Kenya Vision 
2030  financial  sector  development  agenda.  In  terms  of  financial  inclusion,  we  have  far 
exceeded the Government target to increase the proportion of the population with access to 
finance to over 70% by 2018 under the Second Medium Term Plan, 2013–2018. 
• 
The proportion of adult population using formal financial services rose to 75.3% in 
2016. 
 The rural-urban formal financial access gap has narrowed since 2006. 
   Kenyans  are  increasingly  using  a  combinations  of  a  variety  of  financial  services 
providers  and  new  innovations  reflecting  the  importance  of  a  diversified  financial 
system  with  59.7%  of  the  adult  population  using  two  or  more  types  of  financial 
services providers compared with 18.8% in 2006. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
5. 
There is need to foster appropriate and proportional regulation and supervision of the 
different financial services providers to enhance access to a broader mix of providers and 
products  that  meet  the  needs  of  different  consumers.  With  this  growing  demand  from 
consumers  for  a  diverse  mix  of  products  and  innovations,  the  financial  sector  requires  an 
enabling  environment  to  foster  innovations  to  the  changing  financial  market  environment. 
However, we need to take appropriate measures to address any emerging risks and mitigate 
any potential impact to the financial system stability. 
6. 
Uses: The survey data and findings can be used by various stakeholders’ to further 
enhance financial inclusion and promote the sector’s development. I urge you all to design 
ways to enhance dissemination to minimize administrative burden and ease access to allow 
majority of Kenyans to use the information. 
7. 
Despite the progress made in the financial inclusion front in the last 10 years, I 
believe  that  large  gaps  still  remain  in  formal  financial  inclusion  across  regions,  income 
groups, age, education and gender in the country. 
• 
In order to enhance financial inclusion to reach a wider population across the country, 
supportive policy strategies and innovations coupled with a strong and proportionate 
supervisory and risk management frameworks are necessary. 
Moreover, the need for financial education and literacy programmes to the population 
by both the public and private sector is vital, which should be underpinned by sound 
market conduct practices including financial services consumer protection measures. 
8. 
At this point, let me invite you to listen and learn from today’s presentations of the 
survey  findings  and  urge  you  to  make  use  of  the  information  and  build-upon  the  same  to 
expand the financial inclusion landscape. 
With these few remarks, I welcome you to this breakfast launch event of the Key Findings of 
the 2016 FinAccess Household Survey and wish you fruitful deliberations. The survey report 
is, therefore, officially launched. 
Thank You! 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
