   Jens Weidmann: Not against the laws of economics – Hans-Werner Sinn 
as a public intellectual 
Speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman of the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  International  Scientific 
Symposium  and  Official  Ceremony  to  Mark  Hans-Werner  Sinn’s  retirement  and  the 
25th anniversary of the Center for Economic Studies (CES), Munich, 22 January 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Dear Hans-Werner Sinn, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour for me to speak today to such a large audience of distinguished scholars 
who have gathered here to honour Hans-Werner Sinn. 
Hans-Werner Sinn has been a professor of economics for more than 30 years and President 
of  the  ifo  Institute  for  more  than  15  years.  Thankfully,  I  do  not  have  to  even  attempt  to 
summarise his copious academic achievements: Kai Konrad has just done that in his excellent 
speech. He also pointed out that under Hans-Werner Sinn’s stewardship the ifo Institute has 
developed into an internationally renowned research institution. 
But Hans-Werner Sinn is more than an outstanding academic and an exceptional manager of 
science. He is also an influential public intellectual who has shaped every major political debate 
over the past few decades by injecting economic arguments into it. 
Kurt Tucholsky once said that: “To have an effect on other people, you must first speak to them 
in their language”. 
And Hans-Werner Sinn did exactly that. Like few other German economists, he was able to 
make economic arguments accessible to the public. More than a dozen books, hundreds of 
opinion pieces and numerous radio and television interviews are proof of this. They provide a 
great translation service from the often model-based arguments of the economic profession to 
a language that the public is able to understand. 
In doing so, he was sometimes polarising, often trenchant and always battlesome – but these 
are  defining  characteristics  of  a  public  intellectual.  Public  intellectuals  argue  their  cases 
passionately. They have an attitude and not just an opinion. This is indispensable to ensure 
that their public statements encourage others to form their own opinions and to engage in a 
discourse. 
For Hans-Werner Sinn, interacting with the public was never an end in itself. It is one of his 
firmly held convictions that no policy maker can permanently ignore what he calls the laws of 
economics. Because doing so would eventually turn out to be extremely costly. 
He is convinced that politicians are always tempted to ignore the laws of economics because 
taxpayers often discover the true price tag of a policy measure only years later. Hans-Werner 
Sinn  therefore  wanted  to  alert  the  public  early  about  when  policies  were  inconsistent  with 
economic principles. 
“It is my duty to speak publicly about economic and fiscal policies and to initiate debates…,” 
as he put it in an interview.1 It is this motivation which gave rise to his enormous number of 
public interventions. 
                                                
1   Sinn, Hans-Werner (2013). Verspielt nicht eure Zukunft. Edition Redline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Even if I wanted to, I couldn’t give you the full list of topics he’s covered. Today, I will highlight 
just three issues that have been milestones over the last 25 years of Germany’s economic 
history. And they all bear some lessons for today’s economic challenges in Europe. 
The first stop on our journey through German economic history will be Germany’s economic 
unification. 
Germany’s economic union: incomplete convergence 
2. 
When East German companies entered into the Economic, Monetary and Social Union with 
West Germany in 1990, their productivity lagged far behind that of their western competitors. 
In their book “Jumpstart: The Economic Unification of Germany”, Hans-Werner Sinn and his 
wife, Gerlinde, pointed out that, to avoid rising unemployment in the eastern part of Germany, 
wages  there  would  have  to  remain  below  those  in  the  western  part  until  eastern  German 
companies had increased their capital stock, and thus labour productivity, sufficiently.2  
But at that time, policy makers were already confronted with a strong migration movement from 
eastern to western Germany. Huge differences in wages between the two parts of Germany 
would have further accelerated this movement. So, maintaining large discrepancies in wages 
wasn’t  the  preferred  option for most  policy  makers. They  accepted that  labour  unions  and 
employers’ associations agreed to fully adjust wages to those in western Germany in as little 
as five years. 
The  book  “Jumpstart”  correctly  predicted  that  it  would  be  “completely  impossible  that 
productivity of the East German economy could increase quickly enough to make these wages 
compatible with full employment or at least low unemployment.”3 And indeed, in the first five 
years of economic unification, unemployment in eastern Germany rose from virtually zero to 
almost 17%. Unemployment in the western part increased only by 3pp. 
But to be fair, other factors may have also contributed to the increase in unemployment. One 
was the currency conversion. Some of you will remember the controversial debate about how 
to  convert  the  East  German  Mark  into  the  Deutsche  Mark.  In  the  end,  wages  in  eastern 
Germany  were  converted  one  to  one  into  the  Deutsche  Mark.  The  then  president  of  the 
Bundesbank Karl-Otto Pöhl had warned – for the same reasons that Hans-Werner Sinn put 
forward – that this was to the disadvantage of companies in eastern Germany. However, he 
later acknowledged that there was hardly any alternative, as “political realities were stronger 
than economic logic”. 
The high level of unemployment in eastern Germany was cushioned by transfers from the 
western part. While the exact amount of these transfers is difficult to calculate, Hans-Werner 
Sinn once estimated that transfers paid up to the present day amount to around €1.8 trillion – 
roughly the size of the German GDP in 1991,4 but this number certainly comprises more than 
just the transfers via the social security system. 
A  central  tenet  of  “Jumpstart”  is  that  it  would  have  been  much  cheaper  to  compensate 
employees  for  accepting  lower  wages  than  to  compensate  the  unemployed  for  their  job 
losses.5 “Implement distributional objectives through transfers and not by altering factor prices” 
was  the  economic  principle  that  Hans-Werner  Sinn  saw  violated  in  the  formation  of  the 
                                                
2   Sinn, Gerlinde and Sinn, Hans-Werner (1993). Kaltstart – Volkswirtschaftliche Aspekte der deutschen Einheit. 
3rd revised edition, Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag. 
Ibid. 
3  
4   Sinn,  Gerlinde  and  Sinn,  Hans-Werner  (2015).  Die  deutsche  Vereinigung  als  Vorbild  für  Europa?  FAZ, 
2 October 2015. 
5   Sinn, Gerlinde and Sinn, Hans-Werner (1993). Kaltstart – Volkswirtschaftliche Aspekte der deutschen Einheit. 
3rd revised edition, Deutscher Taschenbuch Verlag. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
economic union between the two Germanys. And he feared that this would allow wages to 
remain above the market clearing level for too long. 
And  also  the  distributional  objectives  were  only  partly  achieved:  Not  least  because 
unemployment in eastern Germany is still higher than in the western part, per capita income 
in eastern Germany is still only 71% of that in western Germany. 
It is this experience which explains at least partly why many German economists are sceptical 
about establishing a transfer union in Europe, as at the European level these problems are 
aggravated by the fact that the balance between control and liability would be thrown further 
out of kilter. Decisions would mainly be taken at the national level, while the consequences of 
those decisions would be spread across the entire euro area. Many proposals in terms of risk 
sharing  and  mutualising  liabilities  have  been  put  forward  over  the  last  years,  including 
Eurobonds or the establishment of a common deposit guarantee scheme, but little has been 
said about the necessary transfer of fiscal sovereignty. Without a transfer of national fiscal 
powers to the European level, such a set-up would undermine the incentives for sound and 
sustainable policy decisions in the member states. I will come back to this point later on. 
Germany’s welfare system and the forces of globalisation 
3. 
Hans-Werner  Sinn’s  impetus  to  explain  to  the  public  when  policy  makers try  to  defy  basic 
principles  of  economics  struck  again  in  the  early  2000s.  In  another  round  of  public 
interventions, he warned that the German welfare state was ill-equipped to deal with the forces 
of globalisation. 
Germany’s reform of the labour market is the second stop on our journey into the past. The 
key economic principle at stake was again the same: distributional objectives should not be 
aimed at by changing factor prices. 
With regard to the entry of China and India into the global markets, Hans-Werner Sinn was 
convinced that this would put downward pressure on the wages of the less skilled workers in 
Germany. “Trade in goods and mobility of capital […] creates a common labour market, and 
on such a labour market there can no longer be substantial differences in wages,”6 as he put 
it. 
He was rightly concerned that Germany’s approach of using wage substitutes to compensate 
the losers of globalisation would define an implicit minimum wage that would prevent wages 
from  adjusting.  This  was  another  attempt  to  defy  economic  forces.  And  “[…]  as  a  result, 
globalisation produces unemployment rather than gains from trade,”7 he wrote in an influential 
article in 2004. 
So a way had to be found to compensate the losers of globalisation without preventing the 
market  from  adequately  determining  factor  prices.  Together  with  other  economists,  the 
German  Council  of  Economic  Experts  and  also  the  Bundesbank  he  therefore  called  for  a 
change  in  the  welfare  state  paradigm:  to  rely  more  on  wage  subsidies  and  less  on  wage 
substitutes. 
This made Hans-Werner Sinn one of the trailblazers of the so-called Agenda 2010 reforms that 
were enacted between 2003 and 2005. A central element of the reforms was to shorten the 
period of eligibility for unemployment assistance and to tighten work availability requirements. 
In return, the government began topping up low wages. Germany’s welfare system now paid, 
as Hans-Werner Sinn put it, “more for taking part and less for staying away”. 
                                                
6   Sinn, Hans-Werner (2004). Das Dilemma der Globalisierung. Forschungsgemeinschaft für Nationalökonomie 
an der Universität St. Gallen. 
Ibid. 
7  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   
And  the  recipe  worked  as  predicted:  unemployment  began  to  trend  downwards  and 
employment  began  to  rise.  The  full  truth  is,  however,  that  this  was  also  supported  by  a 
changing behaviour on the part of trade unions and employers’ associations, resulting in more 
moderate  wage  policy  and  the  strengthening  of  establishment-level  agreements  as  trade 
unions reacted to the further increase in the already high level of unemployment. 
These changes allowed Germany to rise to the multiple challenges stemming from German 
unification, the competitive pressures from EU enlargement to the east, and globalisation. 
By the way, even today and against the background of almost full capacity utilisation the wage 
settlements are still mindful of their employment effects. The Bundesbank’s focus with regard 
to wages is purely analytical. The crucial question is here, whether their development is in line 
with our main objective: price stability. And in this regard we have in particular to check for 
second-round effects. According to our analysis such second-round effects can currently be 
denied for Germany. 
This perspective on wages is not a policy recommendation. Not only because we do respect 
the autonomy in wage bargaining but also because we agree with Hans-Werner Sinn that wage 
negotiations  should  not  be  overburdened  by  aiming  other  policy  goals  –  for  example  by 
targeting the current account. 
Recent economic policy decisions, however, such as the introduction of the minimum wage 
and the option to draw a full pension at 63 offered to long-term contribution payers can be seen 
as a roll-back of the Agenda 2010 reforms. 
And again, these decisions illustrate the key challenge related to policy advice I mentioned 
earlier: In the short run, where the economic situation and employment is relatively stable, the 
minimum wage, for example, might even have positive economic effects, as it leads to an 
increase in the income of the workforce. And consequently, the Bundesbank assumed in its 
macroeconomic forecasts for last year that the minimum wage would have a slight, stimulating 
growth effect. In the medium term, the consequences of the minimum wage are certainly less 
benign  and  will  first  of  all  depend  on  whether  a  politicisation  of  the  work  of  the  Low  Pay 
Commission can be avoided. 
Reforms for a more stable monetary union 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the last stop on our time travel expedition is the euro-area crisis, which 
is also one of Hans-Werner Sinn’s central points of focus in his academic and political work. 
In his book “Der Euro” (The Euro) he writes: “The tension in Europe stems from a fundamental 
conflict between wish and reality – or what has been dubbed the primacy of policy over the 
laws of economics. For years, policy makers have been able to get their own way and pretend 
that fiscal constraints, laws of economics, and mathematics simply do not exist.” 
In his description of the euro area’s current state he is rather negative: “Today the Eurozone 
is a shambles, staggering from one crisis to the next.” 
As Hans-Werner Sinn knows, I am not as pessimistic as he is with regard to the state of the 
euro area. This is not only because of the difference in age and the fact that as life advances, 
recollection takes the place of hope – to quote the German writer Wilhelm Raabe. After all, 
there has been some progress in the euro-area countries and institutions. 
But I agree with him that one important reason for the euro-area crisis was the limited success 
of capital markets in constraining public and private indebtedness in the euro-area member 
states, which found its expression in an exaggerated convergence of risk premiums for lending 
to governments and households in the euro area after the introduction of the euro. 
This  convergence  could  be  partly  explained  by  the  elimination  of  the  exchange  rate  risk 
because  of the  introduction  of the  euro.  But  the  convergence  in  risk  premiums  went  even 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
further as investors mispriced the risks associated with the increase in public and private debt 
levels. 
While the rescue mechanisms that were put in place prevented the crisis in the euro area from 
escalating,  they  did  so  by  a  bailout  of  creditors  to  banks  and  sovereigns.  The  principle  of 
creditor liability was further undermined. 
This is another of the economic laws, violation of which Hans-Werner Sinn warned would turn 
out to be very costly. “Creditor liability is the core tenet underpinning the market economy,” he 
wrote. “Investors only act with caution when making their investments if they reckon with being 
held liable in case their investment fails.” Hans-Werner Sinn devoted at least three books to 
this issue, all of which contain impassioned calls to realign control and liability. 
An  important  step  in  this  direction  with  regard  to  investments  in  banks  was  made  at  the 
beginning of this year, when the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, (BRRD) became 
effective. It helps to ensure that, in the future, the shareholders and creditors of a bank will be 
first in line to absorb any risks and losses. 
And in this context it is important to note that because of the new Basel III regulation, banks 
are now obliged to maintain higher capital buffers. This helps to increase bank shareholders’ 
liability if the bank has to be restructured or even resolved. 
To  ensure that  the  principle  of  liability  –  or  as Walter  Eucken  put  it:  “Those  who  reap  the 
benefits  must  also  bear  the  costs.”  –  is  also  respected  with  regard  to  sovereign  debt,  the 
founding fathers of the euro had incorporated the no-bailout clause into the Maastricht Treaty. 
It was the “linchpin of the construction of the euro”, as Hans-Werner Sinn wrote in one of his 
books. 
But with the institutions and rules in place before the crisis, simply letting a sovereign default 
happen proved to  be risky for the financial stability in the euro area. Because government 
bonds were treated, wrongly, as risk-free in the capital regime for banks, they held a significant 
stock of government bonds – the sovereign-bank nexus is strong in the euro area. 
Hans-Werner Sinn suggested a number of measures that would bring more market back to the 
sovereign  debt  market.  Here,  I  would  like  to  mention  only  two  that  strike  me  as  being 
particularly important – and which are similar to points that I also make frequently: 
The first is to do away with the regulatory privileges afforded to public debt. 
The second proposal is to limit assistance from the rescue mechanisms to what is 
absolutely necessary to assess whether the situation at hand is one of illiquidity or 
insolvency. 
While Hans-Werner Sinn tries to achieve this by limiting the time for assistance up to two years 
the Bundesbank has suggested to introduce an automatic three-year maturity extension for all 
government bonds – which would be activated the moment a government applies for an ESM 
programme  –  designed not  to  let  private  bondholders  off  the  hook  until  it  is  clear that the 
problem is one of illiquidity and not insolvency. 
Addressing  both  issues  is  crucial  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  the  Maastricht  framework, 
which is – as it has to be recalled from time to time – still the legal foundation of the monetary 
union. 
Last but not least, Hans-Werner Sinn unquestionably deserves special acclaim for pointing the 
public’s attention on the impact of central banks’ crisis measures. He anchored his criticism in 
the discussion at one specific keyword: The balances of the “Trans-European Automated Real-
time Gross settlement Express Transfer system”, known as TARGET for short. He even dared 
to write a book about that topic, which was previously known to only a handful of experts. I am 
sure that no one else than Hans-Werner Sinn could have taken such an unwieldy subject and 
propelled it to the top of the German bestseller list for business books. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   
I don’t wish to rehash the whole Target debate here. The Bundesbank shares many of the 
observations made and conclusions reached by Hans-Werner Sinn. However, our opinions do 
differ in several points of analysis. For instance, we don’t see the Target system as the problem 
per se, but rather as a system that reflects existing problems in the euro area. Above all, the 
underlying risks stem from the provision of liquidity and the liquidity provisioning framework, 
as well as in the subsequent cross-border distribution of liquidity. Similarly, in banking, it is the 
non-performing  loan  that  is  a  potential  risk,  not  the  payment  system  through  which  the 
payments were routed. Consequently, our critical appraisal focuses on aspects of such liquidity 
provision  where  the  boundary  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  is  in  danger  of 
becoming blurred. For example, when emergency liquidity assistance is granted on a very 
large scale, the collateral framework is severely watered down, or when government bonds 
are purchased. This is doubtless in keeping with Hans-Werner Sinn’s views. But our views 
probably differ in our assessment of the risks that the Target system presents for Germany, 
say. 
Despite  some  differences  of  opinion  it  is  without  any  doubt  one  of  Hans-Werner  Sinn’s 
outstanding achievements that he has fostered intense broad public debate – even though the 
sometimes  sharply  propounded  arguments  did  not  always  make  life  easier  for  us  in  the 
Eurosystem. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Dear Hans-Werner Sinn, Arthur Schopenhauer once wrote: “There is no greater consolation 
in age than the feeling of having put the whole force of one’s youth into works which still remain 
young.” 
Well, I am not sure your age necessarily warrants the need for consolation. Looking at your 
latest publications, you seem to have maintained a lot of this force. And you have obviously 
saved some of your youth for a host of other achievements above and beyond those which I 
have discussed today. 
But I hope that the short time journey I have undertaken today through your public interventions 
over the past decades demonstrates at least one thing clearly: that your achievements will not 
age. They contain lessons that are still relevant today and will remain relevant tomorrow. 
And there is no doubt that your publication list will become even longer. You already said in an 
interview that you were planning to write more books. I wish you the strength and energy for 
many more public interventions. 
And ladies and gentlemen, I hope you will find the discussions here at today’s symposium 
inspiring. 
This is the right time to hand over to the first panel of today’s symposium. The title of the first 
panel is “The European Monetary Union: Deficits and Cures”. Harold James, the floor is yours. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
