  Manuel Sánchez: Mexico in an unfriendly world economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  2016 
Mexico  Opportunities  Conference  “Harvesting  Growth”,  organized  by  J.P.  Morgan,  Mexico 
City, 21 June 2016. 
 It is a pleasure to be here with you this morning. I would like to thank J.P. Morgan for the 
invitation to participate in this annual conference devoted to opportunities for attaining higher 
economic growth in Mexico. 
In my talk, I would like to focus on the challenges and prospects for the Mexican economy in 
the  current  difficult  international  environment.  To  this  end,  I  will  touch  first  on  Mexico’s 
economic  developments  and  outlook;  then,  I  will  briefly  analyze  the  impact  of  widespread 
uncertainty  on  the  country’s  financial  markets;  and  finally,  I  will  make  some  comments  on 
inflation and monetary policy. 
Before I begin, I should note that my remarks are entirely my own and do not necessarily 
reflect the positions of the Bank of Mexico or its Governing Board. 
Economic developments and outlook 
A natural starting point for my comments is found in international economic conditions, which 
during the last couple of years can be characterized as less favorable for emerging markets. 
In particular, advanced nations continue to witness a slow recovery amid decelerating growth 
in emerging economies and stagnant global trade. Added to this condition are doubts and 
concerns  over  monetary  policy  stances  and  expected  monetary  divergence  among 
developed countries. 
Worries over the health of the Chinese economy, in turn, persist amid uncertainty growing on 
geopolitical issues, with Brexit currently the number-one fear. In addition, commodity prices 
are expected to remain low for some time. Finally, this environment has fueled heightened 
risk aversion, which has hit emerging economies especially hard. 
In  this  complicated  world,  the  Mexican  economy  has  maintained  relatively  stable  and 
moderate growth since 2014, reaching 2.8 percent in the first quarter of 2016 on a year-on-
year basis. The main driver has been an expanding services sector, as industrial production 
had decelerated somewhat, although picking up recently. 
Three factors behind softer industrial growth are clear. First and foremost, oil extraction has 
seen a longstanding decline. Construction activity, for its part, has slowed and is somewhat 
erratic,  apparently  still  affected  by  the restructuring  process  to  which  this  sector  has  been 
subject in the last few years. To round out the list, manufacturing production, which holds a 
tight  relationship  with  industry  and  manufacturing  in  the  United  States,  has  been  less 
dynamic. 
Given significant vertical integration between the two countries, slower U.S. industrial activity, 
reflecting  the  downsizing  of  the  oil  sector  amid  low  prices,  has  capped  the  expansion  of 
Mexican manufacturing. As a result, manufacturing exports have lost steam, with declining 
rates of annual growth falling into negative territory in recent quarters. 
This  deceleration  has  taken  place  in  spite  of  significant  real  peso  depreciation,  which  has 
occurred  along  with  that  of  other  emerging-market  currencies.  This  fact  highlights  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
dominant  negative  effect  stemming  from  a  decline  in  external  demand,  notably  from  the 
United States, Mexico’s main trading partner, but also from other nations as well.1 
In  short,  the  main  engine  of  recent  Mexican  economic  expansion  has  been  domestic 
spending, largely by the private sector, including both consumption and investment. Yet it is 
worth  noting  that,  although  representing  a  smaller  weight  in  total  aggregate  demand, 
government consumption was expanding, thereby supporting spending as well. In the 2016 
first quarter, however, this trend changed. Additionally, public  investment, an even smaller 
contributor to aggregate demand, continues to contract. 
As with the global economy and most world regions, Mexico’s economic outlook has been 
subject to downward revisions, with a modest recovery projected for this and the following 
year. Even in this lackluster scenario, Mexico distinguishes itself, with expected expansion 
higher than the average pace foreseen for Latin America.2 
This  does  not  mean  we  should  be  satisfied  with  only  middling  growth.  As  an  emerging 
economy,  Mexico  should  eventually  enjoy  much  higher  rates  of  economic  expansion, 
breaking out of its previous long-term, not excessively encouraging, record. 
To  be  sure,  in  the  short  term,  real  challenges  prevail.  Specifically,  Mexico’s  scenario  of 
modest improvement faces risks, among which the downside forces seem more numerous. 
Let me mention three. 
In  the  first  place,  U.S.  imports  and  industrial  output  may  slow  further,  potentially  not  only 
inhibiting the country’s manufacturing production, but also generating spillover effects on the 
services  sector  and  private  investment.  Second,  producer  and  consumer  sentiment  could 
deteriorate  due  to  less  favorable  international  financial  events.  Finally,  a  larger-than-
anticipated  fall  in  Mexican  oil  extraction  could  occur.  On  the  upside,  however,  recent 
structural reforms could start to yield greater-than-expected benefits.3 
Financial markets 
International financial markets have been affected by uncertainty on the implications of the 
extraordinary lax monetary  stances undertaken in advanced nations and the normalization 
process in the United States. As central banks in these regions are navigating unchartered 
waters, the consequences are impossible to predict. 
Meanwhile, portfolios have been adjusted away  from emerging markets, with lower capital 
inflows and even outflows in some cases. Asset prices, at the same time, including those of 
emerging market bonds and currencies, have seen downward pressure.4 
Also, spikes in financial volatility have hit amid geopolitical jitters, including fears over Brexit. 
These developments reflect tensions and headwinds against emerging markets, testing the 
strength of their fundamentals. 
In Mexico, the unprecedented shrinkage of the oil balance has resulted in a larger current 
account deficit. This gap still remains, however, only slightly below 3 percent of GDP. 
                                                
1   For an econometric estimation of the effects of U.S. manufacturing production and the bilateral real exchange 
rate  on  Mexico’s  manufacturing  exports  to  that  country,  see  Banco  de  México  (2016).  Quarterly  Report 
October – December 2015, Box 1. 
2   Analysts’ estimates for GDP in Latin America and Mexico are, respectively, –0.6 and 2.4 percent in 2016, and 
2.0 and 2.8 percent in 2017. See Consensus Economics Inc. (2016). “Latin American Consensus Forecasts,” 
May. 
3   For an online progress report of Mexico’s structural reforms, see Presidencia de la República, Reformas en 
Acción, http://reformas.gob.mx/. 
4   See Koepke, R. and Farnham, S. (2016). “May 2016 EM Portfolio Flows Tracker,”  Institute  of  International 
Finance, June. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
The enlargement of the current account deficit has caught the attention of many observers, 
perhaps not so much because of the sheer magnitude of the total balance, but likely because 
of  the  underlying  trends,  which  may  eventually  trigger  external  financing  restrictions.  This 
type of concern should not be neglected, and must be properly assessed. 
One fact is precisely the weakening of the oil trade balance, reflecting lower extraction and a 
significant deterioration of the oil terms of trade. A second is that the other component, the 
nonoil  balance,  has  been  improving,  partly  aided  by  real  exchange  rate  depreciation. 
Nevertheless, this performance has not been sufficient to completely offset trends in the oil 
balance.  In  a  word,  recent  less  favorable  balance-of-payments  developments  reflect 
Mexico’s oil situation. 
To  preclude  the  continuation  of  these  tendencies  and  support  financial  stability,  an 
adjustment  in  public-sector  spending,  already  underway,  is  obviously  called  for.  The 
necessity  is  clearly  confirmed  by  rising  Pemex  credit  risk  perception,  where  higher  CDS 
spreads beginning in mid-2014 and coinciding with lower oil prices should not be surprising, 
with slightly less pressure since last February. 
An  important  consequence  is  the  contamination  that  Pemex  credit  risk  perception  has 
exerted  on  Mexico’s  sovereign  debt.  Inaction  from  the  state  oil  company  is  definitely  not 
acceptable,  if for  nothing  else,  because  of  the danger  of further  contagion  on  country  risk 
perception. 
Additionally, the share of nonresident holdings of peso-denominated government securities 
in the total outstanding has decreased, with a change of composition away from short-term 
zero coupon instruments  (cetes) and in favor of long-term bonds. These portfolio changes 
could  be  interpreted  as  a  natural  investor  reaction  to  less  optimistic  views  on  emerging 
markets.  Hence,  so  far,  those  seeking  the  exit  have  been  mainly  holders  of  short-term 
securities, while holdings of long-term bonds have risen in absolute terms during the year. In 
any case, developments of foreign funds in Mexico must continue to be monitored. 
As  in  other  emerging-market  economies,  heightened  risk  aversion  since  the  taper tantrum 
has  widened  interest-rate  spreads.  It  is  worth  noting  that  current  spreads  are  not 
unprecedented, as they are similar to those observed at the beginning of 2012, when fears 
surrounding the sustainability of the euro area also fed risk aversion. 
As  in  other  countries,  a  flexible  exchange  rate  has  performed  the  crucial  role  of  buffering 
markets in an adverse financial environment. The Mexican peso has depreciated significantly 
since mid-2014, hurt more than other emerging-market currencies in the present year. 
These  difficult  developments  underscore  the  importance  of  ongoing fiscal  strengthening, a 
necessary  and  welcome  development  to  face  external  headwinds.  Adjustment  already 
includes  at  least  four  measures,  starting  with  financial  and  business  restructuring  being 
implemented  in  Pemex.  Additionally,  cuts  to  2016  budgeted  public  expenditures  are  in 
process, with an initiative sent to Congress for a positive primary balance in 2017. Finally, in 
the  aim  of  keeping  the  public  finances  sustainable,  a  commitment  is  in  place  for  the 
stabilization  and  decline  of  the  total  balance  of  public-sector  borrowing  requirements  over 
GDP in the medium term.5 
Inflation and monetary policy 
Annual  inflation  has  continued  to  be  benign  at  unprecedented  low  levels.  Specifically,  for 
13 months  in  a  row,  inflation  has  remained  below  the  permanent  3  percent  target. This  is 
quite  an  achievement,  as  convergence  to  this  objective  assumes  inflation  to  fluctuate 
                                                
5   See SHCP (2016). “Documento Relativo al Cumplimiento de las Disposiciones Contenidas en el Artículo 42, 
Fracción I, de la Ley Federal de Presupuesto y Responsabilidad Hacendaria,” April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
sufficiently close to 3 percent, sometimes above and sometimes below. Before 2015, inflation 
persistently ran around an average above 4 percent. 
Lower inflation has resulted from both relatively contained core price increases and declining 
noncore inflation. A surge in core merchandise inflation reflects a modest effect from peso 
depreciation on tradable goods prices. 
At  the  same  time,  the  core  services  component  has  remained  subdued,  benefiting  from 
persistently  falling  telecom  tariffs  resulting  from  competition  enhanced  by  reforms  in  that 
sector. It may also suggest the absence of significant overall aggregate demand pressures to 
date.  Falling  noncore  inflation  reflects  reduced  agricultural  price  increases,  as  well  as 
contractions in the index for energy and government-determined prices. 
Short-  and  medium-term  inflation  expectations,  as  reflected  in  analysts’  surveys,  are 
gradually moving towards the 3 percent permanent target, while those extracted from market 
instruments seem to have converged to the target, a significant advance in light of a history 
of high inflation.6 
Some threats to the consolidation of inflation convergence to the target prevail. Upward risks 
are particularly substantial in view of the relatively short time inflation has remained anchored 
on  the  target.  The  biggest  menace  may  come  from  further  peso  weakness,  which  could 
result in greater pass-through and misalignment of inflation expectations. 
Another risk could emerge in aggregate demand pressure, as total absorption has increased. 
Agricultural  price  rises  may  also  pick  up,  reverting  to  the  medium-term  average,  carrying 
second-round price effects. 
Thus, monetary policy must avoid complacency, remaining on watch to consolidate inflation 
convergence.  Results,  although  recently  positive,  include  no  guarantee  for  the  future.  In 
addition, exchange rate considerations have to be viewed from the perspective of the Bank 
of Mexico’s price stability mandate. 
For time-consistency considerations, the relative monetary stance vis-à-vis the United States 
should continue to be a factor. However, challenges to price stability may surface whatever 
the U.S. Federal Reserve does. Hence, monetary policy actions can be independent of the 
Fed. In any case, the Bank of Mexico  will continue to act in a timely and decisive  way to 
consolidate price stability. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by saying that Mexico’s economic fundamentals are being tested. Structural 
reforms, an improved rule of law, and better security could produce more rapid growth in the 
medium to long term. With the financial state of Pemex weak and posing contamination risks 
to  the  Mexican  sovereign,  meanwhile,  adjustment  of  the  fiscal  stance  is  a  welcome 
development. 
Fortifying economic fundamentals is an ongoing challenge for policy makers. As recent good 
inflation  performance  is  not  guaranteed,  complacency  cannot  be  allowed  to  seep  into 
monetary policy. Pursuit of permanent convergence to the target must continue. 
                                                
6   See Banco de México (2016). “Encuesta sobre las Expectativas de los Especialistas en Economía del Sector 
Privado: Mayo de 2016,” June. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
