   Andrew Bailey: Bank capital – debating again 
Speech by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  at  Barclays’  2016 
Financial Conference, London, 9 March 2016. 
 Bank capital has been in the news again recently, or at least parts of the news – there are 
some other things going on. There are probably two reasons for this “news”: first, because we 
have entered another phase of highly uncertain conditions in financial markets, which has had 
a strong impact on the market value of banks; and second, as authorities we are pushing on 
with  implementing  the  post-crisis  reforms  to  capital  standards,  and  in  doing  so  we  have 
reached a point where some of the important building blocks are now being put into place. 
Today, I am going to reflect on and draw some conclusions for what I would call the bigger 
picture, namely what sort of banking system are we seeking to create, what are we not doing, 
and why not. I will draw on the detail, and there is no shortage of that, but this is not a talk 
about the detail of bank capital, you can find that in plenty of other places.  
Another objective is to tackle some urban myths of today. Let me start with an important one, 
the  so-called  “liquidity  narrative1”  which  sets  up  in  order  to  knock  down,  and  attributes  to 
regulators, the view that the financial crisis (indeed crises more generally) was caused by a 
lack of liquidity rather than solvency in the banking system, and this blinded people, notably 
regulators, to the real cause of the problem, namely solvency and capital. Whatever happened 
in the past, it is most certainly not true today. Loss of liquidity is much more the symptom than 
the cause of crises, and while symptoms have to be observed, and some actions taken to 
minimise their effects, I am in no doubt that the cause is usually either an actual solvency 
problem or critically rising expectations that there will be such a problem in the future. If you 
spend time in the PRA, you would quickly learn that capital is front and centre in what we do 
as supervisors.  
Why is that so? Banks are different from other financial firms because they provide deposit 
contracts to their customers. A deposit is a very particular form of debt contract. For all of us 
the essential feature of a deposit contract is simple – we put our money (our asset) on deposit 
at a bank, and we expect all of it back, with whatever rate of return is agreed, and we expect 
to have access to it in line with the terms of the contract.  
Let’s contrast that with non-deposit debt (bonds) and equity contracts. If you invest in either of 
these, you are not promised all of your investment back, though of course you expect to make 
a positive return. Such an investor ordinarily expects the full return of their investment, but this 
is not assured. Investment in debt and equity can of course be managed on a collective basis, 
as  asset  management.  You  may  remember  the  Woody  Allen  quote  that  a  stockbroker  is 
someone  “who  invests  your  money  until  it’s  all  gone”.  Cruel  I  know,  but  it  illustrates  the 
difference between deposits, other forms of debt and equity.  
A  distinguishing  feature  of  banks  is  that  by  providing  deposit  contracts,  far  more  of  their 
liabilities take the form of value certain contracts. This alone makes capital and solvency critical 
for banks. In contrast, for asset managers, the contract does not promise such value certainty. 
Two particular conditions need to be met in my view to make asset management effective and 
robust to wider economic conditions. First, that there is no lack of clarity of the nature of the 
assets  held  under  management.  Second,  that  there  is  no  illusion  give  to  investors  about 
                                                
1   Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes: What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about 
it”. P38–40 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   liquidity of their assets. It follows therefore that capital and solvency matter much more for bank 
supervision, and market liquidity conditions matter more for asset management supervision.  
So bank capital matters a lot. The next question, rather obviously, is how much of it banks 
should have as a liability on their balance sheet? This has been the subject of lively recent 
comment. Most of that comment has focussed on the core issue of how much capital and 
overall loss absorbency banks should have as part of their balance sheet liabilities to protect 
the value certainty of deposits. This is a very reasonable debate because there is no monopoly 
of wisdom on such a subject. I do however discount heavily those commentators who have 
seamlessly switched from attacking on the grounds that as supervisors we were choking off 
lending by requiring too much capital (the so-called at the time “Capital Taliban” argument) to 
arguing now that we are falling down by setting the standard too low.  
The main argument of late has been whether our recent proposals on capital buffers for the 
largest banks operating in UK markets have diverged from previous post-crisis commitments 
on the level of capital banks should maintain both in going concern, and the overall level of 
loss absorbency available amongst the liabilities of a bank to enable a resolution to occur if 
needed. To put it into context, the capital standard we have developed is based on the last 
quarter century of bank performance – including the financial crisis – such that the probability 
of bank failure during that period would have been extremely low. In aggregate terms we have 
not  diverged,  and  if  anything  our  recent  proposals  put  the  level  a  little  higher  than  that 
suggested, for instance, by the Independent Commission on Banking, but not by enough to 
make a big point of it. It is true that within that aggregate we have introduced a new element 
in  the  form  of  incentives  to  protect  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  We  have  followed 
through wherever possible on the principle that larger and more complex banks should have 
higher capital buffers because they pose a greater risk to the stability of the financial system. 
Consistent  with  that  principle,  we  have  created  a  tiered  system  of  increasing  capital 
requirements but left the topmost tier unpopulated. This empty tier is not a product of a craven 
fear of putting a bank there, but rather to create a disincentive to further complexity. So, we 
don’t see this element of the design as contradicting its goal.  
We could argue about the merits of small changes in the capital standard, but that is not in my 
view  a  worthwhile  exercise.  What  is  more  notable  is  the  divide  between  this  view  of 
strengthening banks’ loss absorbency and the alternative view that the answer lies in a radical 
restructuring of the banking system to require banks to have loss absorbency which would be 
a substantial part (say 20% to 30%) of their total balance sheet2. It is wrong in my view to 
conflate an argument about small differences in capital buffers with one that is all about a 
different financial system.  
I want to spend a few minutes on this alternative view, on what it would mean, and why it is 
advocated. To be clear, I am not commenting as a supporter, but rather to try to cast light on 
this big issue. The essence of the argument as I see it is that it is asserted by supporters of, 
let’s call it the “big equity” school, that we cannot value large banks adequately because they 
are too complex and opaque, cannot supervise them effectively and cannot resolve them, we 
must resort to an approach which requires a sizeable shift in the balance of their funding away 
from value certain deposits contracts towards loss absorbing equity type contracts. This is on 
the basis that there is then a large buffer to absorb the losses that will flow from inadequate 
valuation and supervision, and without recourse to resolution. For me, this begs the question 
of the appeal of a proposition which states to the public: “will you please provide equity funding 
to  something  we  can’t  value  or  properly  oversee”.  Put  like  that,  the  idea  does  not  seem 
appealing. I cannot see why there would be a desire to provide equity funding for banks on 
such terms rather than invest in other companies either directly or through a collective asset 
                                                
2   To be clear, this is 20–30% of the total balance sheet not 20–30% of risk weighted assets, the latter being a 
considerably smaller number.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   scheme. I recognise that it has been proposed that the equity funding should be built up by 
retaining  dividends,  but  to  accumulate  say  20%  of  a  bank’s  balance  sheet  by  this  means 
requires I think an implausibly long transition period. In fact, based on the current position of 
the major UK banks, including the average dividend payment rate, the transition period to 20% 
equity would be around 90 years. That’s a little bit longer than the 17 year transition period for 
Solvency II. I do not therefore see “big equity” as a sustainable solution because this sort of 
proposal is just not practical.  
A more logical alternative to today’s approach is the narrow banking model3. Again, to be clear, 
I  don’t support the  approach,  but  it  has  the greater  logic  over  the  “big” equity  approach of 
creating  deposit  funded  banks  which  can  only  hold  highly  liquid  and  low  risk  government 
bonds. Loans would be made by other financial intermediaries. I think that the ring fence as 
proposed by the Independent Commission on Banking is a better way to achieve sensible and 
safe  separation  of functions  within  a  bank  while  not causing great  disruption to  the  overall 
financial  system.  Interestingly,  the  argument  against  narrow  banking  from  the  “big”  equity 
school is that narrow banking exports all of the risk in the financial system to so-called shadow 
banks, thereby making them a danger to the system4. Again, this amounts to an argument that 
unmanageable risk should be kept in banks which must therefore attract substantial equity 
funding. It’s not a winner I’m afraid.  
This brings me right back to the argument for what we are doing today, namely to strengthen 
the loss absorbency, risk management, governance, supervision and resolvability of the banks 
we do have. I do not accept the proposition that we can only abandon all hope of understanding 
the  risks  in  banks.  Likewise,  I  do  not  agree  that  large  banks  are  unsupervisable  and 
ungovernable. And, I do not concur with the view that large banks can never be resolved, thus 
leaving too big to fail always with us, and with the answer then to either require a lot of equity 
funding or to hope that the shadow banking system does not cause risks that threaten the 
whole system.   
Let me finish by focussing on resolution and supervision. We went through the crisis without 
properly  functioning  bank  resolution  regimes  in  many  countries  including  the  UK,  with  the 
consequence that the response was a combination of using public money and improvisation 
to  create  resolutions  where  possible.  But  now  we  are  well  on  the  way  to  having  properly 
functioning  resolution  regimes  in  place.  So,  what  is  the  argument  for  why  they  will  be 
ineffective? This is a crucial piece of the story, because it is a fundamental principle of the big 
equity school of thought that they reject resolution as a usable solution. The argument seems 
often to come down to doubting the will of the authorities to enact resolution5. True, in the past 
it was much harder to enact resolution in the absence of the means to do it, but that will not be 
so in the future. It is also true that resolution necessarily involves changing the property rights 
of investors which is a big thing. Will the authorities have the nerve? My view is that we must, 
because the alternative is much worse. We are making huge strides in resolution as a technical 
matter. Last year’s agreement on TLAC in the G20 was a landmark. But alongside that is a 
vast amount of work to get to grips with what it takes to resolve a major bank. If you are involved 
in that work, as I am, you can see that there is no lack of commitment and progress.  
The remaining challenge then is whether the authorities will have the nerve to follow through 
and carry out a resolution. This is the charge that comes from opponents, namely that it will be 
“bottled”. I don’t see this as likely to be an issue, because if resolution is a credible route to 
take, as it will be, why would the authorities want to put the cost somewhere else?  
                                                
3   John Kay “Should we have ‘Narrow Banking’?” The Future of Finance, LSE Report, 2010 
4   Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes: What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about 
it”. P271 
5   Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig: “The Bankers New Clothes:  What’s wrong with Banking and what to do about 
it”. P74–78 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Now for supervision and whether it too can function effectively. Make no mistake, in many 
countries supervision failed badly in the run-up to the crisis. Prudential supervision of banks is 
all  about  understanding  the  risks  firms  take,  the  effectiveness  of  the  controls  in  risk 
management, using the framework of rules and regulations to create the right incentives to 
control risks appropriately, and where necessary intervening directly to require actions to be 
taken that would otherwise lead the firm to a potentially unsafe or unusual position. There is 
nothing easy about this activity, and the lessons of the pre-crisis and crisis periods demonstrate 
the dangers of encouraging broader attitudes which act to discourage the work of supervision 
in favour of a light touch approach in which the risks in the system build up and are praised as 
contributors to stability and prosperity, until that is the crash comes.  
Supervision  is  a  continuous  activity  which  needs  to  benefit  from  constant  public  attitudes 
towards it, and in turn supervisors need to be accountable and explain what they do. We have 
made big strides forward on these fronts in recent years.  When we talk about banks, solvency 
and capital is at the heart of effective prudential supervision. The capital regime that is being 
put in place is stronger not just in terms of the quantity and quality of capital that is funding 
banks, but also because of the incentives that are being embedded in the regime. To end, I 
don’t believe that we can ignore the risk in banks, and the consequence if it crystallises. This 
helps to explain why the exercise of judgement is such an important part of the supervision of 
banks. Therefore we have to create a system of rules, we have to supervise banks and have 
the scope and freedom to apply those rules in ways that create the right incentives for banks 
to maintain safety and soundness, and to guard against the time when something does go 
wrong we must be confident that our resolution regimes will work. I simply do not believe that 
the alternative approaches are sufficiently credible.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
