  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: A culture of inquiry and evidence 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  workshop  entitled  "Evidence  in  Financial  Inclusion: 
New Findings and their Applications", Manila, 5 July 2016. 
 We  thank  all  you  for  accepting  our  invitation  to  this  important  workshop  on  “Evidence  in 
Financial Inclusion.” 
Important because poverty alleviation is central to our country’s financial inclusion program 
and we are co-hosting this with the Innovations for Poverty Action or IPA, the US-based non-
profit organization dedicated to promoting solutions to global poverty problems. 
With  their  involvement  in  the  Philippines  and  50  other  countries  where  it  has  over  six 
hundred  studies,  IPA  is,  indeed,  an  ideal  partner  for  countries  such  as  ours,  that  are 
committed  to  financial  inclusion  to  address  poverty  and  promote  inclusive  growth.  In 
particular, I understand that IPA has completed 30 research studies in the Philippines and 
more are in progress. 
For today’s workshop, we have with us, no less than IPA Founder and President Professor 
Dean Karlan, and IPA Country Director Nassreena Sampaco-Baddiri. 
We  look  forward  therefore  to  a  full  day  of  engaged  and  fruitful  discussions  between  our 
workshop participants and the IPA which will share their learnings from the Philippines and 
other parts of the world. 
Our  objective  is  to  develop  among  policy  makers  and  financial  inclusion  practitioners,  an 
evidence-based mindset in pursuing financial inclusion. 
This is necessary if we are to move our financial inclusion programs in accordance with our 
targets and timetables in the most effective and efficient manner. 
Poverty alleviation is a national priority in the Philippines. While the incidence of poverty in 
our country has been on the decline, the Philippine Statistics Authority estimates that poverty 
incidence among Filipinos in the first semester of 2015 was at 26.3%. That means more than 
26 million Filipinos still live in poverty. 
In this connection, the Bangko Sentral continues to address persistent barriers to financial 
inclusion. These come in the form of human barriers such as lack of financial literacy, age 
and gender issues. On the other hand, institutional barriers include limited understanding of 
client  needs;  prohibitive  costs  to  deliver  products;  cultural  and  geographical  barriers;  and 
barriers  related  to  infrastructure  such  as  lack  of  connectivity  or  access  to  providers  and 
markets. 
These  barriers  are  multi-dimensional  and  must  be  addressed  in  concert  with  different 
sectors.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  BSP  took  steps  last  year  to  bring  together  12  other 
government  agencies  along  with  representatives  from  the  private  sector,  multilateral 
institutions  and  the  NGO  community  to  prepare  a  harmonized  plan  under  the  National 
Strategy for Financial Inclusion or NSFI. 
An Executive Order signed by then President  Benigno Aquino III established the Financial 
Inclusion Steering Committee under which the Bangko Sentral has been appointed as chair. 
The Executive Order also lodged the Technical Secretariat with the Bangko Sentral. 
The Reinforcing Roles of Narratives and Data 
Narrative, one of the most time-honored ways of communication and knowledge transfer, has 
played  an  important  role  in  the  process  of  building  and  implementing  the  NSFI.  The  BSP 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  shared lessons learned in the development of our microfinance sector and our initiatives in 
financial inclusion. 
The  process  of  reaching  out  to  other  stakeholders  and  players  has  been  anchored  in 
narratives  as  well.  Through  the  sharing  of  stories  of  the  unserved  and  underserved,  we 
learned about needs that should be addressed urgently as well as the appropriate manner in 
which to address them. 
The narratives have brought us this far  –  a responsive policy and regulatory environment as 
well  as  a  clear  strategy  with  implementing  plans.  At  the  BSP  we  have  steadily  reinforced 
these narratives with data and evidence. We accumulate data through demand-side surveys, 
information  sharing  agreement  with  other  government 
reportorial 
requirements from our supervised institutions. 
Insights derived from these information help us shape more responsive and more effective 
policies.  For  instance,  the  Bangko  Sentral  fostered  the  creation  of  scaled-down  or  micro-
banking  offices  to  provide  unserved  municipalities  access  to  banking  services.  We 
recognized  that  smaller  markets  do  not  justify  the  cost  of  setting  up  regular  bank  offices. 
Today,  we  have  540  micro-banking  offices,  over  12%  of  which  are  in  areas  with  no  other 
bank presence. 
Indeed, we consult our stakeholders to improve our regulations. Our microfinance regulations 
are  a  case  in  point.  Recognizing  the  peculiarities  of  microfinance,  we  provided  incentives 
such as branching liberalization and documentary exemptions while instilling clear prudential 
and conduct standards to mitigate risks and maintain alignment with international standards. 
Today, we have a robust and active microfinance industry in the Philippines. 
institutions,  and 
Initiatives and Gaps 
Traversing  the  road  toward  a  culture  of  inquiry  and  evidence  is  challenging  but  worth  the 
effort. In the past, we did not have a repository of financial inclusion information and data. 
There was a dearth in demand-side data. 
Keeping  in  mind  the  principles  of  inquiry  and  evidence,  the  BSP  introduced  measures  to 
bolster its data and measurement frameworks. These include: 
• 
The creation of a Data and Measurement Group within the BSP’s Inclusive Finance 
Steering  Committee  (IFSC)  to  ensure  a  coordinated  focus  in  pursuing  programs 
supportive of financial inclusion. Among others, it oversees the institutionalization of 
information sharing within the BSP and other agencies 
The  creation  of  a  supply-side  financial  inclusion  database  and  library  to  be 
maintained  and  updated  by  a  dedicated  team  of  data  analysts  from  the  BSP’s 
Inclusive Finance Advocacy Office. 
The roll out of the National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion (NBSFI). This is 
the  first  national  survey  of  individuals  that  measures  baseline  dimensions  of 
inclusive products and services from the perspective of users of financial products 
and services. The survey help provide a more holistic picture of financial inclusion 
and  facilitates  identification  of  barriers,  crafting  evidence-based  policies  and  the 
setting of targets. 
  The importance we ascribe to data and measurement is underscored by the simultaneous 
launch  of  our  maiden  baseline  survey  with  our  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion. 
Completed last year, the baseline survey showed the following results: 
• 
 25%  of  Filipino  adults  have  never  saved,  32%  used  to  save,  and  only  43  % 
presently have savings. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Of those with savings, only 32% save in banks  while 68 % keep their savings at 
home. 
 65 % of unbanked adults cited lack of money as the main reason for not having a 
bank  account.  About  47  %  of  adults  have  outstanding  loans.  The  main  source  of 
borrowing  is  informal  –  62%  borrow  from  family,  relatives  or  friends  while  10% 
borrow from informal lenders. 
 The  survey  indicates  the  many  challenges  we face  moving forward.  For  service  providers, 
the  survey  reveals  that  there  are  plenty  of  opportunities  for  those  looking  to  expand  their 
business or to introduce game-changing innovations. 
And we continue to push forward. We are now in the process of building a monitoring and 
evaluation  framework  for  our  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion.  Among  others,  we 
need to consider the different levels of technology across member-agencies of our Steering 
Committee; distill the results of our National Baseline Survey on Financial Inclusion to yield 
focused studies; and take deeper dives into focus areas to deepen our understanding of the 
environment and its needs. 
Ladies and gentlemen. We are encouraged that even as we address the gaps in data and 
measurement,  we  continue  to  see  gains  in  our  financial  inclusion  programs.  For  your 
information, the  Philippines  has  been  ranked  by  the  Economic  Intelligence  Unit  as  the top 
country in Asia with the most conducive environment for financial inclusion. A paradigm shift 
in the way we pursue financial inclusion may be just what we need to propel us forward in a 
major  way.  We  need  to  constantly  measure  how  we  are  doing  through  evidence-based 
surveys and studies to ensure that we are on the right track and that we are not wasting time 
and resources. 
We need to develop an evidence-based mindset to continuously enrich our knowledge base 
and  become  more  effective  agents  of  financial  inclusion  programs  that  improve  lives  and 
liberate people from poverty. 
I wish therefore that our workshop on Evidence in Financial Inclusion will be successful and 
fruitful, and generate innovative programs to address poverty in our country and other parts 
of the world. 
Finally, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, we thank IPA our co-host, Citibank, all 
our resource persons and workshop participants for joining us today. 
Thank you all and Mabuhay! 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
