Daniel Mminele: The role of BRICS in the global economy 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Bundesbank Regional Office in North Rhine-Westphalia, Düsseldorf, Germany,7 July 2016. 
 There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version. 
Introduction
1.
Good evening and thank you to Dr Andreas Dombret, member of the Executive Board of the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  and  Ms  Magarethe  Müller,  President  of  the  regional  office  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank for the opportunity to address you today on the topic of “The role of 
BRICS in the global economy”. Admittedly, this may have been a much easier topic a few 
years  ago  when  the  successes  of  the  BRICS  economies  far  overshadowed  their 
weaknesses. As the challenges facing the BRICS economies have mounted, there are now 
many  question  marks  over  the  economic  power  of  the  BRICS  grouping  and  the  ability  to 
realistically  challenge  and  change  the  global  economic  order  to  one  which  is  more 
representative and fair. 
Indeed,  BRICS  is  not  alone  in  the  many  challenges  that  it  faces.  Both  advanced  and 
emerging  economies  have  slowed  with  each  facing  their  own  set  of  dynamics  adversely 
impacting  growth  and  which  inter  alia  require  bold  actions  in  the  implementation  of  much 
needed structural reforms. 
It seems appropriate to be delivering this speech in the heart of Europe, a region which has 
vast  trade  linkages  with  the  BRICS  economies  and  where  the  economic  influences  are 
strong. 
I would imagine that developments in Europe and the many challenges that this region has 
been confronted with lately, have occupied more of your attention than BRICS matters have. 
European  developments  have  certainly  occupied  the  attention  of  policymakers  in  BRICS 
countries since, as we all know, we live in a highly interconnected and interdependent world 
with significant spill-overs across countries. 
South  Africa  takes  a  keen  interest  in  Europe,  given  large  trade  linkages  and  therefore 
significant  implications  for  our  economic  prospects.  The  relationship  between  South  Africa 
and Germany in particular, has been a long and fruitful one and certainly the contribution to 
South  Africa’s  development  has  not  been  insignificant. There  are  a  large  number  of major 
German  companies  represented  in  South  Africa,  in  particular  in  the  automobile  sector,  as 
well  as  a  number  of  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises.  Approximately  600  German 
companies  have  operations  in  South  Africa,  employing  over  90,000  workers1.  Such  a 
presence contributes significantly to employment and skills-building, and no doubt, towards 
technological advancement in South Africa. 
But  let  me  turn  to  the  topic  of  the  speech.  I  will  discuss  BRICS  in  the  South  African  and 
global  context,  more  recent  developments  in  terms  of  the  slowdown  in  BRICS  economic 
growth  and  focus  on  the  successes  of  the  BRICS  countries.  I  will  conclude  with  a  brief 
update  on  economic  developments  in  South  Africa,  which  could  be  of  interest  to  some  of 
you. 
1  www.southafrica.diplo.de. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1 
  BRICS and South Africa 
2. 
The BRIC countries, as the grouping was initially known, admitted South Africa as a member 
to the club in December 2010. There were many criticisms levelled towards the inclusion of 
South Africa in this grouping, with the perception that South Africa’s economic size was just 
too small for it to have any benefits for the BRIC. However, if one considers the country’s 
large  mineral  resources;  very  well  developed,  deep  and  sophisticated  financial  markets; 
strong  institutions  and  robust  and  expanding  infrastructure  programme,  then  surely  South 
Africa’s presence in this grouping is not misplaced. In addition to South Africa being the only 
African  member  of  the  G20,  its  inclusion  into  the  BRIC  group  provides  it  with  a  more 
representative  structure  and  further  emphasises  the  BRIC  countries  commitment  to 
strengthening  their  presence  and  engagement  in  Africa.2  Indeed,  within  the  Sub-Saharan 
Africa (SSA) region, South Africa is the second largest economy, accounting for 21 per cent 
of SSA GDP. SSA is an important export market, and there are significant financial linkages 
in  terms  of  foreign  direct  investment  and  a  strong  presence  of  South  African  firms  in  the 
South African Development Community3. 
South Africa’s trade with BRIC countries has expanded in recent years, as exports to BRIC 
countries grew from R20 billion in 2005 (EUR1 billion), to R154 billion (EUR9 billion) in 2013 
(although  this  has  since  slowed  to  R147  billion  (EUR8.5  billion)  in  2015).  Imports  have 
similarly increased from R48 billion (EUR2.8 billion) in 2005 to R277 billion (EUR16 billion) in 
2015.4 Much of the exports are destined for China, which accounts for 64 per cent of South 
Africa’s exports to BRIC, followed by India accounting for close to 30 per cent. The bulk of 
exports  to  BRIC  countries  consist  of mineral  products,  although  the  percentage  of mineral 
products in total exports in China, for example, has declined from levels of close to 80 per 
cent to 60 per cent in 2015. This most likely reflects to some extent the slowdown in China. 
In terms of imports from BRIC countries, China accounts for 72 per cent of South Africa’s 
imports  from  BRIC,  followed  by  India  with  approximately  20  per  cent.  Most  of  the  imports 
from China relate to machinery products and in India’s case, mineral products. Thus, while 
trade with BRIC countries has expanded, there has been a slowdown in export growth more 
recently, with a consequent increase in the trade deficit with BRIC countries. 
BRICS in the global context 
3. 
Increased  globalisation  has  meant  that  BRICS  has  become  an  important  source  of  global 
growth  and  political  influence.  BRICS  economies  have  grown  rapidly  with  their  share  of 
global GDP rising from 11 per cent in 1990 to almost 30 per cent in 2014. BRICS account for 
over 40 per cent of the world population, hold over US$4 trillion in reserves and account for 
over 17 per cent of global trade.  
Financial  markets  in  the  BRICS  countries  have  similarly  expanded  in  a  rapid  manner.  For 
example, in the 20 years until 2010, Brazil’s market capitalisation increased from a very low 
4 per cent of GDP to 74 per cent, India from 12 per cent to 93 per cent, Russia and China 
from  almost  zero  to  70  per  cent  and  81  per  cent,  respectively.  In  South  Africa,  market 
capitalisation has more than doubled from 123 per cent to 278 per cent. According to S&P 
Global  Market  Intelligence  global  bank  rankings,  banks  from  these  five  countries  figured 
among the top 100 banks in the world, with the top 4 banks headquartered in China. 
It  therefore  comes  as  no  surprise  then  that  these  economies  became  the  new  engines  of 
global demand. Having been victims of the global financial crisis, and suffering the impact of 
large  and  volatile  capital  flows  and  what  Mohamed  El  Erian  has  referred  to  as  “tourist 
                                                
2  www.brics5.co.za, South Africa in BRICS. 
3  World Bank 2016 Global Economic Prospects: Sub-Saharan Africa. 
4  All figures in EUR quoted at exchange rates prevailing at the time. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  dollars”5,  the  BRICS  countries  were  propelled  into  a  common  objective  of  reforming  the 
international financial and monetary system, with a strong desire to build a more just, and 
balanced international order that reflects the dynamics of today’s global economy and serves 
the interests of all in a fair manner. To this end, the five countries in the BRICS community 
play an important role in the G20, in shaping global economic policy and promoting financial 
stability. 
The future role of BRICS 
4. 
Following  an  impressive  performance  in  the  aftermath  of  the global financial  crisis,  BRICS 
countries  have  recently  started  to  slow.  In  this  respect,  there  seems  to  be  an  awful  lot  of 
doom  and  gloom  bandied  about  the  BRICS  in  some  quarters.  Some  have  referred  to  the 
BRICS  bubble  bursting,  others  have  noted  that  BRICS  “instead  of  propelling  the  global 
economy  into  calmer  waters,  now  risk  capsizing  it”  and  others  question  “why  the  mighty 
BRICS nations have broken?” 
This slowdown has been reflected in a number of areas. Exports from BRICS to developed 
markets and investments into their respective economies have declined, while the collective 
contribution to global growth has fallen from a peak of nearly 50 per cent in 2013 to around 
36  per  cent  in  20156.  Real  GDP  growth  of  BRICS,  which  was  over  8  per  cent  in  2010 
declined to just over 4 per cent in 2015. In addition, the local currencies of BRICS, with the 
exception  of  China,  has  experienced  varied  levels  of  volatility  following  the  onset  of  the 
global economic crisis. 
As Christine Lagarde noted in a recent speech7 there have been three particular challenges 
confronting  the  global  economy  and  also  the  BRICS  countries.  First  is  China’s  growth 
transition  and  the  rebalancing  of  its  economy  from  industry  to  services,  from  exports  to 
domestic  markets,  and  from  investment  to  consumption.  In  the  short  run,  this  will  lead  to 
slower growth with spill over effects through trade and lower demand for commodities. Global 
trade, which fell to 20 per cent below its pre-crisis trend, was driven by sluggish growth in 
advanced economies, and the maturation of global value chains which has further reduced 
the elasticity of trade flows to economic activity  and exchange rate changes. Furthermore, 
higher  capital  requirements  and  tightened  financial  regulations  have  reduced  banks’ 
willingness  to  extend  trade  finance,  and  the  pace  of  trade  liberalization  slowed.  Secondly, 
declining  commodity  prices  has  placed  many  commodity-exporting  emerging  economies 
under severe stress with very large currency depreciations in some cases and has set back 
growth 
in  commodity-exporting  BRICS.  Third,  asynchronous  monetary  policies  has 
contributed  to  an  appreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar,  putting  considerable  strain  on  emerging 
market currencies. Meanwhile, net capital flows to BRICS have undergone significant bouts 
of volatility, which have weighed on investment growth. 
Until 2013, the slowdown was predominantly driven by external factors, however, the role of 
domestic factors has increased in the past two years and have come to the forefront as the 
predominant forces behind slowing growth in BRICS. This reflects declining potential growth, 
compounded  by  a  deterioration  in  fiscal  positions  of  BRICS  and  political  dynamics  which 
have dented confidence and increased pressure. 
The question then is, does BRICS still matter and should it occupy so much of our attention? 
BRICS  account  for  about  two-thirds  of  emerging  market  GDP.  The  World  Bank  has 
estimated that in the event that growth in BRICS economies fell one percentage point below 
                                                
5  Whitman Lecture, What Lies Ahead for the Global Economy, A BRICS Perspective, October 2014. 
6  BRICS New World Order is now on Hold, Wall Street Journal, Davos 2016. 
7  The  Role  of  Emerging  Markets  in  a  New  Global  Partnership  for  Growth,  By  Christine  Lagarde,  Managing 
Director, International Monetary Fund, University of Maryland, February 4, 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  expectations, this would knock 0.8 percentage points off growth in other emerging markets 
over a period of two years and reduce global growth by 0.4 percentage points. The effects of 
a  BRICS  slowdown  on  other  emerging  markets  and  the  global  economy  are  significantly 
worse if one assumes that financial sector turbulence  will also accompany the slowdown.8 
These effects are a result of unintended knock-on effects, in the form of financial, trade and 
economic  spill-overs.  In  this  context,  the  BRICS  are  at  an  important  juncture  and  the 
question is how does BRICS emerge from the current dismal conjuncture? It should be noted 
that the slowdown of BRICS hampers the scope for a speedy recovery of the world economy 
given the much greater weight of BRICS in the global economy. 
As  we  have  heard  time and  again,  a combination  of  proactive  countercyclical  policies  and 
structural  reforms  are  needed  to  reinvigorate  domestic  economies  and  economic  growth. 
While the recipe for success are of course not the same for all, the ingredients for success 
are  mostly  the  same  and  include  inter  alia  encouraging  greater  private  sector  investment, 
labour  market  reforms,  stronger  protection  for  intellectual  property  rights,  and  addressing 
infrastructure bottlenecks, amongst others. Given the sheer size, vast resources and youthful 
populations  of  the  BRICS  countries,  the  potential  of  this  grouping  for  both  domestic  and 
global  outcomes  is  beyond  question.  Indeed,  recessions  in  Brazil  and  Russia  and  slower 
growth in South Africa are expected to bottom out this year, while China may experience only 
a modest slowdown and India continues to expand at a robust pace. 
This brings me to the next point of my speech, which is the progress that BRICS has made in 
terms  of  collaborating  and  setting  up  institutions  to  help  address  common  challenges  and 
risks that lie ahead. 
The achievements of BRICS 
5. 
The  BRICS  grouping  have  achieved  much  since  the  first  political  dialogue  in  September 
2006 and the first BRIC Summit which took place in June 2009. In the seven years since the 
first Summit, the BRICS countries have established the New Development Bank (NDB), and 
the Contingent Reserve Arrangement (CRA), amongst other initiatives. In my view, these are 
quite significant  achievements  in  a  relatively  short  period  of time.  For  the  purposes  of this 
talk, I would like to focus on these two initiatives. 
The  establishment  of  the  BRICS  NDB  marked  a  milestone  in  BRICS  co-operation  and  as 
mentioned by some analysts is a testament of the “coming of age” of these countries in the 
world  of  development  finance.  Others  have  mentioned  that  the  NDB  was  established  to 
challenge  the  post-Second  World  War  international  economic  order,  that  is,  the  Bretton 
Woods  System.  However,  as  has  been  indicated  previously  by  many  other  BRICS 
colleagues, one of the objectives of the NDB is to promote South–South co-operation and to 
better serve the needs of developing countries through the promotion of infrastructure and 
sustainable  development.  Against  this  background,  the  NDB  should  rather  be  seen  as  a 
complement  to,  rather  than  a  challenge  or  as  competition  to  existing  Bretton  Woods 
institutions.  In the future,  the World  Bank  and  the  NDB  may  look  to co-operate  and  by  so 
doing, enhance the international development financing system. 
The NDB is well under way in mobilising resources for infrastructure development projects. 
The NDB has appointed its first President and has a fully functioning Board of Governors and 
Board  of  Directors.  The  NDB  has  already  disbursed  its  first  funds  for  renewable  energy 
projects in all five BRICS nations, while the NDB Board has also approved the first five year 
Yuan  bonds.  The  NDB  is  in  the  process  of  seeking  an  international  rating  where  after 
issuance on international markets will be pursued. 
                                                
8  World Bank Global Economic Prospects 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  What makes the NDB a “new” development bank. Firstly, it has new financing sources in that 
the financing will come from the world’s major developing economies, within the framework 
of new South–South co-operation. Secondly, the financing is largely devoted to meeting the 
needs  of  developing  countries  for  infrastructure  development.  This  is  different  because 
MDBs  are  largely  devoted  to  reducing  global  and  regional  poverty  along  with  many  other 
priorities, which limits the finance available for infrastructure development. Thirdly, it has new 
financing  mechanisms  which  focuses  on  a  more  equal  and  balanced  development 
partnership  in  the  relations  between  major  developing  countries  and  with  their  smaller 
developing counterparts. The NDB plans to use market-oriented operations to reduce loan 
costs  and  provide  innovative  loan  facilities  so  that  developing  countries  will  have  a  more 
robust, flexible and customer-oriented development finance service.9 
The CRA Treaty of the BRICS countries was signed in July 2014 and came into effect a year 
later  with  the  finalisation  of  all  the  operational  requirements  pertaining  to  the  Treaty.  The 
CRA  is  basically  a  self-managed  contingent  reserve  arrangement  to  forestall  short-term 
balance  of  payments  pressures,  provide  mutual  support  and  further  strengthen  financial 
stability. Once again, as with the establishment of the NDB, the CRA is not meant to replace 
any  financing  arrangements  under  the  IMF,  but  is  rather  a  complement  to  existing 
international monetary and financial arrangements and in the main helps to strengthen the 
global financial safety net. The arrangement is important because it provides the possibility to 
quickly obtain additional liquidity in the event of a crisis. As yet, none of the BRICS countries 
have had a need to call upon the CRA. 
There are a number of new initiatives being discussed under the BRICS agenda, with a view 
to furthering the work already undertaken and cementing the progress that has been made to 
date. 
Allow  me  now  to  briefly  touch  on  recent  economic  developments  in  South  Africa,  before  I 
conclude my address today. 
Recent economic developments in South Africa 
The South African economy has slowed in recent years, from growing by almost 6 per cent 
prior to the global financial crisis, to a mere 1,3 per cent in 2015. In the first quarter of 2016, 
growth contracted by 1,2 per cent. South Africa has been buffeted by a number of negative 
developments,  namely,  the  slowdown  in  China  and  reduction  in  commodity  prices;  weak 
demand  in  advanced  and  emerging  market  economies,  as  well  the  deterioration  in  growth 
prospects  for  the  Sub-Saharan  Africa  region;  policy  uncertainty;  and  suffering  one  of  the 
worst droughts on record during 2015/2016. According to the SARB’s most recent forecast 
the economy will only grow by a meagre 0.6 per cent in 2016. However, the Bank expects 
that  the  first  quarter  GDP  number  represents  the  low  point,  and  a  slow  upward  trend  is 
expected  going  forward.  This  view  is  consistent  with  the  favourable  developments  in  a 
number  of 
the 
manufacturing  sector  and  an  increase  in  the  real  value  of  non-residential  building  plans 
passed. A modest recovery is expected in the next two years, with growth forecast at 1,3 per 
cent and 1,7 per cent respectively. 
Amidst  a  worsening  growth  outlook,  the  inflation  outlook  has  also  deteriorated  with  an 
extended breach of the 3 – 6 per cent inflation target expected, while inflation expectations 
remain at uncomfortably high levels. The exchange rate remains one of the biggest risks to 
the  inflation  outlook  and  highly  sensitive  to  domestic  political  developments  and  the  ever-
changing  risks  associated  with  US  monetary  policy.  Brexit  is  a  further  factor  whose  full 
impact on South African financial markets and the economy is still unknown. South Africa’s 
the  Barclays  Purchasing  Managers 
indicators,  such  as 
Index 
for 
                                                
9  BRICS  Insight  Paper  2,  New  South-South  Co-operation  and  the  BRICS  New  Development  Bank,  by  Zhu 
Jiejin. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  policy rate has been adjusted upwards by 200 basis points since January 2014, in line with 
rising inflation risks. However, it is quite obvious that the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) 
faces a policy dilemma as reflected by the inflation and growth dynamics. The South African 
Reserve  Bank  operates  within  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework,  and  this  requires 
carefully calibrated policy decisions. These decisions need to appropriately take account of 
the evolving international and domestic economic and financial markets environment. They 
also need to protect the credibility of the framework in managing inflation expectations. And 
while policy decisions need to be sensitive to growth dynamics, they also need to take into 
account  that  monetary  policy  cannot  address  structural  deficiencies  holding  back  the 
economy. 
Conclusion 
Let me then conclude by saying that the challenging times we face as the BRICS are by no 
means unique to us. Indeed, the entire global economy is at a difficult juncture at present. 
While we may have emerged from the global financial crisis, the recovery has by no means 
been as robust as one would have liked. 
The challenges we face need to be tackled decisively and provide us with the opportunities 
to  implement  meaningful  reforms,  which  ultimately  can  lead  to  strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth.  Such efforts  are  well  underway. What  has  been  broken  can  certainly  be 
fixed, and I have no doubt that the BRICS, along with the rest of the global economy, through 
better co-ordination and collaboration will emerge stronger. 
Thank you. 
References: 
www.nkibrics.ru/system/brics/.../BRICS_AND_THE_GLOBAL_ECONOMY.pdf 
BRICS and the Global Economy, Dr Bandi Ram Prasad, Financial Technologies Knowledge 
Management. 
BRICS Insight Paper 2, New South-South Co-operation and the BRICS New Development 
Bank, by Zhu Jiejin. 
The  Role  of  Emerging  Markets  in  a  New  Global  Partnership  for  Growth,  By  Christine 
Lagarde, Managing Director, International Monetary Fund, University of Maryland, February 
4, 2016. 
BRICS Joint Statistical Publication 2015. 
South Africa in BRICS, www.brics5.co.za/. 
www.ndbbrics.org. 
Statement of the Monetary Policy Committee, 19 May 2016. 
World Bank Global Economic Prospects 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
