  Luis M Linde: An outlook on the Spanish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  Official  Monetary  and 
Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF), London, 9 February 2016. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  OMFIF  and  Mr.  David  Marsh  for  the  invitation  to  participate  in  this 
Forum, an initiative that favours public and private sector interactions and the exchange of 
views on topics of common interest. 
According  to  the  title  of  my  intervention,  I  will  comment  on  the  current  situation  of  the 
Spanish economy, with a special focus on developments in employment, the external sector 
and fiscal adjustment. I shall continue with a brief review of some of the reforms undertaken 
that  have  laid  the  foundations  underpinning  the  recovery.  I  will  continue  with  some 
references to the situation of the banking sector and the challenges it is confronted with; and 
I will conclude with some comments on the growth perspectives of the Spanish economy. 
Current performance of the Spanish economy 
The  current  performance  of  the  Spanish  economy  shows  robust  growth,  employment 
creation and a surplus in the external balance. The simultaneous occurrence of these three 
positive developments has not been very usual in recent decades in the Spanish economy. 
We  should  also  mention  the  ongoing  deleveraging  process,  which  should  be  considered 
necessary and positive. 
The  recovery  of  the  Spanish  economy  started  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  following  the 
severe contraction that took place in the preceding years. According to the estimates of GDP 
growth for the fourth quarter, the economic expansion extended into the final part of 2015, 
setting  the  rate  of  growth  at  3.2%  for  the  whole  year.  Spain  thus  recorded  the  strongest 
economic growth amongst the main economies in the euro area. 
Certainly, these developments were supported by some tailwinds, whose impact on growth 
rates is expected to decay over time. I refer here to the fall in oil prices, the depreciation of 
the euro and the easing in financing conditions. But, quite obviously, these factors were also 
present in other economies which posted significantly lower growth rates. This underlines the 
fact  that  elements  of  a  more  permanent  nature  lie  behind  the  recent  performance  of  the 
Spanish economy, these elements being linked to the correction of the previous imbalances 
and the reforms that have been undertaken. 
Concerning  prices,  the  latest  estimate  for  the  harmonized  price  index  in  Spain  was 
moderately  negative  in  January  (minus  0.4%),  due  to  a  decline  in  energy  prices,  and  it  is 
expected to remain in negative territory for the coming months. The indicator that excludes 
energy prices went up moderately in the course of last year, in line with the reduction in the 
degree of slack of the economy. 
In the euro area, overall prices showed an increase of 0.4% in January, that is, 0.8 pp above 
the rate recorded in Spain. Thus, the Spanish economy continues to gain competitiveness 
vis  à  vis  the  euro  area.  That  said,  low  inflation  in  the  eurozone  adds  some  additional 
pressure on the adjustments of the Spanish economy. 
The  recovery  of  activity  has  proceeded  alongside  significant  employment  creation. 
Employment  grew  at  an  annual  rate  of  3.2%  in  January.  Social  security  affiliates  have 
increased by more than half a million people in 2015, a figure closely in line with the latest 
numbers provided by the labour statistics. The unemployment rate stood at 20.9% at the end 
of last year, 2.8 percentage points lower than a year earlier and 5.4 percentage points below 
the peak at the beginning of 2013, but this is still a very high figure comparing it with Europe 
or the Eurozone. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The  favourable  dynamics  of  the  labour  market  since  the  start  of  the  recovery  can  be 
explained, at least partially, by the process of wage moderation which, in turn, is associated 
with the effects of the 2012 labour market reform. 
Balance of payments 
The performance of the external sector in recent years has been remarkable. In terms of the 
current account balance, Spain has successfully addressed deficits around 10% of GDP at 
the beginning of the international financial crisis turning them around to surpluses above 1% 
of  GDP  since  2014.  Exports  of  goods  and  services  have  been  a  key  driver  of  these 
developments, with sales abroad growing well in excess of export markets themselves. This 
vigorous behaviour of exports is strongly related to the improvement in cost competitiveness 
and to the need for Spanish firms to search for new markets abroad, all of which has resulted 
in a significant increase in the diversification of export markets. 
Deleverage 
Corporate  and  households  debt  has  followed  a  downward  path  since  mid-2010,  when  it 
reached its highest levels in terms of GDP. The deleveraging process is now quite advanced. 
In September 2015 (latest available data), the ratio of debt to GDP for corporates (excluding 
intercompany  loans)  stood  at  88%,  and  for  households  at  69%,  30  and  16  p.p.  below  the 
peak levels of 2010. As a result, the gap with the EMU average has been reduced from its 
peak of 37 percentage points (p.p. ) to 10 p.p. for non-financial corporations, and from 20 to 
10 p.p. for families. 
Since the start of the recovery, the reduction in the indebtedness of the private sector as a 
whole has not prevented new bank lending from flowing to borrowers with potential profitable 
projects and/or a good export performance. The share of companies whose credit stock has 
not declined has shown an increasing trend in the last two years and the rate of decline of 
NFC aggregate debt has moderated. 
With regard to the public sector, the ratio of debt to GDP is expected to have stabilised in 
2015, according to the official targets. Should that aim have been accomplished, the upward 
trend in public debt commencing 2008 would have been finally controlled after an increase of 
60 points of GDP. 
The basis of the recovery: the structural reforms 
Now, I will briefly elaborate on the main reforms which have been the basis of our recovery. 
These reforms have been oriented towards increasing the flexibility and competitiveness of 
the economy and addressing previous imbalances. For the sake of brevity, I will concentrate 
on the labor market reform, the reforms to ensure budgetary discipline and sustainability, and 
the reforms on the public pension system. 
Labor market reform 
The labour market reform has been key in the process of correcting the imbalances of the 
Spanish  economy,  where  we  can  mention,  first  of  all,  the  losses  of  competitiveness 
accumulated between 2002 and 2008 and very high unemployment. 
The  reform  approved  in  2012  made  important  changes  in  the  institutional  framework, 
including a reduction in the degree of centralisation of the collective bargaining system, an 
alleviation of dismissal costs and of the complexity of procedures, and a widening of hiring 
possibilities. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In a nutshell, the reform attempts to avoid repeating the previous pattern under which firms 
adjusted  to  an  economic  slowdown  either  by  dismissing  workers  or  by  closing  down, 
providing firms with increased flexibility to link wage negotiations to their particular economic 
conditions, and the possibility of opting-out from sectoral agreements, giving greater priority 
to firm-level ones. 
Fiscal adjustment 
The  Spanish  economy  has  made  visible  progress  in  the  redressing  of  fiscal  balances 
towards levels that are compatible with the sustainability of public finances. The adjustment 
has required strong measures both on the revenue and the expenditure sides. 
From  near  double  digit  deficits  in  the  early  years  of  the  current  decade,  the  deficit  was 
reduced to 5.9% of GDP in 2014. The commitments with the European authorities involve a 
further reduction of fiscal imbalances in 2015 and 2016. In this respect, public deficit targets 
are set to 4.2% and 2.8% for 2015 and 2016, respectively. 
Despite  the  additional  efforts  shown  in  the  most  recent  budgetary  information  (up  to 
November 2015), the fulfilment of these targets is not without risks. To tackle these risks it 
will be important to ensure a strict implementation of the budget, both at the national and the 
regional  levels  and,  if  the  need  arises,  to  be  ready  to  take  the  appropriate  corrective 
measures within the framework of European Union fiscal governance. 
But the challenges should not cloud the fiscal consolidation effort already made. This can be 
easily seen in the structural primary balance’s evolution, which turned around from a deficit 
of 5.2% of GDP in 2010 to an estimated surplus of 0.6% of GDP for 2015, according to the 
latest European Commission figures. It is worth remembering that the bulk of this adjustment 
was  made  through  a  severe  economic  recession  and  under  very  stressed  conditions  in  a 
fragmented Eurozone financial market. 
Several  legal  reforms to  ensure  budgetary  discipline  and  sustainability  have  contributed  to 
these  developments.  Among  those  I  would  highlight  the  2011  Constitutional  reform  which 
enshrined the principles of budgetary discipline and fiscal sustainability the maximum legal 
status;  the  2012  Law  on  Budgetary  Stability  and  Financial  Sustainability  which  sets  these 
principles  in  Spanish  legislation;  and  the  creation  in  2013  of  a  new  Independent  Fiscal 
Responsibility Authority. 
Pension reform 
The  recent  pension  reform  aims  at  achieving  financial  sustainability  of  the  Social  Security 
System.  It  provides  automatic  mechanisms  to  absorb  the  challenges  originated  by  the 
foreseen  gradual  ageing  of  the  population  and  those  from  adverse  developments  in  the 
economy. 
The most important change has been the establishment of a new mechanism for calculating 
the annual revaluation of pensions and the introduction of the so-called “sustainability factor” 
from 2019 onwards. The revaluation formula sets an annual pension increase based on the 
system’s budget constraints, replacing the previous mechanism in which this increase was 
linked to changes in the CPI. The sustainability factor is an automatic mechanism linking the 
initial retirement pensions to life expectancy. 
The Spanish financial system 
Now, I will briefly comment on several issues relating to the current situation of the Spanish 
banking system. 
After  experiencing  a  severe  crisis,  far-reaching  reforms  have  been  implemented  in  the 
Spanish banking sector. These reforms can be summed up along three significant lines: an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  intense restructuring process in terms of size and capacity; the sanitisation of bank balance 
sheets  (recognition  and  treatment  of  bad  assets);  and  the  recapitalization  of  individual 
institutions and the entire system. 
The  levels  of  solvency  of  the  Spanish  banking  system  are  currently  well  above  regulatory 
minimums. The top quality capital ratio, namely Common Equity Tier 1 or CET1, of Spanish 
banking  institutions  stood  last  June  at  12.4%;  and  the  overall  capital  ratio  was  14.3%,  far 
exceeding the regulatory minimum levels. 
Regarding  domestic  business,  since  early  2014,  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  have 
continued  to  decline,  in  line  with  the  pick-up  in  economic  activity.  The  refinanced  or 
restructured credit to the resident private sector has also been declining. This has enabled 
the  NPL  ratio  to  fall  to  11.2%.  Even  so,  for  historical  standards,  the  volume  of  NPLs  and 
foreclosed assets on institutions’ balance sheets still remains high. 
Total  consolidated  profits  of  Spanish  banks  have  continued  the  recovery  initiated  in  2013, 
with the return on equity (ROE) standing at 9.2% and the return on assets (ROA) at 0.63% in 
June 2015. The improvement was due both to an increase in net interest income – driven by 
positive  developments  in  business  earnings  outside  Spain  from  internationally  diversified 
banks  –  and  to  the  containment  of  certain  costs  which  pushed  down  profits.  These  costs 
refer, on the one hand, to operating expenses (employees and offices restructuring), and, 
on  the  other,  to  the  decline  in  asset  impairments  as  a  result  of  the  provisioning  efforts 
already made and the recovery of the economic activity. 
I would note that the subsidiary model followed by the main Spanish banking groups for their 
international expansion, with high local autonomy, benefits from certain characteristics which, 
I dare to say, are not always well understood. To mention one of its main distinctive features: 
in this model, subsidiaries are autonomous in both capital and liquidity, therefore, limiting the 
contagion  risk  between  the  Group’s  units,  while  benefitting  from  revenues  and  risk 
diversification.  It  is  well  known  by  markets  and  supervisors  that  this  model  helped  the 
Spanish banking sector and the Spanish economy through the financial crisis. 
Banking  business  today  has  to  face  rapid  technological  change,  new  regulations,  growing 
competitive pressure and low interest rates. These challenges are shared by many different 
banks throughout the world and, obviously, are not exclusive to the Spanish banking system. 
But now I will focus on the three main sources of pressure on the domestic income statement 
of Spanish banks. 
In the current scenario of very low interest rates, the loan-deposit gap is at historically very 
narrow levels (around 1%). Where the interest rate spread is so tight, the sustainability of net 
interest income over time needs an adequate level of activity to offset, by volume, the scant 
contribution of price to the income statement. But this is not the case at present, as banking 
activity levels are still low, and precisely this is the second source of pressure on the income 
statement.  The  third  one  is  the  significant  volume  of  non-productive  assets  (NPLs  and 
foreclosures) remaining on banks’ balance sheets although, as I mentioned earlier, the data 
shows a positive trend with a significant decline over the last two years. 
In a period of far-reaching changes in the banking sector, it is important for banks to improve 
their  efficiency,  so  as  to  remain  viable  competitors.  Banks  could  do  this  through  various 
means,  for  example  redesigning  their  networks,  redefining  their  capacity  and  efficiency, 
enhancing their geographical diversification, and increasing specialization in certain market 
segments.  From  this  perspective,  a  number  of  analysts  and  market  participants  expect  a 
greater  degree  of  consolidation  in  the  Spanish  banking  sector.  The  start-up  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  gradual  disappearance  of  barriers  against  banking 
integration  at  the  European  level  facilitate  a  new  operational  framework  for  banks,  when 
defining  their  strategies  through  the  Eurozone  and  the  area  covered  by  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions: growth perspectives 
Now, to conclude: 
According  to  most  analysts,  public  and  private  alike,  the  Spanish  economy  is  expected  to 
continue growing at sustained rates in the medium term. In particular, GDP might increase at 
a  rate  around  2.8%  in  2016  according  to  the  consensus.  This  figure  is  well  above  the 
estimated rate for the euro area average. 
However, this central scenario is not free from risks. 
The  international  environment  has  not  only  deteriorated  recently,  but  it  has  also  become 
more vulnerable due to the extent of the slowdown of the global economy -in particular, of 
some emerging economies, as far as they may affect world growth and international trade- 
and  the  evolution  of  commodity  prices,  in  a  context  where  there  are  doubts  about  the 
reaction of markets to the normalization of US monetary policy. 
On  the  Spanish  domestic  political  front,  it  is  obvious  that  the  uncertainty  regarding  the 
formation  of  a  new  government may  affect  investment  and consumption  decisions.  So far, 
the  impact  on  the  Spanish  financial  markets  has  been  limited.  In  any  case,  I  take  it  for 
granted that any new government will show respect towards European Union commitments 
and the general framework of the European Union fiscal governance. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
