   Ong Chong Tee: Regulatory landscape for 2016 – positioning for a 
dynamic, trusted and vibrant market 
Keynote address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of 
the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  SGX  Equities  Dialogue  2016,  Singapore, 
28 January 2016. 
 Mr Loh Boon Chye, CEO of SGX 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good afternoon. I am delighted to join you at the inaugural SGX Equities Dialogue. 
A challenging start 
1. 2016 has started on a challenging note for global stock markets. The first trading week of 
this year alone saw global markets losing close to S$3 trillion,1 led by sharp declines in the 
Chinese stock market. The STI Index has fallen by more than 20% during the last 12 months 
to the lowest level since October 2011. Oil prices are testing lows last seen in 2004 and many 
other commodity prices are also under downward pressure.  
2. The prevailing negative market sentiments reinforce the importance of various measures 
undertaken by both MAS and SGX together with different market stakeholders, to build a more 
robust  and  resilient  financial  market.  These  include  areas  relating  to  capital,  liquidity  and 
margin rules, infrastructure resilience and so on; all of which complement various measures 
on promoting high standards of professional conduct, improved corporate disclosures as well 
as retail investor education. We have also worked with the industry at large on regular stress 
tests  and  crisis  management  exercises. The  current  uncertain  macroeconomic  and market 
environments underscore the importance of staying vigilant to new or growing risk areas and 
vulnerabilities. 
3.  But  it  is  also  important  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  long-term  positives.  Our  capital  markets 
continue  to  attract  a  diverse  range  of  players  and  activities.  Besides  SGX,  international 
exchange  groups  such  as  the  InterContinental  Exchange  (ICE)  and  EUREX,  have  or  will 
establish exchanges and clearing houses in Singapore. These will add to the vibrancy of our 
exchange landscape in parallel with the continued growth in our asset management industry. 
The last asset management survey done for 2014 showed robust growth in total assets under 
management,  with  assets  under  management  increasing  by  30%  to  S$2.4 trillion. There  is 
clearly  a  role for  our  capital  markets to  help match  savers  and  users  of  capital  and  in  the 
management of financial risks.  
4. The SGX Equities Dialogue this afternoon is a good occasion for sharing, discussion and 
reflection on developments affecting our securities market. Allow me to use this address to 
share some thoughts on our market regulatory structure, and MAS’ roles in market surveillance 
and enforcement; and I will conclude by sharing some shorter remarks on new trends and on 
skills development.  
A sound regulatory system 
5.  As  an  international  centre,  Singapore’s  financial  market  is  influenced  by  many  external 
factors.  The  growth  of  our  financial  sector  in  part  has  been  driven  by  our  ability  to  attract 
                                                
1   Source: 
george-soros-says 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-07/global-markets-at-the-beginning-of-a-crisis-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   international  investors,  traders  and  financial  intermediaries  to  participate  in  our  financial 
markets, and for foreign corporates to tap our markets for their funding and hedging needs. 
Clearly, Singapore does not and cannot operate in isolation from rest of the world; indeed, we 
have become an important node in the global financial system.  
6. Singapore’s attraction and standing as an international financial centre must be underpinned 
by investor confidence in a stable business environment, with clear rule of law and a sound 
regulatory  framework.  Only  when  there  is  confidence  and  stability  in  the  system  would 
corporates,  financial  institutions  and  individuals  tap  our  financial  centre  to  invest,  to  raise 
capital and to manage risks.  
7. As our markets develop, we must continue to safeguard this reputation of integrity, trust and 
resilience. Because many global financial institutions operate here, we have to also measure 
ourselves to international standards and expectations by incorporating international rules and 
best  practices  where  appropriate.  In the  securities markets,  the  MAS  has  an  active  role  in 
international  standard  setting  bodies  such  as  International  Organisation  of  Securities 
Commissions  (IOSCO);  as  an  example,  we  co-chair  a  CPMI-IOSCO  Working  Group  on 
strengthening the cyber resilience of financial market infrastructures, including dealing with 
cyber-threats. 
8. As exchanges in Singapore are key financial market infrastructure with a global participation, 
they are regulated to meet international standards. Many of these standards are implemented 
through the exchanges’ own business rules to ensure fair and orderly trading.  
9. This brings me to the subject of SGX as a self-regulatory organisation or SRO. Singapore’s 
capital markets operate under a dual-level regulatory framework. The MAS is the statutory 
regulator, and we have the broad mandate of overseeing the proper functioning of financial 
markets, including exchanges like the Singapore Exchange (SGX) and newer entrants such 
as  ICE  Futures  Singapore  (ICE  Futures)  and  EUREX.  The  MAS,  as  you  all  know,  is  an 
integrated  financial  supervisor  and  our  Capital  Markets  Group  performs  the  equivalent 
regulatory functions as other standalone securities regulators including the SEC in the US, the 
SFC  in  Hong  Kong  or  ASIC  in  Australia;  our regulatory  powers  encompass  policy  making, 
supervision and enforcement. 
10. The exchanges, with their frontline interface with industry players, traders and investors, 
perform complementary and important roles in ensuring fair, orderly and transparent markets. 
The exchanges are accountable to MAS on how they exercise these regulatory responsibilities. 
11. Questions have been raised, and quite understandably so, on whether a listed for-profit 
exchange can discharge its role as a regulator. 
12. In  Singapore,  this  issue  has  been  reviewed  periodically  since  the  demutualisation  and 
merger  of  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Singapore  (SES)  and  Singapore  International  Monetary 
Exchange (SIMEX) in 1999, to form SGX. It is important to be mindful of what the SRO function 
entails.  
13. Let me elaborate. The SRO function goes beyond listings, which has been the main area 
of focus. This is partly because the listings function is the more visible part of the SRO to 
investors  and  listed  companies.  But  in  fact,  the  SRO  function  is  much  broader.  Besides 
functioning as a listing authority, the SGX’s SRO role also encompasses a market surveillance 
function to uphold the integrity of the market, and a member supervision function to ensure 
participants’ adherence to trading and clearing rules.  
14. So removing the SRO function from the SGX – as some have suggested – could mean 
that the exchange will not need to undertake market surveillance; nor to regulate members for 
compliance  with  rules  of  the  exchange.  Others  have  suggested  removing  only  the  listing 
authority function from SGX. But the flip side is that this risks losing the synergy of its regulatory 
function with its other roles pertaining to the development of a viable and credible marketplace; 
and creates ambiguity as to who oversees proper conduct of listed companies – the separate 
listing authority or the exchange.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   15.  It  is  worth  noting  that  SGX’s  SRO  function  is  neither  a  new  invention  nor  “uniquely 
Singapore”.  Exchange  self-regulation  has  a  long  history  in  financial  markets  and  in  many 
established  markets.  Most,  if  not  all  exchanges  globally,  perform  a  varying  range  of  SRO 
functions. Global exchanges – like the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), NASDAQ, ICE and 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) in the US, and London Stock Exchange (LSE) in the UK, 
and  Hong  Kong  Exchange  (HKEx),  Australian  Securities  Exchange  (ASX)  Group  and  the 
Japan Exchange (JPX) Group in Asia – are also SROs. This brings me to my next point. 
16. There is no single “correct” model for the SRO. Neither is a particular model cast in stone 
and unchangeable. The division of regulatory responsibilities between the statutory regulator 
and the exchange’s SRO function – or some other regulatory model – has to reflect and adapt 
to each jurisdiction’s circumstances, market environment and other idiosyncrasies. To illustrate 
this diversity: 
• 
In  the  US,  the  SEC  has  primary  responsibility  for  reviewing  IPO  filings  made  by 
companies. Member supervision is undertaken by the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (FINRA), a separate industry SRO which supervises all securities broker 
dealers. US exchanges are responsible for market surveillance, although some have 
outsourced the duties to FINRA.  
In UK, the LSE performs market surveillance and member supervision, while listings 
are approved by its statutory regulator i.e. the Financial Conduct Authority.   
In Asia, HKEx, JPX Group and ASX Group perform all SRO functions in the areas of 
listings, member supervision and market surveillance, much like in Singapore. There 
may  also  be  additional structures  and  processes  in  place to  supplement the  SRO 
functions. For example HKEx has an independent Listing Committee that makes all 
formal decisions on listing applications.  
  17. The varied practices across the globe suggest the viability of different SRO models with 
their attendant benefits and limitations that may be appropriate to one jurisdiction while not 
necessarily  to  others.  But  what  is  common  is  that  the  notion  of  exchanges  as  frontline 
regulators has not been radically changed nor dismantled.  
18.  In  Singapore’s  context,  when  we  review  the  role  of  the  MAS  vis-à-vis  an  SRO,  a  key 
consideration is who is better placed to make that assessment of risk-return tradeoffs in the 
strategy to support a sustained thriving marketplace. A stringent set of entry or policing criteria 
can limit growth and development; a loose set of criteria can undermine long-term confidence 
of market participants including investors and companies. On either end, the exchange’s own 
shareholders and other stakeholders including the investing public will be worse off. In addition, 
we have to consider who is in a more nimble position to manage the different types of risks 
posed by market participants on the exchange itself including early detection and preliminary 
investigations.  
19. I should emphasise that these do not mean that concerns over potential conflict of interest 
especially with respect to the listing function are unfounded. Hence the MAS regularly reviews 
the extent to which the SRO functions – listings, member supervision and surveillance – should 
reside with the exchange. The answer is not necessarily a binary “yes” or “no” outcome each 
time but involves a review of whether there are sufficient safeguards and conflict-mitigants 
incorporated into the exchange’s governance, organisation structure and including its reward 
and recognition system in relation to the SRO function. 
20.  I  will  highlight  our  recent  review  in  the  three  areas  of  listing,  member  supervision  and 
market surveillance. Much work has been done to enhance the exchange’s role around listings. 
We believe that SGX – as the only securities exchange in Singapore – remains an appropriate 
listing authority. SGX has raised its admission criteria, and enhanced the governance process 
by  setting  up  three  new  independent  listings  committees  to  complement  SGX’s  listing  and 
disciplinary processes. The committees comprise a diverse mix of reputable, independent and 
experienced individuals to represent both investor and public interest. We believe these are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   positive  developments  and  we  should  allow  these  committees  to  carry  out  their  respective 
oversight functions. 
21. However, we have also determined that there is scope to recalibrate the responsibilities of 
the exchange vis-à-vis the MAS in the areas of member supervision and market surveillance. 
The impetus for such a recalibration is not because we think that there is material or potential 
conflict-of-interest  risk.  Rather,  as  Singapore’s  financial  landscape  features  more  than  one 
exchange,  it  is  not  efficient  to  have  each  exchange  carry  out  similar  supervisory  roles  of 
common members.  
Member supervision 
22. Therefore, with respect to member supervision, MAS will redefine the scope of regulatory 
responsibilities between MAS and exchanges so that overlaps faced by intermediaries who 
are members of different exchanges, and at the same time regulated by MAS, are minimised. 
To elaborate, exchanges typically supervise intermediaries to ensure that they comply with the 
exchange rules, uphold high standards of market integrity and are financially sound. MAS, on 
the  other  hand,  supervise  intermediaries  for  compliance  with  MAS’  statutory  licensing 
requirements pertaining to systemic and conduct risks.  
23. In practice, exchange rules can and do overlap with the statutory requirements under the 
Securities and Future Act. The regular dialogue and co-ordination between MAS and SGX 
have allowed us to manage inspection visits in a way that reduces the burden on intermediaries 
who are both licensed by MAS and are members of SGX.  
24. However, this will become more challenging when more than one exchange operates in 
Singapore. For example, an intermediary that is licensed by MAS, can also be a member of 
both SGX and ICE Futures; it should not have to undergo three separate inspections a year, 
especially if a number of areas are duplicative. 
25. In the US which has many more exchanges, they have either set up a separate industry 
SRO to undertake member supervision in the case of the securities market or relied on an 
exchange to play a “lead SRO” role in the futures market.  
26.  As  a  statutory  regulator,  MAS  will  remain  primarily  responsible  for  the  supervision  of 
intermediaries who are our licensees in areas of capital and reserves, business conduct, anti-
money laundering & counter terrorist financing (AML/CFT) and operational resilience. These 
are  areas  which  have  been  stipulated  in  our  regulations  and  notices,  and  are  statutory 
obligations to be complied with. Starting from this year, MAS will no longer require exchanges 
to inspect their members in these areas as long as the entities are licensed by MAS. In other 
words, MAS will effectively be the “lead regulator” in these areas.   
27. The need to form a separate SRO at this juncture for the purpose of member supervision 
is in our view, not compelling. It is unlikely to be an efficient model given the size of our market. 
In fact, it may require greater coordination since there will be more parties involved, namely 
MAS, the exchanges and yet another SRO.  
28.  The  exchanges  will  remain  responsible  for  areas  affecting  their  respective  market 
operations such as those relating to the priority of orders on a trading floor or risk management 
rules on margin requirements. In other words, these are business rules which members have 
to comply with, and may differ from exchange to exchange. Exchanges will need to supervise 
their  members  for  compliance,  in  accordance  with  the  risks  these  members  pose  to  the 
markets or clearing houses, and undertake disciplinary proceedings for members who breach 
their rules.  
29. Clearly, we cannot avoid all overlaps and even some differences between MAS’ regulations 
and  exchanges’  rules  in  certain  areas  such  as  those  relating  to  financial  resources  and 
business conduct requirements. This is in a way inevitable as MAS’ regulations have to cover 
all capital markets intermediaries regardless whether they are members of exchanges or not. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Exchanges,  depending  on  the  type  of  products  that  they  offer,  may  need  to  impose 
differentiated  requirements  on  different members  depending  on  the  assessment  of product 
risks and credit worthiness of their members, which may or may not be regulated by MAS. 
Protocols  on  information  sharing  between  MAS  and  exchanges’  SRO  units  will  hence  be 
mapped out.  
30. At a broader level, we believe this change will lead to greater supervisory efficiency and 
better  system-wide  risk  management.  While  exchanges  will  retain 
their  regulatory 
responsibilities in terms of member supervision, their resources can be concentrated on the 
supervision of members with significant risk exposures on their respective exchange. This can 
include members which are not under MAS’ oversight such as those based overseas.  
Market surveillance  
31. The MAS on our part will be enhancing our surveillance capabilities both within and across 
markets. The presence of multiple exchanges, each focused on its own markets, can give rise 
to blind spots as each exchange may not have the complete picture of common members’ 
exposure and activities. There are also certain markets such as in the OTC derivatives space 
that are not under the direct surveillance of exchanges.  
32. Hence MAS, as the statutory regulator, will be in a better position to aggregate and review 
different  pools  of  information  in  the  activities  across  exchanges  and  market  sectors  to 
anticipate possible risk and to investigate potential misconduct and market abuses.  
33. Advancement in technology, particularly in the field of data analytics, has brought about 
enhanced surveillance techniques. In terms of capacity building, the MAS will enhance our 
analytics and thematic studies of big datasets to detect hitherto complex patterns, for potential 
market misconduct and abuses. 
34. What all these mean, is that in each market, both the exchange and MAS will be looking 
out for potential risks, albeit based on different parameters. This will increase the robustness 
of the overall oversight of market activities. 
Robust enforcement and market discipline  
35. These enhancements to our surveillance efforts will complement, in a significant way, our 
enforcement actions against market misconduct. The objective is on early detection as well as 
to  support  more  expedient  investigations  and  tough  enforcement  actions.  This  will  also 
augment our toolkit to combat misdemeanors such as market manipulation and insider trading.  
36. MAS has and will spare no effort to investigate any serious market misconduct and to take 
appropriate enforcement action. This is not always an easy task because investigations into 
market misconduct often involve complex and large scale relationships, which will necessitate 
considerable  investigation  resources.  Market  misconduct  is  often  perpetrated  by  multiple 
parties,  some  of  whom  may  be  outside  our  jurisdiction.  Such  cross-border  investigations 
present additional challenges, as crucial evidence may be situated beyond the jurisdictional 
reach of enforcement agencies and require coordination by multiple agencies globally.   
37.  I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  joint  investigations  arrangement  between  MAS  and  the 
Commercial  Affairs  Department  (CAD)  which  commenced  last  year  for  all  potential  market 
misconduct offences has facilitated greater efficiency in the enforcement process and enabled 
both agencies to pursue more effective enforcement outcomes. There have been queries on 
the  status  of  the  investigations  by  MAS  and  CAD  in  the  penny  stocks  debacle;  it  is  still 
premature for me to comment but I just want to note that this is a complex exercise that is 
ongoing  and  involves  reviewing  vast  amounts  of  trade  data  from  more  than  500  trading 
accounts (both local and overseas), requiring our investigators to obtain and comb through 
more than 20,000 communication messages, many witnesses and other pieces of potential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   evidence. Investigations are at an advanced stage and charges are likely to be filed against 
the responsible parties in the course of this year. 
38.  Notwithstanding  the  complexity  of  current  or  future  investigations,  our  enforcement 
agencies will be relentless in our pursuit of persons who break our securities laws. We will also 
seek criminal actions or higher civil penalties in appropriate cases to send the right deterrent 
message. I encourage you to read our Capital Markets Enforcement monograph which outlines 
our philosophy and approach to enforcement.  
39. However, it is neither realistic nor desirable for regulators to police every single trade in 
our financial markets, which will require inordinate resources. Instead, the surveillance and 
enforcement functions of the MAS should be complemented by a culture of market discipline 
through  greater  transparency.  This  will  allow  market  participants  including  investors  and 
analysts to query, and to exercise their interests as stakeholders. As former Federal Reserve 
Chairman Alan Greenspan once said, “Transparency challenges market participants not only 
to  provide  information,  but  also  to  place  that  information  in  a  context  that  makes  it  more 
meaningful”.  
A dynamic and evolving market  
40. I will now move on to some broader development areas. Financial markets will evolve, in 
part driven by technology and as a response to regulatory requirements. Just as technology 
has improved operational efficiency of stock exchanges in the 1990s from an open-outcry pit 
system  to  real-time  electronic  trading  screens,  technology  will  continue  to  transform  and 
improve how exchanges and other financial market infrastructures work.  
41. The trend of financial markets “electronification” is inevitable as more financial products 
are standardised and traded electronically. We are likely to see more algorithmic trading which 
do  not  require  human  intervention  in  trading  decisions.  As  the  cost  of  setting  up  trading 
platforms  declines,  trading  venues  including  exchanges,  electronic  crossing  networks, 
multilateral trading facilities will proliferate and compete for liquidity. 
42. We have seen significant investments in technology to reduce latency and design in ever-
smarter  algorithms  to  trade  more  efficiently.  Whether  such  innovations  have  led  to  more 
efficient markets for end-users to invest and to manage their risks are still subject to some 
debate. Regulators worldwide also have been keeping abreast with innovative developments 
to  understand  newer  forms  of  risks  and  market  linkages,  as  well  as  to  embrace  the 
opportunities that these may bring. I will highlight a few examples that will be relevant to the 
world of exchanges. 
43. I think we can expect innovations in distributed ledger technology that will be applied to the 
“plumbing” of financial markets, areas which we hitherto tend to take for granted. A distributed 
system should in theory improve resilience as it theoretically removes the risk of a single point 
of  failure.  If  the  clearing  and  settlement  of  equity  trades  can  be  reduced  from  the  existing 
standard of 2–3 days to as little as 10 minutes, this will further reduce settlement risk. Some 
have said that the near instant settlement of transactions can transform the financial system 
and free up billions of dollars’ worth of collateral that is locked up during the trade settlement 
period.  
44. Technology can also lead to “commoditisation” of certain financial intermediation functions. 
Just 15 years ago, the cost of brokerage for retail investors was as much as 1%. But now our 
retail investors are able to access global markets at significantly lower brokerage costs. There 
will be no let up on cost pressure. We used to hear about brokerages such as E-Trade offering 
stock trading  at  a  $9.99 flat  commission;  now  we  have  the  likes  of  Robinhood  in  the  U.S. 
offering retail trading for free.  
45.  The  advent  of  “robo  advisers”  also  suggests  that  investors  can  access  automated 
investment  advice  on  their  Smartphones,  without  the  need  for  human  interface.  Some 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   commentators believe that computer algorithms can essentially provide customized advice to 
investors at a fraction of costs compared to human financial advisers.  
46. The interplay of new technology, different platforms and new players inevitably suggests 
faster and cheaper options ahead. These can impinge on the existing job roles in our financial 
marketplace.  Technology-driven  applications  may  very  well  become  alternatives  to  the 
traditional stockbroking service offering. If a consumer is already getting regular and instant 
updates on the markets using his Smartphone, it is only natural for him to expect higher service 
levels from his stockbroker beyond ad-hoc market updates and pure execution. If consumers 
are already comfortable with making and receiving payments instantly via internet banking, 
there will be calls to shorten if not eliminate the 2 to 3 days taken to settle and deliver his stock. 
So the business model of CDP as a central securities depository may need to be reviewed in 
future.  
Upskilling the stockbroking industry  
47.  This  leads  me  to  the  subject  of  skills  upgrading.  The  Government  has  launched  the 
SkillsFuture initiative last year, to allow all Singaporeans to acquire a mastery of skills and to 
be better prepared for future jobs. This can be helpful to financial market professionals such 
as our trading representatives as example. 
48. The Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (IBF) has  worked  with  SGX to  conduct  a  survey 
polling some 1,200 trading representatives last year for their feedback on their training needs 
and professional development. IBF has also organised extensive consultations with multiple 
stakeholders such as Securities Association of Singapore (SAS) and the Society of Remisiers 
of Singapore (SRS), as well as arranged focus group discussions with individual remisiers and 
dealers.  
49. As a follow up to these consultations, IBF will be introducing a new set of competency 
standards to help trading representatives acquire competencies to service their clients better. 
IBF will also be working closely with the SGX Academy, SRS as well as the larger broking-
firms to have in place a wide offering of training programmes to be made available to trading 
representatives  
50. MAS will continue to support the various training initiatives. All learning and development 
programmes formally recognised by IBF will receive at least 50% funding subsidy2 2 from the 
Financial  Sector  Development  Fund  (FSDF).  In  addition,  trading  representatives  who  are 
prepared  to  undergo  the  IBF  Standards  certification  programme  will  receive  70%  funding 
subsidy. You might be aware that the SkillsFuture Credit has already been rolled out early this 
month. Trading representatives can use the $500 Credit for eligible training programmes. I 
encourage all trading representatives to make use of these schemes to upskill themselves. 
51. MAS has also looked into some feedback from the industry that certain business conduct 
rules pose operational challenges to trading representatives who provide advice to customers 
on their trades. Currently, trading representatives are subject to the same requirements as 
those  imposed  on  financial  advisory  representatives,  and  are  required  to  take  into 
consideration the customer’s investment objectives, financial situation and particular needs to 
ensure suitability of the products recommended which can take time to do so. Yet we recognise 
the time-sensitive nature of execution services for listed non-complex products such as SGX-
listed shares. MAS will therefore look to exempt trading representatives from requirements that 
apply to financial advisory representatives by the middle of this year. This change will make it 
easier for trading representatives to provide investment advice on simple products. 
                                                
2   Funding subsidies are subject to eligibility criteria, grant caps and available to Singaporeans and Singaporean 
Permanent Residents only. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   Conclusion 
52. Finally, let me conclude here and thank you all for your patience and attention. May I wish 
everyone a very energetic and prosperous year of the Monkey. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
