 S S Mundra: ABCD of MSME credit 
  Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 2nd 
CII National Conference on MSME Funding, New Delhi, 23 August 2016. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Jose  Kattoor,  Ms.  Sudha  Vishwanathan  and  Shri  Sanjeev  Prakash  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1.  Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this  second  edition  of  the 
Conference on MSME Funding. I compliment the CII for having chosen a very relevant theme 
for  the  Conference  ‘Propelling  MSME  Growth  through  Enhanced  Financial  Access  and 
Support’. The theme lays emphasis on two crucial pillars that are pertinent for the sector i.e. 
enhancing financial access and ensuring adequate support to enable MSMEs to attain faster 
growth. 
2. It is universally recognized that small businesses are the best vehicles for generate jobs. A 
IFC /Mckinsey Study has estimated worldwide MSME population at 420 to 510 million, of which 
360 to 440 million alone, are in emerging markets. The report also estimates that the formal 
SMEs contribute up to 45 percent of total employment and up to 33 percent of national income 
(GDP) in emerging economies and these numbers could be significantly higher when informal 
SMEs are included. The Asia SME Finance Monitor 2014 published by the Asian Development 
Bank  has  estimated  that  96%  of  all  enterprises  in  the  Asian  region  fall  under  the  MSME 
category, absorb close to 2/3rd of the working force and contribute to about 42 % of GDP. 
3. According to MSME Ministry’s Annual Report for 2015-16, MSME sector in India today is a 
network  of  51  million  enterprises  providing  employment  to  117.1  million  persons  and 
contributing 37.5 per cent of India’s GDP1. The development of this sector is, therefore, crucial 
in generating significant levels of employment across the country, more so since we have a 
large young and educated population which is on lookout for employment. 
MSME – significance beyond job creation 
4. While  job  creation  is  certainly  critical,  small  businesses  play  a  far  greater  role  than  just 
providing employment. Let me state two key contributions of MSME sector here. 
5.  One,  the  MSME  sector  is  a  nursery  for  entrepreneurship  and  a  school  for  innovation. 
Countless medium and large corporates in India have evolved out of being micro and small 
sometime in not so distant past. I am sure many in the audience here, who own fairly large 
businesses today, would have cut their teeth in business through the route of micro and small 
enterprises. 
6.  Secondly,  MSME  sector  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  the  national  agenda  of  Financial 
Inclusion. Let me explain. Normally, when we talk about financial inclusion, we do so largely 
from the perspective of an individual or at best a household. However, to my mind, universal 
financial inclusion cannot be considered to have been achieved unless it is ensured that the 
micro  and  small  businesses  are  financially  included.  Credits  to  these  small  family  run  or 
individual  run  entities  from  the  formal  financial  channels  would  make  these  businesses 
sustainable and help them move out of poverty and propel them to a better quality of life. 
7. The surmise that I am trying to drive at is that if this is the sector that is the bulwark for such 
critical developmental paradigms, there are compelling enough reasons for all stakeholders- 
be they the Associations, the Financial Institutions, the regulators or the Government, to put 
                                                
1   Annual Report, Ministry of MSME 2015–16. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   all their might together in a convergent fashion so that the right environment is created to propel 
growth of MSMEs in our country. 
8. For achieving this objective, there is a need to create an ecosystem which can facilitate 
handholding and nurturing of MSME units particularly at the nascent stages. Also, there is a 
need to eliminate a host of impediments – of permits, of inspections, of red tape and provide a 
set of enablers – skill development, infrastructure, markets, technology etc. However, of all the 
enablers, probably none is more important than Credit. The IFC/Mckinsey has estimated the 
credit gap for formal and informal MSMEs worldwide at around $ 3.9 trillion globally, of which 
$2.1 to 2.6 trillion is in emerging markets. 
The ABCD of credit 
9. As I said, credit is perhaps the most critical component for MSME entrepreneurs. Provision 
for Credit is essentially dependent on four pivotal issues which I would call “ABCD” of credit. 
Let me take you through each of them and also explain what we are doing to iron out these 
issues. 
The á of credit – access/availability 
a)  
10.  The  4th  All  India  survey  of  MSMEs  states  that  close  to  90  per  cent  of  MSMEs  are 
dependent  on  informal  sources,  which  by  any  standards  is  a  worrisome  figure.  Since  that 
survey, some headway must have been made in improving MSMEs’ access to formal financial 
channels; however, it still remains a challenge. The public sector banks today have close to 
3000 specialized branches which specialize in lending to MSME units. Private sector banks 
have built up products and processes, which enable quick disbursal of loans. Most banks have 
switched over to centralized credit sanctioning, which enables better turnaround time. Many 
others have increased the credit limits to the field level functionaries. While these steps have 
improved access, there is still a huge unmet demand for credit for MSMEs2 (There is a total 
finance requirement of INR 32.5 trillion ($650 billion) in the MSME sector, which comprises of 
INR  26  trillion  ($  520  Billion)  of  debt  demand  and  INR  6.5  trillion  ($130 Billion)  of  equity 
demand).As per provisional data for period ended March 2016, total outstanding loan of the 
banking  system  to  MSME  sector  stood  at  around  11.1  trillion  rupees  in  20.6  million  loan 
accounts. Contrast this to the estimated need of INR 26 trillion and number of MSMEs at 51 
million. 
11. An important piece of the problem is adequacy of banking outlets. Small entrepreneurs are 
spread across remote locations in the country where physical bank branches are not available. 
Also, the banking correspondent mechanism is yet to mature to a level where they can play a 
key role in credit disbursal. Second and perhaps a more import dimension is availability of 
credit  at  a  time  when  it  is  required  by  the  entrepreneur.  Ability  of  small  entrepreneurs  to 
withstand life cycle shocks is extremely limited and hence availability of timely credit becomes 
critical for their survival. The formal financial system, due to a variety of reasons, which may 
include cumbersome procedures, lack of understanding of the business model, inability of the 
entrepreneur to meet the requirements of the banks etc., is unable to meet this immediate 
need of the entrepreneur. 
“B”- banks and business 
b)  
12. “B” in the “ABCD” paradigm of credit fundamentally refers to the information asymmetry 
between the two Bs – Banks and Business. 
The United States Agency for International Development (2009) defines a financially literate 
SME  owner/manager  as  “someone  who  knows  what  are  the  most  suitable  financing  and 
                                                
2   “Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Finance in India”, IFC, World Bank Group, November 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   financial  management  options  for  his/her  business  at  the  various  growth  stages  of  his/her 
business; knows where to obtain the most suitable products and services; and interacts with 
confidence with the suppliers of these products and services. He/she is familiar with the legal 
and regulatory framework and his/her rights and recourse options.” 
13.  I  don’t  think  that  majority  of  the  MSME  entrepreneurs  in  the  country  today  meet  the 
criterion.  Financial  literacy  in  the  context  of  a  MSME  focuses  on  an  individual’s  ability  to 
translate  financial  literacy  concepts  to  business  needs.  Financial  literacy  is  essential  for 
effective money management and low levels of financial literacy hinder the understanding of 
available financial products and services. MSE entrepreneurs are also constrained by lack of 
operational skills, accounting and finance acumen, business planning etc. which underscores 
a need for facilitation by banks/other agencies. 
14. However, it is not a one way street. Large-scale retirements in banks in recent years have 
also adversely impacted the collective skill-sets available at the field level in understanding, 
appraising  and  monitoring  the  MSME  loan  portfolio.  The  poor  underwriting  skills  leads  to 
avoidable under or over financing, which can have a telling effect on the health of the MSME 
units, particularly in adverse life cycle situations. 
“C”- collateral requirements 
c)  
15. The formal financial institutions particularly banks consider lending to MSMEs as highly 
risky since the entrepreneurs often do not possess adequate collateral to support the credit. 
Very often, the loans are rejected, despite the project prima facie, being feasible. While there 
are several dispensations to tide over the problem, the credit culture has not matured enough 
to a level existing in developed economies where lending is done against the assets of the firm 
including  its  movable  assets.  This  also  necessitates  that  we  build  up  strong  financial 
infrastructure, which would support the banks in lending to these sectors without worries and 
using all types of assets available to secure the loan. It is also pertinent for banks to realise 
that though the loan to the individual entities in the sector may be riskier on a solo basis, overall 
on a portfolio level, these are less vulnerable than loans to corporate. 
“D”- documentation 
d)  
16. Many of the MSMEs, particularly the Micro units, do not have adequate documentation to 
match the rigours of a formal financial system. Absence of documentation drives the small 
entrepreneurs  to  informal  sources  that  are  willing  to  provide  credit  with  minimum 
documentation. Further, a vast majority of the MSMEs are informal, which brings down the 
credit score of the entrepreneur and hinders the ability of the formal financial system to lend to 
them. Banks, on their part will need to leverage on modern technology algorithms and Big data 
so that they can differentiate between a good borrower and a not so good one even in the 
absence of conventional documentation. 
17. Having analysed various impediments in finance to the sector let me dwell on some of the 
steps taken by RBI, Government of India and other Apex institutions in bridging these gaps. 
(i)  
RBI has initiated several measures to improve the availability of banking services, especially 
in the rural and far-flung areas where access to formal finance is arduous. 
18. New institutions: As you are aware, two new universal banks have started operations 
while in-principle approval has been granted to 10 entities to set up Small Finance Banks that 
would  primarily  focus  on  lending  to  unserved  and  underserved  sections  including  small 
business units, small and marginal farmers, micro and small industries and unorganized sector 
entities. These small finance banks have been mandated to extend 75 per cent of its Adjusted 
Net Bank Credit (ANBC) to the sectors eligible for classification as priority sector lending (PSL) 
by the Reserve Bank. At least 50 per cent of its loan portfolio should constitute loans and 
advances of up to Rs. 25 lakh. Many of the SFBs have prior experience of working with small 
Access / availability 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   businesses as MFIs/NBFCs and we believe that they will be able to bring in technology backed 
innovative last mile practices to serve their customers. 
19. Increased branch penetration/ Specialized branches: RBI has advised banks to set up 
‘brick and mortar’ branches in villages with population of more than 5000 in a phased manner. 
Coupled with a more mature Banking Correspondent mechanism, this would give considerable 
fillip in meeting the banking needs of the MSMEs particularly in rural areas. Besides, creating 
presence of physical branch, there is also a need to have large number of bank officials with 
appropriate skill sets and knowledge to handle the life cycle needs of the small businesses. 
Already, Public Sector banks have established specialized MSME branches in every district to 
cater to the needs of the small businesses. We are already working towards improving the skill 
sets and entrepreneurial sensitivity of the field level functionaries. 
20. P2P lending: New players have entered the MSME lending landscape in form of P2P 
companies. These entities use an online platform to match lenders with borrowers to provide 
unsecured loans and mostly for receivables financing. P2P lending has great potential as an 
alternative form of low-cost finance as it can reach to the needy where formal sources are 
unable to reach or unwilling to lend. RBI has been mindful of a need to regulate these entities 
without stifling their ability to innovate and is currently in the process of issuing final guidelines 
on P2P lending. 
21. Policy intervention for Life Cycle Issues: We have advised the banks to keep a provision 
for additional credit limits (Standby Credit Facility for term loans and an additional provision 
within the overall working capital limits) in order to provide timely financial support to Micro and 
Small  enterprises  facing  financial  difficulties  during  their  lifecycle.  Banks  have  also  been 
advised to carry out mid-term review of regular working capital limits and fix up timelines for 
credit decisions. I am happy to say that most banks have put in place similar provisions in the 
last one year or so. 
22. Co-origination of loans: While several steps have been taken to address the problems 
related to accessibility, there are certain structural problems which would take their own sweet 
time in getting sorted out. One of this is the issue of reaching the last mile. Much as we have 
encouraged the banks to establish brick and mortar branches across remote villages, we must 
be conscious that they would always be driven by viability assessments/ cost considerations. 
One possible solution for this problem could be convergence of efforts between banks on one 
hand and the NBFCs, MFIs on the other, who have “feet on the ground” in such locations, 
better understanding of the local conditions and business viability, better knowledge about the 
credit  worthiness  of  individuals,  their  repayment  capabilities  etc.  Could  we  envisage  a 
framework  for  co-origination  of  loans  by  banks  and  the  NBFCs/MFIs  with  risk 
participation? While it would ensure skin in the game for both parties, it would benefit the 
entrepreneurs in terms of cost of credit, which on account of blending could be substantially 
lower. This could probably be the most ideal structure to serve the micro enterprises who are 
the most deprived in terms of availability of credit. 
(ii)  
23. Let me now turn my focus to steps for bridging the information asymmetry between the 
banks and the businesses. As I mentioned earlier, this is not a one-way street. Not only are 
the small entrepreneurs often ignorant about banking products and practices, several bankers 
have little understanding of the lifecycle credit needs of small businesses. Towards covering 
this base, RBI has started a capacity building initiative called the National Mission for Capacity 
Building of Bankers for financing MSME Sector (NAMCABS) in a mission mode. The field level 
functionaries must appreciate the importance of two critical pillars of financing MSME sector 
viz., timeliness and adequacy of credit. I am happy to state that close to 3300 officials of the 
banks have undergone this programme in the last one year. 
24. Credit Counsellors: For bridging the information asymmetry on the MSME borrowers side, 
RBI is initiating a process for putting in place a framework for accreditation of credit counsellors 
who are expected to serve as facilitators and enablers for micro and small entrepreneurs. Since 
Banks and business 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The difficult ‘C’s -credit and collateral 
MSMEs are typically enterprises with little credit histories and with inadequate expertise in 
preparing financial statements, credit counsellors will assist the borrowers in preparing their 
project reports and also help banks make better informed credit decisions. 
25. Revival and Rehabilitation of MSMEs: Another key step in the direction of supporting the 
firms in distress is the issuance of guidelines on the Framework on Revival and Rehabilitation 
of MSMEs, which provides an institutionalized framework for rehabilitation of enterprises which 
are  potentially  viable,  but  are  under  temporary  duress.  The  Framework  provides  for  a 
structured mechanism, which could be triggered either by the banker or by the entrepreneur 
at the first signs of stress. The problem resolution is scaled up to a committee with a time 
bound  schedule.  I  see  this  as  a  very  powerful  tool  and  urge  upon  the  bankers  to  get  this 
process rolling at the earliest. 
(iii)  
26. The issue of finding the right balance in securing a loan without pushing the borrower to 
informal sector has been a bugbear for the banking system. This is sought to be addressed 
through creation and development of right institutional structures. Let me delve upon some of 
these efforts: 
27. Movable Asset Registry3: Movable assets, as opposed to fixed assets such as land or 
buildings, often account for most of the capital stock of private firms and comprise an especially 
large share for micro, small and medium-size enterprises. Hence, movable assets are the main 
type  of  securities  that  firms  can  pledge  to  obtain  bank  financing.  I  am  happy  to  state  that 
CERSAI, in active coordination with Government of India and Reserve Bank has established 
the movable asset registry, which when mature would have a multiplier effect in lending to the 
sector. 
28. TReDS: In order to solve the problem of delayed payment to MSMEs, RBI has licensed 
three entities for operating the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS). The system 
would facilitate the financing of trade receivables of MSME enterprises from corporate and 
other  buyers,  including  government  departments  and  public  sector  undertakings  (PSUs) 
through  multiple  financiers.  The  objective  is  to  create  Electronic  Bill  Factoring  Exchanges 
which could electronically accept and settle bills so that MSMEs could encash their receivables 
without delay. It is expected that the TReDS will commence operations within this current fiscal. 
It would be important that the use of TReDS is made mandatory for, to begin with corporate 
and PSUs and later for the Government departments. I would urge the Chambers and the 
MSME Ministry to proactively examine this aspect as success of TReDS initiative can be a 
game changer for the sector. 
29. Utility of the Credit Guarantee Scheme: Realizing the problems of small borrowers in 
posting collaterals, RBI has asked the banks not to insist on collateral in case of loans up to 
Rs 10 lakh extended to units in the MSE sector. Also, Credit Guarantee Fund Trust for Micro 
and  Small  Enterprises  (CGTMSE)  has  been  set  up  to  encourage  the  Member  Lending 
Institutions  to  extend  credit  based  on  the  viability  of  the  proposal  rather  than  insisting  on 
security  or  surety.  Based  on  practical  experience  however,  I  tend  to  believe  that  these 
provisions have not led to desired outcomes. Let me elaborate. 
30. On one hand, the guideline on collateral-free loans has led banks to at times devise ways 
of denying credit to the MSMEs borrowers, while on the other extreme, the provision for credit 
guarantee has potential to cause deterioration in quality of credit appraisal and due diligence, 
consequently straining the resources of the CGTMSE. Clearly, both outcomes are undesirable. 
I would rather advocate that borrower is compensated by way of a better pricing in loan for the 
availability  of  collateral.  Further,  I  would  also  like  to  see  the  CGTMSE  to  evolve  a 
                                                
3   http://blogs.worldbank.org/allaboutfinance/does-introduction-movable-collateral-registries-increase-firms-
access-finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The cumbersome “D”- documentation 
 
framework for making the pricing risk-based rather than having a uniform risk premium 
related  to  the  past  performance  and  quality  of  individual  portfolios.  Eventually,  this 
activity should also move to an open market system. 
(iv)  
31.  The  absence  of  credit  history  and  the  need  for  documentation  often  pushes  the  micro 
entrepreneur away from conventional banking channels to the more informal sectors. This has 
to  be  addressed  through  a  constant  process  of  simplification  of  procedures  and  more 
importantly by leveraging technology. 
32. Udyami Mitra portal set up by SIDBI leverages IT architecture of Stand-Up Mitra portal 
and aims at instilling ease of access to MSMEs’ financial and non-financial service needs. The 
Portal, as a virtual market place endeavours to provide 'End to End' solutions not only for credit 
delivery but also for the host of credit-plus services by way of hand holding support, application 
tracking,  multiple  interface  with  stakeholders  (i.e.  banks,  service  providers,  applicants).We 
could see development of more such technological interfaces in the coming days making it 
easier  for  MSME  entrepreneurs  to  borrow  from  the  banking  system.  RBI  is  committed  to 
support such initiatives with appropriate safeguards and consumer protection measures. 
33. Role of Associations: The entrepreneur and Industry bodies have a significant role to 
play in linking, maintaining and sustaining the borrower-banker relationship. This could be in 
handholding, enabling and capacity building of the new entrepreneurs. As you are aware, the 
BCSBI  has  formulated  a  Code  of  Bank's  Commitment  to  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises  for 
voluntary  adherence  by the  banks. The  industry  associations  must  also spread  awareness 
about various facilities available/guidelines issued by the regulators to bridge the information 
asymmetry. 
Conclusion 
34. Let me conclude by going back to the theme of propelling growth of MSMEs. In using the 
term  ‘propel’  you  have  underlined  the  sense  of  urgency  that  is  required  in  this  area.  Our 
demographics  compel  us  to  push  forward  this  agenda  and  make  quantum  jumps  so  that 
entrepreneur can start and drive businesses without worrying about finance. We are committed 
to this paradigm shift and the slew of measures that are being taken by the RBI, other apex 
institutions and stakeholders signify this. I call upon CII and other industry bodies to also join 
this effort as enablers. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
