  
 
John Iannis Mourmouras: Recent monetary and economic developments 
in Greece 
Text of the First HBA-HAA Lecture by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor 
of the Bank of Greece, at Cass Business School, London, 23 March 2016. 
 Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of 
Greece. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here.  I  would  like  to  thank  both  associations,  the  Hellenic 
Academics Association and the Hellenic Bankers’ Association, for inviting me to speak to you 
today at the familiar premises of Cass Business School. Although I was in London only last 
January for a speech on European monetary policy at the Houses of Parliament, the newly-
elected Chairman of HBA, Antonis Ntatzopoulos, managed to persuade me to come again so 
soon. Thank you also, Antoni, for your kind welcoming address. I am delighted to see in the 
audience many of my former students from my time as University Professor here in London, 
now as members of London’s banking and academic community. 
My  lecture  will  be  structured  in  two  parts.  The  first  part  investigates  the  ECB’s  recent 
monetary decisions and their impact on inflation dynamics, also exploring the benefits and 
limits  of  such  policies.  In  the  second  part,  I  will  offer  some  reflections  on  the  current 
economic situation in Greece, its outlook and short- to medium-term prospects. 
A.  
The ECB’s unconventional monetary policy 
The ECB measures announced on 10 March 2016 
1. 
A brief look, now, at the ECB measures announced on 10 March 2016. Ten days ago, the 
ECB  Governing  Council  decided  in  favour  of  a  more  accommodative  monetary  policy  as 
follows: 
 
The interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem has been cut 
by 5 basis points to 0.00%, the interest rate on the marginal lending facility has been 
lowered  by  5  basis  points  to  0.25%,  and  the  interest  rate  on  the  deposit  facility 
decreased by 10 basis points to –0.40%. 
The monthly purchases under the asset purchase programme will be expanded to 
€80 billion per month starting in April, from €60 billion per month currently, taking the 
total size of the asset purchase programme to €1,740 billion by March 2017. 
Investment  grade  euro-denominated  bonds  issued  by  non-bank  corporations 
established in the euro area have been included in the list of assets that are eligible 
for  regular  purchases  (as  of  11.03.2016,  the  ECB  has  purchased  under  the  APP 
programme:  €801.2  billion:  PSPP  Holdings:  €620.5  billion,  ABSPP  Holdings: 
€19.1 billion,  CBPP3:  €161.6  billion.  Breakdown:  €46  billion  on  the  primary  and 
€115.6 billion on the secondary market.) 
A new series of four targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II), each 
with a maturity of four years, will be launched in June 2016. 
   My  short  comment  on  the  above  measures  is  that  they  are  a  combination  of  quantitative 
easing  with  credit  easing,  namely  a  widening  of  QE  as  seen  from  the  higher  amount  of 
monthly purchases, and credit easing as evident in the eligibility of corporate debt for ECB 
purchases,  plus  of  course  the  second  round  of  TLTROs,  meaning  literally  that  the  central 
bank pays commercial banks to provide loans to businesses. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  
 
Why  did  ECB  President  Mario  Draghi  decide  to  proceed  even  further  with  the  above 
expansionary monetary policy, eleven months after the initiation of the program? 
The current economic outlook of the euro area 
2. 
The answer to the above question lies in the euro area economic outlook. 
 
Core inflation fell to 0.8% in February (flash estimate), down from 1.0% in January. 
According  to  ECB  forecasts  in  March  2016,  inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  now 
projected  to  be  at  a  very  low  level  (0.1%)  on  an  annual  average  basis  in  2016, 
before rebounding to 1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018. 
Inflation  expectations,  as  measured  by  the  five-year  inflation-linked  swap  rate, 
declined to a historic low of 1.37%, compared with 1.7% just prior to the start of the 
PSPP. 
GDP  growth  has  been  revised  downwards  by  0.4  percentage  point,  to  1.4%  for 
2016;  for  2017  and  2018,  real  GDP  is  expected  to  grow  by  1.7%  (revised 
downwards by 0.1 percentage point) and 1.8%, respectively. 
In short, it seems that up to this point the QE programme had a rather minimal impact on 
inflation or inflation expectations and growth in the eurozone. 
From  my  point  of  view,  three  main  factors  have  contributed  to  the  inability  of  inflation  to 
increase. 
(1) 
First,  supply-side  factors  have  been  deflationary,  as  reflected  in  a  decline  in  the 
price of oil (as measured in US dollars) of about 25% since early March. Evidence of 
a  sustained  rise  in  underlying  inflation  has  yet  to  be  seen,  while  falling  industrial 
producer prices also signal weak inflation dynamics. 
Second,  demand-side  factors,  as  reflected  in  the  persistence  of  the  euro-area’s 
negative output gap, continue to exert downward pressures on prices. 
Third,  under  the  Phillips  curve  relationship,  inflation  expectations  are  a  main 
determinant of the present inflation. Consequently, to generate increases in present 
inflation,  it  is  necessary  to  increase  inflation  expectations.  However,  inflation 
expectations have been declining since the initiation of the PSPP. 
(2) 
(3) 
Some positive evidence from QE 
3. 
It  is  true  that  there  is  some  encouraging  evidence  mainly  from  the  M3  growth  and  the 
banking sector, such as the growth rate of loans. 
 
M3 growth accelerated to 5.0% in January, compared with a 4.7% rise in December 
(M1 growth was 10.5% in January, compared with 10.8% in December). 
The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 0.6% in 
January, compared with 0.1% in December. 
The verdict so far is that QE has reduced fragmentation in the eurozone financial 
markets. More specifically, bank lending rates decreased, with significant declines 
recorded  in  the  nominal  cost  of  bank  borrowing  for  non-financial  corporations 
(NFCs)  and  households  (by  79  and  65  basis  points  respectively,  see  Figures  1 
and 2). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     2 
     Figure 1 
Euro area lending to the private sector 
 Composite indicators of the nominal cost of bank borrowing for households (for 
house purchase) and non-financial corporations in the euro area 
Figure 2 
Source: European Central Bank. 
 Cross-country  heterogeneity  in  bank  lending  rates  has  declined  further.  For 
example,  since  last  summer  the  average  cost  of  borrowing  for  euro  area  non-
financial corporations has fallen by around 70 basis points, and by 90 basis points 
and 110 basis points for NFCs in Spain and Italy, respectively. 
Since  the  start  of  the  QE  programme  in  March  the  euro  depreciated  against  the 
dollar by 2%, while since the beginning of the year it has depreciated by about 10%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  The purchase programmes have also greatly contributed to a significant decline in 
sovereign yields, a compression of intra-euro area spreads and a flattening of yield 
curves  across  all  markets  that  were  only  partially  offset  by  the  bond  market 
correction that began in early May. More precisely, Germany’s benchmark 10-year 
Bund  is  trading  at  0.26%,  while  currently  more  than  eleven  two-year  government 
bonds of euro area Member States are trading with negative returns (compared with 
8% for Greece). 
 Recent economic developments in Greece 
B. 
Let me now move on to Greece. After six years of austerity and reforms, the country is again 
at a crossroads and under heightened uncertainty as a result of the delay in the completion 
of the First Review of the 3rd MoU, the setbacks in the implementation of structural reforms 
and privatisations, and finally due to the mounting migrant crisis. 
The state of the economy 
B1.  
Coming now to the prospects of the Greek economy, I will try to make three quite important 
remarks, but before that I will give you a few figures on the Greek economy. 
Economic activity 
Although European Commission initial forecasts suggested that Greece’s economic activity 
would be severely affected (-4% in 2015), the final data suggest that recession in 2015 was 
milder than initially expected, i.e. –0.2% for the whole year. 
Average annual GDP growth rates and main components 
Figure 3 
 Due to the carry-over effect from the second half of last year, the Bank of Greece’s estimate 
for the growth rate in Q1 and Q2 this year is negative, turning to positive in the second half of 
the year. 
Money, inflation and credit 
 
Inflation has been negative over the past three years (2013–2015) and stood at 
–1.1% on average in 2015 (see Figure 4). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Figure 4 
Inflation 
(percentages) 
  Sources: ELSTAT and Bank of Greece calculations. 
The  completion  of  bank  recapitalisation  in  December  2015  is  a  step  towards  the 
restoration of confidence in the Greek banking system that will facilitate the gradual 
recovery of bank deposits. 
Monthly flows of deposits from non-financial corporations and households 
(in billion euro) 
Figure 5 
 Source: Bank of Greece. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
  In January 2016, the rate of contraction of bank credit to non-financial corporations, 
which has been deteriorating since July 2015, speeded up to an annual rate of 
–1.6%. The respective rate of bank credit to households decelerated slightly to 
–3.0% (see Figures 6 and 7). 
 Figure 6 
Bank credit to households 
(in billion euro; annual percentage changes) 
 Source: Bank of Greece. 
Figure 7 
Bank credit to non-financial corporations 
(in billion euro; annual percentage changes) 
   Source: Bank of Greece. 
Disinvestment: the long-term risk 
The  most  important  upside  risk  to  the  growth  outlook  is  related  to  the  generalised 
disinvestment  situation  that  Greece  faces  for  a  prolonged  period.  For  example,  in  2007, 
investment was 27% of GDP, whereas last year it was 12% of GDP, the lowest level since 
1960, and, taking into account depreciation, we have effectively had negative net investment 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
for  all  the  previous  years.  No  physical  capital  accumulation,  the  debasement  of  human 
capital  due  to  the  brain  drain  and  lack  of  spending  on  skills,  all  these  point  to  hysteresis 
effects on long-term growth in Greece. 
Figure 8 
Investment growth 
  Source: ELSTAT. 
Figure 9 
Investment in the EU-28, US and Greece 
(as a percentage of GDP) 
U.S. 
EU-28 
Greec
   Source: AMECO 2014. 
For 2016, European Commission forecasts that disinvestment in Greece will continue, albeit 
at a slower rate (-3.7%), before increasing in 2017, as shown in the following Table (Table 1). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Table 1 
EU Economic Forecasts 
(winter 2016) 
Source: European Commission. 
Figure 10 
Greece’s GDP components 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Figure 11 
Investment by asset 
(as a percentage of GDP) 
Figure 12 
Greece’s disinvestment evolution 
(in million euro) 
Source: ELSTAT. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    9
  Three remarks 
B2.  
I will now turn to my three remarks. 
First remark: 
Since  2010,  I  have  been  writing  and  speaking about  this.  Out  of  all  the  problems  that  the 
Greek economy is faced with, i.e. unemployment, recession, public debt, private debt, non-
performing  loans,  disinflation,  etc.,  I  would  definitely  place,  in  terms  of  importance, 
recession/lack of growth at the top, and not public debt, especially after the PSI, which some 
view as the number 1 problem and even go as far as to ask for a nominal haircut in public 
debt, something which is ruled out by the European treaties. A return to normality will only be 
achieved through growth that will create jobs, bring social cohesion and increase wages and 
salaries across the Greek population. All this is achieved by means of steady positive growth 
rates, which will in turn improve public debt dynamics and sustainability, but will also reduce 
unemployment, effectively tackle non-performing loans and private debt, and so on. If I may 
slightly rephrase US President Bill Clinton: “It’s the growth, stupid!” 
I have one further comment regarding private debt now, which exceeded €200 billion, and 
now accounts for 113% of Greece’s GDP. The breakdown is as follows: NPLs: €100 billion, 
tax  arrears:  €80  billion,  overdue  insurance  contributions:  €20  billion.  Given  its  short-  to 
medium-term effect on private consumption (which determines GDP growth by 75%), doubts 
arise about the growth prospects of the Greek economy in the next five to ten years. Given 
the disinvestment issue, which I discussed earlier, that is why I have been writing since 2010 
that the country badly needs an investment shock. 
Second remark: 
Nobody,  I  am  sure,  in  this  room,  but  also  outside  of  it,  would  wish  for  the  unpleasant 
experience of last year’s backtracking to be repeated this year, i.e. the deposit outflow which 
destabilised the banking system and resulted in the introduction of capital controls, a bank 
holiday and bank recapitalization – only a year following the 2014 recapitalisation – and, of 
course, the recession in 2015 and 2016, from initially positive expectations for both years. 
The cost of last year’s backtracking was elevated, as we all understand, but what I would like 
to point out here today is that the cost of any further delays this year would be equally high. If 
the negotiations of the first review of the 3rd Memorandum are drawn out over time, then the 
risks of a destabilisation of the economy and its financing conditions would be heightened. 
Let  me  be  more  precise:  I  should  mention  that  the  cost  of  this  delay  is  reflected  in  the 
deferment of voting major bills at the Hellenic Parliament which are at a stalemate for some 
time now, although they concern critical issues relating to the country’s growth, such as the 
development  law,  the  new  framework  on  public  procurements,  the  modernisation  of  public 
construction works, scientific research and development. Without a timely review, all of the 
above bills are in the air. The price to pay for our economy will be heavy. 
I hope that the benefits of a timely review are clear to everyone. And for one more reason: 
the  credibility  deficit  vis-à-vis  both  the  markets  and  our  creditors  as  a  result  of  last  year’s 
delays (2 elections in just 9 months, a referendum, the country coming to the verge of Grexit) 
which led to the signing of the 3rd Memorandum, can only be overcome, at this point, with 
deeds  and  tangible  proof  that  agreements  are  kept  in  Greece:  i.e.  that  fiscal  adjustment 
measures  and  reforms  are  implemented,  and  privatisations  are  accelerated.  Pacta  sunt 
servanda, as the Latins say. 
Third remark: 
A  question  I  am  often  asked  in  Athens,  as  you  might  suspect,  is  whether  I  am  optimistic 
about  the  country’s  economic  prospects.  Mark  Twain  said  something  along  the  lines:  The 
man who is a pessimist before 50 knows too much; he is wise man; if he is an optimist after 
50,  he  simply  needs  to  visit  a  GP!  So  my  answer  to  those  who  asked  me  whether  I  am 
optimistic is that if there is a timely conclusion of the first review, I see the glass half-full for 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
 
the following reasons: in the short-term, immediately, confidence will be drastically restored, 
thus accelerating a return of deposits to the Greek banking system and this will, in turn, lead 
to  a  further  relaxing  of  capital  controls  and,  once  again  immediately,  lead  to  Greek 
government bonds being readmitted as eligible collateral for Eurosystem operations, under 
the so-called ‘waiver’. Such a development will allow the provision of much cheaper financing 
for  Greek  banks  by  the  ECB,  hence  boosting  liquidity  provided  to  the  real  sector  of  the 
economy. 
Furthermore, the successful conclusion of the First Review will be immediately followed by a 
start  in  negotiations  with  our  creditors  for  public  debt  relief,  and  improvements  in  credit 
ratings  for  Greek  government  bonds  and,  in  the  end,  our  participation  in  the  quantitative 
easing  programme  of  the  ECB,  something  which  will  become  a  catalyst  for  the  drastic 
reduction in Greece’s borrowing costs, a return to international capital markets and finally a 
return to European normality for my country. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
