   Christian Noyer: Thoughts on the zero lower bound in relation with 
monetary and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Honorary  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Former 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Farewell 
Symposium  in  his  honour,  held  by  the  Bank  of  France  and  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, Paris, 12 January 2016. 
 I find myself in a strange situation today. Memories of recent policy debates are still vivid in my 
mind  and  it  is  difficult  to  distance  myself  from  very  recent  discussions.  However,  the 
circumstances require that I take a step back and summon the wisdom supposedly derived 
from sixteen years in central banking. I will try to do a little bit of each, knowing that I might be 
better at the former than the latter. 
When I started at the ECB in 1998, the zero lower bound was a mere theoretical curiosity, 
which deserved at most a brief mention of one page in economic textbooks (except, maybe in 
the case of Japanese textbooks). It turned out that nearly half of my time as Governor was 
spent in a near zero interest rate environment. Japanese official interest rates have been there 
for over 20 years. Official interest rates have stood at zero for more than six years in the US – 
until very recently – and in the euro area and the UK. 
It  is  now  well  accepted  that  there  are  deep  and  fundamental  causes  for  that  prolonged 
coincidence  of  low  interest  rates  and  low  inflation.  In  advanced  economies,  and  possibly 
worldwide, equilibrium real interest rates have dropped to very low levels. Falling equilibrium 
rates  may  require  zero  or  negative  policy  rates  and,  more  broadly,  very  accommodating 
monetary conditions that conventional instruments cannot deliver. Hence the development of 
non-conventional monetary policies in all our economies. 
Part  of  the  fall  in  equilibrium  rates  is  a  consequence  of  the  crisis  and  the  subsequent 
deleveraging and balance sheet repair that is taking place in many sectors of the economy. 
Part may predate the crisis itself and result from shifts in global desired saving and investment. 
Whatever the causes, low equilibrium rates complicate the task of monetary policy. Because 
of the zero lower bound on nominal rates, they constrain the ability of central banks to react to 
negative cyclical shocks. They may lead to cumulative downward spirals if low inflation keeps 
real policy rates above the equilibrium level. In addition, the perceived inability of monetary 
policy to keep inflation close to the objective may fuel pessimistic expectations, a point to which 
I shall return. Over the last two years it has become increasingly apparent that all those risks 
are materialising in the euro area. 
Finally, low equilibrium rates worsen the trade-off between price and financial stability. Policy 
rates must be brought down for price stability to be preserved. However, long periods of low 
interest rates unavoidably create incentives for risk taking and “search for yield”. That dilemma 
can,  in  principle,  be  solved  through  proper  macroprudential  policies.  I  will  return  later  to 
challenges we face in that specific area. 
The meaning of price stability 
Let me start with a crucial point. Central banks have a strong mandate to preserve and 
achieve price stability. Strict adherence to this mandate – and the clear willingness to fulfil it 
– is their main protection against the dangers created by the zero lower bound. As we all know, 
inflation  is  ultimately  driven  by  expectations.  Inflation  expectations  were  remarkably  stable 
during the whole first decade of the euro. Today, the major risk in the euro area is a downward 
drift that would durably set long-run inflation expectations at a level below our objective of price 
stability. We do not know much about how expectations are formed. However, I have no doubt 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
that the perceived reaction function of the central bank plays a major role in anchoring price 
stability. 
Second, symmetry is of the essence. For a significant period of time, we have been well 
below our definition of price stability in the euro area, both in terms of effective inflation and 
long-term  expectations.  There  is  a  temptation  to  take  a  benign  view  of  this  situation  and 
consider that low inflation is beneficial per se, irrespective of its level. In a similar vein, some 
forms of “good” deflation could be accepted as conducive to stronger growth. 
To me, this approach is very misleading. I will indulge here in a little bit of history. As you know, 
at the inception of the euro, the definition of price stability was set as “lower than 2%”. That 
definition was quickly perceived by markets and economists as meaning we took a benign view 
of low inflation or, even, stood ready to accept deflation. As a result, the Governing Council felt 
the need, in 2003, to change the wording and specify the definition of price stability as “lower 
but close to 2%”. 
Third, the validity of the 2% target is widely acknowledged. That definition of close to 2% 
has today been broadly adopted in major advanced economies, including in the US and Japan. 
This  is  no  coincidence.  There  is  a  robust  rationale  for  aiming  at  2%  or  close  to  2%  and, 
therefore,  not  tolerating  persistent  lower  inflation.  First,  since  the  work  of  the  Boskin 
Commission, which, I believe, is also valid for the euro area, we know that available measures 
tend to overestimate this rate. So it is legitimate to consider that, technically, an inflation rate 
of 1% may, in reality, be zero. Then, if the central bank aims at 1%, any negative shock would 
plunge the economy into deflation. To absorb such a shock, some margin – in the order of an 
additional 1% – is necessary. This simple reasoning provides a very strong basis for the current 
definition. 
The objective of price stability, therefore, must be symmetric. The reaction function of central 
banks should equally be perceived as symmetric. They should be equally vigilant about any 
deviation from this objective, in either direction, up or down. A central bank that remained 
passive  with  persistently  low  inflation  would  in  effect  encourage  a  downward  drift  in 
expectations. The case for symmetry is even stronger today as we are confronted with several 
sources  of  uncertainty,  regarding:  the  economic  situation;  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy; and the underlying causes for low inflation. We should avoid adding a further 
uncertainty concerning the true priorities of central banks. 
For the same reason, it would be unwise to entertain the idea that the inflation objective should 
be  revised,  –  upward  or  downward.  The  analytical  argument  for  a  higher  target  sounds 
attractive.  For  a  given  equilibrium  real  rate,  a  higher  inflation  objective  would  reduce  the 
probability of hitting the zero lower bound in the future. This may be a case, however, where 
analytics do not provide a proper guide for policy. The truth is we do not know how inflation 
expectations  would  react  to  a  change  in  objective.  We  are  in  a  period  where  expectation 
dynamics are highly uncertain. Empirical evidence collected over the last 15 years shows that, 
in the euro-area at least, a rate of inflation significantly over 2% triggers very negative reactions 
from the general public. Finally, the credibility of central banks in sticking to their objective 
could be jeopardized by the change of definition of price stability. And that would generate risk 
premia and additional volatility in financial markets. 
The challenge in achieving price stability 
Implementing a symmetric mandate in current circumstances is not an easy task. I see three 
challenges in the current situation 
First, in finding the optimal mix of non-conventional instruments. Central Banks in general, 
and the ECB in particular, have been quite innovative. New methods of forward guidance have 
been developed that have proved very efficient in the euro area in bringing down the short end 
of the yield curve. The main question, in my mind, concerns the best combination of the other 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
instruments: negative deposit rates and asset purchases. There is no certainty that they can 
be implemented together in a consistent way. 
Asset purchases are expected to act both through changes in asset prices and a flattening of 
the yield curve. They inject central bank liquidity that forces banks to hold excess reserves in 
significant amounts. However, the negative rates create a sort of tax on those reserves. The 
apparent rationale is that negative rates would push banks to grant new loans or buy assets, 
therefore reinforcing the impact of asset purchases. But since loans create deposits, and the 
sellers of assets receive liquidity that they need to deposit on bank accounts too, there is simply 
no  way  this  liquidity  can  disappear  until  the  central  bank  decides  to  withdraw  it.  Even  if 
residents choose to move into foreign assets, the liquidity in the domestic currency will not 
disappear and will ultimately be deposited with the domestic banking system. In the end, and 
as a whole, the banking system is trapped. 
The question then is how banks will react and with what consequences for the economy. They 
could impose negative rates on depositors, but that is not always easy, and in the case of 
households, it could have a negative impact on the wealth sentiment. They could increase their 
credit margins, with the effect of tightening credit conditions, although that may also be difficult 
if the demand for credit is weak. Or the banking system could simply become weaker, with the 
paradox that the more a bank is conservative and well-managed, extending high-quality loans 
and covering them by deposits with no short-term market funding, the more it will be penalized! 
A second, different challenge, relates to the rigidities in the economy. Price rigidity is higher 
in Europe than in the United States as the goods and labour markets are less “contestable” 
and outsiders find it harder to compete. And in the labour market, there is a strong downward 
rigidity  on  wages.  Structural  rigidities  have  complex  effects  on  inflation  and  monetary 
dynamics.  In  the  very  short  run,  price  rigidity  may  somehow  protect  the  economy  against 
deflationary shocks and, more generally, increase the output response to a monetary stimulus. 
This may come at a cost in the longer run, however, as price rigidity impedes the adjustment 
process and reduces the efficiency of monetary policy. A large part of the perceived differences 
between the FED and the ECB in terms of policy reactions results, in fact, from differences in 
price flexibility. Because of specific rigidities in Europe, the fall in inflation that normally follows 
a decline in output materialized later and more slowly. Moreover, it notably happened after 
several governments had implemented a series of structural reforms and adjustment policies 
in 2010–2011. This explains part of the delay in implementing non-conventional measures in 
Europe, as compared to the United States. 
A  third  challenge  comes  from  managing  the  risks  that  low  interest  rates  and  non-
conventional  policies  imply  for  financial  stability.  Significant  advances  have  been 
achieved in developing proper macroprudential frameworks and instruments for the banking 
sector. Strong capital and liquidity requirements have increased its systemic robustness. New 
countercyclical tools have been developed. Progress has been made towards reducing moral 
hazard through proper resolution mechanisms for large and systemic institutions. 
However,  the  timeliness  and  efficacy  of  macroprudential  measures  on  specific  areas  of 
exuberance, such as real estate, are still being put to the test. More importantly, I see one blind 
spot. Risk has not fully disappeared but rather has morphed and migrated to new parts of the 
financial  system.  Specifically,  maturity  transformation  has  developed  outside  the  banking 
sector and by direct market intermediation. Increasingly, it is taking place through vehicles – 
such as open funds and ETFs – that issue very short-term (often intraday) liabilities and invest 
in long-term instruments. It may be a matter of priority to develop a conceptual and operational 
approach to macroprudential policy that allows regulators to monitor those parts of the financial 
system that are currently out of reach. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
    When  central  banks  entered  into  non-conventional  territory, most  observers  saw  that  as  a 
temporary incursion. For some of us, this temporary situation has lasted seven years. For the 
euro area, the current horizon extends, at least, until 2017. This is quite a long period. For 
many young people today – say, for instance, current PHDs students -, conventional monetary 
policies  are  a  prehistoric  curiosity.  Non-conventional  is  the  only  “normal”  that  they  have 
experienced in their lifetime as adults. 
Will the future look like the past or be different? This question cannot be avoided for three 
reasons. 
First,  over  the  past  30  years,  long-term  real  interest  rates  worldwide  have  been  steadily 
declining. If low equilibrium rates are a permanent phenomenon, which is rooted in structural 
shifts in the world economy, then current difficulties and challenges will persist. The chances 
that we will sooner or later hit the ZLB again are non-negligible. Some observers make the 
point that, if we look at historical frequencies of cycles and recessions, it is much more likely 
than  not  that  interest  rates  may  need  to  return  to  zero  at  some  point  in  the  future.  “Non-
conventional policies” may then become part of central banks’ standard toolkit, rather than a 
unique exception. 
Second, one legacy of the crisis will be the size of central banks’ balance sheets. A central 
bank’s balance sheet is the foundation on which it conducts its policies, through its monopoly 
to create base money. An expanded balance sheet can be seen in two ways. Either as a 
problem because the central bank leaves too big a “footprint” on money and financial markets; 
and  this  could  impair  their  normal  functioning.  Also,  by  holding  and  actively  managing  a 
portfolio of public debt, central banks take quasi-fiscal responsibilities that must be avoided. 
Alternatively the current situation may be seen as an opportunity, at least in times of crisis. 
Central banks can use their expanded balance sheet to develop a richer set of tools and better 
address the challenges they are facing. 
Finally,  the  pre-crisis,  inflation-targeting  regime,  was  closely  associated  with  the  “Great 
Moderation” when inflation was low and output growth stable. This period of sustained growth 
and  limited  volatility  was  considered  normal  at  the  time.  We  know  now  that  it  was  very 
exceptional from a historical perspective. In the future, it is likely that monetary and financial 
stability policies will be periodically confronted with some kinds of abrupt, discontinuous shocks 
for which appropriate responses will have to be devised. 
In the coming years, there will be no shortage of very difficult issues for you to debate at the 
periodic  meetings  in  Basel.  One  thing  that  makes  me  confident  about  the  future  is  my 
experience at the BIS and with my colleagues, many of whom I am honoured to see in the 
audience today. Looking back at my life, nowhere else have I met a group of leaders and 
officials who are so highly dedicated, so deeply sophisticated and professional, so devoted to 
acting together for the public good, so mutually respectful of each other. There is, indeed, 
something unique in the culture of central banking, which one cannot find anywhere else and 
which cannot be replicated. It is a source of pride to have chaired the Board of the BIS for more 
than five years. Nowadays, it is common to hear that central banks are the only game in town. 
This, I do not know. But one thing I do know is that many disasters could have occurred in the 
last seven years if it had not been for your collective wisdom, courage and willingness to act 
and take risks in very extreme circumstances. The world owes much gratitude to the people 
who are here or represented today. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
