   Philip Lowe: Resilience and ongoing challenges 
Keynote address by Mr Philip Lowe, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the 
UDIA National Congress 2016, Adelaide, 8 March 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
I would like to thank Craig Evans for assistance in the preparation of this talk.  
It  is  a  real  pleasure  for  me  to  be  back  in  Adelaide  today.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Urban 
Development Institute of Australia (UDIA) for the invitation to be part of your National Congress 
in this beautiful city.  
I previously spoke at a UDIA National Congress in 2010. That year it was held in Sydney. On 
that  occasion,  I  spoke  about  how  and  why  the  Australian  economy  had  come  through  the 
severe global downturn in much better shape than most other countries. I spoke about the 
expected upswing in mining investment and the positive effect that it was likely to have on our 
economy over the next few years. And I spoke about three specific challenges: the need to 
expand the supply side of the economy; the need to get a better balance between supply and 
demand in the housing market; and the need to ensure that inflation remained low and stable.  
In the six years since then, a lot of water has flowed under the bridge. The global economy 
has had a recovery of sorts, although the average growth rate is still below what it was before 
the crisis. In Australia, the expected boom in mining investment did take place, leading to a 
large increase in our production capacity. For a time, this did result in the economy growing at 
an above-average pace, but this has been followed by a few years where growth has averaged 
below trend as mining investment returned to more normal levels. In terms of the challenges 
that I spoke about six years ago, the issue of expanding the supply side of the economy and 
boosting productivity growth is just as pressing as it was then. A bit more positively, in the 
housing market we now appear to have a better balance between supply and demand. And in 
terms of inflation, the outcomes in Australia – and almost everywhere around the world – have 
been lower than was earlier expected.  
Today, I thought it might be useful to again touch on these broad themes – the resilience of 
our  own  economy,  the  productivity  challenge,  the  balance  in  the  housing  market  and  the 
inflation outlook.   
The resilience of the Australian economy 
So first to the Australian economy. Here, the main point to emphasise is the resilience of our 
economy and its ability to adjust.  
A few years back when we were looking down from the peak in the mining boom, there was 
considerable trepidation in some quarters about how Australia would manage over coming 
years. With commodity prices already declining and talk of an upcoming mining investment 
cliff, there were concerns about where the growth in output and, more importantly, the growth 
in jobs would come from.  
As things have turned out, though, we have managed pretty well so far, despite what has been 
a fairly difficult environment. Over the past two years, the prices of our commodity exports have 
declined by 40 per cent (Graph 1). Mining investment has also declined by almost 40 per cent, 
which is the equivalent of nearly 3 per cent of GDP. Yet over these two years, our economy 
has  continued  to  expand  at  a  reasonable  pace,  with  growth  over  2015  having  been  a  bit 
stronger than was earlier expected and not too different from the long-term average.  
Importantly, there has also been sufficient growth in aggregate demand over recent times to 
keep the unemployment rate broadly steady and to accommodate a rise in the participation 
rate  (Graph 2).  Again,  taking  the  past  two  years  together,  annual  employment  growth  has 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   averaged almost 2 per cent, which again is not too different from its long-term average. It is 
also a bit above population growth, so the share of the working-age population that is employed 
has also risen by around ½ percentage point over the past two years.  
The  job  creation  has  been  particularly  strong  in  a  range  of  household  services  (Graph 3). 
Health care has been a stand-out, with annual growth in jobs averaging about 4½ per cent 
over  the  past  two  years.  There  has  also  been  strong  growth  in  jobs  in  business  services, 
following a period of weakness a few years ago when exploration activity and pre-construction 
work in the resources sector were being scaled back. In contrast, there has been little job 
creation in the goods-related industries over recent years.  
This picture of our economy adjusting reasonably well to the changed circumstances is also 
evident  in  a  number  of  other  indicators.  Over  recent  times,  most  business  surveys  have 
suggested that conditions have been around, or a little above, average. Business credit growth 
has picked up after having been subdued for quite a while. And last week's national accounts 
confirmed that growth in household spending has also picked up.  
While none of these indicators suggests that we are on the cusp of a return to the type of 
growth  rates  we  saw  before  2008,  they  do  suggest  that  the  economy  is  successfully 
rebalancing following the mining investment boom.  
This resilience reflects, in part, the flexibility of three key prices: the exchange rate, the price 
of money (or interest rates), and the price of labour.  
The  effect  of  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  is  evident  in  the  improved  conditions  and 
prospects for a number of industries, including tourism, education, agriculture and parts of 
manufacturing. Just as the earlier appreciation helped the economy avoid overheating during 
the resources boom, the depreciation is now helping the economy adjust to lower commodity 
prices and lower investment in the resources sector.  
The effect of low interest rates is most clearly evident in residential construction activity, which 
increased by 10 per cent over 2015. This strong growth is having positive spillovers to other 
parts of the economy. Over coming quarters, we can expect a further increase in residential 
construction, although at a slower rate than seen recently.  
Finally, the low wage growth is one of the factors that has underpinned the reasonably positive 
employment outcomes. Over the past year, the Wage Price Index (WPI) has risen by just 2¼ 
per cent, the lowest outcome in the 17-year history of this series (Graph 4). Lower still is the 
growth rate in average hourly earnings measured by the national accounts. This measure, 
which takes into account compositional and other effects that are not captured by the WPI, is 
unchanged over the past year. These types of wage outcomes are much lower than what most 
people had become used to and lower than suggested by the historical relationship between 
wages  growth  and  unemployment.  While  this  low  wage  growth  is  one  factor  constraining 
consumption growth for many individual households, importantly, it means that more people 
have jobs and this is clearly a positive for both aggregate household spending and the broader 
society.  
So the flexibility in these key prices – the exchange rate, interest rates, and wages – has served 
us well.  
Our central scenario remains for growth in output to be a bit below trend over 2016, but then 
gradually  to  strengthen  as  the  drag  from  lower  commodity  prices  and  mining  investment 
wanes, and more of the increased capacity in the LNG sector comes on line.  
The main risks to this central scenario still seem to lie in the international sphere.  
The first couple of months of 2016 have been volatile ones in bond, equity and commodity 
markets. Our largest trading partner, China, is going through a difficult transition to a more 
consumption-led and service-based economy and is dealing with high levels of corporate debt 
and the complications of opening its capital account. On the monetary front, interest rates in 
the United States were recently increased for the first time in nine years, while the Bank of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Japan unexpectedly moved one of its key interest rates into negative territory. In doing so, it 
joined the European Central Bank, the Swiss National Bank, the Swedish Riksbank and the 
Danish central bank with negative rates. And in a number of countries, there is an expectation 
that yet further monetary easing will take place.  
It remains to be seen what all this means for us. The recent international data have been mixed 
but, at this stage, do not suggest that momentum in the global economy has been lost. The 
monetary easing abroad is a complication for us, as it tends to put downward pressure on the 
currencies where the easing is taking place and thus upward pressure on the Australian dollar. 
More positively, lower oil prices – which primarily reflect increased supply capacity – are mostly 
good for global growth: they lower the cost of production for almost every firm in the global 
economy and put more money in the hands of consumers. The lower oil prices do, however, 
create financial strains for some economies and for some companies.  
So there are lot of cross-currents here that we are watching very carefully at the moment.  
I now want to move to the three challenges that I spoke about in 2010.  
Expanding the supply side – productivity 
The first of these was expanding the supply side of the economy – or lifting our productivity.  
Six years ago, the focus was on ensuring that the economy had sufficient productive capacity 
to avoid overheating during a period of strong demand flowing from the resources boom.  
Today, the focus is a little different. While we have done a pretty good job of adjusting to our 
changed  circumstances,  the  not-so-good  news  is  that  growth  in  real  income  per  capita  in 
Australia has stalled (Graph 5). Indeed, average real income is no higher today than it was in 
2008. This follows a 17-year period in which growth averaged a remarkable 3.1 per cent per 
year. During this earlier period, we benefited from: (i) strong productivity growth in the 1990s; 
(ii) a very large rise in our terms of trade; and (iii) favourable demographics, which helped 
increase the share of the population in paid employment.  
In all three of these areas, recent outcomes have not been as kind. It is more than coincidental 
that the timing of this change in our fortunes broadly coincides with the timing of increasing 
pressure on the federal budget, an increase in the general sense of economic uncertainty, 
slower gains in some asset prices and slower growth in wages and profits. Inevitably, when 
income growth is weak the effects are felt broadly through the community.  
Looking ahead, we should be able to look forward to somewhat better outcomes than over the 
recent past. We could expect that the drag on our national income from falling commodity 
prices  will  eventually  lessen.  And  if  current  trends  in  employment  continue,  we  could  look 
forward to some further increase in the share of the population in paid employment. Both of 
these would be positive for real income growth. Australia's fundamentals also remain sound. 
We have a tremendous base of natural resources, a talented, diverse and growing workforce, 
a stable political and legal system, a highly regarded university system, and we are well placed 
to benefit from the increasing demand for services from Asia.  
But there is no escaping the fact that future growth in the average income of Australians relies 
largely on our ability to lift our productivity. While the rebalancing and resilience of our economy 
is  certainly  something  to  welcome,  the  longer-term  challenge  is  to  lift  our  living  standards 
through finding new things to do and better ways of doing what we currently do. The need for 
this is made more pressing by the fact that the growth momentum in the global economy is 
less than it once was.  
Ultimately, productivity growth is heavily reliant on decisions made by businesses. But policy 
decisions  can  also  make  a  difference.  Here,  there  is  no  shortage  of  ideas.  They  cover 
strengthened competition policy, better provision and pricing of transportation infrastructure, 
developing a strong innovation culture, creating strong incentives for entrepreneurship and 
hard work, and investing in high-quality education. The task we collectively face, then, is to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   identify the right specific policies in each of these areas and then find ways of implementing 
them. Clearly, this is not an easy task, but neither is it an impossible one.  
Housing 
I would now like to turn to the second issue – the balance in the housing market.  
Again, when I spoke six years ago, the focus was on the pressures in the housing market 
arising from the rather unusual situation of having the growth rate of the population exceed 
that  in  the  number  of  dwellings  by  a  substantial  margin  (Graph 6).  Since  then,  population 
growth has slowed, and the rate of growth in the dwelling stock has increased so that it now 
once  again  exceeds  that  of  the  population.  Reflecting  this  increase,  the  share  of  GDP 
accounted for by the building of new dwellings has risen significantly and is now close to the 
various peaks reached over the past 50 years (Graph 7). Notwithstanding this, with spending 
on  alterations  and  additions  being  relatively  subdued,  overall  investment  on  residential 
construction remains some way below the previous peaks.  
This increase in the supply of dwellings has come on the back of a large run-up in housing 
prices in Australia's two largest cities. But the increase in supply now looks to be contributing 
to some moderation in the rate of increase in housing prices in these cities. It is also putting 
downward pressure on rents, with the CPI measure of rent inflation running at just 1.2 per cent 
in 2015, the lowest for 20 years (Graph 8). Whether or not these trends are maintained remains 
to be seen, and so we continue to watch developments in the housing market very closely. 
However, the overall picture does appear to be one of a better balance between supply and 
demand than was the case in 2010.  
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  lift  in  residential  construction  has  been  an  important  element  in  the 
cyclical rebalancing of the economy. In the period ahead, we can expect a further increase in 
residential construction, although at a slower rate than took place last year. While this more 
modest increase will mean a more modest boost to overall GDP growth from home-building, it 
should assist with the sustainability of the current boom in residential construction. It is unlikely 
to be in our collective interest to have a further surge in the construction of new dwellings, as 
a  share  of  the  economy,  then  to  be  followed  by  what  would  surely  be  a  larger  and  more 
prolonged decline later on. Overall, the recent data on building approvals suggest that we are 
on a reasonable path here.  
From a longer-term perspective, the challenge of providing an adequate supply of reasonably 
priced housing for an increasing population rests largely on the flexibility of land supply and, in 
particular, the supply of well-located land. This is because high housing costs largely reflect 
high  land  prices,  not  high  construction  costs.  Here,  it  is  zoning  regulations  and  the 
transportation infrastructure that can make a material difference. In both areas, progress has 
been made since 2010, but there is more to be done.  
Inflation 
The final issue is the inflation outlook.  
Six years ago, inflation rates in almost all advanced economies were below the midpoint of 
central bank targets. This remains the case today (Graph 9). The average core inflation rate 
across the advanced economies is very similar to that in 2010, and headline inflation rates are 
lower than they were then, because of the decline in oil prices over the past year.  
Six years ago, Australia was one of the few advanced economies in which inflation was not 
below the midpoint of the target (in our case, 2½ per cent) (Graph 10). This was, perhaps, not 
surprising given the mining investment boom that was then taking place. But today, as in many 
other countries, we too find ourselves below the midpoint of the target, although by only a 
relatively small margin. Importantly, unlike most of these other countries, inflation in Australia 
does remain consistent with the medium-term target.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   It would appear that in many advanced economies the inflation dynamics are a little different 
from  those  in  the  past. In  earlier  decades,  it  was  very  rare  for  central  banks  to  worry  that 
inflation and inflation expectations were too low. Yet today, we hear this concern quite often, 
and the ‘unconventional’ has almost become conventional.  
One factor that has contributed to the low inflation outcomes is the fall in oil prices. But a more 
fundamental influence has been the low wage increases in most advanced economies. In a 
number  of  these  economies,  including  the  United  States,  Japan,  Germany  and  the  United 
Kingdom, the low wage increases have coexisted with fairly strong employment growth and 
not-so-strong output growth. This is evident in Graph 11. The left hand panel shows, for each 
country, average employment growth over the past two years relative to the long-term average. 
Similarly,  the  right  hand  panel  shows  recent  GDP  growth  rates  relative  to  the  long-term 
averages. The pattern is reasonably clear: employment growth has been quite strong relative 
to historical trends, but output growth has not. It is also worth noting that each of these four 
countries is at, or near, conventional estimates of full employment.  
The  commonality  of  this  experience  of  low  wage  outcomes,  strong  employment  gains  and 
relatively subdued output growth suggests that some global influence may be at work. One 
possibility is that workers in the advanced countries perceive that they have less bargaining 
power  than  they  had  before,  either  as  an  after-effect  of  the  financial  crisis  and/or  the 
incremental globalisation of many service industries. Another possibility is that it is a reflection 
of the subdued growth in the global production of goods and the relatively strong growth in 
services, where output is more difficult to measure.  
Whatever the reason, the dynamics of labour markets are critical to the future path of inflation. 
It is possible that wage outcomes will remain very subdued even in countries with strong labour 
markets. If this turns out to be the case, then it is likely that inflation rates will also continue to 
be  very  low  and  monetary  policy  very  accommodative.  Alternatively,  what  we  might  be 
witnessing is just a slightly longer lag in the normal relationship between employment growth 
and wages. If this is the case, a pick-up in wage growth and inflation may not be too far away. 
Here,  the  United  States  is  a  test  case  of  sorts  given  that  its  recovery  is  most  advanced. 
Recently,  there  have  been  some  signs  of  a  pick-up  in  inflation  there  and  it  will  be  worth 
watching what happens quite closely over the next few months.  
For us, here in Australia, the continuing low wages growth means that CPI inflation is also 
likely to remain relatively low. While there is some upward pressure on the retail prices of 
imported  goods  as  a  result  of  the  depreciation,  this  pressure  is  being  muted  by  stronger 
competition following the entry of a number of overseas-based retailers into the Australian 
market.  
As the Reserve Bank has indicated for some time, this low inflation outlook provides scope for 
easier  monetary  policy  should  that  be  appropriate  in  supporting  demand  growth  in  the 
economy. An important factor here will be whether the growth in aggregate demand continues 
to be sufficient to accommodate the growth in our labour force.  
So, this brings me to the end of my remarks. I wish you the best of success for your National 
Congress. I hope that in another six years' time we can still be talking with some satisfaction 
about the resilience and growth in the Australian economy. And I suspect that the issues of 
productivity growth, the balance in the housing market and the inflation dynamics will be just 
as relevant as they are today, and as they were in 2010.  
Thank you and I would be happy to answer any questions.  
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 Graph 1 
 
Graph 2 
   6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 3 
 
Graph 4 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Graph 5 
 
Graph 6 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 7 
 
Graph 8 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 Graph 9 
   
Graph 10 
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Graph 11 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
