   
Simon M Potter: Money markets after liftoff – assessment to date and the 
road ahead 
Remarks by Mr Simon M Potter, Executive Vice President of the Markets Group of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 70th Anniversary Celebration of the School of International 
and Public Affairs at Columbia University, New York City, 22 February 2016. 
 The footnotes can be found at the end of the document. 
The charts can be found at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website:  
Thank you. It’s an honor to speak to you today as part of the 70th Anniversary Celebration of 
the School of International and Public Affairs at Columbia University, and I would like to thank 
my former colleague and longtime friend Trish Mosser for the invitation. The programs offered 
by SIPA, which aim to train young leaders to address the world’s most pressing public policy 
problems, are especially relevant to the mission of the New York Fed, and many members of 
the Bank’s Markets Group are alumni.1 
I’m here to offer a few thoughts on money markets and the implementation of monetary policy. 
Because of the large size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, the staff at the Federal 
Reserve spent the past several years developing a new and innovative framework to control 
money market rates, and working to increase the amount of data we receive about trading in 
those markets. In my remarks today, I will review the performance of this new framework and 
discuss key insights from those new data collections. 
Before  2008,  bank  reserves  were  scarce,  and  the  Federal  Reserve  influenced  overnight 
interest rates by making small adjustments in the supply of reserves. The expansion in the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet during and after the financial crisis means that reserves are 
now abundant, and small adjustments in the quantity of reserves will not have much influence 
on overnight interest rates. Instead, the Federal Reserve’s new framework is premised on the 
payment of interest on reserves and on ensuring sufficient competition in money markets so 
that the rate of interest paid on reserves is passed through to other money market rates and 
thus to deposit rates offered to households and firms.2 
Implementing  policy  in  this  new  way  has  required  a  significant  shift  in  the  staff’s  analytical 
focus,  toward  quantitative,  data-driven  analysis  of  money  market  structure.  This  work  was 
accomplished by a large roster of highly talented staff at the Board of Governors, the New York 
Fed, and elsewhere in the Federal Reserve System. Of course, the development of this new 
framework entailed frequent interaction with the Board of Governors and the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC), which are responsible for the tools used to implement monetary 
policy. 
I’ll focus my remarks on a few key questions. 
First, what is this new framework and why was it necessary? In this section, I will explain why 
the  Federal  Reserve  was  able  to  lift  rates  off  zero  without  requiring  large-scale  “reserve 
draining.”3 
Next, what do the new data on money market trading say about how this new framework is 
affecting market conditions? As part of this discussion, I’ll walk through the enhanced data 
that, starting in March, the New York Fed will use to calculate the effective federal funds rate.4 
Finally, what questions remain, and what can be done to learn more about the issues they 
raise?  These  include  the  level  of  capacity  required  in  the  Federal  Reserve’s  reverse  repo 
operations and the consequences of changes in the regulatory rules for banks and money 
funds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   As always, these views are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York 
Fed or the Federal Reserve System. 
A new approach for policy implementation 
Why are we following a new approach to implementing monetary policy? 
Before the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve followed a well-worn playbook for monetary 
policy implementation that was based on scarcity of reserves. Reserves left at the Federal 
Reserve earned zero percent interest. As a result, to achieve the FOMC’s desired level of the 
federal funds rate, the Open Market Desk at the New York Fed (Desk) estimated the amount 
of reserves to add or subtract that would intersect supply and demand at the target interest 
rate directed by the FOMC.5 All else equal, if the Desk wanted interest rates to go up, it slightly 
reduced the amount of reserves; if it wanted rates to go down, it slightly increased the amount.6 
So long as the Desk was able to effectively forecast the appropriate amount of reserves to add 
or subtract, temporary open market operations provided it with an efficient means to add or 
subtract  them,  and  therefore  allowed  for  good  control  over  the  federal  funds  rate.7  These 
operations were conducted as repos or reverse repos secured by Treasury securities or other 
high-quality collateral.8 
Back then, a typical day on the Desk focused on forecasting the demand for reserves created 
by  reserve  requirements  and  other  sources,  and  projecting  autonomous  factors  affecting 
reserves.9,  10  With  very  small  amounts  of  excess  reserves  in  the  system,  there  was  a 
straightforward relationship between rates in a range of money markets. Thus, the Desk was 
able  to  target  a  rate  in  one  part  of  the  unsecured  market  by  conducting  small  secured 
operations as needed with primary dealers. 
Since the financial crisis, the environment has changed in two important ways. First, by the 
end of 2014, following the large-scale asset purchase programs, the Federal Reserve balance 
sheet was funded by about $3.1 trillion in liabilities other than Federal Reserve notes, which 
were mostly in the form of reserves in excess of the amount banks were required to hold; in 
contrast, there were only $64 billion of non-Federal Reserve note liabilities in June 2007, of 
which only about $2 billion were excess reserves. As a result, reserves are now anything but 
scarce. Second, Congress granted the Federal Reserve an important new tool: the authority 
to pay interest on reserve balances, or IOR.11  
In many countries, and in theory, a standing facility that pays IOR provides a floor on interest 
rates. The reason is simple: if a private counterparty can invest cash at the central bank, then 
given  the  safety  and  convenience  of  this  investment,  it  will  dominate  any  other  overnight 
investment at that interest rate. Further, if banks can acquire funds in the wholesale market at 
rates below IOR, then competition for these funds will bid up these rates close to that paid on 
reserves. 
The  Federal  Reserve  instituted  interest  on  reserves  in  late  2008,  and  the  interest  rate  on 
reserves turned out not to be a floor; market interest rates fell significantly below it. With the 
large levels of excess reserves in the system, certain institutional aspects of money markets 
in the United States – including bank-only access to IOR, credit limits imposed by lenders and 
other impediments to market competition, and the costs of balance sheet expansion – appear 
to create frictions that have made IOR act more like a magnet that pulls up short-term interest 
rates  than  a  firm  floor  beneath  them.  Thus,  in  considering  how  to  implement  policy 
normalization, the Federal Reserve evaluated a variety of ways to increase competition for 
funds among borrowers and thereby improve the control provided by IOR.12  
The Federal Reserve initially considered an approach to policy normalization that was based 
on a combination of term operations and asset sales or redemptions aimed at making reserves 
sufficiently scarce so that, once the FOMC decided to tighten monetary policy, this tightening 
could be implemented using IOR within a framework that was otherwise similar to that used 
before the crisis.13 As part of this approach, the Federal Reserve acquired a new set of reverse 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   repo counterparties, including money market funds and government-sponsored enterprises, in 
addition  to  the  primary  dealers  with  which  it  had  traditionally  transacted.  These  new 
counterparties were major investors of cash in overnight markets and had capacity to facilitate 
the “draining” of substantial reserve balances, if offered attractive term investments with the 
Federal Reserve. In addition, the Federal Reserve developed a term deposit facility to drain 
banks’  reserve  balances.14  This  playbook  of  draining  reserves  back  to  reserve  scarcity  to 
support the transmission of interest on reserves into market rates is standard among central 
banks. If policymakers had chosen to do so, the Federal Reserve could have made such a 
term reserve draining approach work to help control money market rates in the United States.15 
So, why did the Federal Reserve not follow this approach of large-scale reserve draining? As 
the  balance  sheet  continued  to  grow  as  a  result  of  asset  purchase  programs,  it  became 
apparent that such reserve draining operations would have been very large in comparison to 
the size of private money markets. As a result, they probably would have had lasting effects 
on the structure of those markets – for example, by reshaping the structure of term money 
market activity according to the structure of the Federal Reserve’s operations. These lasting 
effects could have been especially large if the balance sheet did not run off quickly. 
For  this  reason,  the  Federal  Reserve  instead  pursued  offering  an  overnight  investment 
opportunity that could, with sufficient capacity, intensify competition in money markets and, 
without necessarily draining reserves, enhance the transmission of IOR into other overnight 
money  market  rates.  This  approach  entailed  a  twist  on  a  traditional  Federal  Reserve  tool, 
reverse repos: Instead of running quantity-based, term operations aimed at altering reserve 
levels,  the  Desk  would  run  interest-rate-based  overnight  operations  aimed  directly  at 
influencing market rates. 
A number of operational features were required to implement such an overnight reverse repo, 
or ON RRP, facility: It would need same-day settlement;16 the operation would need to be run 
predictably, every day, and as late in the day as possible, to give lenders time to bargain with 
other  counterparties  using  the  outside  option  of  investing  with  the  Federal  Reserve;17  an 
appropriate spread below IOR would be required to ensure that the facility neither induced 
large changes in the structure of money markets nor lost the ability to support interest rate 
control;18 and the operations would need enough unused capacity that lenders could credibly 
propose to leave borrowers that did not offer an adequate interest rate.19  
This  approach  works  in  theory,  and,  with  the  support  of  staff  across  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, a theoretical framework was developed around money market rate control through 
the use of this framework.20 The ON RRP facility was also tested for more than two years. This 
theoretical  and  empirical  examination  gave  the  Federal  Reserve  confidence  that  it  could 
effectively raise rates when the time came while limiting undesirable effects on financial market 
structure, and also ensured that additional term tool options were available if the combination 
of the overnight tools – IOR and ON RRP – was not sufficient to provide interest rate control.21  
At this point, you might have a question: from late 2008 to late 2015, the federal funds rate 
traded well within the FOMC’s target range of zero to 25 basis points.22 Shouldn’t this have 
been conclusive evidence as to the ability of the operational framework to provide sufficient 
control of interest rates? 
Unfortunately, the answer is no, because there are natural features of the financial system that 
likely  provide  support  to  interest  rates  near  the  zero  lower  bound,  or  ZLB.  These  features 
include  the  availability  of  physical  cash  and  a  behavioral  aversion  by  some money  market 
investors to investing at negative rates, and also encompass certain unique features of money 
markets  in  the  United  States,  such  as  legal  and  regulatory  incentives  applicable  to  money 
market  mutual  funds  and  the  ability  of  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  to  leave 
unremunerated deposits at the Federal Reserve.23  
As a result, while the pre-liftoff testing suggested that the tools were likely to work well, it wasn’t 
possible to determine with complete certainty the extent to which market rates were driven by 
the tools or by ZLB effects. So we couldn’t completely rule out that the federal funds rate and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   other money market rates might not go up one for one with rises in administered rates. One 
might also worry that money market rates might not move together as rates rise, meaning that, 
for example, a disconnect might emerge between secured and unsecured rates, or between 
overnight  and  term  instruments.24  Either  situation  could  result  in  impaired  transmission  of 
monetary policy into broad financial conditions. 
Assessing the performance of the new framework 
To summarize my conclusion about the performance of the operating framework to date: I am 
extremely pleased with what we’ve seen so far. 
In discussing why I view the framework as effective, it’s helpful to start by explaining what it 
means for the tools to work well. I think about this issue through three lenses: interest rate 
control,  avoiding  unintended  impact  on  the  structure  of  the  financial  system,  and  avoiding 
financial instability. I’ll touch on what each of these mean, and then I’ll review the quantitative 
evidence since liftoff on how well things have gone. 
Interest rate control 
Clearly, interest rate control is the paramount objective. It is of great importance that the public 
is confident that the federal funds rate will be, on average over time, within the target range 
set forth by the FOMC, and that other money market rates will continue to move closely with 
changes in the federal funds rate. This way, expectations for the FOMC’s future policy stance 
will be properly incorporated into the term structure of interest rates, and thereby appropriately 
affect broad financial conditions and the broader economy. 
It’s not necessary that the effective rate stay within the target range each and every day. Before 
the crisis, there was usually a bit of variability in the effective rate owing to limitations on the 
Desk’s ability to achieve completely precise daily forecasts for reserve demand. Now, as I said 
earlier, the FOMC sets the target as a range, not as a point value. The federal funds rate can 
vary  within  that  range,  and  it  could  even  move  outside  that  range  on  occasion,  without 
materially affecting the economy.25  
We have instituted a data-driven, cross-market framework for evaluating interest rate control. 
In unsecured markets, we gather daily, transaction-level data through a new Federal Reserve 
statistical collection called the FR 2420. These rich data give us much greater insight than we 
had before the crisis about how these markets are structured, which is important to developing 
and  maintaining  an  operating regime  based  on  improving  competition  among  borrowers  in 
money markets, in the context of a large amount of reserves and substantial ongoing regulatory 
and business model changes.  
Monetary control does not stop at the effective federal funds rate: The Federal Reserve also 
wants to ensure that the stance of monetary policy is passed through into other money market 
rates. For example, we evaluate such transmission in the Treasury tri-party repo market, the 
market in which ON RRP is conducted, by collecting similar trade-by-trade data from clearing 
banks. In addition to these overnight markets, we pay close attention to the Eurodollar market, 
which I’ll address later, as well as term money market rates. 
Avoiding unintended effects on the structure of the financial system 
A second lens for evaluating the operational framework is the extent to which it avoids creating 
incentives that might result in undesirable changes in the structure of the financial system. This 
means that the framework shouldn’t have lasting unintended effects on how people invest their 
money or on how financial institutions interact with each other. 
The Federal Reserve is operating the ON RRP on a temporary basis, primarily because the 
balance sheet is currently large. The FOMC’s policy normalization principles and plans make 
the temporary nature of the ON RRP clear by stating that it will be discontinued when it is no 
longer needed to help control the federal funds rate.26 This intention was noted again in the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   minutes  to  the  January  FOMC  meeting.  As  a  result,  we  expect  that  firms  would  not  make 
structural  changes  in  how  they  operate  in  response  to  the  ON  RRP,  to  avoid  the  cost  of 
unwinding those changes when it is discontinued. The intention of the FOMC to impose an 
aggregate cap on the ON RRP, as described in the January minutes, will mitigate this risk. 
We closely monitor industry structure and fund flows to detect whether the framework is having 
any unintended impact. For example, we watch banking data and money fund holdings to see 
if savings are shifting between the two, because if such a shift had to reverse as we wound 
down the ON RRP, those flows could potentially create costs to the firms concerned and also 
unnecessary  problems  for  market  functioning.  We  also  keep  track  of  prime  money  funds 
converting  into  government-only  money  funds,  because  if  they  do  so  on  the  mistaken 
impression  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  provide  a  risk-free  investment  opportunity 
indefinitely and on a very large scale, they might later have to unwind that change when their 
error became apparent. 
Avoiding financial instability 
The  third  lens  for  evaluating  the  framework  is  the  extent  to  which  the  framework  avoids 
augmenting risks of financial instability. In particular, the framework shouldn’t create a risk that, 
in times of stress, money market lenders will rapidly disintermediate their usual counterparties 
and come to the Federal Reserve instead, such as through the ON RRP facility.27 Of course, 
flight-to-quality effects existed in financial markets long before we put the new framework into 
place  –  what I’m referring to  is  a situation  where the framework facilitates those  effects  or 
makes them larger. 
We address the risk of sudden surges in take-up in a couple of ways. For example, we can 
employ vigilant market monitoring to detect any such shifts and allow the FOMC to formulate 
a response. We also use per-counterparty caps, and can use an aggregate cap. 
Evidence to date on control 
Now, let’s discuss what the data tell us about how well the framework performed. 
The distribution of traded rates in the federal funds market, shown in Figure 1, essentially made 
a parallel shift higher after liftoff. These data are drawn from the new FR 2420 data collection 
I discussed earlier, and they show an average over all days from liftoff to this past Wednesday, 
leaving out December 31. Nearly all trading occurred within the new range – it’s normal for 
there to be a little bit above the range – suggesting that our framework was broadly effective 
in moving traded rates upward. 
Because traded rates moved upward in this way, we have so far achieved an excellent level 
of control over the federal funds rate. Since December 17, the day after the FOMC meeting, 
the effective federal funds rate, calculated under its current methodology as a volume-weighted 
mean, has traded within the FOMC’s new 25-to-50-basis-point range on all but one day, which 
I’ll come back to. This is shown in Figure 2. The rate has averaged around 36 basis points, 
about 25 basis points above its average level over the analogous year-ago period, when the 
target range was zero to 25 basis points. 
Let’s consider the calculation of the effective rate for a moment. Last year, we announced 
some changes to that calculation, the most significant of which is that, starting in March, we 
will  switch  to  calculating  it  as  a  volume-weighted  median  using  data  drawn  from  the 
FR 2420 data collection, rather than a volume-weighed mean using data provided by federal 
funds brokers. The change in the data source was made to make the calculation process more 
robust.28 We changed the calculation methodology because, while the mean and median are 
usually very close to one another, when they differ the median is a better reflection of money 
market activity, and because using a median enhances the reliability and integrity of the rate.29 
The New York Fed published a technical note this past July that describes in detail the benefits 
of this change.30 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Our recent experience has confirmed the expectation that the transition to the median in March 
will result in little overall impact on the level of the effective rate over time. Figure 3 shows a 
time series of the mean and median rates computed from the FR 2420 data. As you can see, 
they remain quite close to one another. 
The  FR  2420  data  also  allow  us  to  examine  closely  the  distribution  of  traded  rates  in  the 
overnight Eurodollar deposit market. For those who are not native speakers of money market 
jargon, the federal funds and Eurodollar deposit markets are very similar: They are wholesale 
funds  taken  in  by  banks,  with  definitional  differences  that  I’ll  leave  to  the  footnotes  to  my 
speech.31 Just this past October, following amendments to the FR 2420 collection, we began 
to receive trade-level data for the bulk of activity in the Eurodollar market.32  
The Eurodollar market is considerably larger than the federal funds market. According to FR 
2420  data,  on  average  in  the  last  two  months  of  2015  there  was  $233  billion  of  overnight 
borrowing in the Eurodollar market; in contrast, over that same period, there was $70 billion 
overnight borrowing in the federal funds market.33 I’ll show some data on the composition of 
activity in these markets a bit later, but it’s worthwhile noting that many of the Desk’s nonbank 
counterparties, such as the money funds, are active lenders in the Eurodollar market. 
We observed a similar response in yields in the Eurodollar market as we did in the federal 
funds  market,  with  the  distribution  of  traded  rates  making  a  parallel  shift  upward  of  about 
25 basis points, as shown in Figure 4. Since liftoff, the overnight Eurodollar volume-weighted 
mean rate as calculated from FR 2420 data, as seen in Figure 5, has averaged about 35 basis 
points.34 This is in line with the effective federal funds rate. The volume-weighted median, also 
shown in the figure, moved upward by a like amount. This is an encouraging development 
because it indicates that, as we have moved up from the zero lower bound, money market 
rates are continuing to move together. 
We can look into that further by examining the overnight Treasury repo market. Rates on these 
transactions as reported by the tri-party clearing banks, shown in Figure 6, exhibited a similar 
shift upward, although they settled modestly lower in the target range than they had in the pre-
liftoff period. In part, this shift likely reflects the fact that the ON RRP offered rate was 5 basis 
points before liftoff – that is, 5 basis points above the bottom of the target range – and it is now 
set to 25 basis points, or the bottom of the target range. 
It also looks as though the increase in the federal funds rate passed through effectively into 
term money  market  instruments.  Figure  7  shows  the  recent  progression  of rates  on three-
month Treasury bills and three-month commercial paper. Also shown for comparison is a three-
month overnight index swap quote for the effective federal funds rate. All of these rates rose 
going into the December FOMC meeting, which makes quite a bit of sense, given that most 
market participants expected the FOMC to tighten policy at that meeting.35 We also gather 
information about rates on term unsecured borrowing in our FR 2420 collection, and about 
term secured transactions from the clearing banks, and these data tell a similar story. 
Treasury bill yields rose a bit less than other rates on instruments of comparable term and now 
trade at yields somewhat below the ON RRP rate. Treasury bills have some attractive qualities 
in comparison to ON RRP, such as round-the-clock liquidity. In addition, there seems to be 
strong demand for bills from investors who don’t have direct access to the ON RRP or IOR, 
and it appears that most Treasury bills are owned by such investors. Also, bills have typically 
traded  below  other  money  market  rates  during  tightening  cycles,  as  they  do  now;  periods 
where bills trade at or above other rates have been the exception and not the rule.36 Thus, the 
smaller increase in bill yields than in rates on other term instruments is not surprising, and I do 
not read it as undermining the general conclusion that the policy rate increase was effective in 
firming money market conditions.37  
December 31 
Now, I mentioned earlier that fed funds traded within the target range on all but one day. Let’s 
talk about that day, which was December 31.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   On that day, the effective federal funds rate, calculated as a mean from the FR 2420 data, 
printed at 20 basis points, 15 basis points below its prior-day value and 5 basis points below 
the FOMC’s target range. The median dropped a bit more, by 20 basis points to a level of 
15 basis points. In addition, as shown in Figures 8 and 9, the dispersion of traded overnight 
rates  in federal funds  and  Eurodollars  increased  on that  day,  with  a substantial  amount  of 
trading activity at fairly low rates. These year-end effects were transitory, and the level and 
distribution  of  rates  in  the  federal  funds  and  Eurodollar  markets  returned  to  pre-year-end 
conditions on the following day. 
Although  the  effects  were  transitory  and  did  not  adversely  affect  policy  implementation, 
spending a bit more time on this episode can contribute to our understanding of money market 
relationships. Why did we see the year-end drop in unsecured rates? Recall that the framework 
functions by creating opportunities for investors to borrow funds in money markets to earn IOR 
whenever there are significant differences between market rates and the IOR rate. On quarter-
ends,  the  actual  and  perceived  marginal  balance  sheet  costs  of  a  number  of  depository 
institutions  increase  as  they  publish  financial  statements  and  calculate  regulatory  ratios.38 
These  increased  balance  sheet  costs  mean  that  depository  institutions  borrowing  funds  in 
money markets to earn IOR must do so at a lower interest rate to account for these costs. 
Further, the reduction in balance sheet capacity can temporarily lower the bargaining power of 
lenders, again allowing borrowers to obtain funds at lower rates. 
Many lenders in the federal funds and Eurodollar markets with access to the ON RRP facility 
responded to these low rates by increasing their use of the facility, as shown in Figure 10. 
However, other lenders remained in these markets, including those without ON RRP access, 
those  who  received  funds  late  in  the  afternoon  after  the  ON  RRP  operation  had  already 
occurred, and those for which the ON RRP was not an acceptable substitute. On this last point, 
for some institutions, the ON RRP is an imperfect substitute to lending in private unsecured 
markets because, in the tri-party repo system through which the ON RRP is settled, cash is 
not returned at maturity until late the next day, whereas in private unsecured markets, earlier 
return of funds can be negotiated.39 
These quarter-end effects, as measured by the effective federal funds rate, are likely to appear 
a  bit  larger  when  we  switch  in  early  March  to  a  median  calculation.  As  I  mentioned,  on 
December 31, the median fell a bit more than the mean did, 20 basis points in the median 
versus 15 for the mean. A larger relative decline isn’t unusual; averaging across the quarter-
end dates in March, June, and September 2015, the median declined by 7 basis points while 
the mean  declined  by  6.  The median  declines more  because  it  is,  in most  cases,  a  better 
measure of the center of the distribution of traded rates – an issue the Desk analyzed at some 
length in the technical note I mentioned earlier. This difference between the two might grow a 
bit more as rates move further from zero. 
In secured markets, rates in the tri-party repo market on year-end were relatively stable. This 
makes sense, as ON RRP is a good substitute for tri-party repo with private counterparties, 
and therefore this facility forms a fairly firm floor on overnight repo rates for lenders that have 
access to the facility.40 As I’ll show in a moment, volumes declined in the private repo market, 
as is typical on quarter-ends. 
Evidence to date on other “lenses” 
Turning to the second lens I noted earlier, we have achieved excellent control while avoiding 
any unintended change in the structure of the financial system. Figure 11 shows RRP take-up 
over time, grouped by counterparty type. Take-up, both in aggregate and at the counterparty-
type  level,  has  been  stable  since  liftoff.  Among  the  money  funds  shown  in  this  figure, 
government-only funds make up more of the demand on typical days, with funds that can invest 
in a broader universe of money market instruments, called prime funds, accounting for the 
balance. This has also been stable since liftoff.41 Indeed, more recently, usage has come down 
as unsecured and secured rates have firmed some. Even with zero usage, the ON RRP facility 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   could still be effective in underpinning the level for money market rates by supporting lenders’ 
bargaining power. 
In addition, as shown in Figure 12, lending volumes in secured and unsecured money markets 
have been stable, suggesting that the Federal Reserve’s facilities have not displaced activity 
in the private sector.42 Figure 13 shows activity in unsecured markets by select lender types. 
This shows that, post-liftoff, the composition of activity in these markets also appears to have 
been stable. 
Finally, I’d like to speak briefly to the third lens, avoiding financial instability. As you know, there 
has been quite a bit of volatility and risk aversion in financial markets lately, and there has 
been  no  corresponding surge  in ON  RRP  demand. This  continues to  be  an  issue that  the 
FOMC is thinking closely about, as reflected in the January FOMC minutes. 
Lessons learned on operational structure 
We have learned a lot about the structure of our operations from our experience with liftoff. I 
will discuss a few of my observations. 
Let’s begin with quantifying the aggregate capacity limit. At the December meeting, the FOMC 
directed that the ON RRP’s capacity be “limited only by the value of Treasury securities held 
outright in the System Open Market Account that are available for such operations.” As a result, 
in practice, the ON RRP is currently being run with an aggregate capacity limit of around $2 
trillion, which is far in excess of typical daily demand and well above the $300 billion capacity 
limit the facility had had since September 2014. As the FOMC made clear in the minutes to its 
March 2015 meeting, this elevated capacity was intended to ensure a smooth liftoff, but the 
absence  of  an  aggregate  cap  is  only  temporary.  This  is  why  the  recent  January  minutes 
included a discussion of when and how it will be appropriate to reinstate an aggregate cap. 
So, what have we learned about the appropriate level of the cap? It seems likely that having a 
very  elevated  aggregate  capacity  was  helpful  in  controlling  market  rates  initially,  perhaps 
because it showed the FOMC’s commitment to achieving interest rate control, but it’s unclear 
exactly how much available capacity, or “headroom,” is needed to maintain such control. By 
way of background, determining the appropriate level of capacity involves striking a balance 
between the “lenses” I discussed earlier. Imposing a limit on the facility’s capacity reduces the 
extent to which there can be a disruptive surge of funds into the facility and the extent to which 
private-sector investors can change their lending patterns by using the facility. Thus, such a 
limit helps avoid financial instability and unintended effects on the structure of the financial 
system. However, a limit that is perceived as likely to bind weakens our control of interest rates, 
because  when  demand  exceeds  capacity,  the  interest  rate  paid  on  the  ON  RRP  facility  is 
determined by an auction and is likely to be below the offering rate, thus reducing the efficacy 
of the facility in supporting the federal funds rate.43  
Our  recent  experience  suggests  that  having  reasonably  high  aggregate  capacity  can  help 
improve control without necessarily encouraging greater use of the facility. When that capacity 
is great enough, money market lenders are confident that they will be able to place funds with 
us  at  the  administered  rate,  even  on  financial  statement  reporting  dates.  That  confidence 
empowers them to demand rates from their borrowers that are above the ON RRP offering 
rate. Conversely, when the capacity is perceived as low, lenders worry that they might not be 
able to place all their funds at reasonable rates. This means that they might accept relatively 
low rates in money markets. In addition, because of switching costs and other frictions as well 
as risk aversion on the part of lenders, rates can decline days or weeks ahead of a date on 
which the ON RRP is anticipated to reach its capacity, to levels so soft that lenders reallocate 
funds to the ON RRP.44 So, having a high capacity could actually reduce ON RRP take-up. 
But as I mentioned earlier, it isn’t clear exactly how high the capacity needs to be to achieve 
the confidence of which I speak, and the benefits of high capacity must be carefully balanced 
against the benefits of a tighter aggregate cap in terms of avoiding financial instability and 
unintended effects on the structure of the financial system. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Looking  at  the  recent  data,  it’s  hard  to  precisely  identify  the  extent  to  which  the  very  high 
capacity, relative to the previous limit of $300 billion, helped to facilitate control beyond instilling 
confidence, as I discussed earlier. One tentative indication that high capacity may be playing 
an important role is that unsecured rates appear to have settled in about the same position 
relative to IOR as before liftoff, even though one might have expected the widening in the IOR-
ON RRP spread and the lower support from the ZLB to result in some downward shift. 
The ON RRP also has a per-counterparty cap, which was, and is, $30 billion. It seems that the 
current level of the per-counterparty cap was also adequately large for perceived individual 
“headroom,” thereby supporting lender bargaining power. Figure 14 shows summary data on 
how frequently we receive large bids in our operations at the ON RRP and term RRP facilities. 
As  you  can  see,  we  rarely  see  bids  of  more  than  $10  billion,  and  combined  individual 
counterparty usage across overnight and term operations has never exceeded $30 billion. 
Recently, we learned a bit about the term RRP operations. We have been conducting these 
over  quarter-ends  as  a  way  of  providing  additional  RRP  capacity.  Additional  capacity  is 
available  because  term  RRP  operations  are  subject  to  a  separate  overall  size  limit,  and 
because there is no per-counterparty cap in those operations. Counterparties appear to regard 
these as close substitutes for ON RRPs, and as shown in Figure 15, we’ve typically seen that 
overall RRP take-up, across overnight and term RRP, has been fairly stable across quarter-
ends. 
At this past year-end, there was essentially no take-up at the term RRP operations. The reason 
is that the aggregate and per-counterparty caps were sufficiently high that market participants 
were confident that they would not bind, and also because we conducted the term operations 
without any interest rate premium relative to the overnight operations. At prior quarter-ends, 
term RRPs were typically offered with maximum bid rates a few basis points above the ON 
RRP rate. 
The year-end experience suggests that market participants generally prefer overnight RRPs 
to term RRPs if they offer the same rate, and that, if desired, adequate control over money 
market  rates  can  be  attained  without  term  RRPs,  as  long  as  there  is  adequate  ON  RRP 
capacity. 
Finally, I’ll offer a few observations on a daily repo operation I haven’t yet mentioned. As a 
long-standing service to foreign central banks, foreign governments, and international official 
institutions, the New York Fed runs an overnight investment facility known as the foreign repo 
pool.45 In this operation, at the end of each business day, account holders’ cash balances are 
invested in an overnight reverse repo secured by the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings.46 
The foreign pool is an autonomous factor affecting reserves and, as a result, in the pre-crisis 
operating framework, the Desk would have to essentially sterilize variations in the pool's size 
with repo operations. Accordingly, the interest rate on the pool was slightly below overnight 
Treasury  repo  rates  in  the  market.47  To  ease  the  Desk’s  job  in  the  daily  forecasting  of 
autonomous factors, tight limits were imposed on customers’ ability to rapidly vary the size of 
their investment in the pool. 
Since the crisis, the New York Fed has continued to provide the pool as a service. Investments 
in the pool continue to be paid the market-based rate I mentioned. Figure 16 contains some 
statistics on this rate relative to a measure of the broad market rate. We do not use the foreign 
pool  as  a  means  for  implementing  monetary  policy,  and  the  change  in  the  composition  of 
Federal Reserve liabilities it can generate has little to no impact in unsecured markets because 
of the large amount of reserves in the system. Recall that the current operating framework is 
not based on reserves scarcity. 
Use of the foreign pool has grown over the last year and a half, from a bit under $100 billion in 
mid-2014 to about $247 billion on February 17. This growth isn’t associated with liftoff, and it 
isn’t because we have changed the way in which the interest rate is calculated. Instead, use 
of the pool has increased because over time the constraints imposed on customers’ ability to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   vary the size of their investments have been removed, the supply of balance sheet offered by 
the private sector to foreign central banks appears to have declined, and some central banks 
desire to maintain robust dollar liquidity buffers. 
Open questions 
Compared with the relative calm of the pre-crisis period, money markets have recently gone 
through a sustained period of substantial change. Some of these changes are the result of 
regulations  to  improve  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system,  others  relate  to 
business model enhancements, and, of course, some relate to Federal Reserve activity. The 
Federal Reserve continues to collect data on the structure of money markets to determine 
whether  any  changes  are  needed  in  its  operating  framework  to  ensure  that  its  objectives 
continue to be met. 
We are continuing to watch developments as business models adapt to the numerous changes 
in bank regulation introduced over the past few years. We are interested in the extent to which 
these business model changes impact the structure of money markets and thereby affect the 
form  of  monetary  policy  implementation.  For  example,  we  are  monitoring  developments  in 
bank behavior that could have implications for the transmission of monetary policy into market 
rates.  Thus,  we  are  paying  close  attention  to  the  behavior  of  foreign  banks  on  financial 
statement reporting dates. We are also keeping a close eye on how domestic banks continue 
to respond to enhanced requirements on nonoperating deposits, which, for some institutions, 
are  fairly  large  relative  to  the  size  of  their  reserve  holdings.  Should  these  business  model 
changes increase the spread banks demand to borrow funds in money markets to earn IOR, 
or should business model decisions apparently related to regulatory changes alter broader 
dynamics in money markets, this could result in upward pressure on ON RRP take-up over 
time. 
We are also paying close attention to developments in the money market mutual fund industry 
and  their  potential  impact  on  policy  implementation.48  The  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission recently announced new regulations for these funds aimed at enhancing financial 
stability.  One  important  feature  of  these  new  rules  is  that  government-only  money  funds 
receive  different  regulatory  treatment  than  prime  funds,  possibly  making  government-only 
funds  more  attractive  for  some  institutional  investors.  If  the  assets  under  management  in 
government-only money funds were to grow significantly, that could put upward pressure on 
ON  RRP  take-up,  since  most  fund  managers  consider  the  facility  to  be  a  government 
investment.49 As I noted earlier, we would not want to see growth in government-only money 
funds if it were predicated on a mistaken impression that ON RRP would be around indefinitely 
and  with  high  capacity.  Also,  if  assets  under  management  in  prime  funds  were  to  decline 
sharply, this could possibly lead to less efficient transmission of monetary policy. 
Finally, we want to keep an eye on relative value relationships in money markets. For example, 
the difference between customer-to-dealer and interdealer repo rates has been quite volatile 
in recent months, apparently because of growth in dealer balance sheet costs. 
The road ahead 
To summarize, in the period since liftoff, we have achieved excellent control over the effective 
federal funds rate, and we have done so while avoiding unintended effects on the financial 
system  or  financial  stability.  The  policy  rate  increase  has  passed  through  to  other  money 
market rates, suggesting that the increase is affecting broader financial conditions as expected 
and intended. 
We still have a lot of work to do, both to observe ongoing structural changes in financial markets 
and to formulate and implement any necessary response in the Federal Reserve’s monetary 
policy  operations.  I  believe  we  have  thoughtfully  considered  these  uncertainties,  and  I  am 
confident that we have appropriate policy tools available to respond as necessary to them. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Thank you. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
  1  
I would like to thank James Egelhof and Patricia Zobel for their excellent assistance in the preparation of these 
remarks, and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for numerous insightful comments and suggestions. In 
addition, I would like to acknowledge the leadership of James Clouse, William English, and Lorie Logan in the 
construction  of  this  new  framework  and  James  McAndrews  for  his  intellectual  leadership  on  U.S.  money 
markets. 
2   For more details on implementation frameworks, see for example Ihrig, Meade, and Weinbach (2015). 
3   With the commencement of the policy normalization process in December 2015, the Federal Reserve began 
issuing an implementation note that provides the operational settings of the Federal Reserve's policy tools. This 
note serves to separate communications about the policy stance from those about policy implementation. It also 
promotes greater cohesion and transparency in communications about policy implementation by consolidating 
information  that  was  previously  provided  in  FOMC  statements,  FOMC  minutes,  Desk  statements,  and 
elsewhere. 
4   An  estimated  historical  series  for  an  effective  federal  funds  rate,  produced  using  the  new  data  source  and 
calculation methodology, is available on the New York Fed’s website. This series will be updated at the end of 
February. 
6  
5   Demand  for  loans  of  reserves  was  driven,  for  example,  by  reserve  requirements  imposed  on  depository 
institutions. 
I emphasize “all else equal.” There were many subtleties to the pre-crisis relationship between the operations 
and money market rates. In particular, money market rates would often move to a new target rate even before 
operations  were  conducted,  because  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  credibility.  Of  course,  that  credibility  was 
underpinned  by  the  Federal  Reserve’s  actual  operational  capability.  For  a  detailed  exposition  on  pre-crisis 
monetary policy implementation, see Bernanke, “Implementing Monetary Policy,” March 30, 2005. 
7   Of course, the Desk also controlled the level of reserves through permanent open market operations. 
8   When the Desk conducts a reverse repo transaction, it sells securities held in the System Open Market Account 
(SOMA) under an agreement to repurchase the securities at a predetermined price. The difference between the 
sale price and the repurchase price, together with the length of time between the two legs of the transaction, 
implies a rate of interest (the reverse repo rate) paid by the Federal Reserve to its counterparty. The transaction 
leaves the size of the SOMA securities portfolio unchanged but shifts some of the liabilities on the Fed’s balance 
sheet from bank reserves to reverse repos while the trade is outstanding. A repo (as opposed to a reverse repo) 
is the opposite. Before the crisis, repos were more common than reverse repos. The eligible collateral for the 
Desk’s repo and reverse repo operations is set forth in the FOMC’s Authorization for Domestic Open Market 
Operations. 
9   Autonomous factors are those components of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that affect reserve balances 
but are not directly under the central bank’s control. The largest of these, by far, is currency in circulation. Others 
include  U.S.  Treasury  deposits,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  “float,”  and  overnight  reverse  repos  conducted  with 
foreign central banks. See, for example, Hilton (2008). 
10   The 2005 speech by then-Governor Bernanke that I noted earlier provides great detail on a day in the life on 
the Desk prior to the financial crisis. 
11   Congress granted this authority to the Federal Reserve in the Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, 
with an October 2011 effective date, but accelerated its implementation to October 2008 as part of the legislative 
response to the financial crisis. A similar tool is critical in the implementation regime of most advanced economy 
central banks.  
12   The FOMC also considered an arrangement under which depository institutions could pledge funds held in a 
segregated account at the Federal Reserve as collateral in borrowing transactions with private creditors. This 
approach aimed to reduce credit-related barriers to depository institutions’ borrowing funds in money markets 
and  thereby  intensify  competition  among  borrowers.  The  FOMC  decided  that  these  accounts  involved 
operational, regulatory, and policy issues that would have been difficult to resolve in a timely fashion, and it 
shelved further work. See the minutes to the FOMC’s December 2014 meeting. 
13   This approach was discussed in detail in the FOMC’s June 2011 Exit Strategy Principles. 
14   The Federal Reserve continues to test its Term Deposit Facility (TDF). In late 2014 and early 2015, the Federal 
Reserve conducted rounds of testing of the TDF that on two occasions resulted in cumulative take-up of more 
than  $400  billion.  These  operations  reportedly  had  no  significant  impact  on  conditions  in  money  markets, 
suggesting that TDF operations would have to be significantly larger to put upward pressure on rates. 
15   This approach has been used heavily, for example, by central banks that have large foreign exchange reserves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   16   In July 2015, the FOMC announced that changes in administered rates would go into effect on the day after its 
policy  decision.  Otherwise,  the  intraday  timing  of  a  policy  change  could  result  in  various  operations  being 
conducted with inconsistent settings. 
17   ON  RRP  is  currently  offered  to  a  broad  set  of  counterparties;  these  counterparties  make  up  a  fairly  large 
proportion of the lending community in overnight money markets. By offering this large group of counterparties 
an alternative, risk-free investment option, ON RRP should improve lenders’ market power and help keep money 
market rates near or above the ON RRP offered rate. Even if money markets were perfectly competitive, ON 
RRP  would  likely  still be  effective  at  supporting the floor  provided  by  IOR,  for  example through  addressing 
segmentation between secured and unsecured money markets. 
18   The preservation of enough activity in the federal funds market to maintain the viability of the effective federal 
funds rate was one component of this. 
19   A final operational change to improve the transmission of IOR into market rates was a revision to the interest 
calculation  methodology  that  became  effective  in  July  2015.  As  originally  implemented,  interest  on  excess 
reserves  (IOER)  was  paid  on  each  bank’s  average  balances  over  a  two-week  maintenance  period,  at  the 
average interest rate. This meant that if the interest rate changed during a maintenance period, the change 
would not have been fully reflected in the interest payments to depository institutions until the beginning of a 
new maintenance period. This methodology likely would have resulted in slow adjustment of market rates to 
changes in the IOER rate. The revised calculation bases interest payments to depository institutions on the 
IOER rate in effect each day and the level of balances held each day. 
20   See Clouse, Ihrig, Klee, and Chen, “The Federal Reserve’s Tools for Policy Normalization in a Preferred Habitat 
Model of Financial Markets,” October 2014; Martin, McAndrews, Palida, and Skeie, “Federal Reserve Tools for 
Managing Rates and Reserves,” September 2013; and Armenter and Lester, “Excess Reserves and Monetary 
Policy Normalization,” September 2015. 
21   Testing  focused on  two  types  of  term  operations.  Term  RRPs  are similar  to  ON  RRP in most  respects;  for 
example, both operations use the same expanded set of counterparties. The key differences are that term RRPs 
are conducted for longer than overnight, they each have their own, separate, aggregate capacity limit, and the 
term RRP does not incorporate a per-counterparty cap. Term RRPs can be used in a variety of ways. In the 
current  framework,  they  have  been  used  to  offer  increased  RRP  capacity,  using  an  interest-rate-oriented 
approach, around periods when larger-than-usual demand is expected, but they could also be used in a quantity-
oriented way to drain reserves. Term deposits are likewise similar to IOR; TDF offers a somewhat higher rate 
to banks that are willing to lock up their funds for a time. 
22   The FOMC’s decision to use a target range for the federal funds rate, instead of a point target as was used prior 
to December 2008, further supported the use of this operating framework. The FOMC’s use of a range supports 
this framework by underscoring the fact that variation of the effective rate within that range is expected and is 
consistent with the level of interest rate control it desires. 
23   Frost, Logan, Martin, McCabe, Natalucci, and Remache, “Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: 
Some Design Considerations,” February 2015. 
24   It seems particularly appropriate to pay close attention to the integration of money markets in light of the increase 
in bank and dealer balance sheet costs that has ensued from post-crisis changes in financial regulations and 
other factors. 
25   See Chair Yellen’s September 17, 2014, press conference. “To begin normalization, the Committee will raise its 
target range for the federal funds rate. The Committee expects that the effective federal funds rate may vary 
within the target range, and could even move outside of that range on occasion, but such movements should 
have no material effect on financial conditions or the broader economy.” 
26   See the September 2014 Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. 
27   It is possible that the ON RRP facility might, in certain circumstances, have beneficial effects on financial stability 
by providing confidence that there will be an elastic supply of risk-free assets available to nonbanks. 
28   “Statement  Regarding  Planned  Changes  to  the  Calculation  of  the  Federal  Funds  Effective  Rate  and  the 
Publication of an Overnight Bank Funding Rate,” February 2, 2015. 
29   “Statement Regarding the Calculation Methodology for the Effective Federal Funds Rate and Overnight Bank 
Funding Rate,” July 8, 2015. 
30   “Technical Note Concerning the Methodology for Calculating the Effective Federal Funds Rate,” July 8, 2015. 
31   Eurodollars are unsecured U.S. dollar deposits held at a bank or bank branch outside of the United States or 
domestically through an international banking facility (IBF), whereas federal funds are domestic borrowings by 
U.S. banks and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations (FBOs). Although the Federal 
Reserve can impose reserve requirements on net Eurodollar deposits of U.S.-based banks, it has imposed a 
zero  reserve  requirement  since  1990,  making  the  treatment  of  Eurodollar  deposits  effectively  the  same  as 
federal funds borrowings. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   32   Since revisions were implemented to the FR 2420 on October 20, 2015, both domestic banks and FBOs have 
been required to report Eurodollar transactions on the FR 2420. Domestic banks report the activity of all offshore 
branches with more than $2 billion in assets, while FBOs report activity of offshore branches that are managed 
and controlled by offices based in the United States. Additionally, both domestic banks and FBOs report the 
activity of their IBFs. Prior to the revisions, only domestic banks reported Eurodollar transactions, and there was 
no reporting by IBFs. 
33   In addition to enhancing the Eurodollar collection, the revised reporting instructions, effective October 20, 2015, 
modified and clarified the definition of federal funds transactions and expanded the number of reporting entities. 
The effect of these changes was an increase in the amount of reported federal funds activity. 
34   The data file for this speech, available on the New York Fed’s website, includes a historical calculation of the 
OBFR based on data provided by federal funds and Eurodollar brokers until October 19, 2015 and based on FR 
2420 data, from October 20th, 2015 until February 17th, 2016. 
35   See  “Responses  to  Survey  of  Primary  Dealers,”  December  2015,  and  “Responses  to  Survey  of  Market 
Participants,” December 2015. 
36   One such exceptional period was in mid-October 2015, amid some market concern about the debt ceiling that 
eventually abated. 
37   The Treasury has recently begun to ramp up its issuance of Treasury bills in part to support the maintenance of 
a larger cash balance, which it keeps in its “checking account” at the Federal Reserve. This action increases 
the amount of Treasury bills in circulation, thereby creating a greater stock of investible assets for nonbank 
money market investors – an outcome that tends to put upward pressure on Treasury bill rates and potentially 
other term money market rates. 
38   Domestic depository institutions are subject to a regulatory leverage ratio that is calculated as an average over 
the quarter and thus experience less variation in balance sheet costs at the end of quarters. 
39   The Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) are one type of institution that requires this feature for some of their 
cash holdings. Prior to liftoff, the FHLBs, which have access to unremunerated deposit accounts at the Federal 
Reserve, were able to use this to support their negotiating position with borrowers at quarter-ends, but now with 
rates further above zero it is less effective in this regard. 
40   ON RRP does not always provide a completely firm floor on the tri-party repo market. For example, late-day 
funds can generate some softness. Also, there is evidence that some lenders in repo markets are reluctant to 
frequently switch their counterparties. However, ON RRP is otherwise a close substitute to repo with a private 
counterparty. In particular, since all tri-party repo is unwound at the same time, there is no possibility of early 
return  of  funds,  which,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  is  a  significant  benefit  some  federal  funds  and  Eurodollar 
borrowers are able to offer. 
41   Prime funds’ share of participation is significantly larger on quarter-end dates. 
42   A small number of financial market commentators had opined that use of the tri-party repo infrastructure for the 
ON RRP facility would make it harder for market participants to borrow the Federal Reserve’s Treasuries in 
securities lending to facilitate settlement, and therefore result in less liquid Treasury markets. However, use of 
the Federal Reserve’s securities lending program has been stable since liftoff, suggesting that the design of the 
ON RRP facility has thus far not contributed to any increase in the scarcity of specific Treasury collateral. 
43   If the total amount of propositions received is less than or equal to the amount of available securities, awards 
are made at the specified offering rate to all counterparties that submit propositions. In the event that the value 
of propositions received exceeds the ON RRP’s capacity, awards are made at the rate at which the capacity 
was achieved (the stop-out rate), with all propositions below this rate awarded in full and all propositions equal 
to this rate awarded on a pro rata basis. The stop-out rate, which can be any value at or below the specified 
offering  rate  (including  a  negative  rate),  is  determined  by  evaluating  all  propositions  in  ascending  order  by 
submitted rate up to the point at which the total quantity of propositions equals the overall size limit. The ON 
RRP FAQs provide more information on the auction mechanism.  
44   In  September  2014,  money  market  rates  were  soft  for  several  days  going  into  quarter-end,  as  market 
participants anticipated that the ON RRP would reach its aggregate capacity on that day. According to market 
participants, money market lenders lent overnight funds well in advance of quarter-end at rates below the ON 
RRP rate to informally secure balance sheet capacity for the quarter-end date. 
45   The foreign repo pool is authorized each year by the FOMC. For more background information about the foreign 
repo pool, see “Services for Central Banks and International Institutions.” 
46   Other major central banks provide analogous services. In managing the foreign reserves of the United States, 
the Federal Reserve avails itself of these services when appropriate. 
47   As  a  result,  the  rate  paid on the  pool  closely  tracked  the interest  rate  achieved on  temporary  open market 
operations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   
48   We are also monitoring developments in money fund net yields versus retail bank deposit rates. Money fund 
management fees declined considerably as interest rates fell to near-zero levels, apparently as fund managers 
worked to preserve a non-negative yield for their investors. Net interest margins at banks were also compressed. 
It is natural to expect that this compression in margins, both at money funds and at banks, will reverse as rates 
move away from zero, but the magnitude and timing of this reversal in margin compression may vary among 
these two investment types. We are watching closely to see whether there is a shift in relative pricing between 
them that could produce a flow from one to the other and thereby have implications for the structure of financial 
intermediation. 
49   Assets  under  management  in  government-only  funds  could  grow  two  ways:  Prime  funds  could convert into 
government-only funds, or prime fund investors could transfer their money into government funds. Most prime 
funds have announced their intentions at this point, and among those that have converted to government funds, 
take-up  has  not  markedly  increased,  so  therefore  we  are  less  concerned  about  such  conversions,  but  we 
continue to pay close attention to them, as we do to investor behavior. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
