   Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan’s economy and the Bank of Japan – yesterday, 
today, and tomorrow 
Speech  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Economic 
Conference to commemorate the 150th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations between Italy and 
Japan  “The  Economics  of  Italy  and  Japan:  Historical  Development  and  Future  Policies  for 
Stability and Growth”, co-hosted by Keio University and Bocconi University, Tokyo, 23 May 
2016. 
Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  today  at  this  conference 
commemorating the 150th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic ties between Italy 
and Japan. Moreover, I am grateful for the wide-ranging close relationship that has developed 
between the Bank of Italy and the Bank of Japan at all layers and am very happy to be able to 
speak with Senior Deputy Governor Rossi in this session. Personally, when I was a young boy, 
the legend of Romulus and Remus about the founding of Rome left a lasting impression on 
me,  and  ever since, I  have  been  one  of  the  many  Japanese  who  are fascinated  by  Italy’s 
history, art, fashion, food, and football. The subtitle of today’s speech – “Yesterday, Today, 
and Tomorrow” – is chosen based on the title of the movie starring Sophia Loren and Marcello 
Mastroianni, which won the 1965 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. 
Well, let me start with my speech today. As is well known, following the collapse of the bubble 
economy in the early 1990s, Japan’s economy suffered a prolonged period of low growth and 
deflation – what has come to be called the “Lost Decades.” The causes of the Lost Decades 
have been the subject of active debate among policy makers and economists alike, but until 
relatively recently, the associated issues were regarded as specific to Japan. However, since 
the 2008 global financial crisis, the United States and Europe also have faced the threat of low 
growth and deflation, giving rise to talk about a “Japanization” and renewed interest in Japan’s 
experience. In fact, when I glance at the economies of the euro area including Italy, I have to 
say I often have a sense of deja vu. 
Therefore,  in  my  speech  today,  I  would  like  to  look  back  at  Japan’s  experience  since  the 
collapse of the asset bubble and the Bank of Japan’s policy responses to maintain the stability 
of  the  financial  system  as  well  as  monetary  policy.  I  will  then  go  on  to  discuss  the  policy 
challenges for Japan as well as the implications of Japan’s experience for Europe today. 
Developments in Japan’s economy during the lost decades 
I. 
As is well known, Japan’s economy has been mired in stagnation since the 1990s. On the 
other hand, what is less well known, especially abroad, is that the challenges that Japan’s 
economy has faced during this prolonged stagnation have differed over time. Put simply, until 
the early 2000s, the main challenge consisted of dealing with the instability of the financial 
system  and  deleveraging  in  the  banking  sector brought  about  by  the  collapse  of  the  asset 
bubble, and of resolving the so-called “three excesses” in the corporate sector, consisting of 
excess  debt,  excess  capacity,  and  excess  employment.  However,  these  problems  were 
essentially resolved by the early 2000s and a more serious challenge since the second half of 
the 2000s has been the decline in Japan’s growth potential and inflation expectations. The 
decline in both since the 1990s has been brought to the fore by the large decline in aggregate 
demand  as  a  result  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  These  two  major  challenges  appeared  in 
succession  and  it  is  mainly  for  this  reason  that  Japan’s  economic  stagnation  has  been  so 
prolonged. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   The collapse of the asset bubble, financial system instability, deleveraging, and the 
“three excesses” 
In  the  1990s,  Japan’s  banking  sector  was  riddled  with  a  mountain  of  nonperforming  loans 
resulting from the collapse of the 1980s bubble in real estate and stock prices. At the same 
time,  Japan’s  corporate  sector  was  suffering  from  the  “three  excesses”  just  mentioned  – 
excess  debt, capacity,  and  employment  –  owing  to the  expansion  of  businesses  driven  by 
overly  optimistic  growth  expectations.  In  1997  through  1998,  these  problems  led  to  the 
successive  failure  of  major  financial  institutions,  significantly  impairing  the  functioning  of 
financial  intermediation  and  causing  a  sudden  credit  crunch  (Chart  1).  The  economy 
contracted severely and the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) fell 
into negative territory, marking the beginning of Japan’s prolonged, though moderate, deflation 
(Chart 2). 
The  Bank  of  Japan  responded  to  this  financial  crisis  in  Japan  during  the  1990s  by  acting 
extensively as lender of last resort.1 Moreover, since the safety net was underdeveloped at 
that time, the Bank of Japan, in order to carry out its mission of ensuring the stability of the 
financial system, played the role that essentially should have been the responsibility of the 
government, had there been a robust financial safety net; specifically, in addition to supplying 
liquidity, the Bank took various extraordinary measures such as injecting capital to an ailing 
bank and setting up a bridge bank on its own. However, as a result, the Bank had the painful 
experience of recording credit losses reaching 200 billion yen. The crisis became obvious to 
everyone, and legislative steps to set up a safety net were finally taken. It was only in 1998, 
almost  a  decade  after  the  collapse  of the  bubble, that  a comprehensive framework for  the 
temporary nationalization and the injection of capital using public funds was put in place. 
Under this framework, the resolution of failed banks progressed. Whereas the increase in the 
number of failed financial institutions in the late 1990s occurred under circumstances in which 
the underdeveloped safety net made it difficult to get the crisis under control, the spike from 
2000 onward is proof of a systematic resolution of failed banks under the new framework (Chart 
3).  During  this  period,  deleveraging  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  resolution  of  the  three 
excesses  in  the  corporate  sector continued.  For  example, the  amount  outstanding  of  bank 
lending, which stood at more than 500 trillion yen in the second half of the 1990s, fell below 
400 trillion yen in the mid-2000s – a drop of more than 20 percent (Chart 1). The decline in 
bank lending through this deleveraging process finally came to an end in 2006, when bank 
lending rebounded. Moreover, in the same year, CPI inflation returned into positive territory, 
so that deflation temporarily receded (Chart 2). Fortunately, Japan had been able to avoid a 
1930s-style deflationary spiral with a rapidly deteriorating economy and falling prices. Thus, by 
the mid-2000s, Japan’s economy had overcome the negative legacy of the asset bubble and 
appeared to have laid the foundations for renewed sustained growth. 
The decline in the growth potential and inflation expectations 
In fact, Japan’s economy did return to a growth trajectory, benefitting from the tailwind of a 
favorable  global  economy  spurred  on  by  rapid growth  in  China.  However, triggered  by  the 
outbreak of the global financial crisis in autumn 2008, circumstances changed at a stroke. In 
contrast  with  Europe  and  the  United  States,  the  exposure  of  Japan’s  financial  sector  to 
subprime mortgage-related financial products was limited and the financial system generally 
remained stable; however, the real economy, as a result of the significant slowdown of the 
global economy, could no longer rely on exports, the traditional engine of economic recoveries 
in Japan. Against this background, the decline in the potential growth rate came to the fore as 
                                                
1   For details on Japan’s experience during the financial crisis, see Hiroshi Nakaso, “The financial crisis in Japan 
during the 1990s: how the Bank of Japan responded and the lessons learnt,” BIS Papers No. 6, October 2001. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   
a  major  economic  challenge  (Chart  4).2  The  decline  in  the  potential  growth  rate  reflects  a 
slowdown in productivity growth since the collapse of the bubble economy, a decline in the 
labor force since the late 1990s due to demographic trends, and deceleration in the pace of 
capital accumulation. 
Meanwhile,  on  the  price  front,  CPI  inflation  fell  back  into  negative  territory,  and  inflation 
expectations started to slide (Chart 2). With only little room to lower interest rates, it did not 
take much time for Japan to face the zero lower bound on interest rates again and real interest 
rates remained elevated. At the same time, in line with the falling potential growth rate since 
the 1990s, the natural rate of interest – that is, the interest rate at which the economy neither 
accelerates  nor  decelerates  –  had  declined  substantially  (Chart  4).  As  a  result,  Japan’s 
economy fell into a situation in which it was difficult for the Bank of Japan to provide sufficiently 
accommodative financial conditions through an extension of policies that had been employed 
before. These economic difficulties were compounded by the Great East Japan Earthquake in 
2011. 
Evolution of monetary policy during the lost decades 
II. 
Next, I would like to look back at monetary policies taken by the Bank of Japan from the start 
of the Lost Decades until recently. As the first central bank facing the aftermath of the collapse 
of a bubble and deflation, the Bank developed a range of new policy measures. These consist 
mainly  of  two  measures  that  correspond to  the challenges  that  the  Bank faced  at  different 
points in time. The first measure was quantitative easing, QE for short, which concentrated on 
the provision of ample liquidity, while the second was quantitative and qualitative monetary 
easing, or QQE, which focused on raising inflation expectations (Chart 5). 
QE,  which  was  implemented  from  2001  to  2006,  proved  effective  in  that  it  maintained  the 
stability of the financial system through the provision of ample liquidity and prevented Japan’s 
economy from falling into a deflationary spiral. However, it was not powerful enough to reverse 
the  declining  trend  in  inflation  expectations  and  overcome  deflation.  As  mentioned  earlier, 
Japan’s natural rate of interest had been falling due to the decline in the potential growth rate; 
at the same time, real interest rates remained high due to the zero lower bound on nominal 
short-term  interest  rates  and  the  decline  in  inflation  expectations.  As  a  result,  QE  did  not 
provide sufficiently accommodative financial conditions. Under these circumstances, a vicious 
cycle  of  a  decline  in  prices,  a  fall  in  sales  and  profits,  restraint  in  wages,  stagnation  in 
consumption, and a further decline in prices took hold. This indicates that once the economy 
becomes stuck in a deflationary equilibrium, it is difficult to escape from it. 
From  a  theoretical  perspective,  the  policy  prescriptions  are  obvious.  What  is  needed  is  to 
remove, once and for all, the deflationary mindset and raise inflation expectations – that is, to 
lower real interest rates – through decisive monetary easing, and to raise the potential growth 
rate – that is, to raise the natural rate of interest – through a growth strategy and deregulation. 
This, in fact, is exactly what the three arrows of Abenomics are aimed at. One can often hear 
discussions as to whether monetary easing or structural reforms are more important, but I do 
not see this is a particularly constructive question. Both are essential for overcoming deflation 
and achieving sustainable growth. It is not a question of either monetary easing or structural 
reforms – they are complementary to each other. 
With regard to the first arrow, monetary policy, the Bank of Japan introduced the price stability 
target in January 2013 with the aim of achieving 2 percent inflation in terms of the year-on-
year rate of change in the CPI. This was followed, in April 2013, by the introduction of QQE to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. The challenge for 
                                                
2  
I gave my detailed views on the implications of the decline in the potential growth rate in my speech on “Monetary 
Policy and Structural Reforms” at the Japan Society in New York in February 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   monetary policy is how to raise inflation expectations given the limited room for lowering short-
term  interest  rates.  For this reason,  QQE  consists  of two  elements. The first  is the  Bank’s 
strong and clear commitment to the target. Specifically, the Bank has made clear its stance 
that it seeks to achieve the price stability target at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon 
of about two years, and has committed itself to pursuing QQE as long as it is necessary for 
achieving the price stability target in a sustainable manner. The second element is the exertion 
of downward pressure on nominal interest rates across the entire yield curve through massive 
purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs). That is, the Bank seeks to exploit to the 
greatest possible extent any remaining room for further declines in nominal interest rates. The 
combination of the two elements will lower real interest rates and thereby stimulate private 
demand. If people as a result see prices going up, this will raise their confidence in the Bank’s 
commitment, which will further reinforce this process. 
In January 2016, the Bank further enhanced QQE by adding the new dimension of a negative 
interest rate. “QQE with a Negative Interest Rate” aims to exert stronger downward pressure 
on the entire yield curve by lowering the short end of the yield curve through a negative interest 
rate applied to a certain tier of current accounts at the Bank while continuing with massive 
purchases of JGBs. In designing the negative interest rate policy scheme, we were inspired by 
the experience of central banks in Europe, including the ECB. 
The effects of QQE and QQE with a negative interest rate 
III. 
About three years have passed since the introduction of QQE, and the Bank judges that QQE 
has been exerting its intended effects. 
Let me start by considering the effects on interest rates. Since the introduction of QQE, yields 
on  10-year  JGBs have cumulatively  fallen by  about  70  basis  points (Chart  6).  Against this 
background, bank lending rates have continued to decline, so that the average interest rate on 
the stock of total bank lending has fallen to a level around 1 percent. The amount outstanding 
of bank lending, including to small firms, has continued to rise, with the annual pace of increase 
recently  exceeding  2  percent  (Chart  1).  It  appears  that,  at  present,  with  real  interest  rates 
substantially below the natural rate of interest, financial conditions for the real economy are 
highly accommodative (Chart 4). 
Given such accommodative financial conditions, the real economy has evidently improved. In 
the  household  sector,  the  employment  and  income  situation  has  steadily  improved.  Labor 
market conditions have continued to tighten as seen in the fact that the unemployment rate 
has declined to the range of 3.0–3.5 percent, which we think corresponds to full employment 
(Chart 7). Reflecting the tight labor market conditions, base pay increases – that is, across-
the-board  wage  increases  mainly  reflecting  inflation  and  decided  in  the  annual  labor-
management wage negotiations – returned in 2014 for the first time in two decades. Base pay 
increases have continued this year, marking the third consecutive year of such increases. In 
the corporate sector, profits have increased to record levels, partly helped by the correction of 
the  excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen  and  the  decline  in  energy  prices.  Against  this 
background, firms have maintained their positive stance with regard to fixed investment. 
As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the all-item CPI excluding fresh food is about 
0  percent,  reflecting  the  decline  in  energy  prices,  but  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  has 
steadily improved. CPI inflation for all items excluding fresh food and energy, which had been 
in the range of about minus 0.5 to minus 1.0 percent before the introduction of QQE in April 
2013, has been positive for 30 consecutive months since the latter half of 2013 and in recent 
months has been about 1 percent (Chart 8). This is the first time since the second half of the 
1990s,  when  Japan’s  economy  fell  into  deflation,  that  such  sustained  inflation  has  been 
observed. Moreover, looking at price changes across all items, the share of price-increasing 
items minus the share of price-decreasing items has been rising clearly since the introduction 
of  QQE,  and  is  currently  near  its  peak.  This  indicates  that  firms  have  maintained  their 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   willingness to increase prices, and a virtuous cycle between a moderate rise in inflation and 
wage growth has remained in place. 
Meanwhile, I admit there has been a fair amount of criticism in Japan of the negative interest 
rate policy adopted by the Bank in January 2016. The situation seems not dissimilar to the one 
in Europe. Such criticism can be divided into two broad strands. 
The first is that the negative interest rate policy may have an adverse impact on economic 
activity and prices by squeezing banks’ profits, which could hamper the functioning of financial 
intermediation. However, in the case of Japan, the concern that the negative interest rate policy 
will  undermine  financial  intermediation  is  unfounded,  at  least  at  this  moment.  First,  as  I 
explained,  the  process  of  deleveraging  in  Japan  was  completed  by  the  mid-2000s,  and 
financial institutions now have a strong capital base, partly helped by the fact that the impact 
of the global financial crisis on them was limited. Second, despite the current low interest rate 
environment, the profits of both major banks and regional banks are close to record levels, 
mainly reflecting the significant decline in credit costs due to the steady economic recovery. 
And third, when the Bank introduced the negative interest rate policy, it designed the policy so 
as  not  to  excessively  squeeze  banks’  profits.  Specifically,  the  Bank  designed  the  policy 
framework  such  that  a  negative  interest  rate  is  applied  only  on  the  margin  by  dividing  the 
current account balances that financial institutions hold at the Bank into three tiers. As the 
Bank  continues  to  purchase  JGBs,  the  current  account  balances  will  increase  accordingly; 
however, since the tier will be adjusted at the same time, the balances subject to a negative 
interest rate will remain relatively small, between around 10 and 30 trillion yen. Needless to 
say, the Bank will closely monitor the effects on financial institutions’ earnings, and will examine 
and  evaluate  those  effects  in  the  Financial  System  Report.  The  importance  of  banks’ 
functioning  as  financial  intermediaries  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  cannot  be 
overemphasized.3 That is exactly why, since the outbreak of the financial crisis in the 1990s, 
the Bank of Japan has consistently acted as the guardian of financial intermediation. I assure 
you this shall not change in the future. 
The second criticism is that the general public will not really feel the benefits of the negative 
interest rate policy. While the public understand that their deposits will not diminish as a result 
of the negative interest rate policy, we are aware that, for example, households that do not 
have a mortgage will not necessarily feel any specific benefits. Particularly those who rely on 
their savings, such as pensioners and the elderly, may think that the negative interest rate 
policy  has  an  adverse  effect,  since  their  interest  income  further  decreases.  The  Bank’s 
negative interest rate policy can be understood as an extension of QQE in that its transmission 
channel is to maintain real interest rates well below the natural rate of interest, but I cannot 
deny that some aspects of this policy may be counterintuitive to the public. Therefore, we need 
to carefully listen to criticisms. At the same time, we need to clearly explain that the effects of 
monetary policy should not be assessed only in terms of households’ and firms’ direct profits 
and losses in transactions with banks, but in terms of the macroeconomic effects such as the 
benefits from an increase in employment and a rise in wages. In other words, it is essential to 
explain more persuasively that these policy measures are necessary for the economy to revert 
to a sustainable growth path. This seems to be a challenge the Bank of Japan and the ECB 
have in common. 
At any rate, I will keep a watchful eye on how the negative interest rate policy, through the 
further decline in interest rates following its introduction, will work through the economy. 
                                                
3  
I  explained  the  importance  of  the  functioning  of  financial  intermediation  in  my  speech  “Challenges  toward 
Financial  Stability  and  the  Policy  Frontier:  Unconventional  Monetary  Policy,  Macroprudence,  and  Financial 
Institutions’ Low Profitability” made at the IVA-JSPS seminar in Stockholm in March 2016.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
 IV. 
Central banks’ lender of last resort function: lessons from the global financial 
crisis 
  So far, I have outlined the challenges facing Japan’s economy in the past and present and 
how the Bank of Japan has responded. Now, looking into the future, I would like to touch upon 
two issues which I believe are important from the perspective of central banks. 
First, we need to work on the development of an international financial safety net and discuss, 
from a global perspective, central banks’ lender of last resort function. Domestically in Japan, 
our financial safety net has been strengthened based on the lessons learned during Japan’s 
financial crisis in the 1990s and the role of the Bank of Japan’s lender of last resort function 
has become quite clear. The global financial crisis has raised new challenges for central banks’ 
role as lender of last resort, especially in the case of a temporary liquidity crisis of a systemically 
important financial institution operating in multiple jurisdictions and currencies. Issues include 
how central banks should share information and how responsibilities should be allocated in 
such circumstances. Moreover, it is also possible that different countries and jurisdictions treat 
banks and non-bank differently under their individual safety nets. The Bank of Japan actually 
has experience in some aspects of such cross-border challenges, since Yamaichi Securities, 
which failed in 1997 and to which the Bank provided liquidity, had overseas bank subsidiaries. 
In addition, partly as a result of lessons learned during the global financial crisis, the use of 
central  counterparties  (CCPs)  to  centrally  clear  transactions  is  being  promoted  to  reduce 
settlement risks. This raises additional issues, such as how liquidity shortages at cross-border 
CCPs dealing with multiple currencies should be addressed, and how central banks should 
contribute to resolving such issues.4 
Central banks are responsible for the stability of their respective domestic financial systems. 
However, in order to fulfill their responsibilities, they need to ever more closely monitor and 
engage  with  the  global  financial  system.  There  is  also  a  growing  importance  of  further 
strengthening cooperation among central banks. I believe the Bank of Japan, based on its 
wealth of experience, should take a leading role in the discussions in this area. 
Strengthening Japan’s growth potential 
V. 
The second issue is the need to redouble efforts to raise the growth rate. In order to return 
Japan’s economy to a sustainable growth path, it is also important to strengthen the dynamism 
of  the  corporate  sector  and  raise  the  economy’s  growth  potential.  In  this  respect,  the 
government’s growth strategy plays a major role. If the growth strategy bears fruit, the natural 
rate of interest will rise in line with the potential growth rate. The shape of the yield curve will 
gradually return to normality as upward pressure is exerted on the longer end. 
A key characteristic of the government’s growth strategy is that it will take a while before its 
effects become visible. Nonetheless, we are starting to see some tangible results. Let me give 
you one example: raising the labor participation of women (Chart 9). As in Italy, the female labor 
force participation rate in Japan has historically been low and raising it is a long-term challenge. 
Specifically, a major issue is that women in their prime of life have to interrupt their career for 
child  rearing.  Against  this  background,  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  Abe  administration’s  aim  to 
achieve the “Dynamic Engagement of All Citizens” is to boost support for child rearing. In fact, 
the labor participation rate of women has already started to increase through measures such 
as the expansion of childcare facilities. If such tangible results were to spread, this would build 
further public support for the growth strategy and help to drive it forward. 
                                                
4  
I provided a detailed explanation of central bank policies with regard to financial market infrastructure and the 
associated challenge, including the relationship between central banks and CCPs, in my remarks on “Central 
Bank Policy on Financial Market Infrastructure” delivered at the Conference on Retail Payments in May 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Of course, the problems Japan needs to address span a wide range of areas. As mentioned, 
the decline in Japan’s potential growth rate is due partly to the deceleration in productivity 
growth. To give you one example, it appears that there is substantial room for productivity 
improvements  in  IT-related  sectors.  Both  in IT-producing  and IT-using  sectors,  productivity 
growth is lower than in the United States (Chart 10). In this context, a survey on firms in the 
United States and Japan provides instructive results: compared to firms in the United States, 
fewer firms in Japan attach importance to IT investment or have a chief information officer 
(CIO). These results suggest that strengthening Japan’s growth potential is not something that 
can be achieved through the government’s growth strategy alone; what is also needed are 
greater efforts on the part of the private sector to strengthen competitiveness. 
Lessons for Europe 
VI. 
Finally, I would like to make a few comparisons between Japan’s Lost Decades and Europe 
since the global financial crisis. What is worth noting is that in Europe the policy response has 
been quick and decisive. In addition to innovative policy measures such as the coordinated 
provision  of  dollar  funds  by  the  major  central  banks  through  swap  arrangements,  financial 
system  instability  was  warded  off  through  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity,  preventing  the 
financial crisis from turning into a global panic. Moreover, on the institutional front, the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) for the supervision of banks became operational. Further, I 
expect  that  efforts  to  deal  with  remaining  issues  such  as  the  full  operation  of  the  Single 
Resolution Mechanism (SRM) charged with the resolution of failed financial institutions and 
the  expeditious  recapitalization  of  undercapitalized  banks  will  make  good  progress. 
Meanwhile, on the monetary policy front, the ECB has stressed from an early stage the risks 
associated with a potential decline in inflation expectations. In fact, the ECB has responded 
very proactively, being the first among major central banks to introduce a negative interest rate 
policy and combining it with asset purchases. 
There is also perceived to be a need to redouble efforts to drive ahead with structural reforms 
to  raise  the  potential  growth  rate.  However,  this  too  is  clearly  recognized,  as  indicated  in 
President Draghi’s observation that low interest rates are not the consequence of monetary 
policy  but  a  symptom  of  low  growth  and  low  inflation.  I  am  convinced  that  the  risk  of  a 
Japanization of the euro economy is small, given that European policy makers are aware of 
the issues and are responding appropriately. 
Conclusion 
In my speech today I tried to look back at Japan’s Lost Decades and consider potential lessons 
for the current economic situation in Italy and Europe. Naturally, there are many other aspects 
in which Japan and Italy can learn from each other, not only with regard to finance and the 
economy.  Looking  at  the  OECD’s  Better  Life  Index,  which  measures  happiness  across 
countries  based  on  various  indicators  such  as  education  and  the  living  environment,  both 
Japan  and  Italy  rank  in  the  middle  of  OECD  countries;  interestingly,  however,  individual 
indicators suggest that whereas Japan ranks favorably in terms of labor market conditions and 
education, Italy ranks highly in terms of work-life balance and health (Chart 11). 
It is said that Japan became widely known in Europe when the Venetian-born merchant Marco 
Polo in his 13th century travel diary introduced Japan as “Zipangu, the Land of Gold.” Since 
then, as countries with a long history and long traditions, Italy and Japan have continued to 
learn from each other. Let me close this speech by saying that although our two countries are 
currently  facing  a  number  of  similar  problems,  I  am  convinced  that  by  overcoming  these 
problems through cooperation, our bonds will continue to grow over the next 150 years and 
bring a golden future for our two countries, even without the Zipangu’s gold. 
Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     13 
