   S S Mundra: Research imperatives for the Indian banking sector 
Inaugural address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
1st Banking Research Conference, organized by Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics 
and IBS (ICFAI Business School) in collaboration with IBS Hyderabad, Hyderabad, 29 January 
2016. 
 Assistance provided by Smt. Rekha Misra, Shri Sanjeev Prakash, Shri Radheshyam Verma and Ms. Anwesha Das 
is gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
1. Dr. J. Mahender Reddy, Vice Chancellor, ICFAI Foundation for Higher Education (IFHE) 
University; Shri S.V. Seshaiah, Director, IBS, Hyderabad; members of faculty from Gokhale 
Institute of Politics and Economics, Pune and IBS, Hyderabad; Delegates of the Research 
Conference;  ladies  and  gentlemen  !  I  am  grateful  to  Gokhale  Institute  of  Politics  and 
Economics, Pune and IBS, Hyderabad for inviting me to deliver the inaugural address at the 
1st Banking Research Conference this morning. Both are premier educational institutions of 
the  country.  IBS  Hyderabad  has  made  important  contribution  in  the  field  of  management 
education  and  research  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  Gokhale  Institute  of  Politics  and 
Economics (GIPE), Pune, is one of the oldest research and training institutes in Economics in 
the country and continues to be an institute of repute for economic research. I complement 
their efforts towards education and research. 
2.  Banks  are  the  bedrock  of  financial  system  in  all  emerging  economies  and  India  is  no 
different. The banks in India have been quite effectively performing the vital function of financial 
intermediation. The health of the banking system and that of the economy share a symbiotic 
relationship and at this juncture when the global growth is still stuttering, the banking system 
also  faces  a  multitude  of  challenges.  Each  of  these  challenges  has  different  genesis  and 
probably different solution. But, challenges also throw up opportunities. In order to overcome 
current and impending challenges and also to exploit emerging opportunities, it is imperative 
that the sector devotes adequate time and resources in conducting meaningful research. At 
this stage, when the banking sector is on proverbial “crossroads”, I feel this Banking Research 
Conference is very timely. I am sure that the deliberations in the conference would provide 
new insights into the issues facing the banks and also pave the way for further research which 
would generate fresh ideas for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of the banking sector. 
Why research is important? 
3. According to Ben Bernanke, himself a researcher and a practitioner, research provides an 
important long-run perspective on the issues that we face on a day-to-day basis. Theories that 
evolve out of profound research remain relevant forever. Let me quote from our latest Financial 
Stability Report. “When current wisdom does not offer solutions to extant problems, old wisdom 
can sometimes be helpful. For instance, the global financial crisis compelled us to take a look 
at the Minsky’s financial instability hypothesis which posited the debt accumulation by non-
government sector as key to economic crisis. As part of his work, Minsky identified three types 
of  borrowers  –  the  “hedge  borrowers” (those  who  could meet  their  debt  obligations  –  both 
principal and interest through current cash flows from investments), “speculative borrowers” 
(those who could service their debts, that is – pay only the interest but had to roll over the 
principal  periodically 
“Ponzi 
borrowers”(whose current cash flows were insufficient to meet debt obligations but borrowed 
on the faith that an appreciation in the asset values could take care of such obligations). The 
dominance of the Ponzi borrowers can cause disruptions in the financial system when asset 
prices stop rising.” As IMF and other financial research houses moan over high indebtedness 
investments)  and 
through  cash 
from  current 
flows 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   of corporate houses in emerging markets and its consequent implications for global financial 
stability today, it reaffirms the relevance of Minsky’s “Financial Instability Hypothesis”.  
4. Let me give another example. Many of you here must be aware of the ongoing debate on 
what is called as “Re-embracing Keynes.” The standard ‘return to Keynes’ argument is the 
need for fiscal stimulus to boost the economy from the depths of recession. The burden of the 
deficit is not seen as the main drawback of government intervention, but a necessary measure 
to address a failure in aggregate demand. It is important to emphasize here that the theory 
was first presented by John Maynard Keynes in his book, The General Theory of Employment, 
Interest and Money, published in 1936, during the Great Depression. Keynes said “we cannot, 
as a community, provide for future consumption by financial expedients but only by current 
physical output.” Of course, there are many economists who vehemently oppose his views on 
efficacy of fiscal stimulus. Economists, both in Britain and across the Atlantic in the US have 
suggested  that  action  by  Government  on  rapid  reduction  of  budget  deficit  than  currently 
planned would be better to support a sustainable recovery. As some of you may be aware, the 
debate on increasing government deficit to support the economy also figured prominently in 
Government’s pre-budget consultations with the economist in our country. In sum, the very 
fact that Keynesian theory stays relevant evoking strong reactions from supporters and baiters 
alike even after eight decades of being first published, in itself is a great testimony to the quality 
of research undertaken by him.  
5. The need for deep-seated research in the area of banking, which itself is a highly dynamic 
field, with close linkages to economic fortunes of the country, can be hardly over-emphasized. 
Given the dynamic nature of the sector, banking research has to continuously evolve. Failure 
to  ignore  emerging  trends  or  risks  can  be  catastrophic.  As  former  FDIC  Chairman  Irving 
Sprague put it after the onset of the Global Financial Crisis, "Unburdened with the experience 
of  the  past,  each  generation  of  bankers  believes  it  knows  best,  and  each  new  generation 
produces some who have to learn the hard way." 
6. To keep pace with the changing times and to produce relevant research, researchers today 
need to raise new questions, explore new possibilities, regard old problems from a new angle, 
which would require creative imagination and mark real advance in the field. But in my talk 
today, rather than discussing more distant research topics like “Effects of Population Aging on 
Economic Growth” or ‘What ails a Demand Constrained Model of Growth’, I would like to focus 
on some ‘bread and butter issues’ confronting Indian banks, which the sector would do well to 
study in greater depth.  
Some important research undertaken by RBI/ Government in past and outcome 
7.  As  you  may  be  aware,  RBI  and  the  Government  of  India  have  a  rich  history  of  policy 
research. Policy oriented research has led to adoption of various pro-active policy measures 
which helped in making our banking system more inclusive and development oriented. One of 
the earliest examples of application of research and surveys relating to credit/banking are two 
studies commissioned by the Reserve Bank in 1936 and 1937 which highlighted that almost 
the  entire  finance  required  by  farmers  was  supplied  by  moneylenders  and  that  credit  co-
operatives and other agencies played a negligible role. This prompted the Reserve Bank to 
play an active role during 1935–1950 in promoting the co-operative credit movement through 
a variety of initiatives.  
8. Similarly, the Report of the All India Rural Credit Survey (1954) highlighted that agricultural 
credit not only fell short in terms of quantity, quality but also failed in serving the right purpose 
and the right people. The outcome of the survey was developing co-operatives as an exclusive 
agency for providing credit to agriculture together with outlining a role for commercial banks in 
delivering  credit  for  agriculture  in  specialized  areas,  such  as  marketing,  processing  and 
warehousing. Similarly, All India Rural Credit Review Committee set up by the Reserve Bank 
in  July  1966  (Chairman:  Shri  B.  Venkatappiah)  emphasized  on  an  increased  role  for 
commercial banks in delivery of rural credit based on its research findings.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Issues at hand 
9. The above instances highlight the significance of timely and effective research. As I have 
argued above, the need for upping the policy research in banking at the current juncture is very 
high. The sluggish economic revival following the GFC has adversely impacted the banking 
sector. Some of the issues which concern the sector relate to those of asset quality, capital 
adequacy, profitability, risk management and governance. Reflecting the concerns and risk 
aversion, banks’ business (deposits and credit) continues to show moderation. Slowdown is 
evident  in  the growth  in  the  balance  sheets  of banks  which  set  in since  2011–12  and  has 
continued during 2014–15 as well. The return on assets (RoA) of banks, particularly public 
sector banks (PSBs), a common indicator of financial viability has remained weak in recent 
period.  
10. It is well recognized that a competitive, sound and inclusive banking system is sine-qua-
non for a growing economy like India that aspires to be globally competitive. Going forward, 
banks  will  need  to  achieve  the  mandated  higher  capital  standards,  stricter  liquidity  and 
leverage ratios and a more cautious approach to risk. This implies that the banks would need 
to  improve  their  productivity  and  efficiency.  They  would  also  need  to  make  a  quantitative 
assessment of revenue streams from each product and service and an efficient transfer-pricing 
mechanism for efficient capital allocation.  
11. At the same time, the banks would also need to venture into hitherto untapped segments 
to  identify  profitable  business  opportunities.  One  key  segment  that  banks  are  increasingly 
looking at is the customers at the bottom of the pyramid. Financial Inclusion, as you all know, 
is the new buzzword. While everyone agrees that the segment has immense potential, it is 
certainly  not  a  low  hanging  fruit.  If  the  banks  wish  to  profit  from  financial  inclusion  on  a 
sustained basis, they would need to innovate and leverage technology. 
12. Regulatory initiatives like opening up government business to more banks, licensing of new 
banks and subsidiarisation of the foreign bank branches, on the one hand, and the changing 
profile and simultaneously rising aspirations and expectations of customers on the other, is 
making the turf more competitive. Under the circumstances, the need for supportive research 
so as to find out an optimal business delivery model, target set of customers, product profile 
etc., suitable to the risk profile of each individual bank, can hardly be overemphasized. The 
banks  also  need  to  respond  to  the  changing  environment  around  them.  The  country  is 
witnessing some significant changes in demographic patterns, literacy levels and resultantly in 
consumer behavior. The rural- urban divide is quite remarkable and also influences the choices 
the consumers make. Banks have to be constantly aware of the dynamic changes in consumer 
preferences and hence, the need for research gets buttressed.  
13. Let me now come to a few ‘bread and butter’ areas which according to me have remained 
under-researched.  Among  others,  these  include,  credit  to  agriculture,  Micro,  Small  and 
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and private sector leverage. An analysis of the trends in bank 
finance to these sectors throws up quite a few research questions. I would delve into some of 
these in detail. 
Agriculture 
14. A significant transformation has taken place in the character of agricultural credit since the 
decade  of  2000s.  The  common  perception  about  agricultural  credit  is  that  it  has  rural 
orientation and given the pre-dominance of small landholdings in the country, small-sized loans 
would account for a greater proportion of agricultural credit. It is also expected that there would 
be a fair mix of credit given for crop-loans and investment credit. However, when one analyses 
the data, which is the first step in any meaningful research, most of these perceptions prove 
to be wrong. I would present some salient features of agricultural credit in recent times purely 
in terms of trends which would underscore the need for research in the area.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   15. As per the latest available All-India Debt and Investment Survey, the proportion of debt 
owed by cultivator households to formal sources stood at around 64 per cent as compared to 
36 per cent owed to informal sources. Moreover, the proportion of debt owed to formal sources 
has seen a decline from 66.3 per cent in 1991 to 64 per cent in 2013. These figures provide 
an insight into the existing unmet demand for credit among cultivator households, which is 
evidently being met by informal sources. On the other hand, as per the recent RBI Internal 
Working Group1 set up to revisit existing priority sector lending guidelines in March 2015, the 
commercial banks have failed to achieve the targeted level (of 18 per cent) credit to agriculture 
sector  in  all  but  three  years  between  2001  and  2014.  Hence,  the  sector  witnesses  two 
contrasting trends: unmet credit needs of the farmers on the one hand and shortfall in lending 
targets of the banks on the other despite agriculture being designated as one of the priority 
sectors for bank lending.  
16. Agricultural credit, like overall bank credit in India, has traditionally been concentrated in 
the southern and northern regions of the country. In 2012, the southern and northern regions 
together accounted for about 62 per cent, with the southern region alone accounting for 41 per 
cent of total agricultural credit. Further, there was concentration of agricultural credit in select 
districts. In 2012, 15 districts accounted for about 21 per cent of total agricultural credit. Some 
elucidation is needed to explain this concentration. 
17. The small and marginal cultivators (operating less than 5 acres of land) continue to be 
marginalised  in terms  of  their  share  in  agricultural  credit. The  share  of  small  and marginal 
farmers has hovered around at levels less than 50 per cent despite the fact they account for 
more than 80 per cent of total cultivators in India. Likewise, it is also observed that the share 
of long-term credit in total agricultural credit has experienced a secular decline reaching 32 per 
cent  in  2013–14  from  74  per  cent  in  1990–91  suggesting  a  neglect  of  capital  formation  in 
agriculture.  
18. Few other patterns that are noticeable in the farm sector are: 
• 
Decline in average size of operation landholding to around 1.15 hectare from more 
than 2 hectare about four decades ago. To put it in perspective, this size is 1/10th that 
in Thailand and about half of that in Indonesia while in the USA the average farm size 
is 170 hectares 
Families operating less than 1 hectare farm size are dis-savers even after including 
non-farm income 
80%  of  the  borrowings  of  large  farmers  (>10  hectare  land)  are  from  institutional 
sources while for the landless farmers this figure is only around 15% 
  19. The core areas of research which emerge from the forgoing discussion are: 
• 
Is there a direct correlation between increased agricultural credit and productivity in 
agriculture / allied activities? 
Whether focus on agriculture as a priority sector has been effective in encouraging 
agricultural investment? Have small farmers benefited relative to large farmers?  
Have incomes of the farmers smoothened if not actually enhanced?  
While in villages, non-farm sector provides more income generating activity than farm 
sector, why do people still continue to stick to farming? Can 18% of GDP produced 
by agriculture sustain 47% of the workforce?  
                                                  
1   RBI (2015), “Report of the Internal Working Group to Revisit the Existing Priority Sector Lending Guidelines”, 
March 2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   What has been the impact of land fragmentation on agricultural productivity? Post-
fragmentation, whether the farmers have the capacity to service the loan?  
What needs to be done for making the credit delivery system for farmers more efficient 
in terms of timeliness?  
  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
20. MSMEs play a vital role in the Indian economy. They not only employ a large number of 
unskilled and semi-skilled people but also support large industries by supplying raw material, 
basic goods, finished parts and components. There are an estimated 49 million MSMEs in the 
country,  providing  employment  to  111  million  people  which  is  next  only  to  the  agricultural 
sector. The sector accounts for 45 per cent of the manufacturing output and contributes close 
to 40 per cent of all exports from the country. Further, about 55 per cent of the MSMEs are 
located in rural areas, thus offering a great potential for rural development and inclusive growth.  
21. Despite a large contribution of the MSME sector to the GDP, the sector often complains 
about lack of financing from institutional sources. Fourth Census of MSME sector (2006–07) 
revealed that only 5 per cent of the units (both registered and unregistered) had availed of 
finance through institutional sources. As on March 2015, only 8.4 per cent of the gross non-
food credit from scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) was lent to MSMEs against 11.0 per 
cent in March 2010. This is despite increased distress in banks’ books in their lending to large 
corporates over the same period.  
22. There is growing realization that if the country has to move to a higher growth trajectory, 
then MSME sector would need to play a central role. In recent years, both Government as well 
as RBI have made substantial efforts to ease various constraints faced by the sector. While 
GoI  has  established  Micro  Units  Development  and  Refinance  Agency  Ltd.  (MUDRA)  for 
developing and refinancing all micro-finance institutions (MFIs) which are in the business of 
lending to micro and small business entities engaged in manufacturing, trading and service 
activities, RBI has prescribed a target of 7.5 percent of net bank credit for micro enterprises 
for achievement in a phased manner. Further, medium enterprises23 have also been brought 
into the ambit of priority sector credit. In order to improve liquidity for MSMEs, an electronic 
Trade  Receivables  Discounting  System  (TReDS)  is  being  set  up  RBI  to  enable  a  speedy 
realisation of receivables. RBI has also launched a National Mission for Capacity Building of 
Bankers for MSME Financing (NAMCABS) for sensitising the bank staff about the financial and 
other  lifecycle  needs  of  MSME  borrowers.  While  the  steps  taken  by  the  authorities  are 
commendable, a fundamental question remains whether the remedial measures that are being 
administered are based on proper diagnostics? 
23. Against this backdrop, research related MSME sector could focus on: 
• 
Reasons for sickness / quick mortality in MSME sector and to what extent is delay in 
sanctioning by banks responsible for it? 
What are the lifecycle needs of the MSMEs? What is the appropriate credit delivery 
model for the MSMEs? 
Is there a case for a differentiated prudential norm for MSME borrowers as against 
the rule based prescriptions applicable to big corporates? 
                                                  
2   Credit limit is ₹ 50 million per unit for Micro and Small Enterprises and ₹ 100 million for Medium Enterprises 
engaged in providing or rendering of services. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Corporate Sector Leverage 
24. Corporate sector leverage has currently become an issue of great concern for the economy 
in general and the banking system in particular. In the lead up to the crisis and even beyond, 
some  of  the  Indian  corporate  houses  raised  unsustainable  amounts  of  debt  from  various 
sources  including  bank  finance  and  oversees  borrowings.  As  we  notice  now,  several 
indiscriminate  corporate  houses  continued  market  borrowing  with  a  view  to  increase  their 
market  share  and  to  expand  capacity  without  any  regard  to  domestic  and  global  demand 
situation.  In  fact,  the  rate  of  sales  growth  of  the  corporate  sector  particularly  of  listed 
manufacturing companies, declined from an average of 28.8 per cent in Q1 of 2010–11 to 11.4 
per cent in Q2 of 2012–13 at a time when inflation (CPI (IW)) averaged3 around 10 per cent. 
Some of these borrowers necessarily fall into the category that Minsky calls “Ponzi borrowers”, 
which I had alluded to earlier. While banking system could also be held partly responsible for 
continuing to lend to these highly leveraged corporate groups, most of the times they were 
confounded  by  the  labyrinthine  maze  that  these  corporate  houses  had  created  to  access 
finance through group companies or thorough special purpose vehicles. The obvious fallout of 
this indiscriminate borrowing is a severe deterioration in their ability to service debt, besides 
casting an adverse impact on banks’ balance sheets. An indirect outcome of higher corporate 
leverage is also likely in terms of poor transmission of monetary policy impulses as corporates 
may not be in a position to benefit from falling interest rates due to already high levels of debt.  
25. Against this backdrop, there are a multitude of areas that should be looked at in more detail 
by way of research. The distribution of leverage is very important. In India, about a third of total 
corporate  debt  is  owned  by  companies  with  a  debt-equity  ratio  of  more  than  3.  Given  the 
concentration  of  debt,  there  is  a  need  to  assess  the  risk  associated  with  multi-layered 
structures – in the form of holding companies and special purpose vehicles. Further, while the 
corporate profits wait for a turnaround in the economy, there are also instances of companies 
trying  to  meet  their  debt  obligations  in  different  ways,  one  of  which  is  deleveraging.  Many 
companies are now deleveraging – paying off debt by selling off assets, more so as banks 
cease to restructure their bad debts. It is important to weigh the effectiveness of such methods 
against the costs it imposes on the growth of the economy.  
26. While one is quick to demonize the borrowers that are unable to repay their debt to the 
lenders,  it  would  be  unfair  to  say  that  all  of  these  highly  leveraged  borrowers  are  “Ponzi 
borrowers”. Ways and means have to be found to segregate the fraudsters from the genuine 
borrowers. Our experience suggests that a number of these borrowers had borrowed heavily 
to set up infrastructure projects that have got stalled due to external factors. Several projects 
have faced time and cost overruns due to delays in receiving various clearances, cancellation 
of coal or gas linkages, protests from environmentalists etc. It is in our collective interest that 
productive capacity that has been created is not jeopardized and right lessons are drawn for 
future guidance. It is, therefore, important that some meaningful research could be conducted 
into 3–4 of these stalled projects, undertaking a threadbare analysis of the development of the 
project from scratch including the means and structures used for obtaining finance, extent and 
quality  of  equity  brought  in  by  the  promoters,  subsequent  developments  at  various  project 
stages, end outcome and so on and develop them as case studies for reference not only at 
management  institutes  but  also  by  all  stakeholders  including  Government  machinery, 
regulators etc.  
Conclusion 
27. I have listed in brief a few basic issues that need the attention of researchers. These are 
indicative in nature and deal with the core areas that the bankers deal with in their everyday 
functioning.  Besides,  the  issues  that  I  have  discussed  in  details  above,  some  of  the 
                                                
3   Average over April – January 2012–13. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   researchers  present  here  could  also  focus  their  studies  on  the  behavioral  impact  of  credit 
guarantee schemes and interest rate subsidy on the end users and the intermediaries. Couple 
of other areas in which I would like to see some quality research done is on whether financial 
inclusion efforts should be savings led or credit led; and entire gamut of issues surrounding 
education loans. Another interesting area of research could be the policy of public sector banks 
with regard to posting of officers to rural branches as I feel this aspect has a significant bearing 
on progress in agriculture and MSME credit in rural areas.  
28. While I have spoken enough about the subjects for research, there are issues related to 
research methodology per se. The first and foremost of which is, whether adequate and reliable 
data  is  available.  Very  often,  even  within  RBI  also  we  have  to  grapple  with  inconsistent, 
incoherent and incomplete data sets which severely undermine policy formulation. There are 
also  problems  around  data  design  and  data  architecture  like  varied  definitions,  different 
reporting  dates,  etc.  Quality  of  research  would  also  depend  a  lot  on  the  survey  methods 
employed, adequacy of sample used etc. What could be done to address these issues? 
29. Before I close, I would like to thank the organizers once again for inviting me to this first 
ever banking research conference. The issues that I have raised during my address today are 
not exhaustive and I am sure there are many more interesting research ideas which would be 
engaging  the  attention  of  our  researchers.  I  hope  to  see  some  quality  analytical  research 
conducted in banking in the days to come. 
I  wish  the  Conference  all  the  success  and  hope  that  the  deliberations  are  engaging  and 
insightful.  
References 
Report  on Trend  and  Progress  of  Banking  in India  2014–15  and  Financial  Stability  Report 
December 2015 (RBI)  
Re-embracing Keynes(Scholars, Admirers and Sceptics in the Aftermath of the Crisis (Maria 
Cristina Marcuzzo) 
Rural India: Report by IIFL Institutional Equities  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
