   Patrick Njoroge: Credit Information Sharing for innovation and financial 
inclusion 
Speech by Dr Patrick Njoroge, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 3rd Regional 
Credit Information Sharing (CIS) Conference, Nairobi, 23 February 2016. 
 Mr. Henry Rotich, Cabinet Secretary, The National Treasury;  
Dr. Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda;  
Dr. Charity Dhliwayo, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe;  
Mr. Wagara Melchior, 1st Vice Governor, Bank of Burundi;  
Representatives of the Bank of Mexico, Bank of Zambia, BCEAO;  
Representatives of the World Bank and IFC;  
Mr. Habil Olaka, CEO, Kenya Bankers Association;  
Mr. Charles Ringera, CEO Higher Education Loans Board & Chairman, CIS Kenya  
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Good morning. It is a great pleasure to be here with you today, to welcome all of you to the 3rd 
Regional  Credit  Information  Sharing  (CIS)  Conference.  In  particular,  I  extend  a  special 
welcome to representatives of central banks from various countries around Africa and from 
Mexico. That we gather once again for the third regional conference is evidence that CIS is 
increasingly becoming a critical aspect of the financial system.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The theme of this conference “CIS for Innovation and Financial 
Inclusion-Mikopo Kisasa!” is indeed timely as it resonates with the objectives we have set to 
drive the Kenyan financial sector. These objectives include innovation, lower cost of credit, 
transparency and disclosure. Having an inclusive financial sector goes beyond mere access 
to financial services to include consumer protection and making sure that the duty of care owed 
by  financial  institutions  to  their  customers  is  well  executed.  In  addition,  the  provision  of 
sufficient  information  to  assist  consumers  in  making  informed  financial  decisions  is  a 
fundamental enabler in enhancing financial inclusion.  
As you are all aware, information asymmetry in the financial sector is very prominent and as 
such one of the hindrances to deeper financial inclusion. To eradicate this, transparency in the 
pricing  of  credit  by  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  cannot  be  over 
emphasized.  It  is  in  this  regard  that  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has  started  publishing  the 
average lending rates for various loan products as well as the overall average weighted lending 
rates by commercial banks. This will enable the borrowing public to make informed borrowing 
decisions,  which  in  turn  will  facilitate  a  competitive  banking  sector  with  high  quality  and 
reasonably priced products.  
I know that the topic of low cost of credit has been over-analysed. However, this conference 
brings together creative minds that can innovate new affordable products designed to suit the 
needs  of  the  customers  at  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid.  This  would  also  require  financial 
institutions to align  business models  to  support,  especially,  Small  and Medium  Enterprises 
(SME)  lending.  Further,  lower  cost  of  credit  can  also  be  achieved  through  continued 
collaborative efforts between actors in the sector to develop innovative distribution channels. 
It  is  therefore  paramount  that  financial  institutions  embrace  financial  innovation  in  order  to 
enhance  coverage  of  financial  services  and  reduce  transaction  costs,  particularly  through 
electronic and mobile money transfers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   With regard to innovation, I would like to note that CIS is one of the most inventive mechanisms 
in Kenya that has contributed immensely to the development of the financial sector. Despite 
being  a  young  concept,  the  success  achieved  by  CIS  is  remarkable.  This  has  been  duly 
recognized in Kenya’s enhanced rankings in the World Bank Doing Business Report, 2016. In 
the Ease of Getting Credit Indicator, Kenya emerged position 28 globally. This is a significant 
improvement  from  position  118  in  2015,  largely  attributed  to  the  developments  in  the  CIS 
environment such as the sharing of full file data by both Commercial and Microfinance Banks.  
However,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  despite  this  remarkable  progress,  we  have  three  critical 
concerns that I present as challenges to the credit market regarding CIS.  
First, it is said that lenders are quick to inform consumers when their credit profile is poor, but 
are mute when the score is good. Consequently, borrowers only know about the credit bureau 
when there is a problem. This needs to change. Banks in Kenya have been sharing positive 
data for two years now, and therefore must begin to inform and reward their low risk customers 
with better terms.  
Secondly,  lenders  must  be  willing  to  invest  in  efforts  to  ensure  highest  standards  of  data 
quality. This is important because a borrower’s credit report is a score-card on the character 
of individuals and corporates. It is imperative that every effort is made to provide accurate and 
updated information on each of their customers, without regard to status or social standing.  
Thirdly, there is need to address consumer complaints associated with credit information as 
promptly  as  possible.  Where  these  issues  escalate  to  disputes,  lenders  should  explore 
alternative  dispute  resolution  mechanisms.  I  am  confident  that  the  deliberations  regarding 
Alternative Dispute Resolution, which are part of this conference, will provide insights into the 
critical  aspects  of  consumer  protection  that  are  needed  to  ensure  credibility  of  the  whole 
mechanism.  
On our part as the Central Bank, we will continue to play our supervisory role effectively, and 
ensure that we monitor very closely compliance with CIS reporting requirements, given that 
sharing comprehensive information on a timely basis is the only way this mechanism can reach 
its full potential. It is important to note that central banks are also beginning to explore effective 
use of credit information to strengthen banking supervision. I am informed that the Bank of 
Mexico offers a useful case study that will be discussed in the first session of this Conference. 
It is important that central banks invest in the analytical skills needed for effective utilization of 
the data for supervision and monetary policy.  
I wish you all very fruitful discussions as you share experiences that will shape the future of 
CIS in Kenya, Africa and beyond. It is now my distinct pleasure to welcome Cabinet Secretary 
Henry Rotich to officially open the conference.  
Karibu Bwana Waziri!  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
