  Yves Mersch: Scope and limits of monetary policy 
Introductory remarks by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the panel “Europe’s Economic and Monetary Policy” during the Ambrosetti 
Conference  on  the Outlook for  the  Economy  and  Finance,  Villa  d’Este, Cernobbio,  9  April 
2016. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Over recent years, the role of the ECB’s monetary policy has been more actively debated 
than  ever  before,  and  its  measures  have  become  the  subject  of  heightened  scrutiny. This 
examination often addresses the limits of monetary policy. Some have argued that monetary 
policy  is  running  out  of  instruments;  others,  by  contrast,  have  asserted  that  the  ECB,  by 
making use of a plethora of instruments, is over-stretching its remits. 
So let me enter this discussion and focus on the scope and limits of monetary policy. 
To give you the main message upfront: the legal framework of the European Economic and 
Monetary Union assigns the ECB’s monetary policy with the primary objective of maintaining 
price stability. It outlines the set of monetary policy instruments in general and provides the 
Governing  Council  with  broad  discretion  in  the  choice  of  these  instruments  to  achieve  its 
objective. 
At the same time, the framework sets limits of what monetary policy must not do and pursue 
– in particular prohibiting monetary financing of governments. Acting within this framework, 
our measures taken over the last years have shown that we are not short of instruments: the 
scope  of  monetary  policy  instruments  is  wide  and  flexible  enough  to  effectively  fulfil  our 
mandate. Acting within this framework also ensures that we do not encroach upon the area 
of economic policy. This constraint has recently been confirmed by the Court of Justice of the 
European Union in the OMT case. 
Objective and instruments 
The  ECB’s  objective  is  to  ensure  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  The  standard 
instruments that the ECB deploy are its key interest rates. These are adjusted to provide or 
withdraw  monetary  stimulus  to  achieve  the  objective.  Such  changes  in  policy  rates  are 
transmitted via financial market prices, wages, households’ and firms’ inflation expectations, 
etc.  Under  normal  conditions,  this  transmission  follows  predictable  patterns  which  allow 
calibrating the stimulus. In highly perturbed conditions, however, transmission might become 
impaired. The policy implementation process needs to be altered as a consequence. 
Indeed,  we  have  been  facing  unprecedented  challenges  to  which  we  had  to  respond  with 
non-standard instruments. Let me give you some examples of the past: 
• 
Impairments of the transmission process, in particular related to tensions in certain 
sovereign  debt  market  segments,  led  us  to  announce  targeted  bond  market 
interventions under the SMP and, later, the OMT programmes. 
Signs of credit crunch were addressed by a number of credit easing measures, e.g. 
targeted long-term re-financing operations and asset purchases in the covered bond 
and ABS markets. 
The  need  for  additional  monetary  policy  accommodation  in  a  phase  of  falling 
inflation rates and destabilising inflation expectations when short-term interest rates 
were already extremely low led to large-scale purchases of private and public-sector 
debt instruments. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  The impact of large-scale liquidity provision has been reinforced by venturing into 
the territory of negative interest rates. 
 This “instrument independence” proved crucial in responding to the various threats to price 
stability that we were facing over recent years.1 
Selecting  the  effective  tool  was  essential:  a  restriction  of  instruments  –  for  instance,  by 
restraining the central bank to the use of key interest rates as the sole monetary policy tool – 
would have possibly he led to a disastrous outcome for euro area. 
Principle of proportionality in the design of instruments 
Having a large degree of discretion in the choice of instruments comes with the obligation to 
respect  certain  principles  and  select  those  instruments  carefully.  In  legal  parlance,  Article 
127  of  that Treaty  states for  example  that  in  pursuing  its  objectives,  the  Eurosystem  “(…) 
shall act in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free competition, 
favouring an efficient allocation of resources (…)”. 
Moreover,  the  ECB  must  always  observe  the  principle  of  proportionality  laid  down  in 
Article 5(4) of the Treaty on the European Union when exercising its mandate. Specifically, 
this  implies  that  our  measures  need  to  be  suitable,  necessary  and  proportionate  stricto 
sensu. 
• 
For an instrument to be suitable, it needs to be able to address the respective risk to 
price stability. 
For an instrument to be necessary, we must lack an alternative instrument, which 
could achieve the same result. 
For  an  instrument  to  be  proportionate  stricto  sensu,  its  expected  benefits  should 
outweigh its costs. 
  Let me apply these three criteria to one of the ECB’s most-debated instrument, namely the 
purchases  of  public-sector  debt  instruments,  i.e.  the  PSPP  part  of  our  extended  asset 
purchase programme, APP. 
• 
First,  purchases  in  government  bond  markets  are  a  suitable  tool.  By  easing  the 
financing  conditions  of  the  private  sector  and  expanding  the  monetary  base,  the 
PSPP  makes  it  cheaper  for  households  and firms  to  borrow.  This  can encourage 
them  to  borrow  and  expand  consumption  and  investment.  By  eroding  economic 
slack, such boost to demand helps to bring inflation back to levels below, but close 
to 2%. Between end-August 2014, when markets had started to price in larger-scale 
ECB asset purchases, and February 2016, the GDP-weighted average of euro area 
10-year sovereign bond yields has fallen by about 70 basis points. Over the same 
period,  bank  lending  rates  to  euro  area  companies  –  a  key  indicator  of  financing 
conditions in a bank-centred economy such as the euro area – have decreased by a 
similar magnitude. A sizeable fraction of this easing in financing conditions can be 
attributed to our monetary policy measures in general and the PSPP in particular. 
But here again, there are boundaries and limits. Although it is intended to lower the 
bond  yields  of  sovereigns  as  a  major  determinant  for  bank  lending  rates  to 
companies, it is not only undesirable to wipe out the credit risk premium investors 
                                                
1   “Instrument independence” has gained currency as a common expression in the economic literature on central 
bank independence and is understood as “the central bank’s ability to freely adjust its policy tools in pursuit of 
the  goals  of  monetary  policy”,  see  Debelle,  Guy  and  Stanley  Fischer  (1994),  “How  Independent  Should  a 
Central  Bank  Be?”  in  Jeffrey  C.  Fuhrer  (ed.),  “Goals,  Guidelines  and  Constraints  Facing  Monetary 
Policymakers.”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, pp. 195–221. However, it is not a well-defined legal term. In 
the legal doctrine, one would rather refer to “discretion” regarding the choice of instruments. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    
 
ask  from  sovereign  issuers,  it  would  moreover  raise  serious  legal  concerns  as  to 
whether this would not enter the remit of economic policy. 
Second, with key ECB interest rates already very low, and the CBPP3 and ABSPP 
having  insufficient  scope  to  address  severe  downside  risks to  price  stability  given 
their  limited  market  size,  purchases  of  investment-grade  bonds  of  euro  area 
sovereigns were considered a necessary instrument to provide additional monetary 
stimulus.  In  particular,  there  was  no  other  asset  class  with  comparable  risk 
characteristics  and  with  a  similar  potential  for  easing  private-sector  borrowing 
conditions. 
Third,  PSPP  purchases  expose  the  Eurosystem  balance  sheet  to  a  certain  risk. 
These  risks  are  mitigated  because  PSPP-eligible  bonds  need  to  satisfy  minimum 
credit quality requirements. Overall, a proper weighting of costs and risks vs benefits 
must take into account that the maintenance of price stability is the primary objective 
for monetary policy.2 Accordingly, PSPP is also proportionate stricto sensu. 
the  monetary 
for  growth.3  Therefore, 
Monetary financing prohibition as strict and important limit 
The  principle  of  proportionality  works  as  a  disciplining  device  for the  ECB  in  choosing  the 
instruments.  In  addition,  however,  the  legal  framework  provides  further,  and  even  stricter, 
limits.  An  important  case  in  point  is  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  as  enshrined  in 
Article 123 of the Treaty. 
While this reads prima facie as a constraint on monetary policy, it may also strengthen the 
maintenance  of  price  stability.  In  fact,  historical  evidence  has  pointed  to  the  negative 
consequences  which  historically  have  been  associated  with  central  banks’  attempts  to 
minimise the financing burden of governments. And literature has shown that high inflation, 
which  can  arise  from  such  subordination  of  monetary  policy  to  fiscal  needs,  is  in  turn 
detrimental 
fiscal 
considerations out which could distract the Governing Council from its core monetary policy 
task. It helps to protect the ECB from political pressures. 
The  ECB’s  purchases  of  public-sector  debt  instruments  as  part  of  the  APP  are  a  good 
example how this prohibition is applied: 
First  of  all,  we  do  not  buy  government  bonds  in  the  primary  market  –  which  is  explicitly 
forbidden under Article 123 – but only in the secondary market. 
Purchases  of  public-sector  bonds  in  the  secondary  market  in  turn  are  forbidden,  if  they 
circumvent  the  monetary  financing  prohibition,  i.e.  have  an  effect  equivalent  to  that  of 
purchases in the primary market. We have made sure that this is not the case by putting in 
place several safeguards4. As one of these safeguards, PSPP purchases adhere to a black-
out  period,  i.e.  the  Eurosystem  does  not  buy  around  the  date  of  a  new  issuance,  which 
facilitates  the  formation  of  market  prices  for  PSPP-eligible  securities.  Furthermore,  the 
relevant securities are also subject to an issue share limit and an issuer limit, which preserve 
market functioning. These features are compliant with the requirement to act in accordance 
with the principle of an open market economy. 
financing  prohibition  rules 
                                                
2   When weighting the “benefit”, though, one may consider that as the usage of these instruments is expanded to 
very high proportions, they may start to display diminishing returns at some point. 
3   See  Stanley  Fischer,  1993,  The  Role  of  Macroeconomic  Factors  in  Growth,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 32(3):  485–512  and  Stephanie  Kremer,  Alexander  Bick  and  Dieter  Nautz,  2013,  Inflation  and 
Growth: New Evidence From a Panel Threshold Analysis, Empirical Economics 44(2): 861–878. 
4   https://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/en_dec_ecb_2015_10_f_.sign.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
All  this  ensures  that  PSPP  purchases  are  not  being  perceived  as  a  circumvention  of  the 
monetary financing prohibition. 
When the central bank makes “proportionate” use of its instruments, as I described earlier, 
this  is  akin to  prudently  driving  a  car:  depending  on  road  and  weather conditions,  we  use 
different tyres, we accelerate or use the brakes, and thus strive to always travel at an optimal 
speed. The monetary financing prohibition, by contrast, is a traffic rule: a clear stop sign that 
needs to be obeyed whatever the weather and street conditions. The overt monetary finance 
of an increase in fiscal deficits to stimulate aggregate demand would legally not be feasible 
even amid a liquidity trap. 
Conclusion 
The  Eurosystem  enjoys  broad  discretion  in  the  choice  of  its  instruments.  But  we  are 
responsible to use our measures proportionately and to obey the well-defined boundaries set 
by  the  legal  framework.  The  flexible  choice  of  instruments  was  crucial  in  addressing  the 
headwinds  to  price  stability  over  recent  years:  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  measures  have 
prevented  inflation  from  falling  much  further  and  probably  helped  avoiding  a  deflationary 
spiral. 
At the same time, there are limits to what central banks like the ECB can achieve. The euro 
area’s recovery is indeed in need of supportive actions from the side of “Economic Policy”. 
These include structural reforms, a more growth-friendly composition of fiscal policies, while 
remaining  in  compliance  with  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  the 
provision of an adequate public infrastructure. All these economic policy measures are vital 
to increase investment and boost job creation. With other economic policy areas contributing 
decisively to the recovery, they also help the euro area reap the full benefits from the ECB’s 
monetary policy measures.
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
