   Gent Sejko: Bank of Albania highlights for 2015 and priorities for 2016 
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on Bank 
of Albania highlights for 2015 and priorities for 2016, Tirana, 3 February 2016. 
 Year 2015 was a challenging one in the light of maintaining and consolidating the economic 
and financial stability and of improving the institutional framework of the Bank of Albania. 
     The Bank of Albania has provided substantial contribution to maintaining and 
consolidating macroeconomic balances and financial stability in Albania.  
The accommodative monetary policy, implemented throughout 2015, was a pivotal underlying 
factor for ensuring an economic and financial environment with low interest rates, amid ample 
liquidity.  The  prudential  supervision  of  banks,  the  regulatory  improvements,  along  with  the 
intensive exchange of information with European and international counterparts contributed to 
strengthening and safeguarding banking system's financial stability. 
The beginning of 2015 coincided with a set of institutional decisions adopted by the Parliament 
of Albania and the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, which provided the ground for 
the return of public confidence to the institution. In concrete terms:  
• 
the management structure of the Bank of Albania was completed;  
the Audit Committee, composed of three Supervisory Council members, started its 
activity;  
the Inspector General resumed reporting to the Supervisory Council;  
the Medium-term Development Strategy and Medium-term Budget for 2016–18 were 
approved;   
the new organisational structure was approved;  
the head offices renovation and construction works were completed;  
and the Museum of the Bank of Albania was launched.  
to  strengthening  good  governance,  accountability  and 
• 
These  highlights  contributed 
subsequently enhancing public confidence in the Bank of Albania.  
The monetary policy intensified the simulating stance during 2015. The Bank of Albania 
lowered the key rate twice, continued to inject the necessary liquidity in the financial markets 
and  clearly  communicated  the  future  monetary  policy  stance.  Our  monetary  policy  was 
successful in easing the financing conditions in the economy and helped in the return of the 
Albanian economy to a positive development track. 
In particular, interest rates on new lek loans and servicing costs of existing credits fell. Lek 
credit increased, offsetting the continuous fall of the credit portfolio in foreign currency. Also, 
the share of lek credit in the total credit portfolio has been increasing, from around 28% in 2008 
to 43% in 2015. These actions have played a vital role in accelerating the economic growth 
during the last two years. 
During 2015, the banking system continued to expand its activity. Financial soundness 
improved,  while  capitalisation  and  liquidity  stand  at  optimal  parameters,  at  16%  and  4%, 
respectively.  
According to the latest data, as at November 2015, the performance of deposits was positive, 
increasing over EUR 130 million, thus confirming the public trust in the banking system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
After long-standing efforts, having increased for seven years, we provided for the reduction 
of  non-performing  loans  below  20%.  The  lowering  of  the  non-performing  loans  ratio,  as 
financing costs in the financial market stand at minimum historical levels, allows for a reliable 
recovery of credit to economy in the period ahead. We believe that, as a result of the joint 
action plan with the Government, the non-performing loans ratio will continue to fall in the year 
ahead. 
Also, in 2015, a new investor, the American Bank of Investments, entered the banking market, 
being the first one after 2009. We consider the new investment as a very positive development 
for  the  promotion  of  competition  within  the  system.  The  Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to 
promote banking system consolidation and adhere to rigorous requirements for a responsible 
and proactive management of each bank.  
In 2015, the most delicate developments coincided with the complex political and financial 
situation  in  Greece.  The  banking  sector  in  general  and  individual  banks  in  particular 
weathered with success all the difficulties.  
The Bank of Albania, in addition to the constant monitoring of developments in Albanian banks 
with Greek capital, intensified the communication with the respective authorities in Greece and 
in the euro area. The above-stated situation served to test the efficiency of the measures on 
securing liquidity. On the other hand, they promoted the spirit of solidarity and fair competition 
among banks. 
Another important aspect of our work was the contribution in the framework of Albania’s 
approximation  to  the  European  Union.  In  2015,  we  intensified  the  cooperation  with  the 
European Central Bank, ESCB central banks, and other European bodies dealing with financial 
regulations of the Union, notably the cooperation agreement with the European Supervisory 
Authority.  We  strengthened,  at  the  same  intensity,  the  cooperation  with  the  International 
Monetary  Fund,  World  Bank  and  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  and  regional  central 
banks.  
The Bank of Albania has also undertaken concrete steps about the development of payment 
systems. The National Committee on Payment Systems was established in October 2015. 
This is an inter-institutional committee that will contribute to enhancing the security, stability 
and efficiency of the national payment systems in Albania.  
The Law on Savings and Loan Associations (SLAs) has been drafted and is pending approval 
by the Parliament. This law regulates the licensing, supervision and activity of the SLAs in 
compliance with the best standards. In close collaboration with the Albanian Deposit Insurance 
Agency,  amendments  to  the  Law  on  Deposits  Insurance  have  been  drafted.  These 
amendments  consist  in  new  norms  addressing  the  SLAs  and  include  legal  persons  in  the 
insurance deposits scheme. 
The  past  year  was  successful  also  regarding  the  information  technology.  Although  such 
projects are less visible to the public, they are of key importance. At the beginning of 2015, the 
AFISaR system started operation - this is the central electronic register for the documentation 
of each element that accompanies the issue and transactions with securities issued by the 
Albanian  state.  In  the  meantime,  other  successes  achieved  with  regard  to  information 
technology include:   
• 
automation of the reporting system of banks to the Bank of Albania;  
integration and optimisation of the IT network utilisation, thus reducing operational 
costs of the Bank of Albania;  
automation of accounting operations at BoA branches;   
and increase of information processing and storing capacities.  
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   I  emphasise 
Bigger challenges lie ahead of us in 2016.  
Another important objective is boosting credit to support the private sector, certainly at lower 
interest  rates.  The  business  plans  of  banks  for  2016  render  us  optimistic  in  this  regard. 
Meanwhile,  once  again 
that  our  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain 
accommodative in 2016. Furthermore, private sector's demand will be low throughout 2016, 
thus creating premises to increasingly channel the banking system's liquidity to the private 
sector. 
I would like to guarantee the banking system in Albania that the Bank of Albania will be a 
reliable, open and serious partner, in compliance with its mandate, implying its supervisory 
function. One of the main aspects in our work will be the compilation of a particular law to deal 
with banks facing a difficult financial situation, also known in our daily jargon as the Resolution 
Law. This is in the light of an important contemporary directive of European Union, which we 
are working to introduce in our banking legislation. 
Last, but not least, we will continue our efforts during 2016 for the further institutional perfection 
the Bank of Albania, aiming a fast approximation to the model of ESCB central banks.  
The  new  organisational  structure  and  the  three-year  development  strategy  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania will guide a set of decisions of the Bank of Albania's Supervisory Council to improve 
legal  and  sub-legal  acts.  The  daily  activity  of  the  Bank  of  Albania's  departments,  the 
mobilisation  and  motivation  of  human  resources,  efficient  management  of  funds  for  the 
financing of the activity, the strengthening of the internal audit and risk management in the 
activity of the Bank of Albania will be the main priorities in our work during 2016.  
Thank You! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
