   Johnson P Asiama: Fifteen years of Ghana Banking Awards – enriching 
a healthy competitive landscape in the drive for consumer relevance in 
banking 
Speech  by  Dr  Johnson P  Asiama,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of the  Bank  of Ghana,  at the 
Annual  Banking  Awards  2016,  on  the  theme  “Fifteen  years  of  Ghana  Banking  Awards  – 
enriching a healthy competitive landscape in the drive for consumer relevance in banking”, 
Accra, 26 August 2016. 
 Mr Chairman, Captains of Industry, 
Executives of the banking industry, Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  join  you  today  for  the  15th  edition  of  the  Ghana  Banking 
Awards.  This  event  usually  serves  as  a  platform  where  the  contributions  of  the  banking 
sector  to  the  economy  could  be  recognized.  It  should  therefore  serve  the  purpose  of 
stimulating healthy  competition  among  banks  which  could  in  turn  lead  to  improvement  in 
the delivery of financial products and services across the industry. 
This  year’s  theme,  “Fifteen  years  of  Ghana  Banking  Awards:  Enriching  a  healthy 
competitive  landscape  in  the  drive  for customer relevance in banking” could not have 
been better chosen. The  theme  resonates  well  with  a  quote  by  Felix  George  Rohatyn  (an 
accomplished  investment  banker)  who  said “… At  its  core,  banking  is not simply about 
profit, but about personal relationships”. 
I  will  come  back  to  say  more  about  these  shortly,  but  permit  me,  Mr.  Chairman,  to thank 
Corporate Initiative Ghana (CIG), the organizers of  this event for this opportunity. 
For my address this evening, I will begin with some general conceptual  issues  relating  to 
the  banking  scene  and  then  follow-up  with  some  specific matters that touch on the Bank 
of Ghana’s regulatory and supervisory role. 
that 
industry 
the  banking 
A vibrant and growing banking industry 
Mr.  Chairman,  you  will  agree  with  me 
in  Ghana  has 
experienced  tremendous  growth  and  unprecedented  competition  over  the  past  10  years, 
especially  after  the  adoption  of  the  Universal  banking  concept  in  2004.  Today,  banks  do 
not  only  compete  among  themselves,  but  also  with  non-banking  entities  such  as  Savings 
and  Loans  companies,  Finance  Houses,  Rural  and  Community  Banks  and  lately 
Microfinance companies. 
The  objective  for  introducing  the  Universal  banking  concept  was  to  allow  all  banks  in 
the  country  that  comply  with  the  prescribed  capital  requirements the freedom to engage in 
some or all permissible banking business activities  without restrictions. This has resulted in 
banks  penetrating  into  new  and  active  markets  with  the  view  to  increasing market share 
and profitability. 
It is important to note that banking  is a customer-oriented service  industry;  therefore  banks’ 
ability  to  survive  in  the  market  largely  depends  on  customers.  Customers  are  the  focus 
and customer service  is the differentiating factor in the banking industry. Thus those service 
providers who are able to provide tailor made services and high level of  service  quality  do 
not  only  retain  customers,  but  also  obtain  a  sustainable  competitive  advantage.  Thus 
high  customer  satisfaction  is  important in maintaining a loyal customer base. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Mr.  Chairman,  the flip  side  is  that  banks  that  fail  to  respond  to  competitive  pressures  risk 
being  marginalized  as  the  history  of  industry  is  replete  with  examples  of  companies  that 
failed  to  grasp  the  significance  of  innovation  and  ended  up  ceding  their  dominant  market 
positions to firms that were started in garages. 
In  Ghana,  just  as  in  many  other  advanced  markets,  the  government  and  the  regulator 
have  explicitly  moved  to  dismantle  barriers  to  entry  while  encouraging  competition  from 
new  entrants.  This  is  because  new  entrants  would  only  survive  in  such  a  competitive 
environment  by  applying innovative technology and business models which will  eventually 
compel other market participants to follow suit, much to the  benefit of the final consumer. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  anecdotal  evidence  on  the  banking  industry  in  Ghana however 
suggests that a significant proportion of customers  have  the  perception  that  their  banks  do 
not provide  helpful,  proactive  and customized financial services to them. It will interest you 
to  know  that customers are usually  open  to  being  nudged, guided  and  assisted  in  making 
better  decisions;  yet  most  banks  have  not  shown  the  ability  to  harness  the  power  of 
broad  customer  relationship  information  to  deliver real value  to  their customers  beyond 
traditional product silos. 
The  danger  for  banks  is  that  the  trust  advantage  that  they  enjoy  from  their customers  is 
fast eroding, with younger customers far more willing  than their  older generation to  consider 
banking  outside  the  traditional  banking system. Traditional banks  are  challenged to show 
that they can  deliver  value  across  varied  products  and  channels  and  thereby  avoid  being 
overtaken by simpler and more nimble competitors. 
Regulatory and supervisory oversight 
Mr.  Chairman,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  stands  committed  to  ensure  that  a  stable  environment 
for  banking  with  a  level  playing  field  is  provided  through  its  regulatory and supervisory 
functions  for  banks  to  thrive  and  also  ensure  confidence  in  the  banking  system.  In 
connection  with  this,  the  Bank  has  recently  overhauled  the  existing  legal  framework  for 
banking. As  you may be aware, a new Banks and Specialized Deposit-  Taking Act as well 
as  a  novel  Deposit  Protection  Act  have  been  passed  by  Parliament  and  are  currently 
awaiting  Presidential  assent  to usher-in  a new framework for the conduct of bank and non-
bank business. 
The  Banks  and  Specialized  Deposit-Taking  Institutions  Act  seeks  to  address  gaps  and 
inconsistencies in the banking laws and also deepen  cooperation  with  regional counterparts 
to  improve  the  regulation  and  supervision of  foreign  banks that are  active in  the  country. 
This  is  consistent  with  the  vision  of  the  Government’s  financial  sector  reform  agenda 
which aims at among others: 
• 
making  the  financial  sector  of  the  country  the  preferred  source  of  finance  for 
domestic companies; 
Promoting efficient savings mobilization; 
Enhancing the competitiveness of the country’s financial institutions; 
Ensuring a stronger and user-friendly regulatory regime; as well  as 
Achieving a deepened and a diversified domestic financial sector. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The  new  bill  will  be  complemented  by  a  number  of  regulations  and  directives, to help 
enhance the environment for the conduct of banking.  These include: 
• 
• 
• 
Corporate Governance Regulations 
Licensing Regulations 
Outsourcing Directive 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   implementation  of 
Risk Management Directive 
External Auditors Regulations 
Mergers and Acquisitions Directive 
Information Technology Standards 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  with  the  passage  of  the  Ghana  Deposit  Protection  Bill,  I  am 
happy  to  inform  you  that  the  Bank  of Ghana  in  collaboration with the German Government 
will soon establish a deposit  protection  system  in  Ghana  for  the  first  time  in  our  history. 
This  will  ensure  protection  for  small  depositors  and  enhance  the  safety  of  the  financial 
system.  Hopefully,  this  should  lead  to  increased  deposit  mobilization for investment and 
growth. 
The 
the  deposit  protection  scheme  may  however  pose  serious 
challenges to undercapitalized institutions as well as  institutions that breach  regulatory and 
prudential  requirements.  This  is  because such institutions would not qualify to participate in 
the scheme,  and  this  could  clearly  impact  on  their  ability  to  thrive.  May  I  therefore  seize 
this  opportunity  to  advise  all  licensed  institutions  to  ensure  strict  compliance  with  capital 
and  other  regulatory  and  prudential requirements at all times. 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  The  Bank  of  Ghana  has  also  commenced 
the  process  towards  an  effective  implementation  of  Basel II in Ghana. To this end, I will 
entreat banks to review their credit  standards and capital needs in relation to their risk profile 
and appetite to ensure strict compliance. 
that  are 
Let  me  also  take  the  opportunity  to  comment  briefly  on  two  key  interventions 
currently  ongoing  in  the  industry.  The  first  is  about  the  recent  Asset  Quality  Review 
(AQR)  of  banks  by  the  external auditors. The second has to do with the implementation of 
an electronic  retail  payment  infrastructure  to  complement  existing inter-bank  payment and 
settlement systems. 
Mr. Chairman, to sustain the pace of progress in the financial sector and enhance the financial 
system’s  resilience  to  shocks  and  its  contribution  to the needs of a growing economy, the 
Bank  of Ghana, in  collaboration  with  some  selected  audit  firms,  carried  out  a  diagnostic 
assessment of  the quality of financial exposures in the form of loans and advances as  well 
as investments of twenty eight (28) Ghanaian banks in 2015. 
The  exercise  revealed  some  vulnerability  with  respect  to  loan  losses  within the banking 
system which require capital injection by some  banks.  The  bulk  of  these  losses  were  due 
to  funding  to  the  Utility  Companies and Bulk Oil Distribution Companies (BDCs). 
Currently,  the  government  is  finalizing  plans  to  clear  all  arrears  due  to  BDCs  and  Utility 
Companies  to  restore  their  viability.  The  implementation  of  the  plans  would  improve  the 
capital levels of banks  that were affected by the exercise and place them on a sound footing. 
Also,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  is  developing  a  Recapitalization  and  Liquidity  plan to strengthen 
the banking industry and make it more resilient and  robust.  As  part  of  the  plan,  the  Bank 
will  be  conducting  an  update  of  the  AQR  of  all  banks  to  effectively  determine  the  current 
provisioning  and capital needs of each bank. Banks that are found to be significantly  under-
capitalized  would  be  required  to  inject  capital  within  a  stipulated  time frame and improve 
upon their risk management practices. 
The  exercise  will  be  repeated  on  regular  basis  to  ensure  that  all  banks  have  adequate 
provision  for  loan  losses  and  the  required  amount  of  capital  to  match  their  levels  of 
business. This will ensure the safety and  soundness of our banking system. 
Mr.  Chairman,  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  may  recall  that  in  March  2014,  Bank  of 
Ghana  launched  a  Strategic  Payment  Systems  Roadmap  for  Ghana  to  accelerate  the 
transformation of the payment system  landscape from cash-dominance to cash-lite. The key 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   strategy for  executing  this  agenda  is  the  establishment  of  an  integrated  and interoperable 
electronic  national  payment  system  infrastructure.  A  national  payment  system  of  this 
nature  will  avert  the  development  of  fragmented payment systems and ensure efficient use 
of liquidity within  the financial system. 
Currently,  there  is  interoperability  within  the  payment  cards  subsector,  evidenced  by  the 
“gh-Link”  switch  on  one  hand;  and  interoperability among international card schemes such 
as Visa and MasterCard on the  other hand. 
However, the mobile money subsector, which has experienced phenomenal growth in recent 
years, and also holds the key to financial  inclusion is not interoperable. This situation poses 
a serious challenge to  our quest for an efficient and inclusive national payments system. 
In line with the payment system development objectives of the country,  the Bank of Ghana 
has initiated a project to implement a mobile money payment system infrastructure to enable 
mobile  money  platforms  become interoperable for seamless funds transfer from one mobile 
money service provider to another. 
Subsequently, the new retail interoperable switch will be linked to the GhIPSS infrastructure 
to achieve national payment systems interoperability. 
In  sum,  the  project  seeks  to  ensure  an  overall  integration  of  mobile  payments platforms 
of  the  mobile  money  operators.  It  will  also  achieve  integration  with  the  clearing  and 
settlement  facilities  consisting  of  the  Cheque  Codeline  Clearing  with  Truncation,  the 
Automated  Clearing  House,  the  Ghana  Interbank  Settlement  (GIS)  system  -  RTGS,  the 
Central  Securities  Depository  and  the  gh-linkTM.  Finally  the  project  will  ensure  integration 
with  participant banks, mobile money operators  and  existing front end processors. 
Clearly,  this  project,  when  completed  would  provide  enormous  opportunities  for  banks, 
corporate  entities,  government  and  individuals,  and  also  put  Ghana  among  the  league 
of  countries  with  developed payment system infrastructure. 
The  stakeholder  consultations  have  so  far  begun,  and  we  look  forward  to  an  active 
engagement by the banking industry in this regard. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  Mr.  Chairman,  I  want  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  all  the  award 
winners  and  of  course  those  who  could  not  win  any  award.  I  wish  you  better  luck  next 
time.  And  to  the  organizers  of  the  program,  I  wish  you  every  success  in  your  future 
endeavours. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
