   Timothy Lane: Monetary policy and financial stability – looking for the 
right tools 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to HEC Montreal, 
Montreal, Quebec, 8 February 2016. 
 The  charts  can  be  found  at  the  http://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/remarks-080216.pdf 
website. 
I would like to thank Don Coletti and Oleksiy Kryvtsov for their help in preparing this speech. 
Introduction 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks will focus on the following 
question: Should a central bank’s decisions on monetary policy account for the stability of the 
financial system and, if so, how? We at the Bank of Canada are grappling with this question, 
and it is being debated by economists and policy-makers around the world. 
This topic is not new, but finding the right answer now seems more urgent than ever. The 
global financial crisis that began eight years ago has taken an enormous toll, both economic 
and, more important, human. Around the world, including in Canada, the crisis ushered in a 
period of subpar economic growth and inflation, which continues to the present day. 
So it’s easy to see why promoting financial stability – and preventing crises in the future – is 
such a high priority for world leaders and all those involved in the financial system. This priority 
has  given  rise  to  an  ambitious  and  comprehensive  agenda  of  reforms  to  make  the  global 
financial system more resilient. 
But, in thinking about how to prevent financial crises, it’s also natural to look at monetary policy. 
After all, when a central bank influences the cost of financing through changes in the policy 
interest  rate,  its  actions  affect  the  economy  by  changing  asset  prices,  encouraging  or 
discouraging risk taking, and influencing credit flows. This suggests that monetary policy has 
the ability to influence financial stability, for good or ill. 
If a central bank eases monetary policy, it stimulates the economy, largely by encouraging 
households  and  companies  to  borrow  more  and  pushing  up  the  prices  of  many  types  of 
financial assets. The increased borrowing, together with the greater wealth that comes with 
higher  asset  prices,  encourages  households  to  spend  more,  generating  income  for  other 
households and creating opportunities for companies. But, at the same time, more debt and 
higher asset prices may create vulnerabilities in the financial system. 
In Canada in the period since the global financial crisis, the most concerning vulnerabilities 
have  been  in  the  household  sector  –  notably  the  combination  of  rising  indebtedness  and 
elevated house prices. But a wider set of vulnerabilities, in more than one sector, was important 
in setting the stage for previous crises. For example, heightened risk taking by investors and 
elevated leverage in large financial institutions and in shadow banking activities were among 
the factors that turned a downturn in the U.S. subprime mortgage market into a global financial 
crisis. 
While increasing such vulnerabilities at the margin is a normal consequence of an easing of 
monetary  policy,  they  may  become  of  particular  concern  if  interest  rates  stay  low  for  an 
unusually  long  time.  In  the  presence  of  such  vulnerabilities,  an  event  such  as  an  adverse 
macroeconomic shock can stress the financial system or even trigger a crisis. 
Since monetary policy can contribute to financial vulnerabilities, it could also be argued that it 
can be adjusted to limit them. But whether and how to do that can’t be considered in isolation 
from the central bank’s mandate. For the past quarter century, the Bank of Canada has had 
the responsibility of using monetary policy to achieve low, stable and predictable inflation, a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   goal cemented in our 2 per cent inflation target. This is our primary mission, which guides our 
setting of the policy interest rate. While a failure to maintain financial stability would ultimately 
impair our ability to achieve the inflation target, it is generally understood that we should aim 
to get inflation sustainably back to target within about two years. 
Within  this  framework,  financial  system  developments  are  always  part  of  monetary  policy 
discussions, because of their importance for the real economy and especially because of the 
transmission of the effects of monetary policy. 
We have some flexibility within our inflation-targeting framework: we might accept a slower 
return of inflation to target, if necessary, to avoid adverse effects on financial stability. But the 
expectation has been that we would only rarely, if ever, use the framework’s flexibility in this 
way. 
This is not to say that our framework is immutable. The law governing the Bank since 1935 
says we should “regulate credit and currency in the best interests of the economic life of the 
nation.”  How  we  fulfill that  requirement  has  evolved  over  the  years. Inflation  targeting  was 
established in Canada in 1991 under an agreement with the federal government, which we 
renew every five years. We are currently working toward the next renewal, which takes place 
later this year. This process gives us an opportunity to re-examine our mandate and consider 
other ways of doing things. Financial stability, and its relationship to monetary policy, figures 
prominently in our current research agenda. 
In the time I have, I will discuss how our thinking on the interactions between monetary policy 
and financial stability has been evolving, tell you about some interesting recent research by 
our staff and touch on some questions that have yet to be resolved. 
Financial Stability, then and now 
Let  me  start  by  saying  that  central  banks  have  always  had  a  role  in  providing  stability  to 
financial systems. Some of our tools are in the category of crisis management; others for crisis 
prevention. 
When the financial system comes under stress, a central bank may need to calm financial 
markets  through  open  market  operations  or  act  as  the  lender  of  last  resort  to  financial 
institutions to forestall bank runs. These tools were used effectively by many central banks 
during the global financial crisis of 2007–09. 
Some of the Bank of Canada’s financial system activities are also designed, in part, to make 
the  system  less  prone  to  crisis.  An  example  is  the  oversight  of  key  financial  market 
infrastructures,  such  as  payment  systems  and  central  counterparties.  Such  oversight  is 
intended to bolster their risk management so that they can support the continued functioning 
of financial markets in times of stress. 
More broadly, central banks are well placed to analyze systemic vulnerabilities and how they 
might  play  out.  In this  vein,  in  2002,  the  Bank of  Canada  began  publishing  a  semi-annual 
Financial System Review to raise awareness of the most important risks to Canada’s financial 
system. 
But the Bank of Canada is only one of several official bodies whose policies have an influence 
on financial stability. Others control many of the relevant tools – such as capital requirements, 
the regulation of housing finance, the regulation of financial market conduct and the framework 
for resolution of financial institutions. The Bank’s analysis of emerging risks and vulnerabilities 
can contribute to informing decisions by those other bodies. 
It is in this context that we consider the question I raised at the beginning of this speech: the 
possible role of monetary policy in underpinning financial stability. 
While maintaining stable financial conditions was once understood to be part of the purview of 
monetary policy, that changed in the wake of the period of high inflation in Canada and many 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   other  advanced  economies  during  the  1970s  and  1980s.  That  experience,  together  with 
influential research on monetary policy, convinced the economics profession that maintaining 
price  stability  is  the  best  –  or  even  the  only  –  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
promoting a country’s economic and financial well-being. 
The  inflation-targeting  regime  we  have  today  is  an  outgrowth  of  that  experience.  Inflation 
targets have been very successful at maintaining price stability because they give everyone 
an easy way to understand monetary policy and, over time, create a virtuous circle in which 
realized inflation and expectations reinforce each other. 
A central tenet of the framework is that a central bank uses the policy interest rate solely to 
counter risks to inflation. If it tried to do other potentially conflicting things, such as keeping 
unemployment artificially low or containing volatility in the financial markets, its credibility could 
erode, the virtuous circle could break down and inflation could go back to being unpredictable. 
The question of whether central banks can use monetary policy to promote financial stability 
as well as price stability has re-emerged from time to time. It has often been couched in terms 
of  using  monetary  policy  to  prevent  or  deflate  asset-price  bubbles  –  perhaps  to  dampen 
irrational exuberance in stock markets. But the question is really more general, related to the 
use of monetary policy in countering an excessive buildup of leverage in the economy. 
Identifying such financial imbalances is not as straightforward as it sounds, and using monetary 
policy to address them was seen as a potential distraction from the task of targeting inflation. 
Moreover, during the Great Moderation, such imbalances were not seen as a serious obstacle 
to  stabilizing  the  economy.  Confronted  with  the  choice  of  whether  to  “lean”  or  to  “clean”  – 
leaning  against  emerging  financial  imbalances  by  keeping  interest  rates  higher  than  they 
otherwise would be or cleaning up in the event the risks they create are realized by providing 
stimulus – central bankers at that time generally agreed that cleaning would be best. 
That consensus was shattered by the global financial crisis. Unlike past episodes in recent 
history,  the  crisis  began  in  the  world’s  most  sophisticated  financial  systems,  causing 
widespread  economic  devastation.  It  stirred  up  persistent  and  formidable  headwinds  to 
economic growth, also making it very difficult for central banks to bring inflation back to target. 
After  this  brutal  wakeup  call,  economists  went  back  and  re-examined  the  possible  role 
monetary policy plays in setting the stage for crises. 
Looking at the historical evidence, it would be fair to conclude that few, if any, crises have been 
caused by monetary policy alone. The global financial crisis, like the Great Crash of 1929, also 
reflected  widespread  regulatory  shortcomings  and  other  weaknesses  in  a  number  of 
countries.1 But it is likely that monetary policy played at least a contributing role in encouraging 
the  buildup  of  leverage  and  asset  prices  in  a  fragile  financial  system.  The  nature  and 
importance of that role in the run-up to these and other crises is the subject of ongoing research 
and debate.2  
Trade-offs 
So, can monetary policy target inflation and still promote financial stability? This question can 
be addressed in two parts. First, let’s consider a case in which monetary policy is the only tool 
available  to  promote  both  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Later,  I’ll  consider  how 
monetary  policy  might  complement  other  policies  that  work  more  directly  on  the  financial 
system. 
                                                
1   See, for example, B. Eichengreen, Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, the Great Recession, and the Uses – 
and Misuses – of History (New York: Oxford University Press, 2015). 
2   See for example, M. K. Brunnermeier, “Bubbles and Central Banks: Historical Perspectives” (paper presented 
at the Econometric Society Winter Meetings, San Francisco, 3 January 2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Sometimes inflation targeting and financial stability are complementary. For example, if the 
economy  is  running  above  potential,  creating  inflationary  pressures,  while  financial 
vulnerabilities are also building, then both considerations point to tighter monetary policy. In 
retrospect, this appears to have been the case in many countries in the period leading up to 
the 2007–09 global financial crisis (Chart 1, see “Case 1”). 
The chart shows estimates by the International Monetary Fund of output gaps and credit gaps 
during that period; while such estimates are obviously imprecise, they suggest that in most of 
those countries, inflation targeting and financial stability may have been complementary, rather 
than conflicting goals. 
A second example is one in which the economy is in recession, or operating below potential, 
and the financial system is going through a phase of deleveraging and low asset prices (Chart 
1, see “Case 2”). In this case, easing monetary policy is the right action for both inflation control 
and financial stability purposes. An example is the United States after the 2007–09 crisis: easy 
monetary policy cushioned the economy and also helped heal a broken financial system. 
In both of these cases, there is no trade-off for monetary policy. There are other situations, 
however, where there could be tension between the two objectives. One is when the economy 
has been hit by a highly persistent adverse foreign demand shock – such as a recession in the 
economy of a major trading partner – while the domestic financial system is unimpaired (Chart 
1, see “Case 3”). 
In this case, inflation targeting calls for policy easing to support economic activity and return 
inflation sustainably to target. But that easing would also disproportionately affect domestic 
sectors  that  are  highly  sensitive  to  interest rates  like  housing  and  other consumer  durable 
goods,  encouraging  the  buildup  of  financial  vulnerabilities.  This  has  been  the  situation  in 
Canada for the past seven years, as reflected in increasing levels of household indebtedness 
and elevated house prices – although, as I’ll discuss later, regulatory measures have been 
used to mitigate the resulting financial system risks (Chart 2).3  
What can monetary policy do? 
Given the situation in Canada, we have focused our research on the low-demand, high-debt 
scenario. Empirical research shows that a buildup of household debt in the economy makes a 
financial  crisis  more  probable,  so  we  wanted  to  understand  the  costs  and  benefits  of  
 
 
leaning against financial imbalances through tighter monetary policy. Our researchers used 
several of the Bank’s economic models to examine these issues.4  
                                                
3   There is now a growing body of academic research examining these issues. See, for instance: M. Woodford, 
“Inflation  Targeting  and  Financial  Stability,”  NBER  Working  Papers  17967,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research,  2012;  International  Monetary  Fund  Staff  Report,  “Monetary  Policy  and  Financial  Stability,”  IMF, 
September 2015; M. Brunnermeier and Y. Sannikov, “Monetary Analysis: Price and Financial Stability,” paper 
presented at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, May 2014. 
4   The Macroprudential and Monetary Policy Model, the Terms-of-Trade Economic Model and the Large Empirical 
and  Semi-structural  Model.  These  models  are  described  in  detail  in  the  following  research  documents:  S. 
Alpanda, G. Cateau and C. Meh, “A Policy Model to Analyze Macroprudential Regulations and Monetary Policy,” 
Staff Working Paper 2014-6, Bank of Canada, 2014; J. Dorich, M. Johnston, R. Mendes, S. Murchison and Y. 
Zhang, “ToTEM II: An Updated Version of the Bank of Canada’s Quarterly Projection Model,” Technical Report 
No. 100, Bank of Canada, 2013; O. Gervais and M.-A. Gosselin, “Analyzing and Forecasting the Canadian 
Economy through the LENS Model,” Technical Report No. 102, Bank of Canada, 2014. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   On the benefits side, they estimated that increasing the Bank’s policy rate by 1 percentage 
point for one year would reduce real household debt by 2 per cent over five years.5 Everything 
else  being  equal,  less  household  debt  reduces  the  vulnerability  of  the  economy  and  the 
financial system; the results, however, suggest that this difference may be very small. On the 
cost side, the same increase in the policy rate might cut output by up to 1 per cent and push 
inflation down by 0.5 percentage point relative to what it would have been otherwise. While, 
like any empirical results, these findings are a product of the methodology used, it is noteworthy 
that they are consistent across standard models – and indeed, similar results have been found 
using broadly similar approaches in other countries. 
These results suggest that, even though monetary policy could, in principle, be used to reduce 
vulnerabilities in the financial system, it may be too costly in practice. Interest rates affect all 
parts of the economy and are too blunt an instrument to address an imbalance in just one part 
of the economy – household credit. If you have a specific imbalance, you need a specific tool 
to address it. 
The analysis relies on a number of assumptions about how monetary policy affects debt and 
how  debt  affects financial  stability.  The  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability  may  depend  on  the  specific  economic  conditions  in  which  we  find  ourselves.6 
Moreover,  the  processes  resulting  in  financial  cycles,  with  periods  of  unsustainable  debt 
buildup,  occasional  crises  and  periods  of  deleveraging,  are  not  well  captured  by  standard 
models.7 We have more work to do before we can be fully confident about our conclusions. 
Here, I would like to focus on one critical aspect of the discussion: that monetary policy can 
affect financial stability only through its effects on household debt, even though it affects a wide 
swath of the real economy. However, we also need to envisage a case where the effects of 
monetary policy on financial stability are not limited to one sector, as in the case we just saw, 
but spread across many different parts of the financial system. In that case, monetary policy’s 
ability to get in all the cracks of the financial system – to paraphrase former Federal Reserve 
Governor Jeremy Stein – would give it a more powerful influence on financial stability.8  
Another aspect to consider is that risks to financial stability have two elements: the underlying 
vulnerability and the trigger that could cause a risk to materialize. Both elements are part of 
our risk-management approach to monetary policy. 
Over time, stimulative monetary policy may cause vulnerabilities to build up. That was part of 
our  thinking  in  late  2013,  when  inflation  was  running  persistently  below  target:  we  were 
concerned about the downside risks to inflation, but decided against easing policy further to 
avoid exacerbating growing household indebtedness and elevated house prices. 
Failing  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  an  economic  downturn  could,  however,  worsen  the 
contraction and cause a crisis. This scenario was part of our thinking at the beginning of last 
year,  when  Canada’s  economy  was  hit  by  the  collapse  in  oil  prices  and  we  cut  our  policy 
interest  rate.  Although  we  knew  that  lowering  the  policy  rate  could  worsen  vulnerabilities 
related to household debt, we also knew that it would counter the risk that growth would crater 
and lessen the probability that the oil price shock would trigger financial stability risks. 
                                                
5   These values are based on work by Gorea, Kryvtsov and Takamura (forthcoming). 
6   This issue is analyzed in more detail in Alpanda and Ueberfeldt (forthcoming). 
7   Work is under way on models that capture some of these factors. See, for example, A. Auclert, “Monetary Policy 
and the Redistribution Channel,” Princeton University, 2015. 
8   J. Stein, “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses,” (speech to a research 
symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, 7 February 2013). A similar 
conclusion flows from the analysis reviewed in J. Boivin, T. Lane and C. Meh, “Should Monetary Policy Be Used 
to Counteract Financial Imbalances?” Bank of Canada Review (Summer 2010): 23-36. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   Two tools – or three? 
This discussion suggests that any adaptation of monetary policy to financial stability objectives 
is, to say the least, far from straightforward. 
Fortunately, monetary policy is not the only game in town. There are also macroprudential 
tools – regulatory measures that can be used to promote not just the safety of an individual 
financial institution, but also that of the entire financial system. 
Macroprudential  tools  can  be  used  in  two  ways.  One  is  to  foster  a  more  resilient  financial 
system on an ongoing basis. To give just one example, regulators can establish ceilings on 
mortgage loan-to-value ratios on an ongoing basis, so that any correction in housing prices is 
less likely to create stress for the financial system. With a more resilient system, all of the 
financial stability concerns I have been discussing become more manageable. 
Authorities could also, in principle, adjust macroprudential tools to dampen financial cycles – 
tightening them when leverage is building up and risk taking is increasing, and easing those 
requirements when that cycle turns. For example, regulators can lower loan-to-value ratios in 
response  to  indications  of  rising  household  sector  vulnerabilities.  Another  example  is  the 
countercyclical  capital  buffer  introduced  as  part  of  the  Basel  III  reform  of  bank  capital 
requirements. 
Such countercyclical measures are designed, in part, to weaken the feedback loop between 
asset prices and credit growth that can lead to the kind of financial excesses that set the stage 
for a crisis. The track record of countercyclical measures in leaning against a financial cycle is 
not yet nearly sufficient to form a definite view of their practical effectiveness, however. 
The  changes  in  mortgage  finance  regulations  that  we  have  seen  in  the  last  eight  years  in 
Canada  include  a  combination  of  these  elements.  When  the  government  successively 
increased the required down payments and tightened other regulations, it was partly to reduce 
the taxpayer’s longer-term exposure to the housing market and partly to restrain the ongoing 
buildup of financial system vulnerabilities associated with rising household indebtedness and 
housing prices. 
If  the  effectiveness  of  macroprudential  policies  could  be  relied  on,  would  that  mean  that 
monetary policy is off the hook, allowing the Bank to focus on its inflation target and leave 
macroprudential policies to take care of financial stability? 
Perhaps, but not necessarily. There might be significant spillovers between monetary policy 
and  macroprudential  policies.  When  the  government  imposes  tighter  requirements  on 
mortgage insurance, for example, it likely reduces demand for housing, which may, in turn, 
have a negative effect on growth and inflation. Household indebtedness may also affect the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy,  for  instance,  by  influencing  households’ 
willingness to spend out of their disposable incomes. On the flip side, if prolonged low interest 
rates encourage people to take on more debt, financial stability concerns grow. So we need a 
better grasp of how monetary policy and macroprudential measures interact. 
Even  if  such  spillovers  are  important,  a  clear  assignment  of  policies  could  be  effective  in 
achieving  both  objectives: monetary  policy  to  target  inflation,  macroprudential  measures to 
target financial stability. Each could operate independently, focusing only on its own objective.9 
The resulting combination of policies – a Nash equilibrium – could both achieve the inflation 
target and ensure an acceptable degree of financial stability (Chart 3). 
Under certain conditions, as long as monetary policy has a larger effect on inflation than it does 
on financial stability risk and macroprudential policy has a larger effect on financial stability risk 
                                                
9   This argument is advanced, for example, in L. E. O. Svensson, “Monetary Policy and Macroprudential Policy: 
Different and Separate” (presentation to the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 59th Economic Conference, 
Boston, Massachusetts, 2 October 2015). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   than it does on inflation, there would be no need, in theory, for the agencies responsible to 
coordinate their actions explicitly. They would need to share information with each other only 
so that each could use its own policy tool to account for the spillovers from the other policy on 
its own objective. 
This might mean, for example, that the central bank would need to run a more stimulative 
policy than it would have otherwise to offset the effect of macroprudential policies, and the 
macroprudential authority would impose more stringent measures than it would have otherwise 
to counteract the leverage and risk taking generated by looser monetary policy. In the end, we 
could  see  an  increase  in  the  level  of  households’  indebtedness  without  a  significant 
deterioration in their creditworthiness. This has been the situation in Canada over the past few 
years. 
This logic suggests that it is very important to have a public sector body with both the power 
and the paramount responsibility to use macroprudential tools to promote financial stability. 
This setup would leave monetary policy free to target inflation unfettered by possible financial 
stability  concerns. The appropriate  body  might be  a  committee,  as  is  currently  the  case  in 
Canada,  where  the  potentially  relevant  tools  are  shared  among  several  public  sector 
institutions. 
However,  even  with  an  ideal  set  of  institutional  arrangements,  there  may  be  limits  to  how 
independently  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  can  work.  Regulatory  measures 
designed to contain risk might, if carried to extremes, distort incentives to allocate resources 
to their most productive uses. For example, some financial institutions may reduce their lending 
to  riskier  but  innovative  companies.  It  is  also  possible  that,  mindful  of  such  adverse 
consequences,  regulators  may  refrain  from  going  as  far  as  would  be  needed  to  preserve 
financial stability. And that, in turn, could inhibit the central bank from providing sufficient policy 
easing to support the economy. 
Thus, it is possible that, in a situation of sustained weak aggregate demand, relying primarily 
on  monetary  policy 
that 
macroprudential policy cannot, or should not, offset. In such circumstances, fiscal policy may 
be called upon to provide stimulus, particularly since it is likely to be more effective at low 
interest rates. Of course, fiscal policy also has its limits, since an excessive buildup of public 
debt can create its own problems for both the economy and the financial system. We saw that 
in  Canada  in  the  1990s.  But  these  costs  need  to  be  set  against  concerns  that  prolonged 
monetary policy stimulus may result in an excessive buildup of private sector vulnerabilities. 
These issues are relevant to the renewed discussion of fiscal policy that is now taking place in 
Canada. 
to  provide  stimulus  may 
financial  vulnerabilities 
lead 
to 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. 
During the years since the global financial crisis, we have been doing a lot of thinking and 
research to improve our understanding of the nexus between monetary policy and financial 
stability. This is a key question in this year’s renewal of our inflation-control agreement. 
We will need to continue to examine these issues in the period ahead. Indeed, research on the 
nexus between monetary policy and financial stability is an important element of the Bank of 
Canada’s 2016–18 medium-term plan.10  
                                                
10   Central Banking for a New Era: The Bank of Canada’s 2016–18 Medium-Term Plan. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   One thing is clear, though: monetary policy cannot take primary responsibility for maintaining 
financial stability. Other, prudential, tools are required to build a resilient financial system and, 
where needed, to address increasing vulnerabilities. 
Questions remain, however, about the financial stability effects of monetary policy itself and 
what, if anything, should be done to address them. Some of these questions pertain to how 
aggressively a central bank should strive to return inflation sustainably to target in the face of 
other economic forces. When the economy is hit by a large and persistent adverse shock, 
should  we  accept  greater  downside  risks  to  inflation  to  avoid  exacerbating  financial 
imbalances? Or indeed, given such imbalances, should we tighten policy less aggressively as 
the economy returns to potential to avoid triggering financial system risks? 
For the foreseeable future, we are not likely to agree on a formula for addressing these issues. 
We are inevitably in the realm of judgment informed by the available evidence and analysis. 
That  element  of  judgment  in  weighing  financial  stability  considerations,  including  the 
implications of our own actions, is central to our risk-management approach to monetary policy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
