  Ignazio Visco: Fact-finding inquiry on the Italian banking and financial 
system and the protection of savings, also regarding supervision, crisis 
resolution and European deposit insurance 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  before  the  Sixth  Standing 
Committee (Finance and Treasury) of the Italian Senate, Rome, 19 April 2016. 
 The macroeconomic context and its impact on banks 
From  2008 to the  present  day  Italy  has  been  buffeted  by  the  worst  economic  crisis  of  the 
post-war period. 
The trouble started with the explosion of defaults in the US subprime mortgage sector and 
soon spread to the markets for several complex and difficult-to-value assets, dubbed “toxic” 
When  it  became  apparent  that  several  European  banks  –  but  not  Italian  ones  –  also  had 
considerable  exposure  to  these  instruments,  the  euro-area  interbank  market  all  but 
collapsed. 
Then  came  Europe’s  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  originated  in  Greece  and  rekindled  the 
financial  crisis.  Beginning  in  the  summer  of  2011  the  tensions  spread  to  Italy;  the  further 
contraction  in  international  interbank  lending  was  countered  by  the  ECB’s  extraordinary 
refinancing operations. Interest rates on Italian government bonds soared far above those of 
the corresponding securities in other euro-area countries, especially Germany. Only with the 
announcement, in the summer of 2012, of exceptional monetary policy measures designed 
to combat unjustified and excessive market rate rises in the euro area did the tensions begin 
to  subside.  Inevitably,  however,  they  had  already  been  transmitted  to  the  banking  market 
and, coupled with the drying up of the wholesale funding market, led to a sharp increase in 
the  cost  of  credit  and  a  consequent  thinning  of  supply.  This,  in  turn,  exerted  a  brake  on 
manufacturing  activity  which  lasted  over  three  years  and  was  compounded  by  unresolved 
structural problems in Italy’s economy. 
Europe is now slowly exiting the crisis. The recession’s legacy is especially heavy in Italy: the 
loss in real GDP compared with the pre-crisis peak amounts to around 9 percentage points, 
while industrial production has shrunk by about a quarter; in the euro area as a whole, output 
has generally held steady and industrial production has contracted by around 10 per cent, 
much less than in Italy. 
Developments  in  national  banking  systems  have  closely  mirrored  those  in  the  respective 
economies. In the first phase the crisis hit the systems that were exposed to toxic assets: the 
United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  a  number  of  euro-area  countries.  The  result  was 
widespread bank failures, countered by large-scale state support. 
Italy’s banking system, which was not exposed to toxic assets, emerged almost unscathed 
from  the  early  stages  of  the  crisis.  It  was,  however,  profoundly  shaken  by  the  deep  and 
prolonged recession. In those years Italian banks, whose main business consists in lending 
to firms, recorded heavy loan losses: in the period from 2008 to 2015 these totalled about 
€200 billion, eroding 73 per cent on average of operating income. 
The banks responded with large capital increases. At the end of last year, the ratio of their 
core equity capital to risk-weighted assets reached 12.3 per cent, compared with 7.1 per cent 
in 2007. The average capitalization gap with respect to European banks as a whole, whose 
core  equity  ratio  was  13.6  per  cent  at  the  end  of  last  year,  also  reflects  the  massive 
recapitalizations with public money that occurred in several other euro-area countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  All  in  all,  Italy’s  banking  system  proved  resilient.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  IMF  in 
September  2013,  in  the  foreword  to  its  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP),  in 
which it gave a favourable judgment on Italy’s supervisory system.1 
The Bank of Italy’s supervisory action 
Banks specializing in traditional retail services – as is the case in Italy – are more vulnerable 
than  others  to  periods  of  recession,  especially  if  deep  and  prolonged.  The  exceptional 
contraction  of  the  Italian  economy  has  dented  banks’  earnings  capacity and  saddled  them 
with a large volume of non-performing loans, reflecting widespread business failures and the 
decline in employment. When, as occurred on a number of occasions, the repercussions of 
the  crisis  were  aggravated  by  imprudent  policies  or  episodes  of  mismanagement,  the 
deterioration of banks’ assets became critical. 
In  this  difficult  context,  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  action  prevented  the  onset  of  a 
profound and system-wide banking crisis. Where necessary, it adopted corrective measures 
within the scope of the powers conferred on it by law. Only with the transposition of CRD IV 
in 2015 did these powers become more incisive, making it possible to remove individual bank 
executives or to impose changes in management and control bodies, powers which the Bank 
of Italy had long advocated and whose absence had been heavily criticized by the IMF. For 
the  long  period  in  which  these  powers  were  lacking,  moral  suasion  took their  place,  albeit 
with the objective limits this entailed. 
Well before the launch of the single supervisory mechanism in November 2014, the Bank of 
Italy  called  on  credit  institutions  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases  and  make  their  balance 
sheets  more  transparent.  Inspections  of  write-downs  of  non-performing  loans  at  the  main 
banks  in  2012–13  partly  determined  the  adoption  of  stricter  provisioning  policies  and  the 
consequent raising of these loans’ coverage ratios. This restored the credibility of the largest 
intermediaries when they turned to the market to raise capital. The capital resources raised, 
in excess of €40 billion from 2008 onwards, allowed banks to comply with increasingly strict 
rules even in adverse economic conditions. Calls for capital strengthening were flanked by 
robust  corrective  action  on  corporate  governance,  risk  measurement  and  control 
methodologies, and internal controls. 
Taken together, these measures enabled Italy’s banking system – with just a few exceptions 
–  to  pass  the  European-wide  comprehensive  assessment.  But  even  constant,  incisive 
supervision  cannot  prevent  the  outbreak  of  financial  ills,  especially  in  a  fragile  economic 
environment. 
Italian  and  European  law  and  the  prudential  supervisory  model  successfully  ushered  in  by 
the  Basel  Committee  promote the  business  independence  of  banks.  Bank  executives  take 
most of their decisions without prior supervisory control; they are responsible for their actions 
first  and  foremost  to  the  shareholders.  The  supervisory  authority  cannot  systematically 
encroach  on  their  decisions,  even  when  they  adopt  imprudent  or  short-sighted  policies. 
Banks are businesses, after all. They are subject to market forces; their directors must be in 
a position to take fully independent decisions. 
The success of supervision in preserving sound and prudent management depends on many 
factors,  not  least  the  full  transparency  of  directors,  management  and  shareholders  in  their 
dealings  with  supervisors.  However  widely  it  has  exercised  its  powers  of  sanction  and 
notwithstanding numerous reports to the judiciary, banks have not always reacted promptly, 
                                                
1  
“The  Italian  financial  system  is  coping  with  a  severe  and  prolonged  recession  at  home  and  the  crisis  in 
Europe. The system has so far managed to overcome these shocks and indeed expand domestic deposits 
and  build  additional  capital  buffers.  In  contrast  to  other  countries,  the  latter  was  accomplished  without 
significant state support”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  nor  have  the  corrective  measures  adopted  always  been  sufficient.  Rash  and  occasionally 
fraudulent  behaviour  by  top  management  are  also  partly  to  blame  for  the  deterioration  in 
banks’ situation. 
Supervision  aims  to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  crisis  occurring  and  to  mitigate  its 
consequences. As a rule anomalies and irregularities emerge or are confirmed following in-
depth inspections. Whenever they have been identified, the Bank of Italy has acted with the 
maximum determination. Any suspected criminal acts have been reported immediately to the 
public  prosecutor’s  office.  The  situation  has  not  changed  with  the  entry  into  effect  of  the 
single  supervisory  mechanism;  the  inspections  of  the  banks  classified  as  significant, 
including those that brought to light the irregularities at the two former popolari banks, Banca 
Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca, were conducted by the Bank of Italy’s inspectors, 
and the schedules for the investigations and any subsequent interventions were drawn up in 
full agreement with the Bank of Italy. 
Identifying irregularities or illegal acts is neither easy nor automatic. There is a widely held 
belief  among  the  public  that  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  and  investigative  powers  are 
limitless.  On  the  contrary,  pinpointing  anomalies  that  are  sometimes  carefully  concealed 
requires  painstaking  in-depth  analysis  and  finely-tuned  investigative  techniques,  such  as 
confiscations and searches, which are exclusively judicial powers. 
Despite this, the Bank of Italy’s supervision has dealt decisively with problem banks, enabling 
them to repair imbalances in their economic and financial situation. Most of these cases are 
not known to the public at large: with few exceptions, the Banking Law stipulates that any 
news, information or data that is acquired by the Bank of Italy in the course of its supervisory 
activities is covered by professional secrecy. 
In  some  instances  (Banca  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena,  Banca  Carige  and,  more  recently, 
Banca  Popolare  di  Vicenza  and  Veneto  Banca),  given  the  banks’  poor  economic  and 
financial conditions, weak liquidity positions, and grave irregularities, restoring the necessary 
conditions for staying in business required a radical shake-up of directors and management 
and substantial capital increases, some of which are now being finalized. 
For  an  analysis  of  specific  aspects  relating  to  these  banks’  conditions  and  a  detailed 
description  of  the  supervisory  action  undertaken  by  the  Bank  of  Italy,  please  consult  our 
website.2 For now, I will limit my observations to the following main points. 
Over the years the Bank of Italy’s inspections of Monte dei Paschi di Siena examined all the 
main areas of operation: capital adequacy, liquidity position, financial risks, performance of 
the Italian government bond portfolio, credit quality, and the adequacy of management and 
internal control bodies. 
Little by little, as the off- and on-site inspections began to pinpoint problems and shortfalls, 
the Bank of Italy intervened with increasing forcefulness. In November 2011 this culminated 
in the summoning of the top executives of Monte dei Paschi and its Foundation (the principal 
shareholder  at  the  time),  who  were  asked  to  implement  rapid  and  sweeping  change, 
something  that  came  about  in  the  months  that  followed  with  the  appointment  of  a  new 
Managing  Director  and  the  replacement  of  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Board  of 
Directors and Board of Auditors, as well as a major management shake-up. 
As is well known, the bank’s previous management had failed to transmit to supervisors the 
information that was vital for a full recognition of the scale and nature of several operations 
that had been carried out in violation of the law. The Bank of Italy imposed heavy sanctions 
on those responsible and brought the case to the attention of the judiciary, to which it offered 
its full cooperation. 
                                                
2  https://www.bancaditalia.it/media/approfondimenti/index.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  All  in  all,  the  actions  taken  enabled  anomalous  high-risk  practices  to  be  identified  and 
brought  to  an  end,  impelling  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena  to  reinforce  its  organizational 
safeguards  and  controls.  The  bank  continues  to  be  closely  monitored  nonetheless.  The 
supervisory  review  and  evaluation  process  (SREP) for  2015  highlighted  the  persistence of 
several  weaknesses,  most  importantly  the  share  of  non-performing  loans.  This  was  partly 
due to the highly expansionary lending strategy pursued before the crisis, which the bank is 
now actively addressing. Structural solutions have also been called for, such as mergers with 
other credit institutions. 
In the case of Carige, in recent years the Bank of Italy’s supervisory activity focused on the 
group’s  weak  capital  position,  which  failed  to  meet  the  highest  standards  of  Basel  III  that 
were about to be introduced, the progressive deterioration in the quality of its loan portfolio, 
and malfunctions in corporate governance arrangements and controls. 
The inspections conducted in 2013 confirmed these weaknesses and brought to light further, 
more clearly detailed issues, such as the existence of conflicts of interest on the part of the 
group’s top management. They also stressed the need for decisive and timely intervention to 
make  a  clean  break  with  the past,  enabling  a  proper rebalancing  of  corporate governance 
powers and the adoption of strategic repositioning and capital strengthening plans. Following 
the inspections, sanctions were applied and the public prosecutor’s office informed. 
The new top executives appointed at the end of 2013 launched a restructuring plan in line 
with the requests advanced by the supervisory authorities. Despite the results obtained, the 
volume  of  non-performing  loans  remains  substantial  and,  as  for  other  banks,  the 
unfavourable macroeconomic context continues to pose major challenges to earnings. 
Events at the two former popolari banks came to the public’s attention when there were new 
reports  of  inquiries  launched  by  the  judiciary,  with  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  had  been 
cooperating  for  some  time.  In  the  debate  that  ensued  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  actions  were 
repeatedly  called  into  question,  often  based  on  mistaken  premises  or  fundamental 
misunderstandings. 
In the case of Banca Popolare di Vicenza, most of the criticism was directed at the price of 
the shares and their funding by the bank. 
On the first aspect, it is important to specify that Italy’s Civil Code assigns responsibility for 
setting the price of shares to the general shareholders’ meeting, which votes on a proposal 
by the Board of Directors. The Bank of Italy has no direct power in the determination of share 
prices, although it is entitled to question the reasonableness of the procedures followed and 
the objectivity of the criteria adopted to set the price, which it did. Given the exclusive power 
of  the  management  bodies  in  this  instance,  the  Bank  of  Italy  could  only  advance 
methodological criticisms but not value judgments. The Banca Popolare di Vicenza did too 
little  for  too  long  and  its  underlying  inertia  over  the  corrective  action  was  therefore 
sanctioned. Only in 2011 did it issue guidelines for fixing the share price, using an external 
consultancy  service  to  do  so.  As  a  result,  the  price  stayed  unchanged  for  several  years 
before  being  drastically  reduced  (as  had  already  occurred  for  the  shares  of  other  listed 
banks) following findings originating from the anomalies that had emerged in trading in own 
shares. 
Regarding  this  second  aspect,  in  2013  supervisors  intervened  on  several  occasions  to 
remind  Banca  Popolare  di  Vicenza  of  its  duty  to  comply  in  full  with  the  prudential  limits 
envisaged by law before 2014 and to call to  its attention the need to not generate among 
shareholders expectations of certain and immediate liquidity of their holdings and guaranteed 
minimum returns. 
In the course of 2014 it emerged that the bank was buying its own shares without having first 
sought the necessary authorization. In accordance with the new European supervisory set-
up, the Bank of Italy planned a targeted inspection for early 2015 to verify these operations. 
The  inspection  was  again  conducted,  within  the  single  supervisory  framework,  by  Bank  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Italy staff. In addition to revealing unauthorized share buy-backs by Popolare di Vicenza, it 
highlighted a further problem with the funding of the shares issued in recapitalizations: the 
bank had not deducted from the supervisory capital the funds raised against the substantial 
loans  it  had  disbursed  to  subscribers  of  its  shares,  as  instead  required  by  prudential 
regulations. 
Already  after  the  initial  findings  of  the  inspection  the  bank  had  been  called  on  to  take 
corrective  measures,  including  a  virtually  complete  change  of  management.  Once  the 
inspection had been completed the bank was ordered to restore capital adequacy buffers to 
regulatory levels, draw up a new business plan, and strengthen its organization and internal 
control  functions.  In  accordance  with  the  new  business  plan,  the  bank  then  passed  a 
resolution approving a comprehensive plan to strengthen its capital and radically overhaul its 
governance, including its transformation into a joint stock company, now completed, a €1.5 
billion capital increase, and stock market listing. 
In the case of Veneto Banca, an inspection carried out in 2013 found major anomalies of a 
technical and administrative nature, highlighting the practice of disbursing loans to customers 
against purchases of the bank’s own shares, which were then not deducted from supervisory 
capital. We  did  everything  in  our  power:  prohibited  the  bank from  disbursing  new  loans  to 
corporate  executives;  called  a  meeting  of  the  Board  of  Directors  to  examine  the  bank’s 
overall  situation  and  pass  the  appropriate  resolutions;  read  out  to  the  meeting  of 
shareholders the official request for action to ensure that it was aware of the bank’s situation 
and  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  of  Italy;  and  imposed  fines  on  the  persons 
responsible. 
At the same time, where it was not in our power to intervene directly, we used strong moral 
suasion, calling on the bank to replace all of its management boards and to plan a merger at 
the earliest opportunity. 
The bank’s response at the time was unsatisfactory. It did not make all the required changes 
to its governance and continued to engage in conduct contrary to the principles of sound and 
prudent management, such as granting loans to subscribers of the capital increase made in 
2014,  which  emerged  in  the  course  of  the  follow-up  inspection  in  2015.  Because  of  the 
consequent reduction of supervisory capital and further rapid deterioration in the quality of 
assets, the situation could only be remedied through a €1 billion capital increase, now under 
way.  The  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  action,  ensuring  continuity  with  the  past  but  now 
endowed  with  more  incisive  powers  under  CRD  IV,  brought  about  the  replacement  of  the 
bank’s  president  and  most  of  its  senior  executives  and  is  currently  monitoring  the 
implementation of a more radical reform of corporate governance that began with the bank’s 
transformation into a joint stock company and will be completed with its stock market listing. 
As  regards  other  banks,  delays  and  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  governing  boards  have 
gone  hand  in  hand  with  a  marked  worsening  of  their  corporate  profiles,  particularly  their 
credit  risk,  and  an  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  the  market  to  provide  capital  support, 
inevitably resulting in the appointment of a special administrator. This is the case of the four 
banks placed under resolution in the month of November. Before discussing these banks in 
greater detail I would like describe briefly the changes that have affected the management of 
banking crises and determined how these situations are handled. 
Changes to the framework for banking crisis management 
Before 2015 the Bank of Italy’s objectives in handling banking crises were to minimize the 
impact  on  customers,  the  payment  system,  and  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  In  many 
instances,  extremely  fragile  banks  were  taken  over  by  healthier  ones.  When  a  bank  was 
likely to fail, special administration was set in motion and in the worst cases the bank was 
wound up. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Special administration can only take place if the legal conditions for it are met; these include 
serious  violations  of  regulations,  serious  irregularities  of  management,  and  serious  capital 
losses. The definition of serious applies to irregularities and violations of the law which have 
a  wide-ranging  impact  on  the  bank’s  situation  (for  example,  repeated  violations  of  anti-
money-laundering  legislation,  serious  and  frequent  conflicts  of  interest,  and  opaque 
ownership structures), which must cease as soon as possible, and which the bank is unlikely 
to be able to rectify on its own. Capital losses are considered serious when the regulatory 
minimum capital adequacy ratios are not observed. 
Special administration does not come out of the blue. As a rule, it is preceded by intensive 
discussions with the Bank of Italy’s supervisors, repeated attempts to remedy the situation, 
and a number of inspections, the last of which usually ascertains that it is no longer possible 
to restore normal business conditions or comply  with capital adequacy ratios. This is what 
happened in the case of the four banks for which a resolution procedure was activated and 
for the others that were placed in special administration. 
The  latter  entails  the  dissolution  of  the  bank’s  administrative  and  control  bodies  and  their 
replacement by one or more administrators and a supervisory board. The administrators act 
independently  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  which  only  authorizes  certain  decisions  of  particular 
importance. The functions of the shareholders’ meeting are suspended until the procedure 
comes to a close. 
The administrators are charged with ascertaining the true situation of the bank, eliminating 
irregularities and establishing the conditions to prevent their recurrence, as well as favouring 
a  solution  to  the  crisis  that  is  in  the  interest  of  depositors.  The  task  of  ascertaining  and 
eliminating the irregularities may take several months. The longest and most complex phase 
is generally the search for solutions. 
Since 2008 there have been 65 cases of special administration, most of them ending with the 
bank’s  return  to  ordinary  operation.  In  about  20  cases,  the  outcome  was  the  compulsory 
administrative liquidation of the bank, which occurred more frequently during the crisis. There 
were no major implications for customers, however, as the failing banks’ exit from the market 
was  managed  either  by  finding  other  credit  institutions  interested  in  an  acquisition  or  by 
covering the losses with interventions by the Interbank Deposit Protection Fund or the Mutual 
Bank  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund.  This  last  solution  stemmed  from  the  participating  banks’ 
desire to avoid further outlays in the event of liquidation (the principle of least cost). 
More recently, the economic crisis and the raising of prudential requirements have made it 
rather  impracticable  to  resort  to  mergers  such  as  those  that  had  helped  in  the  past  to 
overcome  bank  difficulties  without  causing  disruption.  Moreover,  the  new  European 
regulatory framework has brought about some radical changes. In particular, the Interbank 
Deposit  Protection  Fund’s  scope  for  action  has  been  restricted  by  the  European 
Commission’s Directorate-General for Competition, which now considers any intervention by 
deposit guarantee schemes other than the reimbursement of deposits to be tantamount to 
state  aid,  even  though  it  is  privately  financed  and  decided  independently  by  the  fund’s 
management bodies.3 
Following  a  Communication  issued  in  August  2013,  the  D-G  for  Competition  has  made 
intervention  of  this  type  conditional  on  burden  sharing,  whereby  in  the  event  of  a  bank’s 
                                                
3 
In March 2015 the D-G for Competition initiated a procedure against Italy under Article 108(2) of the Treaty on 
the Functioning of the European Union for presumed violation of the regulation on state aid in connection with 
support measures taken by the Interbank Deposit Protection Fund in favour of Banca Tercas, which allowed 
the crisis to be overcome without involving savers. After lengthy discussions between the Ministry of Economy 
and  the  Commission,  during  which  the  Bank  of  Italy  submitted  several  memos,  in  December  2015  the 
Commission  decided  to  bring  the  procedure  to  a  close  with  a  negative  decision,  which has been  appealed 
before the European Court of Justice. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  failure  the  face  value  of  its  shares  and  subordinated  bonds  must  be  reduced  or  the  latter 
converted into equity before any recourse is made to public funds. Burden sharing is not the 
same as the ‘bail-in’ principle, which was introduced on 1 January this year with the adoption, 
in November 2015, of the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD). The bail-in rules 
provide that, before the National Resolution Fund (or, more generally, public funds) can be 
utilized, the face value not only of shares and subordinated bonds but also of senior claims 
such as ordinary bonds and deposits of over €100,000 must be reduced. A bail-in respects 
insolvency  rankings:  therefore,  it  is  applied  first  to  shares,  then  to  other  equity  and 
subordinated instruments, and then to unsecured debts, including ordinary bonds issued by 
the bank in difficulty. Until the end of 2018, corporate unsecured deposits contribute to the 
same extent. 
The crises at the four banks subject to the resolution procedure 
It is in this new context that the crisis of the four banks resolved in November last year was 
managed.  Details  of  how  the  four  situations  unfolded  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of  Italy’s 
website,  to  which  I  refer  you.4  On  this  occasion, I  will  confine  my  remarks  to  some  of  the 
most widely debated aspects that require clarification. 
The  Banca  delle  Marche  group  had  a  number  of  weaknesses,  mainly  stemming  from  its 
governance  and  control structures  and  poor credit  quality. These  problems  emerged more 
clearly from the three inspections conducted in rapid succession in 2010 and 2011. Based on 
the findings of the inspection at the bank, major corrective measures were called for. When 
an  inspection  at  another  bank  brought  to  light  anomalous  transactions  involving  the 
Managing Director, Banca delle Marche was asked in June 2012 to find a replacement as 
soon  as  possible.  At  that  time  it  was  not  in  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  power  to  remove  bank 
executives. A new Managing Director was appointed in September of the same year. Also in 
view of Banca delle Marche’s delay in implementing the corrective measures requested, at 
the end of 2012 a new inspection was ordered to assess whether Banca delle Marche had 
allocated sufficient provisions for credit risk. The bank’s efforts to remedy the shortfall were 
found to be highly unsatisfactory and in  March 2013 the inspection was extended to other 
risk profiles; it was brought to a close in September 2013. The findings were of such gravity 
that the bank was placed first under provisional management and then on 15 October 2013 
into special administration. 
Inspections at the Carife group focused primarily on the level of risk of its credit portfolio and 
on  its  capital  adequacy.  On  more  than  one  occasion  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  supervisory  arm 
reiterated  the  need  for  a  reorganization  of  the  group  and  a  strengthening  of  its  control 
functions.  Carife’s  liquidity  profile  was  also  closely  monitored  and  the  strains  were  only 
overcome  through  the  issue  of  government-guaranteed  bonds.  Owing  to  the  delays  in 
making  the  corrections  requested,  at  the  end  of  2012  a  full-scope  inspection  of  the  group 
was  set  in  motion.  Owing  to  the  extremely  serious  nature  of  the  situation  that  emerged  – 
there  was  no  possibility  of  the  group  restoring  the  necessary  economic  and  financial 
equilibrium on its own in the short run – a special administrator was appointed in May 2013. 
In 2010 and 2012 two inspections of the Cassa di Rispamio di Chieti group found problems 
of  disorderly  growth,  irregularities,  and  poor  management.  The  Bank  of  Italy  ordered  the 
subsidiary’s merger into the parent group and the removal of the Chief Executive Office, who 
also  held  the  position  of  Managing  Director  of  the  Cassa  di  Risparmio  di  Chieti.  The 
supervisory action was then stepped up and the bank was invited on several occasions to 
take  strong  measures  to  put  the  problems  to  rights.  The  feedback  from  the  executives  of 
Carichieti indicated that they were largely unaware of the problems. It was therefore decided 
in 2014 to conduct another inspection. This not only found a significant deterioration in the 
                                                
4  http://www.bancaditalia.it/media/approfondimenti/2015/info-soluzione-crisi/index.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  bank’s  profitability  and  capital  base  but  also  revealed  extremely  serious  irregularities  and 
regulatory  violations,  such  as  the  persistent  obscuring  of  information  from  supervisors, 
serious administrative anomalies, lack of independence from the controlling bank Foundation 
as  regards  decision-making  processes,  and  negligent  management  of  relations  with 
associated  parties.  Accordingly,  on  5  September  2014  Carichieti  was  put  into  special 
administration. 
Following a series of delays in responding to the Bank of Italy’s requests, an inspection of 
Banca Etruria was launched towards the end of 2012. Initially, its purpose was to verify the 
adequacy of the bank’s credit risk provisions but in March 2013 it was extended into a full-
scope  inspection.  It  ended  in  September  2013  having  ascertained  that  the  management 
boards  were  unable  to  restore the  bank to  health  and  that there  had been  a  considerable 
deterioration in claims. The capital adequacy ratio was above the regulatory minimum thanks 
to the €100 million increase made in August 2013. Hence, Banca Etruria was asked to take 
resolute steps to remedy the problems, including the appointment of temporary management 
and above all a merger with another bank of suitable standing. The Board of Directors, of 
which half of the members, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman had been replaced, failed to 
appoint temporary management and, citing the need to safeguard its local roots and ensure 
the bank’s independence, refused to entertain the only official offer of a merger made of its 
own volition by Banca Popolare di Vicenza. The Bank of Italy increased meetings with senior 
management,  calling  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  group  would  have  difficulty  in  the  future 
ensuring compliance with capital adequacy requirements. As no solution was found, a new 
inspection  was  conducted  in  November  2014,  which  identified  serious  capital  losses  and 
serious irregularities. On 10 February 2015 the bank was put into special administration. 
As a result of the various inspections carried out at the four banks, fines were levied on the 
executives totalling more than €11 million. All the inspection reports were forwarded without 
delay to the judicial authorities. 
The  administrators  appointed  for  the  four  banks  spent  considerable  time  seeking  market 
solutions, contacting a number of banking groups and other intermediaries. However, owing 
to the lack of interest in banks burdened with a large volume of non-performing loans and a 
very  low  capital  base,  it  proved  impossible  to  find  a  solution  involving  mergers  or 
acquisitions. At this point the Interbank Deposit Protection Fund signalled its willingness to 
take part in recapitalizations conducted by other banks. 
However,  the  European  Commission’s  position  –  which,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  likens  the 
intervention  of  the  Fund  to  state  aid  –  made  it  impossible  to  take  up  the  offer.  In  fact, 
because of the Commission’s own rules, this interpretation would require burden sharing to 
be activated first, that is the conversion of subordinated bonds or annulment of their value, 
something not envisaged in Italian legislation until the implementation of the BRRD in mid-
November 2015. 
It  should  be  noted  that  had  this  step  been  taken  without  the  approval  of  the  European 
Commission, trusting in a favourable decision by the Court of Justice, under accounting rules 
it would have entailed allocations to provisions for the same amount as the intervention in 
order to cover the consequent risk of legal action, completely cancelling its effect. The banks 
willing to underwrite capital increases would never have participated owing to the uncertainty 
and  legal  risks  involved.  Nor  would  the  ECB,  as  competent  authority,  have  authorized  the 
operations without the agreement of the European Commission. 
The  Commission,  which  has  direct  contact  with  the  Italian  Government  and  not  with  the 
supervisory authority, set out its position on several occasions in the course of the technical 
discussions  but  only  formally  notified  the  Italian  Government  on  19  November  2015. 
According to this position, intervention by the Interbank Deposit Protection Fund to prevent a 
“resolution”  procedure  under  the  BRRD  was  effectively  limited  to  voluntary  intervention  by 
the banks belonging to the Fund using resources other than the mandatory funds deposited 
with it. However, the banking system was unable to organize such intervention in the short 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  time available, owing to the precarious liquidity situation of the failing banks. Moreover, the 
imminent entry into force, in January 2016, of the bail-in scheme would have extended the 
annulment of the value of customers’ holdings to ordinary bonds and unprotected deposits 
before the National Resolution Fund could intervene. 
The  deterioration  in  the  technical  situation  of  the  four  banks  had  reached  the  point  of  no 
return.  It  was  no  longer  possible  to  delay  taking  measures  to  overcome  the  crisis. 
Accordingly,  the  resolution  programme  had  to  begin  immediately  once  the  new  rules 
introduced by national legislation transposing the BRRD had been put in place. 
Under  this  programme,  four  new  entities  were  created  and  the  business  activities  were 
transferred  to  them  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  essential  services,  thus  allowing  them  to 
continue banking activities in their geographical areas and to preserve the goodwill value of 
the old banks. A vehicle company was then created and the bad debts were transferred to it 
with the aim of maximizing their recovery value in the medium term. 
The resolution costs were mostly borne by the Italian banking system through the Resolution 
Fund and by shareholders and subordinated bond holders. Their sacrifice was proportionate 
to  the  valuation  of  their  assets.  The  start  of  the  resolution  procedure  requires,  in  fact,  an 
independent  assessor  to  furnish  the  Resolution  Authority  with  the  elements  to  ascertain  if 
action is necessary and decide on the most appropriate measures to adopt. For reasons of 
urgency, a provisional evaluation can be made, which must be followed as soon as possible 
by an independent final evaluation. 
With  reference to  the four  banks  under  resolution,  once  the  reasons  of urgency  had  been 
confirmed,  in  its  provisional  assessment  the  Bank  of  Italy  had  to  take  into  account  the 
communications  to Government  offices from  the  European  Commission  which,  interpreting 
EU law on state aid, indicated that the “real economic value” of the divestment of the bad 
debts was 25 per cent of the nominal value for the portion backed by mortgages and 8.4 per 
cent for the  unsecured part (with  a  weighted  average  of  17.6  per  cent).  These  divestment 
values  were  checked  in  the  final  valuations  made  by  the  independent  experts  last  Friday. 
The value of the transfer of the four banks’ bad debt was determined to be 31 per cent on 
average for the portion backed by mortgages and 7.3 per cent for the unsecured portion (with 
a weighted average of 22.3 per cent).5 
In relation to the disposal of the four bridge banks, in order to maximize the sales price, last 
January  the  Bank  of  Italy,  in  its  capacity  as  national  resolution  authority,  launched  a 
transparent  and  competitive  selection  process  to  identify  potential  buyers  capable  of 
ensuring the operational and financial continuity of the four banks and the rapid conclusion of 
the purchase. 
Several expressions of interest were received from banks and investment funds, located both 
in Italy and abroad. The next stage of the tender will begin soon and potential buyers will be 
invited to present their binding offers for the purchase of one or more bridge banks or of all 
four banks en bloc. 
The operation will be evaluated by the ECB as regards the eligibility of potential buyers to 
acquire large shares in banks. 
Considerations on the BRRD 
I  have  recently  emphasized  the  importance  of  reconsidering  the  adequacy  of  the  new 
legislative framework for managing banking crises. Just as the crisis has impaired the quality 
                                                
5  Other “risky positions” were discovered in the loan portfolios requiring further asset write-downs; the resulting 
greater capital requirement cancelled the savings made from the lower percentages of the write-downs of the 
bad debts in relation to the provisional evaluation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  of  bank  credit, the  legislative  response  on  crisis  management  has  engendered  uncertainty 
about investing in bank liabilities. An instrument devised to reduce the impact of a crisis must 
not create the premises to make one more likely: if this is the case, it must be rethought. We 
must strike the right balance: indeed, investors who have been hit will find no comfort in the 
fact that they have been protected as taxpayers. 
Our  negotiating  approach,  repeatedly  taken  on  official  occasions,  was  different:  the  bail-in 
tool should have had a  contractual nature, with no retroactive effects on previously issued 
debt  securities,  and  it  should  have  been  phased  in  gradually.  In  March  2013,  during  the 
BRRD  negotiations  at  the  EU  Council  of  Ministers,  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  Ministry  of 
Economy  and  Finance  presented  a technical  “non-paper”  to  all  the  delegations  in  order to 
illustrate the reasons for our preference for contractual (or targeted) bail-ins, applied only to 
newly-issued securities containing a specific clause in the contract recognizing the power of 
the authorities to write down or convert the securities if the conditions for starting a resolution 
procedure  were  met.  We  were  –  and  remain  –  convinced  that  this  approach  would  have 
given the authorities a credible tool to be used to resolve a bank crisis effectively, with no 
undesired effects on financial stability and at no extra cost to the taxpayer. 
According, instead, to the approach that prevailed, a wide range of liabilities are subject to 
bail-ins, with very few exceptions. This approach can be a source of risk for financial stability. 
We should not rule out the possibility of temporary public support in the event of systemic 
bank crises, when the use of a bail-in is not sufficient to achieve the resolution objectives but 
instead risks compromising financial stability. 
The specific nature of the banking sector and the requirements of financial stability should 
also  be  treated  in  a  more  structured  way  in  the  European  Commission’s  approach  to 
competition  and  state  aid.  Adopted  in  2013  –  and  based  on  the  unfortunately  premature 
conviction that the difficulties of euro-area banks had by then been dealt with – this approach 
greatly limits government intervention to support banks that are fundamentally viable in order 
to  remedy  market  failures  that  are  not  originated  by  prudential  shortcomings.  In  fact, 
according to the BRRD, any public intervention that counts as state aid (and is not among 
the few exceptions allowed by the directive) automatically triggers the resolution procedure. 
This, in turn, determines an overlap and, as a result, the prevalence of competition and state 
aid  policy  objectives  over  the  objective  of  safeguarding  financial  stability.  It  does  not  take 
sufficient account of the fact that financial stability, in particular that of the banking system, is 
of vital importance to the real economy. 
The need to assess the degree of flexibility of the BRRD during the review of the directive 
scheduled to take place by June 2018 was recalled by the IMF in its Global Financial Stability 
Report  published  a  few  days  ago.  It  highlighted  the  necessity  of  applying  the  new  rules 
(including those on state aid) with flexibility and caution during the changeover to the new 
regime, when public intervention is no longer admissible but the banks have not yet put in 
place sufficient buffers to absorb losses without undesired effects on systemic stability. 
Even in the case of public intervention in the management of bank crises, a company’s value 
must be preserved as far as possible, enabling the transfer of assets to other intermediaries. 
Destruction of value clashes with the principles of the BRRD, increases the losses for bank’s 
creditors, and expands recourse to public resources. To ensure clarity and legal certainty for 
investors and to encourage the development of the market for bank funding instruments, the 
order  in  which  creditors get  paid  in  bankruptcy  proceedings  should  be  standardized  at  the 
European level. 
Lastly,  the  third  pillar  of  the  banking  union  must  be  completed:  a  fully  mutualized  deposit 
insurance scheme at the European level supported by a public backstop, again Europe-wide, 
to  prevent  any  negative  effects  on  financial  stability  when  the  resources  of  the  Single 
Resolution Fund and the Single Deposit Insurance Fund are not sufficient. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The outlook 
Only a stable banking system can meet the objective, in a lasting and effective manner, of 
funding  households  and  businesses  at  a  reasonable  cost.  Today  the  rules  that  safeguard 
stability  require  more  capital,  more  liquidity,  and  less  leverage;  all  of  this  implies  fewer 
revenue opportunities, a pressing need to keep costs down, and the necessity of adopting 
new technologies more widely. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, Italy’s banking system faces three main areas of weakness: a 
high  share  of  non-performing  loans,  low  profitability,  and  the  need  to  adjust  its  business 
model  to  the  new  technological  and  market  environment.  The  three  areas  are  closely 
interlinked. The reform of Italy’s banking system, already approved last year, aims to raise 
the  quality  of  corporate  governance,  strengthen  banks’  capacity  to  raise  capital  on  the 
market, and to facilitate the disposal of non-performing loans. The reforms also provide an 
opportunity to encourage bank mergers, allowing risks to be diversified, costs and revenues 
to be shared, and conflicts of interest to be addressed, including by improving governance 
arrangements – all in line with the recommendations of the IMF. 
As  regards  non-performing  loans,  we  may  have  reached  a  turning  point.  The  cyclical 
recovery  is  in  fact  gradually  easing  the  pressure  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  Loan  loss 
provisions in 2015 fell to 65 per cent of banks’ operating income, from about 100 per cent in 
2014. In the fourth quarter of 2015 the loan default rate (3.3 per cent) fell to its lowest level 
since the end of 2008. In the same quarter the ratio of gross non-performing loans to total 
loans  stabilized  at  around  18  per  cent.  The  coverage  ratio  for  non-performing  loans 
(provisions to total non-performing exposures), which has steadily improved in the last three 
years, now stands at 45.4 per cent, in line with the average for the main European banks. It 
is also noteworthy that at the end of last year, against €210 billion of gross bad debts (which 
net of write-downs amounted to €87 billion), the banks held real estate collateral worth about 
€85 billion and further personal guarantees for almost €40 billion. The consolidation of the 
recovery  is  the  sine  qua  non  for  the  continued  reduction  in  the  stock  of  non-performing 
exposures. 
The  reduction  of  non-performing  loans  must  be  managed  without  undermining  the  results 
achieved  as  regards  capital  adequacy.  The  bad  bank  solution  adopted  in  numerous 
European  countries  prior  to the  adoption  of  the new  framework  on  state  aid  did  not  prove 
practicable in Italy. Reducing the stock of NPLs would therefore only be possible by selling 
bad  debts  on  the  market.  The  Italian  State  Guarantee  Scheme  (GACS)  defined  by  the 
Government following extensive talks with the European Commission would work in this way. 
The supervisory authority encourages banks to reduce their stock of non-performing loans by 
every  means,  including  divestments  on  the  market.  This  objective  ought  to  be  pursued 
gradually,  as  the  President  of  the  ECB  and  the  Chair  of  the  Supervisory  Board  have 
reiterated on more than one occasion. 
In the last few days the private sector has started work on an important initiative, known as 
the “Atlante Fund”, to provide insurance against systemic risks and facilitate the reduction of 
the  large  stock  of  bad  debts.  This  would  mainly  be  done  by  ensuring  that  unfavourable 
market conditions do not preclude access to the capital market on the part of banks that have 
already decided on such interventions. Moreover, the fund could purchase securities issued 
as part of bad debts securitizations, thus reducing their volume without weighing too heavily 
on banks’ balance sheets. 
It  is  expected  that  the  fund  will  raise  resources  equal  to  at  least  €4  billion  from  banks, 
insurance companies, foundations and other institutional investors. It will be managed by a 
company that is independent from the investors in the fund itself. The operation is currently 
being evaluated by the ECB. Given that it is an independent initiative of a private nature, it is 
in  line  with  the  European  rules  on  state  aid.  The  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance  has 
informal contacts with the European Commission to which it has described the project’s key 
characteristics. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  For  these  important  projects  to  be  successful  additional  complementary  measures  will  be 
required. 
In the first place, banks must improve their internal procedures for managing non-performing 
loans.  In  many  cases,  the  resources  allocated  to  this  have  remained  virtually  unchanged 
since before the crisis, despite the fact that the share of non-performing loans has tripled. 
Banks  must  therefore  devote  new  human  and  financial  resources  to  optimizing  the 
management of these assets. In the context of European financial supervision, the Bank of 
Italy has been working for some time to persuade banks to make significant progress on this 
front.  We  have  recently  started  a  statistical  survey  on  bad  debts,  designed  to  encourage 
banks to digitalize their records so as to optimize the management of non-performing loans, 
whether they intend to sell or recover them. 
In the second place, progress is still needed to make both judicial and out-of-court recovery 
proceedings faster and more effective, an area in which Italy is at a particular disadvantage 
by  international  standards.  I  have  recently  emphasized  that  if  we  can  cut  credit  recovery 
times by two years, we can considerably reduce, even halve, bad debts as a proportion of 
total loans. 
Last August the Government approved a reform package that is providing an important boost to 
the efficiency of the credit recovery mechanism. But more can be done. There is no real conflict 
between  creditors’  and  debtors’ rights:  recovery  times  in  line  with  international  best practices 
ultimately  lead  to  better  conditions  for  bank  customers  and  an  increase  in  the  availability  of 
credit.  The  Government’s  announcement  of  further  measures  to  make  the  procedure  for 
recovering non-performing loans faster and more effective is a step in this direction. 
In 2015 banks’ profitability showed signs of improvement: ROE returned to positive territory 
(about  3  per  cent  for  the  system  as  a  whole).  Nevertheless,  it  is  still  low,  including  by 
international standards. The flow of loan losses, while smaller than in the past, continues to 
erode operating income. Banks’ efforts to grow and diversify their sources of revenue and to 
keep structural costs down must continue and intensify. 
An  essential  contribution  must  come from the  review  of  banks’  traditional  business  model: 
that fundamentally  based  on  the  presence  of  large,  nationwide  branch  networks  no  longer 
appears  sustainable.  For  traditional  services  that  can  be  standardized,  we  must  move 
decisively  towards  intensive  exploitation  of  technology  (for  example  e-banking  and 
digitalization)  and  modern-day  local  branches  should  focus  instead  on  the  provision  of 
corporate finance services for businesses and household savings management. 
 Italy’s banking system, which is primarily oriented towards traditional intermediation activities, 
and within which the share of loans to total assets remains particularly high, has been dealt a 
severe blow by what economists call “an exogenous shock”: the long and profound recession 
which hit the country”s economy after the global financial crisis and, in Europe, the sovereign 
debt crisis. A crisis that the Italian banks in no way caused but whose impact they inevitably 
felt. 
Despite  this  and  without  weighing  on  the  public  finances,  the  system  as  a  whole  has 
withstood both the blow of the crisis and the consequent tightening of international regulation 
and  supervision  (capital,  liquidity,  leverage  and  crisis  management):  a  tightening  initially 
intended to be gradual and limited, which then became marked and rapid, also due to market 
pressures. 
The high level of non-performing loans continues to represent the main factor of vulnerability 
for  Italian  banks.  But  the  many  measures  to  address  them  –  already  taken  by  the 
Government, Parliament, other authorities, and the banks themselves – have begun to bear 
fruit. We need to press ahead so that the banking system can return as soon as possible to 
fully supporting the economic recovery that Italy needs. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
