  Mario Draghi: Reviving the spirit of De Gasperi – working together for an 
effective and inclusive Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  presentation 
ceremony of the De Gasperi award, Trento, 13 September 2016. 
 I have many reasons to be grateful and honoured by your decision to award me the Premio 
De Gasperi today. His character and his experience provide us with an inspiring message, 
loud and confident: “In Europe we go forward together in freedom”. 
This message is rooted in the 20th century history of our continent. 
The raison d’être of any government is to provide security for its citizens, both physically and 
economically.  And  in  democratic  societies,  that  means  providing  safety  and  security  by 
preserving  individual  liberties  and  individual  rights,  by  promoting  social  fairness  and  equal 
opportunities. 
The statesmen who, after World War Two, looked back over the preceding half-century could 
reach  only  one  conclusion:  that  the  governments  which  emerged  from  nationalist  and 
populist movements, and which were carried into power by a mixture of charisma and lies, 
completely failed to offer their citizens security, fairness and freedom. They had betrayed the 
very reason for their existence. 
In  outlining  the  future  shape  of  international  relations,  De  Gasperi  and  his  contemporaries 
concluded  that  only  cooperation  between  European  governments  within  a  common 
organisation could ensure the joint security of their citizens. 
They saw that implanting democracy in the nations of Europe would not be enough. Europe 
also  needed  democracy  among  nations.  They  understood  that  building  barriers  between 
countries  would  make  them  more  vulnerable  and  less  secure,  not  least  due  to  their 
geographical proximity; and that withdrawing behind one’s borders would make governments 
less effective. 
De  Gasperi’s  vision  of  how  this  joint  process  should  be  shaped  was  articulated  in  various 
speeches he gave in those years. 
Common  challenges  should  be  addressed  via  supranational  instead  of  intergovernmental 
strategies. Speaking to the assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1954, 
De  Gasperi  noted  that  “…from  1919  to  1939,  some  seventy  international  treaties  were 
concluded  –  and  all  became  mere  pieces  of  paper  when  it  came  to  their  implementation” 
because of the lack of “joint control of common resources”.1 And the experience of politicians 
was validated by distinguished economists, such as Ragnar Nurkse, who showed how those 
treaties ended up fostering protectionism.2 
Integration  above  all  had  to  meet  the  immediate  needs  of  the  people.  As  De  Gasperi 
observed, “We must begin by pooling only what is strictly essential to the achievement of our 
immediate  aims,  and  do  this  by  means  of  flexible  formulae  which  can  be  gradually  and 
progressively applied”.3 
                                                
1  Speech on the occasion of his election to the Presidency of the Common Assembly of the European Coal and 
Steel Community, Strasbourg, 11 May 1954. 
2  R. Nurkse (1944). “International Currency Experience”. Geneva: League of Nations. 
3  Speech to the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 16 September 1952. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  And  joint  action  had  to  be  focused  on  areas  where,  evidently,  individual  action  by 
governments was not sufficient: joint control over the raw materials of war, in particular coal 
and steel, was one of the first examples. 
In  this  way,  the  founders  of  the  European  project  were  able  to  pair  effectiveness  with 
legitimacy, since the process was legitimised by both popular consensus and the support of 
governments.  It  was  focused  on  areas  where  the  action  of  European  institutions  and  the 
benefits  for  the  people  were  directly  and  visibly  related.  And  joint  action  did  not  limit  the 
authority of governments, but rather buttressed it, and thus found their backing. 
But it was not only the disastrous experience of the past that motivated De Gasperi and his 
contemporaries.  It  was  also  the  immediate  successes  which  were  made  possible  by  the 
initial decisions of the post-war period. 
The achievements of working together 
The  establishment  of  peace  –  the  crowning  achievement  of  the  European  project  – 
immediately produced growth and laid the foundation for prosperity. Set against this was the 
devastation wrought by the two world wars. Real GDP per capita fell by 14% during World 
War One and by 22% during World War Two, wiping out many of the gains that had been 
made during the preceding years. 
Economic  integration  built  on  peace  in  turn  produced  significant  improvements  in  living 
standards. Since 1960 cumulative growth in real GDP per capita has been 33% higher in the 
EU15 than in the US. Incomes in poorer European countries have also converged towards 
those enjoyed by richer ones. 
And EU citizens have gained the right to live, work and trade throughout the Union – and to 
benefit  from  equal  protection,  wherever  they  are,  provided  by  European  courts  of  law. 
Indeed, the process of coming together in a single market, one of the greatest achievements 
of the European project, was never solely about increasing market integration and efficiency. 
It was above all a choice of values of a free, open society – a choice made by the people of 
the European Union. 
The  European  project  has  firmly  established  political  freedoms,  too.  From  the  outset  the 
promotion of free democracy has been at its heart. As a guarantor of democratic principles, 
the  EU  has  acted  as  a  point  of  reference  for  countries  eager  to  escape  dictatorships  or 
totalitarianism, such as Greece, Portugal and Spain or those of central and eastern Europe. 
The Copenhagen criteria and the Charter of Fundamental Rights ensure that all EU countries 
respect a set of well-defined political principles enshrined in national and European law. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  these  freedoms  have  contributed  immensely  to  the  well-being  of 
Europe. And it is because of these freedoms that many migrants and refugees are looking for 
a better future in the European Union today. 
In short, European integration has provided its citizens with physical and economic security – 
perhaps for longer than ever in the history of Europe – while also spreading and instilling the 
values of an open society. The founders who began this process, and we who have carried it 
on, have demonstrated to the world that freedom and security are not mutually exclusive. By 
consolidating democracy we have secured peace. 
New challenges for Europe 
The  more  recent  years  of  the  European  project  have  been  characterised,  however,  by 
growing  dissatisfaction.  This  was  expressed  perhaps  most  clearly  in  the  referendum  on 
23 June, when the people of the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. 
For some EU countries, these years have entailed the most serious economic crisis since the 
war,  with  unemployment,  especially  among  the young,  reaching  unprecedented  levels  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  feelings  of 
long-accepted  social  contracts,  and  stirred  up 
welfare states constrained by low growth and stretched public finances. It has been a time 
when, in an ageing continent, uncertainty has grown about the sustainability of our pensions 
systems. And a time when large-scale migration has called into question established ways of 
life  and 
insecurity  and 
defensiveness. 
The  disaffection  certainly  has  other  causes,  too.  The  end  of  the  Soviet  Union  and  of  the 
nuclear  threat  it  posed  has  diverted  attention  from  the  notion  of  “safety  in  numbers”.  The 
shifting  balance  of  power  among  the  largest  nations;  ongoing  urgent  geopolitical  tensions, 
wars  and  terrorism;  climate  change  and  the  effects  of  continual,  inexorable  technological 
progress – all of these factors have, in a short period of time, interacted with the economic 
consequences of globalisation and intensified feelings of insecurity, especially in a world that 
was inattentive to how the extraordinary benefits of that globalisation were being distributed. 
Indeed,  while  in  emerging  economies  globalisation  has  liberated  hundreds  of  millions  of 
people from crushing poverty, in advanced economies the real incomes of those in the lower 
half of distribution have remained at the same level as a few decades ago. It is not surprising 
then that many have felt left behind. Anxiety is growing. 
The  policy  responses  to  this  have  at  times  been  reminiscent  of  the  interwar  period: 
isolationism, protectionism, nationalism. And this also happened in previous eras. At the end 
of the first phase of globalisation, in the early 20th century, several countries, including those 
with a tradition of immigration, such as Australia or the United States, introduced restrictions 
on  immigrants,  in  reaction  to  fears  among  workers  that  new  entrants  who  were  willing  to 
accept lower pay would take away their jobs. 
But  while  such  policy  responses  can  be  justifiably  rejected,  it  must  not  prevent  us  from 
reviewing how the mode of European integration itself has also contributed to disaffection. 
Here again, De Gasperi’s own prescient words help us understand what has happened: 
“If we restrict ourselves to creating shared institutions, without a higher political 
will invigorated by a central body in which the wills of nations come together (...) 
we  risk  the  possibility  that  compared  with  the  various  national  strengths,  this 
European venture may seem cold and lifeless – it could even at times appear a 
superfluous and even oppressive extravagance”.4 
The structure of the European Union is solid and its fundamental values remain its base. But 
the  integration  process  needs  to  be  guided  towards  outcomes  that  are  more  efficient  and 
more  directly  aimed  at  the  people,  their  needs  and  their  fears  –  and  less  focused  on 
institution-building. European institutions are not accepted per se by the people, but only as 
necessary instruments to provide those outcomes. 
Yet  on  other  occasions  it  has  been  institutional  incompleteness  that  has  prevented 
authorities from being able to handle the challenges arising from external shocks. Consider 
the  Schengen  Agreement.  It  largely  abolished  Europe’s  internal  borders,  but  it  did  not 
envisage  a  strengthening  of the  continent’s  external  borders.  So  when  the  migration  crisis 
erupted, it was seen as a destabilising loss of security. 
The response of both the European Union and the Member States to these needs and fears 
has so far been insufficient. Surveys show that, together with a drop in support for economic 
integration,  trust  in  both  the  European  Union  and  even  more  so  the  Member  States  has 
fallen.5 
                                                
4  Speech to the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 10 December 1951. 
5  Standard Eurobarometer No. 85. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  This does not apply only to Europe. The data show that in the US, too, people’s trust has 
declined  in  almost  all  institutions,  including  the  Presidency,  Congress  and  the  Supreme 
Court.6 
The  fact  that  this  is  a  worldwide  phenomenon  cannot  however  exonerate  us  Europeans, 
because we are the only group of people in the world to have built a supranational polity in 
the  certainty  that  it  was  indispensable  to  provide  security  where  individual  countries  could 
not. 
Is Europe still the answer? 
So the question is simple, but fundamental: is working together still the best way to solve the 
new challenges which we face? 
For  various  reasons  the  answer  is  an  unequivocal  yes.  If  those  challenges  are  continent-
wide, acting exclusively at national level is not enough. And if they are global, collaboration 
between the Member States gives Europe a strong voice. 
The recent climate change negotiations serve as an example. This global issue can only be 
addressed  through  internationally  coordinated  policies.  And  the  critical  mass  of  Europe 
speaking with one voice has produced results well beyond the reach of individual countries. 
Only the pressure exerted by European countries forming a common front was able to make 
the Paris climate conference a success. And only the EU’s existence allowed that common 
front to be built. 
In a world where technology is diminishing physical barriers, Europe is exerting influence in 
other  ways  too.  Its  ability,  with  its  market  of  500  million  consumers,  to  impose  global 
recognition  of  property  rights,  or  respect  for  privacy  rights  on  the  internet,  is  obviously 
stronger that any of its members could hope for alone. 
National sovereignty remains in many respects the fundamental element of each country’s 
government.  But  for  challenges  that  transcend  national  borders,  the  only  way  to  preserve 
sovereignty  –  that  is,  to  make  the  voice  of  citizens  heard  in  a  global  context  –  is  for  us 
Europeans to share sovereignty within the European Union, which has served as a multiplier 
of our national strength. 
And where responses can only be provided at the supranational level, we should adopt the 
same  approach  that  allowed  De  Gasperi  and  his  contemporaries  to  secure  legitimacy  for 
their  actions:  we  should  focus  on  those  actions  that  deliver  tangible  and  immediately 
recognisable results. 
There are two kinds. 
The first kind of action is to complete those initiatives that are already under way, because 
stopping  half-way  is  the  most  dangerous  option.  We  would  partially  disempower  national 
states without creating – at Union level – the capacity to provide at least as much security to 
the people. 
The  process  of  opening  borders  requires  common  institutions  to  safeguard  freedom  and 
fairness among its members. A free and single market is not anarchy: it requires that all its 
members  are  subject  to  the  same  laws  and  rules;  and  that  they  all  have  recourse  to  the 
same courts where those laws can be applied uniformly. This is why a true single market is a 
political construct. And if those institutions do not exist or do not function properly, borders 
will ultimately be restored to provide the security that people demand. 
                                                
6  Jeffrey  M.  Jones:  Confidence 
http://www.gallup.com/poll/183593/confidence-institutions-below-historical-norms.aspx. 
in  U.S. 
Institutions  Still  Below  Historical  Norms,  June  2015.  See 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Thus to protect the single market in all its forms – and the commitment to an open society 
which it represents – it has to be completed. 
What is different from the past, however, is that today we must devote more attention to the 
redistributive  aspects  of  integration,  and  especially  to  those  people  who  have  paid  the 
highest price. I do not think there will be significant progress in terms of opening up markets 
and competition if Europe does not listen to the demands of those left behind by a society 
built on the pursuit of wealth and power; if Europe, as well as being a catalyst for integration 
and an arbiter of its rules, does not also moderate its outcomes. 
That moderating role is today assigned to nation states, yet in many cases they are lacking 
the strength to fulfil it fully. It is a task that has not yet been defined at the EU level. But a 
greater  role  for  the  EU  would  satisfy  the  characteristics  that  De  Gasperi  identified: 
buttressing the activities of governments and therefore legitimising European action. Recent 
discussions  about  tax  fairness  and  a  European  unemployment  insurance  fund,  about 
professional retraining funds and other projects with the same idealistic goals, all go in this 
direction. 
But  because  Europe  should  only  act  where  the  national  governments  are  unable  to  act 
alone,  the  response  must  still  come  first  and  foremost  from  the  national  level.  We  need 
policies that unleash growth, reduce unemployment and empower individuals, while offering 
essential protections for the most vulnerable. 
For the second kind of action, if and when we initiate new common projects in Europe, they 
should adhere to the same criteria that brought success 70 years ago: they must be based 
on a consensus that action is truly necessary; the projects should complement the actions of 
governments;  they  should  be  clearly  linked  to  people’s  immediate  concerns;  they  should 
unequivocally concern matters of European or global significance. 
If  these  criteria  are  applied,  there  are  many  areas  in  which  Europe  does  not  need  to  get 
involved. But there are also important areas where it clearly needs to, and where European 
initiatives are not just legitimate, but even essential. Today this notably includes the fields of 
migration, security and defence. 
Both  types  of  action  are  essential  because  unresolved  internal  divisions,  for  instance 
concerning the completion of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), are likely to distract us 
from addressing the new geopolitical, economic and environmental challenges. This is a real 
danger in Europe today – and it is one we cannot afford. We need to find the strength and 
wisdom to resolve our differences and go forward together. 
To do that we need to rediscover the spirit that led a small number of great leaders, in much 
more  difficult  conditions  than  we  face  today,  to  overcome  mutual  suspicion  and  succeed 
jointly instead of failing separately. 
So to conclude, let me quote again Alcide De Gasperi, whose words resonate as much today 
as they did in 1952: 
“Economic cooperation is, of course, a matter of compromise between the natural 
desire for independence of each participant and overriding political aspirations. If 
European  economic  cooperation  were  dependent  upon  the  compromises  put 
forward by the various administrations concerned, we should probably be led into 
weaknesses  and  inconsistencies.  So  it  is  the  political  aspiration  for  unity  which 
must prevail. We must be guided above all by the overriding realisation that it is 
essential  to  build  a  united  Europe  in  order  to  ensure  for  ourselves  peace, 
progress, and social justice”.7
                                                
7  Speech to the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe, Strasbourg, 16 September 1952. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5 
