   Mario Draghi: How domestic economic strength can prevail over global 
weakness 
Keynote speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Deutsche 
Börse Group New Year’s reception 2016, Eschborn, 25 January 2016. 
 Thank you, Mr Faber, for your very kind introduction. And let me start by echoing what you 
said about the critical importance of financial market infrastructures. As we move towards a 
Capital Markets Union in Europe, strong market infrastructures are essential. In that context, I 
welcome the fact that Deutsche Börse will be participating in our new TARGET2-Securities 
system,  which  will  help  reduce  financial  fragmentation  and  make  Europe  a  better  place  to 
invest in. 
The euro area has started the New Year facing two opposing forces: a strengthening domestic 
economy and a weakening global one. 
At  home,  the  recovery  is  proceeding,  with  consumption  as  the  main  driver.  That  is  being 
supported by our accommodative monetary policy, falling energy prices and a neutral fiscal 
policy. Employment is rising, up by over 2 million people compared with the trough in 2013.  
But  in  the  world  economy  there  is  more  uncertainty.  Developments  in  China  and  other 
emerging markets have led to a slowdown in global demand and financial market uncertainty. 
Forecasts for global growth are being cut. 
The key question for policymakers in the euro area in 2016 will be which of these forces gains 
the upper hand. Our number one challenge, as a union, is to make sure that domestic strength 
prevails over global weakness. 
Our ability to influence the world economy is limited. But we can affect what happens in the 
euro area. We can take the measures necessary to strengthen our economies and make them 
more resilient to global shocks. For that, all policymakers need to play their part. 
The key element is confidence. Confidence in growth, confidence in stability, and confidence 
in the future of the euro area. Only by building confidence can we turn the ongoing cyclical 
recovery into a robust, structural recovery. 
The role of the ECB 
The ECB has a central role to play in supporting confidence. We do that by fulfilling our price 
stability mandate: an inflation rate of below, but close, to 2%. 
To that end we launched last year our asset purchase programme, or APP, to put inflation on 
a path back towards 2%. And last December we decided to recalibrate the APP to secure that 
path. 
That decision was taken because of new downside risks which threatened the outlook for price 
stability.  Those  risks  were  largely  linked  to  external  factors,  and  ones  which  might  not  be 
temporary. With inflation already low for some time, we saw a danger that a continued period 
of  low  inflation  –  even  if  oil-driven  –  might  destabilise  inflation  expectations  and  become 
persistent. 
That risk was heightened by the fact that “core” inflation, which strips out energy and food, was 
also  low.  Core  inflation  is  not  our  objective,  but it  tends to  lead  headline  inflation  over  the 
medium-term.  
All this called for a monetary policy response. And we chose to respond by recalibrating the 
APP because we have ample evidence that it works.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   I’ve described that evidence in detail elsewhere1, but let me give you just one example. Since 
the middle of 2014, when we launched our credit easing package, bank lending rates have 
fallen by 80 basis points for the euro area, and by between 100 and 140 basis points in the 
countries hit hardest by the crisis. To put that in perspective, to have a similar impact on lending 
rates with conventional policy would’ve required a one-off rate cut of 100 basis points.  
What this shows is that, even when rates are at zero, we can achieve the effect of a sizeable 
rate cut through unconventional measures. Overall, it’s clear that the impact of the APP on 
confidence, credit and the economy has been substantial. 
Some may wonder why we go to such lengths to meet our price stability objective. Isn’t it good 
for people if inflation is low and things are cheaper?  
Certainly, in the short run, a fall in inflation helps consumers. But if inflation stays too low for 
too  long  it  actually  harms  them.  And  that’s  particularly  the  case  in  a  post-debt  crisis 
environment like the one we face in the euro area today. 
Very  low  inflation  complicates  the  adjustment  process  within  countries,  leading  to  higher 
unemployment. It delays the rebalancing process across countries, hindering those that lost 
competitiveness prior to the crisis from regaining it. And if low inflation is unexpected, it raises 
real debt burdens making it harder for the economy to grow out of debt. 
For example, if euro area inflation were to undershoot our baseline by just 1 percentage point 
each  year  for  the  next  five  years,  it  would  increase  the  private  debt  ratio  by  around 
6 percentage points. That might not sound like a big figure. But, over five years, it’s equivalent 
to €700 billion in extra debt for firms and households at a time when we should be aiming to 
reduce debt. 
More  fundamentally,  meeting  our  objective  is  about  credibility.  If  a  central  bank  sets  an 
objective, it can’t just move the goalposts when it misses it. Confidence comes from every 
party fulfilling its mandate. And that’s what the ECB will do, as the Treaty demands of us. 
Questions about the ECB’s policy 
So the ECB is playing – and will continue to play – its part in supporting confidence, price 
stability and a robust recovery. But I know that our policies are not uncontroversial. The low 
interest rate environment and our unconventional measures are seen by some as a cause for 
concern. I would not be surprised if that is the case for many of you here. 
Let me discuss what I see as the three main issues. 
The first is the perception that low interest rates unfairly punish savers. Low interest rates of 
course lead to lower returns on safe assets, such as deposits. But what matters for savers is 
what  their  assets can  actually  buy  –  i.e.  real  returns  –  and  how  their  overall  portfolios  are 
performing. And it turns out that on this metric, the situation isn’t nearly as bad as it’s often 
thought to be. 
As our colleagues at the Bundesbank have shown2, the real return on a typical private portfolio 
for a German household since 2008 has been around 1.5%. That is lower than the pre-crisis 
average, to be sure. But it’s hardly an “expropriation” of savers. In fact, it’s better than in several 
repeated periods since the early 1990s. 
                                                
1   See speech by Mario Draghi at the European Banking Congress: Monetary Policy: Past, Present and Future, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/ 
20  November 
am  Main, 
2015 
Frankfurt 
sp151120.en.html 
2   Bundesbank Monthly Report article: German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of the low-
interest-rate  environment,  October  2015:  https://www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publications/ 
Monthly_Report_Articles/2015/2015_10_households.pdf?__blob=publicationFile 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   A  related  concern  is  that  low  interest  rates  cause  people  to  save  more  to  make  up  the 
difference and are therefore self-defeating. But that’s also not quite right. The Bundesbank 
study I just mentioned shows that just 1% of German households are saving more because of 
low interest rates. For the vast majority – 77% – those rates have not caused them to adjust 
their savings behaviour. 
What  low  interest  rates  are  doing,  however,  is  stimulating  the  economy  and  especially  the 
demand for  durable goods,  like  cars. That  supports the  recovery,  boosts  incomes  and  will 
ultimately lead us back to normalisation more quickly. If, on the other hand, we were to raise 
rates today, the opposite would happen. It would simply push us back into recession and rates 
would stay lower for longer. 
The second concern about our policy is that it threatens financial stability. Low interest rates, 
it’s said, discourage balance sheet repair and create “zombie banks”. It’s also claimed that 
they encourage excessive risk-taking, leading to bubbles. And the longer they last, the worse 
the risks get. 
These are doubtless important issues – but is it really the task of monetary policy to react to 
them? 
After all, as far as policymaking is concerned, what matters for the health of banks is not the 
level of interest rates, but the quality of supervision. And thanks to the creation of the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) and the comprehensive assessment of banks’ balance sheets, 
banks are actually stronger now than they were a few years ago. Capital ratios for euro area 
banks have risen from around 8% in 2007 to close to 14% today. In other words, the risks are 
currently falling, not rising.  
What’s more, though low interest rates can encourage risk-taking, there are no warning signs 
of serious financial instability. Financial crises are typically associated with strong credit growth 
and rising leverage in the banking system. What we see at the moment, however, is a nascent 
credit recovery and deleveraging among banks. In fact, coming out of a deep banking crisis, 
rapid credit growth would really be a “luxury problem”! 
That’s not to say we don’t see pockets of exuberance, for example in some housing markets. 
But euro area interest rates are set to achieve macroeconomic objectives, not to prick local 
bubbles.  In  fact,  we’ve  established  a  whole  new  macroprudential  toolkit  since  the  crisis 
precisely for that purpose, and if necessary countries should use it. And let me also add that if 
we did at some point see a generalised overheating in the economy, it’s never a problem for 
central banks to withdraw excess liquidity.  
The third concern  about  our  policy  is  that  it takes  the  pressure  off governments to  pursue 
structural reforms. But there are several problems with this argument. 
For a start, it doesn’t work institutionally. It’s not the role of the ECB to use its monetary policy 
to force governments to reform. That’s not our mandate in the Treaty. And frankly, for us to act 
in that way would be totally illegitimate as unelected central bankers.  
It  doesn’t  work  empirically  either.  There’s  not  necessarily  any  connection  between  interest 
rates and reforms. For example, Spain started its labour market reforms when interest rates 
had  already  gone  down.  Italy  passed  a  labour  market  reform  last  year  in  tranquil  market 
conditions. Likewise, France is pursuing the Macron reforms with no market pressure.  
And  the  argument  doesn’t  work  logically.  Think  about  the  types  of  reforms  that  euro  area 
countries really need – reforms to judicial systems, to education, to public administration. Such 
reforms  are  difficult  and  can  take  a  decade  to  bear  fruit.  Enacting  them  takes  personal 
conviction  from  politicians  and  a  popular  mandate  for  change.  Whether  interest  rates  are 
temporarily higher is immaterial. 
In fact, what typically happens when interest rates are high is not long-term reforms, but rather 
short-term fixes to placate the markets. And that normally means consolidating budgets by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   raising  taxes,  which  makes  the  recession  worse.  That  in  turn  creates  an  even  harder 
environment for structural reforms as the costs are higher in a depressed economy. 
So if we look at these concerns together, we can see a common theme. While each contains 
a grain of truth, there’s another side to the story which isn’t receiving the same attention. And 
this follows a pattern that we’ve seen throughout the crisis. 
In the course of the last few years some commentators were cautioning that our policies would 
cause runaway inflation. They didn’t. Others warned that we were exposing ourselves to heavy 
losses from expanding our balance sheet and accepting lower-quality collateral. In fact we 
haven’t had a single loss. Then those same authorities claimed that our policies were illegal. 
The European Court of Justice disagreed. Now they warn us about the side-effects and risks 
of what we’re doing.  
But what I never hear them discuss is the risks of doing nothing. What would that mean for our 
price stability mandate, and therefore for growth and jobs, and eventually, for the future of our 
monetary union? Those are, to my mind, the real risks we have to be concerned about. And 
the path our monetary policy is taking is, in that sense, the path of risk reduction. 
The role of other policymakers 
Still, we’ve always said that monetary policy alone cannot be the solution. To give confidence 
a solid foundation, we have to help a cyclical recovery turn into a structural recovery. That 
depends on other policymakers in the euro area playing their part. 
There are four key areas where decisive action could build confidence in 2016.  
The first is fiscal policy. For a strong recovery, we need fiscal policy to work with, and not 
against,  monetary  policy.  And  after  much  hard work,  we  now  have  a  broadly  neutral fiscal 
stance in the euro area. But many countries still need further structural adjustment to boost 
confidence in their public finances. So the challenge is how to do that with as little damage to 
growth as possible. 
The key to growth-friendly consolidation is the composition of adjustment: on the expenditure 
side,  cutting  government  consumption  rather  than  investment;  and  on  the  revenue  side, 
shifting and possibly reducing the tax burden rather than raising it. But what also matters, of 
course, is that we lift the growth potential of our economies to help grow out of debt. That 
brings me to the second area where we need action: structural reforms.  
Structural  reforms  are  essential  to  boost  employment,  especially  in  countries  that  are 
absorbing  large  numbers  of  refugees.  They’re  essential  to  kick-start  a  recovery  in  private 
investment.  And  they’re  essential  to  lift  productivity,  so  that  our  shrinking  workforces  can 
support our ageing societies.  
Every country of course has its own challenges. But if I had to pick out one cross-cutting reform 
agenda item for 2016, it would be this: making it easier to do business in the euro area. That’s 
not necessarily about deregulation, but rather taking practical steps to improve the business 
environment,  such  as  speeding  up  judicial  procedures,  or  reducing  the  time  and  costs  for 
setting up a business. Such reforms would have a direct positive effect on investment, but 
unlike some other measures, they would have little negative impact on inflation or employment 
in the short run.  
A third area is dealing with the high levels of public and private debt which are casting a shadow 
over the recovery. Part of the solution is to have well-designed corporate insolvency regimes 
that can separate viable from non-viable borrowers and facilitate the valuation of assets to be 
sold off. But it’s also key for confidence that the bank resolution process is absolutely clear. 
In  particular,  we  need  to  make  sure  that  the  new  bail-in  rules  are  applied  evenly  across 
countries  and  with  the  minimum  scope  for  national  discretions.  We  also  still  don’t  have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   agreement on a backstop for the Single Resolution Fund. And a European deposit insurance 
scheme would signal progress in completing banking union. 
That brings me to the final area for action: completing our monetary union. The Five Presidents’ 
Report  has  laid  out  a  long-term  vision  for  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  a 
sequence  of  steps  towards  it.  Now  we  need  to  realise  the  short-term  steps  that  will  lend 
credibility to that long-term vision – first and foremost, by finishing all three pillars of banking 
union.  
Removing the fragility of EMU, by making progress with both the short-term steps and the long-
term vision, would bring about a vital boost to confidence in Europe.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The outlook for the global economy in 2016 is uncertain. But our challenge, in the euro area, 
is to ensure that global headwinds do not blow our domestic recovery off course. For that, all 
policymakers need to work to build confidence. 
The ECB is contributing to securing the cyclical recovery by fulfilling our price stability mandate. 
And the concerns surrounding our monetary policy do not stand up scrutiny. Time and again, 
the critics of our decisions have been proved wrong. The ECB has acted independently from 
the political system and for the sake of the euro area as a whole. 
To turn the cyclical recovery into a structural recovery, however, others have to play their part. 
That  entails  concerted  action  on  fiscal  policies,  structural  reforms  and  reducing  the  debt 
overhang. Most of all, we need to continue the process to complete our monetary union on all 
the necessary fronts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
