  Andreas Dombret: What does Brexit mean for European banks? 
Keynote speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  a  conference  of  the  Association  of  German  Banks  and  the  Center  for 
Financial Studies, Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 13 July 2016. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
One  of  the  words  which  were  mentioned  most  during  the  last  few  days  was”confusion”, 
followed by “uncertainty”. Both terms express what many people felt after the British vote to 
leave the European Union – which was not consistent with what experts had expected just 
before the event. The Brexit could certainly mark a turning point for Europe. 
As Jürgen Habermas, the German philosopher, put it in the German weekly newspaper “Die 
ZEIT”:  “I  didn’t  expect  populism  to  beat  capitalism  in  its  country  of  origin.  In  view  of  the 
banking sector’s existential importance for the UK and the media and political power of the 
City  of  London,  it  seemed  unlikely  that  questions  surrounding  identity  would  triumph  over 
other interests.”1  
We  were  all  in  the  financial  sector  somewhat  confused  on  the  morning  of  24  June  and 
probably  still  are,  given  the  many  unanswered  questions  we  are  now  facing.  The  full 
consequences  of  Brexit  will  only  become  evident  as  time  progresses  –  because  formal 
relations between the United Kingdom and the EU will be decided by a negotiation process 
that has not yet begun. So far, a British motion to leave the European Union according to 
Article 50 of the Treaty of the European Union has not been made. 
Only  after  this  process  has  been  settled  will  we  be  able  to  better  assess  the  full 
consequences  of  this  vote  –  both  in  economic  and  political  terms.  But  people  are  seeking 
orientation  and  want  to  discuss  the  matter.  Therefore,  panel  discussions  such  as  the  one 
being  held  here  today  are  of  immense  value,  and  I  wish  to  thank  both  the  Association  of 
German Banks as well as the Center for Financial Studies for their initiative. 
Let me use this opportunity today to comment both on the potential eco-nomic and political 
consequences of the United Kingdom’s referendum decision. 
Banks face immediate economic consequences 
While  the  Brexit  decision  has  caught  most  Europeans  off-guard,  its  immediate  financial 
consequences have materialised as predicted. 
All in all, the reaction of financial markets to the Brexit news was by and large consistent with 
expectations. The news evidently came as a surprise, but there was no panic: The British 
pound  came  under  downward  pressure,  as  did  bank  shares  and  real  estate  funds  with 
investments  in  the  City  of  London  or  in  the  rest  of  the  UK.  In  addition,  country  rating 
adaptations did not come out of the blue. The Euro Stoxx 50 displayed heightened volatility 
as  the  referendum  day  approached,  but  remained  range-bound  between  market  tensions 
earlier this year and in August of last year. Stock prices dropped sharply on the day after the 
referendum; however, the situation had already calmed down by the afternoon. 
A closer look reveals that shares of many financial institutions have dropped strongly since 
the  referendum,  and  valuations  still  remain  significantly  lower  than  shares  of  non-financial 
                                                
1   Die ZEIT, 7 July 2016, No 29, p. 37. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  sectors – not just in the UK but also in the rest of the euro area. This is a sign that other, 
more deeply rooted structural problems prevail in the European banking sector. I will touch 
upon one of these issues later on in my speech. 
However, most banks had taken the possibility of a Brexit sufficiently seriously and therefore 
made careful preparations. Supervisors had asked them to assess the risks associated with 
their  holdings  of  stocks,  bonds  and  foreign  currency  in  good  time.  As  such,  banks  were 
forced to make contingency plans. Thanks to stricter capital and liquidity regulations, banks 
are in considerably better shape today than at the outset of the global financial crisis in 2007. 
In  this  context,  I  wish  to  pay  tribute  to  the  professional  approach  of  the  Bank  of  England 
before  and  after  the  referendum  –  which  demonstrated  excellent  preparation  as  well  as 
execution on its part. The ECB and other central banks, too, declared that they would stand 
ready  to  supply  liquidity  should  the  need  arise.  However,  up  to  now,  no  provision  of 
additional liquidity has been necessary. 
All of the actions taken have certainly helped to ward off stronger financial market reactions. 
But  this  doesn’t  necessarily  imply  that  the  financial  markets  have  already  found  their  new 
equilibrium.  Nobody  can  rule  out  further  movements  in  prices  or  shifts  of  funds  from  one 
asset class to another. Nevertheless, one can be cautiously optimistic that – regarding the 
financial markets – a panic reaction to Brexit is rather unlikely at present. 
Indisputably,  it  is  to  a  large  extent  the  United  Kingdom  that  will  have  to  bear  the 
consequences  of  the  referendum.  Consumer  confidence  declined  rapidly.  Already  in  May, 
the  Bank  of  England  expected  UK  GDP  growth  to  slow  down  to  2  percent  in  2016  2  as  a 
result of heightened uncertainty – new forecasts in the wake of the referendum are of course 
bound  to  paint  a  gloomier  picture.  For  the  EU  as  a  whole,  European  ministers  of  finance 
have reduced their growth expectations by 0.2 to 0.5 percent for 2017. 
In  the  economic  growth  forecasts  presented  by  the  Eurosystem,  a  Brexit  was  one  of  the 
downside risks to the projections. The impact on medium-term economic growth will depend 
strongly  on  expectations  concerning 
long-term  economic  consequences  of  the 
referendum,  which  in  turn  will  hinge  on  the  outcome  of the  exit  negotiations. The  chain  of 
causality runs from the single market to productivity: The more restricted access to the single 
market becomes, the more trade will be inhibited and the more productivity will be curbed – 
both in the UK and the EU. 
In any case, while the impact of Brexit on growth will be negative, fears of a fall in growth in 
the euro area by, say, 0.6 percentage point in 2017, as predicted by Consensus Economics, 
seem exaggerated. 
the 
Political vagueness within the reach of vision 
What does the referendum result imply for the future of the pan-European financial system? 
In some ways, I would expect clear consequences. 
Here, I refer, in particular, to the pulling power of London as a platform for European bond, 
derivative  and  forex  trading.  Banking  supervisors  take  a  critical  view  of  the  fact  that  euro 
activities are mainly based in London and therefore outside the euro area. This criticism has, 
of course, intensified since the referendum. The same can be said for clearing business and 
central  securities  depository  services,  at  least for  euro-denominated  business.  Supervisory 
authorities would need to be a lot more tolerant if this business were allowed to be conducted 
not just outside the euro area but outside the EU altogether. Truth be told, that’s a level of 
tolerance I can neither imagine nor support. 
                                                
2   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech915.pdf. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Against  this  backdrop,  the  announced  merger  plans  of  Deutsche  Börse  and  the  London 
Stock Exchange need to be re-evaluated. The outcome might seem bizarre at first glance, 
but  the  referendum  has  given  positive  impetus  to,  and  even  bolstered,  the  economic 
rationale behind such a merger. Once the UK has left the European Union, bridges between 
both economies will be more important than ever before. The announced merger of LSE and 
Deutsche Börse has the potential to become such a bridge. 
Clearly, the Leave vote poses new challenges for the corporate governance of the merger: 
The  parties  concerned  need  to find  a  governance  structure  which  balances  all  reasonable 
interests  –  even  at  the  expense  of  synergies.  Furthermore,  I  am  convinced  that,  in  the 
medium term, euro clearing cannot take place to the existing extent in London – Frankfurt 
would be the more appropriate alternative. The Referendum Commission set up by Deutsche 
Börse and LSE is now being put to the test in terms of its ability to work calmly, and needs to 
keep  in  mind  the  economic  rationale  of  the  proposed  merger  which  has  gained  greater 
credence through the Brexit vote. 
But uncertainty following the Brexit decision is much less due to economics and much more 
due to politics. Indeed, almost all the economic consequences are associated with political 
uncertainty. As we all know, economic uncertainty is a product of political uncertainty. The 
fact  that  the  mechanics  of  leaving  the  EU  are  laid  down  in  Article  50  of  the  Treaty  of  the 
European  Union  is  well-known  to  most  people  by  now,  but  it  only  governs  the  negotiation 
process  without  changing  the  complexity  of  its  nature  in  any  way.  Clearly,  the  practical 
implications  of  a  Brexit  depend  to  a  large  extent  on  what  will  be  agreed  upon  in  Brexit 
negotiations. 
And this is also true with respect to banks on both sides of the Channel. Many institutions 
have shaped their business models in accordance with the cooperative financial framework 
in  the  EU.  European  banks  based  on  the  continent  operate  in  the  UK  market  and  have 
branches in London. The City of London is also home to a great number of non-European 
institutions which use the passporting regime of the EU to conduct business in any other EU 
country, making London a hub for the entire European banking market. 
So  what  could  happen  with  respect  to  the  passporting  regime  once  the  negotiation  period 
has ended? One thing is clear: It will very much depend on politics. 
In  the  event  that  the  United  Kingdom  decides  to  remain  a  member  of  the  European 
Economic  Area  (EEA),  not  a  great  deal  would  change  for  banks  and  enterprises  on  both 
sides  of  the  Channel.  EU  rules  for  banking  super-vision  equally  apply  to  members  of  the 
European Economic Area. Current supervisory powers would likewise remain unaffected. 
Naturally,  EU  membership  does  not  only  cover  free  trade.  It  also  means  applying  the  full 
body of EU legislation, a key component of which is freedom of movement. On the one hand, 
financial  institutions  in  London  have  bene-fited  from  the  stream  of  human  capital  from  the 
mainland.  On  the  other,  the  negative  consequences  that  it  is  claimed  arise  from  free 
movement are issues that numerous “Brexiteers” in the run-up to the referendum have cited 
as  reasons  why  they  believe  the  UK  should  leave  the  European  Union.  For  some,  EEA-
membership is regarded as the equivalent of jumping from the frying pan into the fire. Many 
other forms of cooperation are therefore also imaginable, including established models such 
as the WTO framework. 
For  banks,  a  situation  in  which  the  UK  were  to  become  a  third  country  would  allow  for  a 
spectrum of outcomes, depending on what is negotiated. At the lower end of cooperation, an 
ordinary  third  country  status  would  require  UK  banks  and  banks  from  foreign  countries  to 
obtain licenses for their branches in any given  EU country. Also, working capital would be 
required as a basis for supervision – I may ascertain this at least with respect to Germany. 
This should indeed give incentives to banks from third countries to establish subsidiaries in 
only one EU country and in this manner avoid the need to acquire more than one license in 
the EU. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Even  so,  the  ordinary  third  country  statues  may  significantly  interfere  with  the  current 
business models of banks. For those foreign banks that currently use their UK subsidiaries 
as a hub for the European market, the UK serving as a third country would compromise their 
business models in the EU. 
Certainly, there would still be room for further bilateral agreements. Thus, German authorities 
could  grant  exemptions  to  foreign  institutions.  For  banks  with  a  British  license,  a  more 
favourable supervisory treatment is conceiv-able. Supervision might even be performed in a 
manner akin to if the UK were an EEA member. But this hinges upon several requirements. 
Most  importantly,  the  UK  would  have  to  follow  the  internationally  approved  canon  of 
supervisory policies. If this were the case, EU members would want to protect themselves 
against  any  form  of  regulatory  arbitrage.  Also,  this  would  require  substantial,  political 
willingness  on  both sides.  However,  such  political  goodwill  might  suffer if  and  when  Brexit 
goes ahead. We will have to wait and observe. 
Generally speaking, we cannot make reliable predictions about the future legal framework for 
banking across the Channel. Planning uncertainty is bound to be costly. Businesses on both 
sides of the Channel are unable to make any longer-term plans as long as these conditions 
haven’t been clarified. On the other hand, location shifting takes time and encourages banks 
to react well ahead of political certainty. Also, it’s very much up in the air whether the spell of 
uncertainty will be over after two years or whether the negotiating parties will have agreed, 
by mutual consent, to extend the negotiating period. 
Moving forward with uncertainty 
Ladies and gentlemen, the bottom line of my message is simple: Whatever the legal outcome 
of Brexit negotiations may be – it better be arranged swiftly. For banks, as for the economy 
as a whole, any uncertainty should be kept to the very minimum. 
In the course of negotiations, both sides will probably be keen to maintain the existing trade 
links. But, at the same time, there should be no doubt that the EU should resist any efforts by 
the UK to cherry-pick the most beneficial terms. So, in all likelihood, individual arrangements 
granting access to the EU markets won’t be possible without concessions being made. 
While negotiations have not even started, there are some definite conclusions to be drawn 
from the referendum result: 
• 
Financial  institutions  have  to  prepare  for  a  scenario  in  which  euro-denominated 
trading and clearing is unlikely to have a future outside the EU. 
Regarding the merger between Deutsche Börse and London Stock Exchange, the 
referendum outcome has even strengthened the economic rationale. But in order to 
reap  the  benefits,  contracting  partners  should  now  invest  in  a  well-balanced 
governance structure. 
Financial  actors  in  Europe  have  so  far  succeeded  in  digesting  the  somewhat 
surprising referendum result. Even ongoing volatility should not serve as an excuse 
to bypass the pillars of financial stability we have only just set up in the EU. 
  Please let me shortly expand on this last, but important point. I am referring, in particular, to 
the challenge of actually making investors in banks liable in case of a bank failure, a concept 
also known as “bail-in”. For that purpose, a codified bail-in mechanism now exists, which has 
been  fully  operational  since  the  beginning  of  this  year.  If  we  allow  states  to  provide 
discretionary aid to their banks, this impedes a core element of the bail-in regime, namely its 
credibility. 
If the bail-in mechanism were to be exposed or even dismantled, markets would no longer 
exert their disciplinary function. The management of banks will always be likely to maintain a 
safety buffer over and above supervisory capital requirements as they face resolution in case 
of falling short of these requirements. If bank supervisors were to observe the dismantling of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the bail-in mechanism, I am convinced the logical and necessary consequence would be for 
supervisors  to  raise  capital  requirements  so  as  to  compensate  for  the  lack  of  market 
discipline. 
In face of the Brexit referendum and the critical attitudes expressed towards EU governance, 
making our rules more trustworthy should be of even greater concern. The Brexit vote must 
under no circumstances serve as an excuse to delay reforms or even undo achievements in 
European  integration.  Instead,  the  EU  should  listen  to  this  wake-up  call  and  react 
appropriately. 
Please allow me one last, and personal, remark: I -probably speaking for most, if not for all of 
my German colleagues – will greatly miss our British counterparts in European institutions; 
not  at  least  because  of  their  orientation  towards  stability  and  free  market  economy.  But, 
fortunately, as central bankers, we will continue our collaboration at many other levels such 
as the G7, the G20, the IMF and the BIS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
