  Andreas Dombret: In the heart of Europe – Europe in our hearts 
Welcoming  address  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, to mark the unveiling of the plaque listing patrons for the euro sign, 
Frankfurt am Main, 4 February 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am extremely pleased that you are joining me in celebrating a very special occasion today – 
the unveiling of the plaque listing patrons of the euro sculpture. 
When  you  think  of  Frankfurt,  what  comes  to  mind?  Perhaps  the  city’s  famous  historical 
landmarks,  such  as  the  Römer  (city  hall)  or  St.  Paul’s?  Or  the  skyline,  featuring  its  many 
skyscrapers? Football fans may think of Attila, the eagle, worn proudly on players’ shirts of 
Eintracht  Frankfurt.  You  might  also think  of  Goethe, the Old  Opera  House,  the  Main  river, 
Germany’s largest airport, and so on. All this is Frankfurt; our city is veritably full of world-
renowned landmarks. 
However,  I’m  sure  that  quite  a  few  of  us  also  have  in  our  mind’s  eye  the  euro  sculpture, 
which has graced the Willy-Brandt-Platz square between the opera house and the Eurotower 
since  the  euro  was  launched  –  and  is  thus  located  right  in  the  heart  this  city.  Much  as 
Frankfurt itself is located in the geographic heart of Europe. 
In the heart of Europe 
2. 
For  nearly  15 years,  the  euro  sculpture  stood  guard  before  the  European  Central  Bank, 
making it clear to all visitors that they were standing at the heart of Europe. The sculpture 
has certainly seen a great deal in that time. When its lights came on for the first time in 2001, 
the euro area comprised only 12 member states; the number has now risen to a total of 19. 
The average forex trading volume that changed hands every day between traders round the 
world amounted to some €450 billion in 2001; it now stands at €1.7 trillion according to the 
latest available figures. The euro is undoubtedly the world’s second most important currency 
after the US dollar. 
Yet it has not always been smooth sailing. We all remember the sometimes dramatic events 
in connection with the recent financial crisis, which dealt a significant blow to the euro area 
and,  in  some  cases,  raised  massive  doubts  about  the  continued  existence  of  our  single 
currency.  It  was  not  least  these  events  which  also  led  to  the  activists  of  the  Occupy 
movement, in 2011, pitching camp in the shadow of the euro sculpture, where they held out 
for more than a year – even as their political message was fading into the background as 
time passed by. 
However,  that  is  all  history  now.  The  euro  area  has  returned  to  stability,  even  though  we 
cannot yet say with certainty that the crisis has been entirely overcome. The ECB has long 
since  taken  up  residence  in  Frankfurt’s  Ostend  district,  and  the  last  traces  of  the  Occupy 
activists have been gone for quite a while. And yet it is right that the euro sculpture will be 
marking the centre of our monetary union, now and in the future. For, after all, the monetary 
union no longer rests solely on monetary policy. 
Around  one  and  a  half  years  ago,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  for  Europe’s 
banks  was  launched,  heralding  a key  step  towards  the  completion  of  this  monetary  union. 
You see, the financial crisis exposed the weaknesses of our existing framework. One such 
weakness  was  the  tendency  of  national  supervisors  to  train  their  sights  primarily  on  the 
institutions  based  in  their  own  jurisdiction,  meaning  that  risk  that  spilled  over  to  other 
countries  sometimes  went  undetected  until  it  was  too  late.  The  SSM  is  addressing  this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  problem  by  taking  an  explicitly  European  approach  and  comparing  banks  from  different 
countries, for example. In addition, the SSM prevents banks in different countries from being 
supervised  with  varying  degrees  of  strictness  because,  for  instance,  national  supervisory 
regimes are too heavily influenced by national interests. 
This  means  that  the  SSM  is,  in  many  ways,  impressive.  One  aspect  sets  it  apart  from 
everything  else,  however.  Never  before  have  sovereign  states  merged  their  banking 
supervisory functions in an independent agency. Our experience of the first year of SSM has 
been quite positive – especially if one stops to think of the magnitude of this project and how 
short  the  preparation  time  was  prior  to  getting  the  SSM  actually  up  and  running.  There  is 
room for improvement in some areas, of course, but the SSM has already earned the respect 
of the institutions it supervises today. 
Our SSM colleagues are sitting today in the Japan Center, not far from here, and in future 
will be supervising the euro area’s largest banks from the Eurotower – where, every day, the 
euro sculpture will make it clear to them what they are working for: a stable euro area, home 
to some 340 million people. 
Europe in our hearts 
3. 
Hans-Dietrich  Genscher  once  said  that  “Europe  is  our  future,  we  have  no  other.”  Europe 
belongs to Frankfurt like almost no other city, apart from Brussels and Strasbourg. The euro 
sculpture has taken its place alongside the ECB, the SSM, EIOPA and also the Bundesbank 
as  an  expression  of  this  belonging.  Thanks  to  your  support,  the  sculpture  is  now  shining 
again  in  due  splendour.  I  personally  wish  to  thank  all  of  you  very  sincerely  –  and  I  firmly 
believe that, in expressing my gratitude, I also speak for many of Frankfurt’s residents as well 
as its innumerable international visitors. It remains to be hoped that Europe, too, will shine in 
future  with  the  same  lustre  as  the  restored  euro  sculpture.  Let  us  all  do  what  we  can  to 
achieve this goal going forward. 
Thank you very much. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
