  
 
Yukitoshi  Funo:  Economic  activity  and  prices  in  Japan,  and  monetary 
policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Yukitoshi  Funo,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Niigata, 31 August 2016. 
I. 
Recent economic and price developments 
 Overseas developments 
A. 
I would like to begin my speech by talking about developments in overseas economies. In 
global financial markets, uncertainty over the global economy going forward heightened and 
investors’  risk  aversion  rapidly  strengthened  in  response  to  the  result  of  the  United 
Kingdom’s referendum in late June, in which the majority voted to leave the European Union 
(EU).  However,  global  financial  markets  have  been  regaining  calmness.  In  this  situation, 
overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace as a whole, although the 
pace  of  growth  has  somewhat  decelerated,  mainly  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies. 
As  for  the  outlook,  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  moderately  increase  their  growth 
rates,  as  it  is  likely  that  advanced  economies  will  see  steady  growth,  and  emerging 
economies in particular will gradually move out of their deceleration phase, mainly through 
their policy measures. According to the World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in 
July  2016  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  global  growth  projections  have  been 
revised slightly downward from the April 2016 WEO, particularly for Europe, but the longer-
term projection that the global growth rate will moderately increase from 2015 through 2017, 
from 3.1 percent in 2015 and 2016 to 3.4 percent in 2017, is unchanged. 
Looking at developments by major region, the U.S. economy has been on a recovery trend 
on the back of firmness in household spending. As for the outlook, the industrial sector and 
overseas demand will likely continue to show mixed developments for the time being, but the 
economy  is  expected  to  continue  to  see  firm  growth  driven  by  private  demand  under 
accommodative financial conditions. 
The  European  economy  has  continued  to  recover  moderately  as  private  consumption 
continues  to  increase.  As  for  the  outlook,  the  economy  is  projected  to  see  a  temporary 
slowdown in its pace of recovery as firms’ and households’ sentiment is becoming cautious 
due to uncertainty, mainly associated with the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, but is 
likely to return to a moderate growth path. 
The Chinese economy has been slightly subdued, particularly in the manufacturing sector, 
which faces an overhang of production capacities. As for the outlook, the economy is likely to 
broadly  follow  a  stable  growth  path  as  authorities  have  been  proactively  carrying  out  both 
fiscal and financial measures to support economic activity. 
Emerging economies have remained subdued, due mainly to developments in the Chinese 
economy,  although  the  effects  of  economic  stimulus  measures  have  materialized  in  some 
economies. Commodity-exporting economies such as Brazil and Russia remain in a severe 
state but have started to bottom out, mainly because commodity prices have hit the bottom. 
As for the outlook, the growth rates of emerging economies are likely to increase gradually, 
due mainly to the spread of the effects of the recovery in advanced economies and to the 
effects  of  the  economic  stimulus  measures,  although  differences  across  countries  and 
regions are likely to remain for the time being. 
Risk  factors  to  the  overseas  economic  outlook  are  wide  ranging,  as  exemplified  by  (1) 
uncertainties associated with the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU, (2) developments in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies including China, (3) developments in the U.S. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  economy and the influences of its monetary policy, (4) the European debt problem among 
banks,  and  (5) geopolitical  risks  such  as those in  the  Middle  East. Therefore,  I  consider  it 
necessary  to  closely  monitor  various  risk  factors  from  a  broad  perspective  in  making 
projections regarding the outlook for overseas developments. 
Japan’s economy and prices 
Economic activity 
B. 
1. 
I will now discuss the economic situation in Japan given the overseas developments I have 
just outlined. Japan’s economy has continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports 
and production have been sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging 
economies.  On  an  annualized  basis,  after  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  for  the  October-
December  quarter  of  2015  registered  minus  1.7  percent,  due  partly  to  the  effects  of 
irregularly warm weather, that for the January-March quarter of 2016 increased, registering 
2.0 percent, and that for the April-June quarter, which was released in mid-August, registered 
0.2 percent; this was broadly about the same level as the growth potential when fluctuations 
are smoothed out. 
Looking ahead, sluggishness is expected to remain in exports and production for some time, 
and the pace of economic recovery is likely to remain slow. Thereafter, domestic demand is 
likely to follow an uptrend, underpinned by a virtuous cycle from income to spending being 
maintained  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors,  and  by  large-scale  economic 
measures,  and  exports  are  expected  to  head  toward  a  moderate  increase  as  overseas 
economies move out of their deceleration phase. Thus, Japan’s economy is likely to be on a 
moderate expanding trend. According to the Bank’s July 2016 Outlook for Economic Activity 
and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report),  the  medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members’ 
forecasts for the economic growth rate are 1.0 percent for fiscal 2016, 1.3 percent for fiscal 
2017, and 0.9 percent for fiscal 2018, and the economy is expected to continue growing at a 
pace above its potential through the projection period. 
2. 
Next, I will talk about price developments. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer 
price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food and energy has decelerated somewhat recently, 
as  firms’  price-setting  stance  has  become  relatively  cautious  against  the  background  of 
relatively weak developments in some indicators of private consumption. The rate of change 
for  all  items  less  fresh  food  has  been  slightly  negative.  Looking  at  annual  price  changes 
across all CPI items less fresh food, the share of price-increasing items minus the share of 
price-decreasing  items  has  maintained  its  historically  high  level,  but  is  declining  slightly  at 
present. 
With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh 
food) is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects 
of  the  decline  in  energy  prices,  and,  as  the  underlying  trend  in  inflation  steadily  rises, 
accelerate toward 2 percent. Meanwhile, assuming that crude oil prices will rise moderately 
from  the  recent  level,  the  baseline  scenario  is  that  the  timing  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of 
change  in  the  CPI  reaching  around  2  percent  will  be  during  fiscal  2017,  although  this  is 
accompanied by considerable uncertainties including those surrounding overseas economies 
going forward. Specifically, the medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts of the year-
on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  (all  items  less  fresh  food)  presented  in  the  July  2016 
Outlook Report are 0.1 percent for fiscal 2016, 1.7 percent for fiscal 2017, and 1.9 percent 
for fiscal 2018.1 
Prices 
                                                
1 
Individual  Policy  Board  members  made  their  forecasts  assuming  that  Dubai  crude  oil  prices  would  rise 
moderately from the recent 45 U.S. dollars per barrel to around 50 dollars per barrel toward the end of the 
projection period; that is, fiscal 2018. Under this assumption, the contribution of energy prices to the year-on-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Keys to assessing the outlook for economic activity and prices 
II. 
In what follows, I will discuss several points that I think deserve particular attention in terms 
of realizing the outlook that I mentioned earlier. 
Employment and income situation 
A. 
First, I will talk about developments in the employment and income situation. Supply-demand 
conditions in the labor market have continued to improve steadily, and employee income has 
increased  moderately.  According  to  the  Labour  Force  Survey,  the  pace  of  increase  in  the 
number of employees has been accelerating, and the labor force participation  – especially 
that of women and the elderly – has continued to rise. Against this backdrop, the active job 
openings-to-applicants  ratio  has  continued  to  see  a  steady  rise,  and  a  perception  of  labor 
shortage suggested by the diffusion index (DI) for employment conditions (the proportion of 
firms responding that employment was “excessive” minus the proportion of those responding 
that employment was “insufficient”) in the June 2016 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey 
of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  has generally  heightened;  both  indicators  are almost  at the same 
levels  as  around  1991–1992.  The  unemployment  rate  has  continued  on  a  moderate 
improving trend, albeit with some fluctuations, and has been in the range of 3.0–3.5 percent. 
The  supply-demand  conditions  in  the  labor  market  are  expected  to  further  tighten.  On  the 
wage side, hourly cash earnings of part-time employees in particular, which are responsive 
to labor market conditions, have continued to show relatively high growth at around 1.5–2.0 
percent. With regard to the outlook, on the back of the heightening of inflation expectations 
and  the  marked  tightening  of  labor  market  conditions,  wages  are  projected  to  rise 
moderately. 
In  light  of  these  prospects  for  employment  and  wages,  employee  income  is  expected  to 
continue  rising  moderately.  Base  pay  for  fiscal  2016  was  revised  upward  for  a  third 
consecutive year, but to a marginally smaller extent than last year. Attention therefore should 
be given to how funds from profits in the corporate sector will circulate in the economy. 
Private consumption 
B. 
I will now discuss developments in private consumption, which has generally maintained its 
resilience  against  the  background  of  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation,  although  relatively  weak  developments  have  been  seen  in  some  indicators.  The 
Consumption Activity Index is heading toward a pick-up, mainly in durable and non-durable 
goods,  albeit  with  fluctuations.  Looking  at  confidence 
to  private 
consumption, the Consumer Confidence Index has continued to be more or less flat, while 
the Economy Watchers Survey and the DIs for business conditions of industries related to 
private  consumption  in  the  Tankan  have  been  declining,  reflecting  effects  such  as  those 
stemming from the wealthy being less motivated to spend on expensive goods and services, 
and  the  sluggish  increase  in  demand  from  foreign  visitors  to  Japan.  With  regard  to  the 
outlook, private consumption is expected to increase its resilience gradually, supported by an 
improvement in real employee income and the effects of various policy measures. However, I 
believe  that  it  is  necessary  to  pay  attention  to  how  the  virtuous  cycle  from  income  to 
spending  –  which  has  been  showing  lackluster  performance  recently  –  will  operate  in  the 
future. 
indicators  related 
                                                                                                                                                   
year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was estimated to be approximately in the range of 
minus 0.6 to minus 0.7 percentage point for fiscal 2016. More specifically, the contribution was expected to 
start to lessen in the second half of fiscal 2016 and reach around 0 percentage point in early fiscal 2017. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Business fixed investment 
C. 
Let  me  now  explain  developments  in  business  fixed  investment,  which  has  been  on  a 
moderate  increasing  trend  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  as  corporate  profits 
have been at high levels. According to the June 2016 Tankan, firmness is seen in business 
fixed investment plans for fiscal 2016 as a whole, including those of large manufacturers, for 
which profit projections have deteriorated as the expected exchange rate has shifted toward 
appreciation of the yen. As for the outlook, business fixed investment is projected to continue 
to see a moderate uptrend on the back of (1) corporate profits at high levels, (2) extremely 
stimulative  financial  conditions  such  as  low  interest  rates  and  accommodative  lending 
attitudes, (3) the effects of various policy measures from the fiscal side, and (4) moderate 
improvement  in  growth  expectations.  Investment  for  maintenance  and  replacement  of 
equipment and investment in labor-saving machinery and equipment – both of which have 
been  increasing  in  recent  years  –  as  well  as  investment  in  growth  areas,  all  tend  to  be 
undertaken independently from temporary developments in corporate profits; therefore, the 
effects  on  such  investment  of  changes  in  the  environment  surrounding  corporate  profits, 
such as the yen’s appreciation and the rise in crude oil prices, are expected to be relatively 
small.  Nevertheless,  I  think  that  it  is  necessary  to  closely  monitor  whether  firms  will  shift 
production  sites  back  to  Japan  for  manufacturing  products  to  be  sold  mainly  in  overseas 
markets. 
Prices 
D. 
Next, I will discuss the aggregate supply and demand balance (the output gap) and inflation 
expectations, which are the main factors that determine inflation rates. First, the output gap 
has been more or less unchanged at around 0 percent recently. It is likely to remain so for 
some time, but thereafter is projected to start increasing through the end of fiscal 2016, at 
which time it is expected that the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies will wane 
and that the effects resulting from the set of economic measures will become evident. From 
fiscal  2017,  the  output  gap  is  projected  to  continue  expanding  steadily  in  positive  territory 
owing to both the capital and labor factors, as domestic and foreign demand increase. 
Second, medium- to long-term inflation expectations have weakened recently, although they 
appear  to  be  rising  on  the  whole  from  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective.  Against  the 
backdrop of relatively weak developments in private consumption, firms seem to be putting 
off  price  increases  –  mainly  those  of  goods  such  as  food  products  and  durable  consumer 
goods  –  since  the  turn  of  the  fiscal  year.  As  for  the  outlook,  firms’  price-setting  stance  is 
expected  to  revert  to  raising  prices  accompanied  by  a  pick-up  in  private  consumption. 
Turning to their wage-setting stance, the high corporate profits have continued to positively 
affect  employee 
inflation  rises  moderately 
accompanied by wage increases has continued to operate. In such a situation, medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations are also likely to return to an increasing trend and gradually 
converge to around 2 percent – the price stability target. 
the  mechanism 
income,  and 
in  which 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
Let me now turn to the Bank’s monetary policy. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held in January 2013, the Bank made a commitment 
to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change 
in the CPI at the earliest possible time, and in April it decided to introduce Quantitative and 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) as a necessary measure to underpin this commitment. 
The main transmission mechanism of QQE is stimulating firms’ investment and households’ 
consumption by lowering nominal interest rates through large-scale purchases of Japanese 
government  bonds  (JGBs),  and  by  transforming  people’s  deflationary  mindset  through  the 
Bank’s  clear  commitment  and  large-scale  monetary  easing  to  underpin  the  commitment. 
Thereafter, the Bank decided to expand QQE at the MPM held at the end of October 2014. In 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  January 2016, it introduced QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, which is designed to enable 
the  Bank  to  make  full  use  of  possible  monetary  easing  measures  in  terms  of  the  three 
dimensions  of  quantity,  quality,  and  the  interest  rate,  with  the  new  option  of  a  negative 
interest rate being added. 
In addition, at the MPM held in July 2016, the Bank decided on an increase in purchases of 
exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  measures  to  ensure  smooth  funding  in  foreign 
currencies,  for  two  reasons:  in  order  to  prevent  uncertainties  that  have  been  heightening 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  United  Kingdom’s  vote  to  leave  the  EU  and  the  slowdown  in 
emerging economies from leading to a deterioration in business confidence and consumer 
sentiment,  and  to  ensure  smooth  funding  in  foreign  currencies  by  Japanese  firms  and 
financial  institutions,  thereby  supporting  their  proactive  economic  activities.  Against  the 
backdrop  of  considerable  uncertainty  over  the  outlook  for  prices  in  view  of  uncertainties 
surrounding  overseas  economies  and  global  financial  markets,  the  Bank  –  with  a  view  to 
achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time – also decided that it would 
conduct a comprehensive assessment of the developments in economic activity and prices 
under QQE and QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, as well as the effects of these policies, 
at the next MPM. 
For  the  good  of  Japan’s  economy,  it  is  necessary  to  make  progress  in  the  conversion  of 
people’s deflationary mindset that has taken hold amid the prolonged deflation, and we are 
only halfway to achieving the price stability target. The Bank will continue to steadily pursue 
monetary easing, making full use of all possible measures in terms of the three dimensions 
of quantity, quality, and the interest rate to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at 
the earliest possible time. 
Challenges for Japan’s economy 
IV. 
I would now like to express my thoughts regarding the current situation of Japan’s economy 
from a longer-term perspective. 
Japan’s potential growth rate, as estimated by the Bank, has declined to the range of 0.0–0.5 
percent,  and  this  reflects  that  the  economy  has  experienced  deflation  for  a  long  period  of 
time. 
Especially recently, it is common to hear that the future of Japan’s economy is bleak because 
of  the  decrease  in  population  and  other  factors.  Similar  opinions  that  arouse  anxiety  are 
expressed on an almost daily basis through various channels; as a result, a vague anxiety 
hangs over the society. 
However, I believe that we can be more reassuring about the future of the economy. It is true 
that the population decline has a substantial impact on the regional and national economies. 
Still, in this day and age, there is enough ground for being optimistic about the future. 
In  this  age,  it  is  possible  to  plan  broad-based  –  cross-regional  or  even  cross-border  – 
distribution and sales of goods and services. For example, having inbound customers means 
that  customers  from  abroad  are  being  attracted.  I  believe  that  many  firms  in  Niigata 
Prefecture  have  customers  not  only  inside  but  also  outside  the  prefecture. The  use  of the 
internet opens up the possibility of conducting business with overseas customers, in addition 
to domestic customers outside the prefecture, of course. It should be noted that Japan is in 
Asia,  the  world’s  most  rapidly  growing  market.  If  Japanese  firms  manage  to  capture  such 
growth,  it  is  reasonably  possible  to  reduce  the  impact  of the  demand-side  problem,  or the 
demand shortage, caused by the population decline. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  supply  side.  The  proportion  of  the  population  that  is  young  will  surely 
decrease, but firms are expected to increasingly make use of women and the elderly in the 
workforce. In terms of utilization of human resources, Japan in fact still has room for better 
use of personnel compared to the United States and Europe. In other words, there is enough 
room  for  further  improvement  in  productivity.  Another  option  is  to  gradually  increase  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  number  of  foreign  workers  in  many  fields.  It  is  likely  that  labor-saving  initiatives,  such  as 
through  the  use  of  industrial  robots,  will  advance  rapidly  in  factories  and  the  like.  Let  me 
remind you that Japan is a world-class manufacturer of robots. 
As illustrated, if the demographic challenges are decomposed and examined in detail, it can 
be said that there is no need to be completely pessimistic. 
So,  how  should  we  address  the  demographic  challenges  to  a  better  future?  One  possible 
answer  is  that  the  private  sector  should  actively  pursue  structural  reforms  by  taking 
advantage  of  the  opportunity  currently  afforded  by  the  bold  economic  measures  of  the 
government and the accommodative financial conditions generated by the Bank. 
In  advancing  structural  reforms,  firms,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  in  manufacturing  or 
nonmanufacturing, will pursue changes in operational processes – i.e., scrap and build – in 
various areas such as production and sales. As a result, substantial costs will be incurred 
with, for example, new investment, worker retraining programs, and retirement allowances, 
and it will be necessary to procure funds for such costs. On this basis, cooperation between 
firms and financial institutions will become very important. 
In  closing,  let  me  underline  that  firms’  initiatives  are  essential  to  addressing  these  issues 
facing Japan’s economy. At the same time, the Bank, for its part, has established the Loan 
Support Program, through which it provides long-term funds at low interest rates so that firms 
can  fully  utilize  accommodative  financial  conditions.  Moreover,  the  Bank  decided  on 
measures  to  support  firms’  investment  in  physical  and  human  capital  at  the  MPM  held  in 
December 2015. Many firms have become proactive in making investment in physical and 
human capital. I consider it desirable that these developments spread further. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
