   Barry Whiteside: The credit institutions sector and the Fijian economy 
Address  by  Mr  Barry  Whiteside,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  at  the  launch  of 
Merchant Finance Limited’s new name and products, Suva, 3 March 2016. 
 The Chairman and Board Members of Merchant Finance Limited 
The Chief Executive Officer, Management and Staff of Merchant Finance Limited 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Bula Vinaka and a very good evening to you all. 
This is the second address that I am making this week in regard to developments taking place 
in our financial services industry. On Monday we had a major Fijian company add their name 
to the list on the South Pacific Stock Exchange, and today we have Merchant Finance Limited 
launching a suite of innovative products which have been designed to assist our small and 
medium enterprises.  
I offer both companies my warm congratulations for these spots of bright news which have 
come during a period of great sadness for all Fijians – a time when we are still grieving our 
loss of life and counting the deadly costs of TC Winston. 
I thank Mr Batimala for his kind invitation to officiate this evening, in both the launching of your 
new company name, Merchant Finance Limited, and with it, the suite of new products. 
Indeed the occasion is one to celebrate for an institution that has continued to strategise its 
way into the mainstream lending market, servicing a niche sector that directly contributes to 
the driving of economic activity in our country.  
The launching today is also a testament to the confidence of our financial institutions as they 
continue, like Merchant Finance Limited, to evolve and develop products that specifically meet 
the needs of a developing market. 
Indeed the Board and senior management must be acknowledged for the strategic direction 
and for rising to the  challenge  to  design  and  offer  products to fit  the  requirements  of their 
customers.  This  clearly  aligns  to  your  mission  of  “providing  innovative  solutions  that 
exceed your customers’ expectations.” 
The credit institutions sector 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  a  developing  country  like  ours,  the  banking  industry  (which 
comprises  commercial  banks  and credit  institutions)  is crucial  in  supporting  and  sustaining 
economic growth. It plays the vital intermediary role of mobilising the savings of our people for 
the purpose of lending to productive investments. 
Credit institutions in Fiji, like Merchant Finance Limited, have typically operated on a smaller 
scale when compared to the banks and are relevant to customers in specific sectors – motor 
vehicles and other transportation equipment and machinery easily come to mind. Their scope 
of business has tended to be higher risk than the traditional banks and their cost of funds has 
also been higher. They have to work hard to keep their customers over the longer term as 
many  tend to graduate to  the  banks  as they  become  more  successful. Indeed  competition 
across the whole banking system has noticeably stepped up in the last five years and customer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   allegiance is almost a thing of the past. No doubt each bank and credit institution is now being 
judged by its level of service. 
Despite  the  intense  competition,  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  our  credit  institutions  have 
persevered in their niche areas and continue to perform well, backed by strong capital positions 
and satisfactory earnings performances. The combined balance sheet of the credit institutions 
recorded  an  annual  growth  of  33  percent  over  2015,  to  reach  $335million,  with  Merchant 
Finance Limited contributing almost half. At the end of last year, combined credit institutions’ 
net  profit  before  tax  stood  at  $18  million  with  capital  and  reserves  growing  13 percent  to 
$72 million. 
Merchant finance limited 
Please allow me to share a brief history of Merchant Finance Limited.  
Officially established in 1986 as the Merchant Bank of Fiji, this institution initially operated as 
a finance company and since it did not take deposits from the public it did not come under the 
supervision of the Reserve Bank. This all changed in 1992 when we granted the company a 
licence to operate as a credit institution, enabling it to access public deposits. In 2002 the 
Merchant Bank of Fiji changed its name to Merchant Finance & Investment Limited. Further 
approval was granted in late 2014 to make another name change. This is the name we are 
actually launching tonight – Merchant Finance Limited.  
So this year Merchant Finance Limited actually enters its 24th year of serving the people of Fiji 
as a licensed credit institution. The company has grown significantly, with an asset book of 
$21 million in 1992 to a publically reported $134 million in June 2015. The profitability of the 
institution has also increased over the years noting an ‘all time high’ of just over $8 million in 
its last financial year. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, as the supervisor of the banking industry, the Reserve Bank closely 
observes the relationships of our licensed financial institutions with the other sectors of the 
economy.  As  I  alluded  to  earlier,  credit  institutions  like  Merchant  Finance  Limited  play  the 
unique yet important role of servicing customers and sectors which the banks may consider as 
high-risk. 
It is pleasing to see that Merchant Finance Limited’s reach as a lender has extended to many 
key  sectors  in the  economy,  such  as  transport &  storage,  building  &  construction,  and the 
agriculture sector. Most notable, however, is its dominant role in servicing private individuals’ 
financing needs for taxis, mini-buses, carriers, tour operators and rental cars-- your typical 
small  and  medium  business  enterprises. These  areas  often  cover  the  highest risk  and  are 
completely reliant on the successful management of the particular business. 
While risk management is at the forefront of ensuring the soundness of a financial institution, 
the competitive market in which credit institutions operate calls for continuous innovation in 
designing products that will be successful.  
The potential for increased trade by Fijian entrepreneurs has long been identified and the four 
trade  finance  facilities  that  will  be  launched  by  Merchant  Finance  Limited  this  evening  will 
complement  similar  trade  finance  facilities  currently  offered  by  other  financial  institutions. 
Perhaps  more  importantly  however,  they  are  specifically  designed  for  small  and  medium 
enterprises (SMEs), and small farmers. 
I do not wish to delve into the features of these new products as we will shortly be provided 
with  all  the  details,  but  I  can  congratulate  Merchant  Finance  on  its  product  development 
initiative and thank the company for its continued commitment to better service and innovation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Fijian economy 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is somewhat of a tradition on these occasions that I say a few words 
on  our  economy.  I  think  it  is  particularly  pertinent  at  this  time  in  view  of  what  has  been 
happening around us. So please bear with me. 
I did mention earlier this week at the Vision Investments Limited listing that it is still too early 
to come up with firm numbers on the damage caused by TC Winston and that we were still 
assessing the impact on our projected growth numbers. Before the event, the Fijian economy 
was forecast to grow 3.5 percent this year, and possibly even a little better.  
What I can now say is that while we expect a number lower than 3.5 percent, it is certainly not 
all doom and gloom. It is still early in the year and we are hopeful that many of our sectors will 
be able to bounce back quickly if given the right support.  
Clearly we have seen through pictures and the media that enormous damage was done to our 
informal sector private dwellings, mainly in villages that were in the path of the storm, and 
these will take time to rebuild. Our agriculture sector has also been severely impacted and will 
need special attention in order to recover. This includes our sugar industry. 
Thankfully, in terms of the business sector which drives much of our economic activity, we 
have noted that the main core of our tourism industry operations, as well as key manufacturing 
and production centers, and our main commercial areas, have been spared.  
There are of course exceptions in one or two areas, but overall, losses may not be very large. 
Full restoration of electricity supply will naturally be an important element for our industries to 
bounce  back  strongly,  as  will  be  the  public  relations  campaigns  overseas  to  ensure  our 
potential foreign visitors get the correct message that our tourism sector is already up and 
running.  
It has been extremely pleasing to see our Fiji Electricity Authority playing a key role in working 
around the clock to give us power. In fact many areas have already been reconnected. We 
have also seen how our tourism industry has been very proactive, along with Government, in 
doing whatever is necessary to keep the visitor arrivals momentum going. 
Given these positives, I would expect that our key manufacturing and service sectors should 
continue to support our growth in the short to medium term. 
In regard to the Reserve Bank’s key objectives, it is likely that we will see some fall in foreign 
reserves as our domestic exports, including sugar and other agricultural products are impacted 
and as our importation of reconstruction hardware and other related items rise.  
However there will be some offsetting positives in terms of foreign aid and assistance inflows 
which  have  already  begun  to  flow  in  through  in-kind  grants  and  even  raised  levels  of 
remittances from our families abroad. While our reserves levels are currently very comfortable, 
any signs of sustained pressure on them will be addressed through appropriate measures, 
including accessing special funding from the International Monetary Fund, which has already 
indicated its willingness to assist. 
On the inflation front, we will likely see a rise in the prices of domestic produce over the next 
three to six months on account of reduced supply, but this should ease in the second half of 
the  year  as  supply  improves.  The  timing  will  depend  on  how  fast  our  farmers  are  able  to 
rejuvenate their farms. They will need much assistance with seed material and I very happy to 
see this has already been activated by our Government with the support of a number of local 
and foreign agencies.  
Also on the positive side, the sustained low oil prices should help cushion the cost of recovery 
for those affected.  
Dear friends there has been so much activity around us in support of our people who have and 
are still suffering the effects of TC Winston. Some areas, such as housing, will take time to 
fully recover. But I am confident that the Government is doing all it can, with great assistance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   from locals and our foreign friends alike. The assistance coming through is unprecedented and 
the resilience of our people is without question, but we must continue to all work together to 
quickly rebuild our nation. 
Official launch 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I reiterate that it is a pleasure to be with you this evening to celebrate 
with  Merchant  Finance  Limited.  I  congratulate  the  Board,  management  and  staff  on  this 
evening’s event. 
Without further ado, I have much pleasure in officially launching the company’s new name 
“Merchant Finance Limited” and its four new trade finance products: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I wish Merchant Finance Limited every success for the future. 
Vinaka Vakalevu and have an enjoyable evening. 
Trade Finance Local; 
Trade Finance Import; 
Trade Finance Export; and  
Agri Trade Finance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
