   Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Global, European and Macedonian 
developments in the area of payment systems and services 
Speech by Ms Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik, Vice-Governor of the National Bank of the Republic 
of Macedonia, at the Ninth International Conference on Payment and Securities Settlement 
Systems, Ohrid, 6 June 2016. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen,   
It is with great pleasure and honor to welcome all of you to the Ninth Conference on Payment 
and Securities Settlement Systems this morning in Ohrid. 
This  year,  again,  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  in  cooperation  with  De 
Nederlandsche Bank and Banco de Portugal, continues the tradition in organizing international 
conferences in the domain of Payment and Securities Settlement Systems, thus enhancing 
the awareness of the importance of development of the payment systems and services for the 
national economy and beyond.  
Therefore, allow me to use this opportunity to express my gratitude and appreciation to De 
Nederlandsche Bank and Banco de Portugal, as well as their esteemed representatives, for 
this fruitful collaboration and the privilege to continue this traditional cooperation in the future.  
In addition, we in the NBRM are very pleased with the presence of the representatives of the 
central  banks  of  the  countries  of  Central,  Eastern  and  Southeastern  Europe,  and  the 
participation of the countries of the Black Sea and the Middle East region, as well as those of 
the Northern Africa. The growing interest for attending the Conference confirms once again 
the  significant  contribution  of  the  Conference  to  the  enrichment  of  the  knowledge  and 
exchange of experience of the representatives of the central banks in regional and international 
frames.  Nevertheless,  the  Conference  would  not  be  a  unique  treasure  of  knowledge  and 
experience, if it did not include the representatives of the domestic financial system and the 
payment service providers, which by their continuous active participation and involvement in 
the panel discussion, contribute to the thematic comprehensiveness of the Conference. 
The  Conference  will  cover  the  latest  developments  in  payment  and  securities  settlement 
systems, as well as payment services on global, European and national level. In the global 
context, Mr Klaus Löber, the esteemed expert from the European Central Bank, will elaborate 
on the new developments in the area of implementation of the PFMIs, work on retail payments, 
cyber security, digital innovations and correspondent banking. These are very important issues 
for central banks given that we also promote the safety and efficiency of payment, clearing and 
settlement,  thereby  supporting  financial  stability  and  the  wider  economy.  In  addition,  the 
developments in the compliance area regarding the prevention of money laundering, financing 
of terrorism, insider dealing, fraud, corruption and other criminal offences are in the focus of 
the Conference, as well. In this context, we appreciate the contribution of Mr Oliver Schufmann, 
the  representative  of  Commerzbank,  who  will  present  their  experience  regarding  the 
compliance activities.  
In the European context, our colleagues from De Nederlandshe Bank and Banco de Portugal, 
Mr  Michiel  van  Doeveren,  Mr  Rui  Pimentel,  Mr  Carlo Winder  and  Mr  Richard  Derksen  will 
provide relevant information about the ongoing changes in payment systems and services in 
Europe. Thus,  a  discussion  will  be  developed  about  the  three  main  pillars  of  the  Strategic 
Vision 2020 of the Eurosystem: achieving a consolidated Eurosystem market infrastructure by 
bringing the two infrastructures TARGET 2 and T2S closer together, harmonization of its own 
collateralization  techniques  and  procedures  and  development  of  pan-European  instant 
payment  services.  In  addition,  the  latest  developments  in  the  legal  spectrum  regulating 
payments at European level,  with special emphasis on PSD2 Directive, will be elaborated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
Also, significant attention will be paid on developments in safe and secure payment services 
as well as the conceptual and practical issues regarding the oversight on FMIs. 
On  the  national  level,  our  efforts  are  focused  on  the  harmonization  of  the  Macedonian 
legislation with the EU regulation. The new Law on payment services and systems and related 
bylaws will implement PSD and part of the provisions from PSD2, Settlement Finality Directive 
and  E-money  Directive.  Thus,  a  panel  discussion 
is  scheduled  where  esteemed 
representatives  from  the  payment  service  providers,  NBRM  and  experts  from  Slovenia, 
Mr Peter Centrih and Bulgarian expert, Mr Antonio Barzashki will elaborate the new package 
of Macedonian legislative on payments. The NBRM expects that the new legislation in the 
payment area will:  
– 
foster  the  competition  by  allowing  non-banking  institutions  enter  the  market  with 
innovative payment solutions;  
strengthen  the  rights  of  payment  services  users  by  obtaining  clearer  and  timely 
information, lower prices of payment services for payment users;  
enhance further the stability of payment systems;  
consolidate current regulation covered by several acts related to payment services; 
and 
establish a legal base for faster integration of the Republic of Macedonia in the EU 
and inclusion in the Single Euro Payment Area. 
   Apart from the new regulation in the payment services area, the NBRM took an important step 
towards harmonization with the EU regulation in the oversight area by adopting new oversight 
regulation.  The  new  regulation  brings  together  the  internationally  accepted  standards  for 
payment systems operation contained in the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, as 
well as the European Central Bank revised oversight framework.  
In addition, I would like to point out the significant changes that have been done in the domain 
of payment statistics in accordance with the ECB Regulation on payment statistics. The NBRM 
developed new bylaws on payment statistics, which are expected to generate high quality and 
comprehensive data, and will provide methodological and operational readiness of payment 
statistics of the NBRM with that of the European System of Central Banks. 
Ladies and gentlemen, at the end of my speech I declare the Ninth Conference on Payment 
and Securities Settlement Systems open, and I wish the chairman, Mr Michiel van Duveren 
and his colleagues, a successful Conference.  
Finally, I wish you all a pleasant stay, hoping that you will take with you nice memories of Ohrid, 
the city with thousands of years of history and beautiful nature that attract the tourists from all 
over the world.  
Тhank you very much for your participation in our Conference. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
