Jens  Weidmann:  No  time  for  complacency  –  current  economic
challenges in the euro area
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Annual General Meeting for
the Members of the Foreign Bankers’ Association, Amsterdam, 3 November 2016.
 1. Introduction
Ms van Houwelingen 
Klaas
Ladies and gentlemen
I  am  very  pleased  to  speak  here  today  at  this Annual  Meeting,  so  many  thanks  for  the  kind
invitation.
I gave my last speech in Amsterdam 2½ years ago. Back then, I spoke about the crisis in the
euro area and the ways to overcome it. Although some progress has been made in stabilising
the euro area, this topic remains as relevant as ever, and I will return to it later in my speech
today.
I am sure, however, that there is a good chance that the crisis will not become a defining feature
of the euro area. At least not as much as the lovely “grachten” have become a hallmark of the
townscape of Amsterdam.
As you all know better than I do, the “grachten” are an architectural feature dating back to the
Dutch Golden Age in the 17th century – a period in which the economy, the sciences and the arts
in the Netherlands were among the most acclaimed in the world.
Particularly the Dutch East India Company, then the biggest corporation in the world, made the
Netherlands  a  powerhouse  of  world  trade. And  the  economic  prosperity  at  that  time  was  not
coincidental,  but  also  depended  on  major  financial  innovations.  These  included  not  just  the
issuance  of  shares  to  finance  the  business  of  the  Dutch  East  India  Company,  but  also  the
evolution of a system of merchant banks.
A  third  important  innovation  was  the  establishment  of  the  Amsterdamsche  Wisselbank,  a
precursor of today’s central bank in the Netherlands: De Nederlandsche Bank. The main task of
the Amsterdamsche Wisselbank was to take in both foreign and local coinage at their gold and
silver mint prices and to give clients transferable credits in its books known as “bank money” in
return.
This  helped  to  overcome  the  major  uncertainties  associated  with  the  many  different  types  of
coins  in  circulation  throughout  Europe.  Furthermore,  it  represented  a  state-backed  deposit
institution, which can be seen as an important cornerstone of Amsterdam’s flourishing financial
market and the prospering economy of the Netherlands at that time.
When the euro was introduced in 1999, the euro-area countries left behind the problem of many
different  types  of  currencies.  That  helped  to  tap  the  potential  benefits  offered  by  the  world’s
largest common market.
However,  if  there  was  ever  any  hope  that  economic  and  monetary  union  in  Europe  would
guarantee  strong  and  steady  growth,  the  Great  Recession  that  followed  in  the  wake  of  the
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial crisis and the fallout of the sovereign debt crisis would have shattered any such illusions
once and for all.
Today, growth in the euro area is lacklustre and uneven. The economic consequences of the
crises  are  still  weighing  on  some  euro-area  countries.  While  the  rates  of  expansion  in  the
Netherlands and Germany, for instance, are quite fair, growth in Italy and Portugal is muted.
2. Monetary policy
But from a cyclical perspective at least, there is a ray of hope on the horizon. The medium-term
economic outlook for the euro area as a whole isn’t all that dull. In fact, the key economic and
financial  indicators  echo  the  ECB’s  economic  projection  in  pointing  to  an  ongoing  economic
recovery. The ECB’s latest macroeconomic projection exercise expects the euro-area economy
to grow at a somewhat quicker pace than potential output in the next few years. And this implies
that the output gap will gradually narrow.
Although it’s true that inflation rates have been lower than the Governing Council’s definition of
price stability for quite some time, I see no danger of slipping into a deflationary downward spiral
of  declining  prices,  declining  wages  and  declining  output.  And  this  view  is  shared  by  the
overwhelming majority of experts: the latest Survey of Professional Forecasters showed that only
2% of respondents expect an inflation rate of less than zero in five years.
There is a clear majority that sees a gradual increase in the inflation rate up to levels that are
broadly  consistent  with  the  Governing  Council’s  definition  of  price  stability. And  this  view  also
matches the baseline scenario of the ECB’s medium-term inflation projection.
There are a number of reasons why inflation is currently so subdued in the euro area, including
the low oil prices and the weak domestic price pressures caused by the adjustment processes
in some euro-area member states. These factors have different lifespans, as it were, with some
representing more of a temporary phenomenon and others having a more medium-term impact.
While the current economic situation justifies an expansionary monetary policy stance in the euro
area, it is also appropriate, in my view, that the Governing Council, at its last policy meetings,
refrained from loosening it any further. And we shouldn’t ignore the fact that, even with monetary
policy rates unchanged, the increase in inflation rates automatically leads to lower short-term real
interest rates and, therefore, to a further loosening of the monetary policy stance.
Given the long and variable time lags in monetary policy, it is important to give the measures
taken enough time to have an impact on the inflation rate. In this regard, we should bear in mind
that the ECB’s definition of price stability aims at an inflation rate of below, but close to 2%, in the
medium term.
This  focus  on  the  medium  term  –  alongside  the  fact  that  the  euro  area  is  still  struggling  to
overcome  the  longer-term  economic  implications  of  the  biggest  economic  shock  since  World
War II – underscores the merits of patience – a position which was also taken up by Klaas Knot
some weeks ago.
Adopting  a  longer-term  perspective  to  monetary  policy  matters  also  allows  financial  stability
considerations to be taken into account – insofar as they might impact negatively on the longer-
term outlook for price stability.
And, by the way, this is precisely the idea behind the Governing Council’s two-pillar monetary
policy strategy. The monetary pillar, as it is known, covers, amongst others, credit developments
which have a lower frequency than business cycles and which could signal price stability risks
stemming from excessive credit growth.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
There  is  one  more  thing  that  shouldn’t  be  forgotten  when  monetary  policy  is  in  highly
expansionary mode – and I never tire of emphasising this: the longer it persists, the less effect it
will have and the more the risks will increase.
This  is  not  just  about  the  Eurosystem’s  government  bond  purchases,  which  are  blurring  the
boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  Central  banks  are  becoming  the  largest
creditors of the member states. This could lead to a situation where monetary policy becomes
harnessed to fiscal policy and is pressured to make high levels of debt sustainable through low
interest rates.
All the more so given that the low-interest-rate environment offers no incentive for governments
to  consolidate  their  public  finances.  Fiscal  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  been  loosened  again
noticeably  over  the  past  few  years.  What  governments  are  saving  in  interest  payments  isn’t
being put towards the urgent goal of reducing debt, but spent for the most part. Germany is no
exception here, by the way.
Furthermore,  the  low-interest-rate  environment  is  impairing  the  profitability  of  banks  and  life
insurance companies.
Admittedly,  bank  profitability  and  the  sustainability  of  life  insurance  and  pension  companies’
business models is not a target of a monetary policy geared solely to preserving price stability.
But  monetary  policy  cannot  afford  to  ignore  these  developments  if  banks’  health  problems
endanger the monetary transmission mechanism, or doubts about the stability of life insurance
or pension companies prompt households to increase their precautionary savings, because both
could depress the outlook for price stability further still.
Last  but  not  least,  low  interest  rates  and  unconventional  monetary  policies  could  drive  up
financial  risk-taking  in  some  financial  market  segments  or  the  real  estate  market.  While  I
currently see no sign of exuberance in the real estate market in the euro area as a whole, there’s
no denying that some national markets are at risk of overheating and the competent financial
stability  authorities  of  some  euro-area  countries  –  for  example,  Ireland,  the  Netherlands,  and
recently  Finland  –  have  introduced  macroprudential  measures  to  limit  the  risk  of  house  price
bubbles.
For me, it is key that concerns over financial stability or the sustainability of public finances do not
lead to a postponement of the exit from the ultra-loose monetary policy. This decision should be
based solely on expected price developments.
All in all, the risks of ultra-loose monetary policy are becoming increasingly clear. It’s no surprise,
then, that the tone on monetary policy matters has changed significantly. For example, there was
a general consensus at the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund in Washington
four weeks ago that monetary policy is no panacea. The IMF, too, has now joined the chorus of
these warning against overburdening monetary policy and pointing to its limits.
There  was  a  broad  consensus  that  monetary  policy  cannot  create  long-term  growth  and  that
governments need to step up their efforts to strengthen the growth prospects.
While it is clear that each country has its own economic situation and preferences – meaning
there’s no such thing as a “one size fits all” approach – I am quite confident that sound public
finances  as  well  as  competition-based  economic  systems  with  flexible  labour  and  product
markets foster growth.
Taking the euro-area countries as an example, for some of them, this would mean reducing the
existing  labour  market  duality;  for  others,  it  would  mean  lowering  the  administrative  costs  of
setting up a new business, or readying the economy to better cope with looming demographic
challenges. 
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies and gentlemen
Few global cities demonstrate what an important source of wealth international trade can be as
impressively as Amsterdam with its historical townscape. 
Today, however, there are some who mistrust the welfare-enhancing effect of international trade
and  who  stress  what  they  believe  to  be  its  negative  effect  on  the  distribution  of  income  and
wealth in society. National tendencies to turn inwards are becoming increasingly popular – the
UK’s Brexit vote is one example of this; another is the exhausting CETA negotiations which very
nearly failed due to very fundamental concerns raised by the region of Wallonia.
Globalisation and international trade is by no means a zero-sum game. The gains of free trade
far outweigh the costs. However, even if nations as a whole benefit from international trade, not
every single person or company is necessarily better off.
If  you  live  in  an  advanced  economy  and  you  are  a  low-skilled  worker  in  a  poorly  competitive
industry, your concern that you might lose your job probably won’t be outweighed by the fact that
you are benefiting from lower import prices for consumer goods and services.
1
To  some  extent,  globalisation  might  have  also  contributed 
income
inequality.  Economic research suggests that the rise in the skill premium – ie the difference
between the wages of skilled and unskilled workers – over the last decades can be attributed to
2
international trade.
the  mounting 
to 
But instead of curtailing international trade, investing more in skills and education and enabling
labour markets to adapt flexibly to a changing world would be an appropriate answer. This would
not only boost labour productivity but also make workers less at risk of losing their jobs.
An OECD study shows that focusing on the early years of life, as well as on the needs of families
with children of school age, is crucial for addressing socioeconomic differences in education –
and  thus  in  income,  too.  It  also  proposes  that  greater  efforts  should  be  made,  with  the  close
involvement of businesses and unions, to promote a continuous upgrading of skills throughout
3
the working life.
So  as  for  Europe,  we  do  not  need  a  less  open  market  but  a  more  open  one.  It  would  be
counterproductive if the difficult political situation in Europe – caused not least by the Brexit vote –
were to bring to a standstill Europe’s efforts to complete the single market for services, achieve a
digital single market, or build up a capital markets union.
The European Commission estimates that a digital single market would create an additional 3.8
million jobs in Europe and increase EU-28 GDP by 4%. Neither the euro-area member states nor
the  other  European  countries  are  in  any  economic  condition  to  brush  aside  such  a  positive
impact on their economies.
3. Reform of European monetary union
Implementing economic reforms at the national or European level as a way of strengthening the
euro  area  and  restoring  trust  in  the  agreed  rules  of  European  monetary  union  (EMU)  is  also
important to improve the cohesion in the euro area, which has undoubtedly suffered from the
financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises.  What’s  also  crucial,  however,  is  to  make  the  institutional
setting of EMU more stable.
The  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises  in  the  euro  area  bore  one  major  characteristic  in
common:  both  saw  a  core  economic  principle  being  violated:  the  liability  principle.  German
economist  Walter  Eucken,  who  was  one  of  the  founding  fathers  of  Germany’s  social  market
economy, once said very aptly: “Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs."
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
If banks assume they are too big to fail, they will be tempted to make the most of this implicit
insurance and take on excessive risks, at the expense of society at large. This is exactly what
happened before the financial crisis.
This  kind  of  implicit  insurance  is  not  altogether  unfamiliar  to  the  framework  of  EMU,  where  a
single monetary policy exists alongside 19 largely autonomous economic and fiscal policies.
As the crisis taught us, this set-up potentially exposes EMU to vulnerability because at the end of
the day, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthy developments in individual member
states if it wishes to prevent the stability of the union as a whole from coming under threat.
The prospect of being able to spread the consequences of unsustainable policy across the entire
monetary  union  might  weaken  the  incentives  to  run  a  sound  budgetary  policy.  This  is  why
institutional safeguards were put in place before the euro was launched: the Stability and Growth
Pact, the no bail-out clause, and the ban on monetary financing of governments.
Unfortunately, however, these safeguards were unable to prevent public debt from ballooning in
some euro-area countries, since the fiscal rules were repeatedly violated and the capital markets
didn’t sanction these breaches because the no bail-out clause lacked credibility.
When doubts about the debt sustainability of some euro-area member states surfaced during the
sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  urgently-taken  rescue  measures  helped  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
escalating. But they did so by mutualising fiscal liability on a substantial scale.
Fiscal  and  economic  policies,  on  the  other  hand,  essentially  remained  a  national  prerogative,
though the fiscal rules have admittedly been adapted. As a result, the balance between liability
and control has been thrown out of kilter.
However,  striking  an  even  balance  between  liability  and  control  is  crucial  for  the  functioning
of EMU – and that’s a point I made in my last speech in Amsterdam 2½ years ago. And I also
said in my speech back then that there are two possible ways to restore the balance between
liability and control: deeper integration, or more individual national responsibility on the part of the
member states.
The first solution would be to create a fiscal union with centralised decision-making powers. Only
within this framework would fiscal transfers and mutual liability via Eurobonds be consistent and
put control and liability back on an even keel.
While a fiscal union would not guarantee sound fiscal policymaking, it could certainly mitigate the
deficit bias of individual member states. And interestingly, even for Karl Otto Pöhl, the former
Bundesbank  President  who  was  a  member  of  the  Delors  Commission,  the  “fiscal  union
approach” was the intuitive one: “In a monetary union with irreversibly fixed exchange rates, the
weak would become ever weaker and the strong ever stronger. We would thus experience great
tensions  in  the  real  economy  of  Europe.  For  this  reason  alone,  monetary  union  without  the
simultaneous  integration  in  fields  like  fiscal  policy  as  well  as  regional  and  social  policy  is
completely inconceivable."
But let’s be honest here: a fiscal union approach was not on the cards 2½ years ago, and it has
become ever more improbable since then.
The outcome of the Brexit referendum has laid bare the scepticism about the European project
and  a  tendency  to  reject  further  integration  steps.  Surveys  reveal  that  many  citizens  in
the EU doubt whether the existing process of integration is still sustainable. This is possibly not
unrelated to the fact that the ongoing debate over the right response to the crisis in the euro area
has brought out into the open the persistent differences of opinion in fiscal and economic policy
matters.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is all the more astonishing because the euro-area countries had actually already established
a consensus on the appropriate role of fiscal policy – as documented in the Stability and Growth
Pact.  So  building  trust  in  the  rules  we  already  have  today  is  paramount  before  we  engage  in
major new integration steps.
To  cut  a  long  story  short:  a  fiscal  union,  which  would  require  member  states  to  surrender
substantial national sovereignty, hardly seems feasible at the moment. And as long as there’s no
willingness  to  transfer  national  sovereignty  to  the  European  level,  there  will  be  no  basis  for
mutualising  sovereign  risks  –  and  that’s  why  the  proposal  to  establish  a  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme (EDIS) isn’t the right institutional response to restore the balance between
liability and control in the euro area.
As long as actions taken at the national level, such as drafting insolvency law or very high stocks
of government bonds on banks’ balance sheets, can have a substantial impact on the health of
financial institutions, EDIS would allow risks to be shifted to the European level. This would send
the wrong incentives to banks and investors alike. The mutualisation of risk would not go hand in
hand with the necessary mutualisation of control rights – irrespective of the Single Supervisory
Mechanism that was put in place.
The second way of restoring the balance between liability and control, meanwhile, would be to
strengthen  the  Maastricht  approach  based  on  individual  responsibility.  This  would  leave
economic  and  fiscal  policy,  as  well  as  ultimate  liability  for  public  debt,  in  the  hands  of  the
individual member states. But how could such a decentralised approach work better in future
than it has done in the past?
One  of  the  problems  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  was  that  the  fiscal  rules  were  incapable  of
effectively limiting the increase in public debt. Although the rules were changed after the crisis,
the European Commission was granted more flexibility in interpreting them. And it has used this
flexibility quite a few times so far – and always to interpret the rules very loosely. As a result, the
binding force of the budgetary rules is weaker than ever before, as we can see, for instance, in
the budgetary developments in France, Spain and Portugal.
One  way  of  ensuring  that  the  rules  are  binding  would  be  to  install  a  new  and  independent
authority, a fiscal council. This institution would not be exposed to the same political conflicts of
interest  as  the  Commission,  which  has  to  assess  whether  national  budgets  comply  with  the
Stability and Growth Pact and hammer out political compromises between the interests of the
different member states.
"Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But,
when  it  is  used  imprudently  and  in  excess,  the  result  can  be  disaster."  This  statement  by
former  BIS  chief  economist  Stephen  Cecchetti  and  his  colleagues  Madhusudan  Mohanty  and
4
Fabrizio Zampolli is directed not only at private debt but also at public debt.
They show that excessively high private and public debt is not only a risk to financial stability but
also to economic growth. According to their estimations, in the euro area we are already in the
danger zone – at least with regard to corporate debt, at 105% of GDP, but also in terms of public
debt,  at  91%. And  so  this  is  one  more  reason  why  effective  limits  for  government  debt  are
urgently needed.
Even though the highly indebted countries’ debt ratios will decrease slightly over the next few
years,  the  gradual  improvement  in  the  economic  situation  and  the  very  favourable  funding
conditions mask a loosening of the fiscal stance in the euro-area countries. The member states’
medium-term budgetary plans reveal that three-quarters of them are far removed from a sound
fiscal position in 2016, and that this share will rise further. That is not what fiscal consolidation
looks like.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Binding fiscal rules and an institution that observes their adherence are just one component of a
consistent reform agenda. Additionally, it is important for capital markets to resume their role of
disciplining  national  fiscal  policy.  More  deeply  indebted  countries  ought  to  pay  higher  interest
rates.  This  will  only  happen  if  the  no  bail-out  clause  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  really  has  teeth.
Therefore,  it  must  be  possible  to  restructure  public  debt  without  posing  major  risks  to  the
financial system.
The July edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly Report describes what needs to be done to make
this possible. There are two reforms I’d like to mention in the following.
First, we need to sever the sovereign-bank nexus. The European banking union already marks a
huge step towards untangling this dangerous embrace. However, to this end, and to complement
the banking union, it is also crucial to do away with the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in
banking regulation. This implies that sovereign exposures will need to be backed by capital and
also be part of a large exposures regime.
A  second  measure  concerns  the  design  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism’s  financial
assistance  programmes.  The  ESM  is  there  to  provide  resources  to  countries  that  apply  for
an ESM financial assistance programme. However, these funds are generally not only used to
cover  budget  deficits,  but  also  to  redeem  maturing  sovereign  bonds.  By  implication,  when  a
programme is activated, European taxpayers are, in essence, bailing out the respective country’s
creditors.  If  a  haircut  ends  up  being  the  only  way  to  restore  a  country’s  debt  sustainability,
taxpayers, rather than investors, would shoulder the bill.
This does not exactly foster any willingness on the part of member states to agree to restructure
a programme country’s debt. Instead of a truly viable solution being reached, when push comes
to shove, a strategy of muddling through would win the day.
That’s why the Bundesbank is proposing to add a clause to the government bonds of euro-area
countries which automatically extends the maturity of bonds by three years if the member state
in question applies for ESMassistance. This way, the initial creditors would remain liable, and if
the government debt really does need to be restructured, that could be done in an orderly fashion
without jeopardising financial stability.
Our proposals would help to sever one direction of the sovereign-bank nexus: banks would be
better shielded from a deterioration in public finances. The financial crisis showed, however, that
wobbling banks can lead to stumbling sovereigns. To cut this direction of the nexus, financial
market regulation will need to be enhanced further.
4. Financial market regulation
In the mid-18th century, Amsterdam, then a global financial centre, had to overcome a series of
bank crises. One of these crises occurred when the Seven Years War came to an end in 1763.
In  the  aftermath  of  this  event,  one  of  the  biggest  Dutch  banks  (De  Neufville)  collapsed  when
commodity  prices,  unable  to  hold  their  inflated  war-time  levels,  plummeted.  Once  it  became
clear  that  the  core  of  the  crisis  revolved  around  a  single  financial  institution,  the  bank  was
resolved by an ad hoc consortium of its various creditors.
Nowadays, no such ad hoc solutions should be needed any longer because of the reforms that
were implemented in the wake of the financial crisis. In the euro area, a common restructuring
and resolution regime (the Single Resolution Mechanism) and bank supervision body under the
aegis of the ECB (the Single Supervisory Mechanism) were established.
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),
which  assures  the  harmonised  implementation  of  the  rules  throughout  all  member  states,
substantially strengthens the principle of individual responsibility in the banking sector, thereby
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
reducing the likelihood of public bail-outs.
However, the first line of defence in making a bank resolution less likely is the establishment of
higher capital requirements for banks. Hence, the G20governments decided during the financial
crisis to improve both the quantity and quality of banks’ capital and liquidity.
The goal of the Basel III framework, then, is to strengthen the resilience of the financial system.
But  to  achieve  that  goal,  it  is  important  for  Basel  III  to  be  implemented  completely.  This  is
especially  the  case  for  the  currently  debated  elements  of  the  Basel  III  framework,  which  are
scheduled to be finalised by the end of this year.
But  a  well-functioning  banking  system  is  essential  for  financing  the  real  economy,  and  it  is
therefore crucial for an ongoing economic recovery in the euro area. That’s why it’s important to
reiterate that we shouldn’t introduce a “Basel IV” framework through the back door. The GHOS
are absolutely right to stress that finalising Basel III shouldn’t lead to a further significant increase
in  banks’  capital  requirements,  and  –  might  I  add  –  the  outcome  should  also  be  regionally
balanced.
Finalising Basel III is not an easy task. While I would admit that the distinct differences in how
banks’  internal  risk-based  models  assess  credit,  market  and  operational  risks  need  to  be
reduced,  an  approach  consisting  of  excessively  high  parameter  floors  that  would  effectively
undermine the risk-weighted approach taken in Basel III would not be an appropriate solution.
Risk-weighted measures were initially introduced by Basel II to encourage banks to enhance their
internal  risk  management  and  rating  models  by  adapting  to  the  regulators’  standards.  This
general  route  is  still  appropriate.  However,  while  the  financial  crisis  revealed  that  banks  still
underestimated certain risks, Basel III rightly continues to adhere to the risk-based approach.
A regulatory framework following the non-risk-weighted approach would be fraught with problems
of its own. It sets banks problematic incentives to take greater risks. And so it was decided to
improve  regulatory  standards  within  the  Basel  III  framework.  The  comparability  of  parameters
between  banks’  internal  models  and  regulatory  models  as  well  as  across  different  financial
institutions and jurisdictions has to be adjusted with a sense of proportion.
Nevertheless, the leverage ratio – as a non-risk-weighted instrument – is a useful complement
as a backstop. I therefore agree with my colleague Mark Carney from the Bank of England who
once said in this context that it is sometimes good to wear a belt and suspenders to prevent your
trousers from falling down.
Last but not least, I would like to come back to a point I mentioned earlier on today, which is
directly  related  to  financial  regulation:  Sovereign  exposures  on  banks’  balance  sheets  still
represent a channel for the dangerous sovereign-bank nexus which acted as an accelerant in the
euro-area  crises.  It  is  essential,  then,  for  sovereign  debt  to  be  incorporated  appropriately  into
banking regulation.
5. Conclusion
Since I last spoke here in Amsterdam 2½ years ago, a great deal of work has been done in the
euro  area  to  overcome  the  turmoil  unleashed  by  the  crisis,  and  important  measures  like
the  SSM  and  the  SRM  have  been  implemented  to  safeguard  the  future  stability  of  monetary
union. Nevertheless, now is not the time for complacency.
If we are to shore up the resilience of EMU, it is mainly the individual member states that are
responsible for strengthening their economies. But additional measures at the European level are
needed to foster growth in the euro area. And last but not least, we will need to make further
reforms to EMU’s institutional framework. These reforms can lay the foundations for restoring the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
balance between control and liability.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
See, for example, Ann Harrison, John McLaren and Margaret McMillan (2011), "Recent Perspectives on Trade
and Inequality", Annual Review of Economics Vol. 3, pp 261-289.
See,  for  example,  Daron  Acemoglu  (2003),  "Patterns  of  Skill  Premia",  The  Review  of  Economic
Studies, Vol. 70, No. 2, pp 199-230; Paolo Epifaniand Gino Gancia (2008), "The Skill Bias of World Trade", The
Economic Journal, Vol. 118, Issue 530, pp 927-960.
OECD (2015), "In it together: why less inequality benefits all", Paris.
Stephen G Cecchetti, Madhusudan Mohanty and Fabrizio Zampolli (2011), "The real effects of debt", BIS Working
Papers No. 352.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
