3RD ANNUAL KENYA DIASPORA HOMECOMING CONVENTION 
 Catholic University, Nairobi 
 Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge 
Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
December 14, 2016 
As Prepared for Delivery 
Good  afternoon!  I  am  indeed  honored  to  speak  before  this  distinguished  diaspora 
homecoming convention.  
 I  would  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  the  Kenya  Diaspora  Alliance  for  the  invitation  to 
participate  in  this  session  as  a  Keynote  Speaker.  Let  me  begin  by  acknowledging  the 
important  role  of  the  Kenyan  diaspora  in  economic  development  mainly  through 
remittances.  Diaspora  remittances  are  currently  one  of  the  main  sources  of  foreign 
exchange for the country, amounting to USD1.7 billion in the 12 months to October 2016, 
up  from  USD1.4  billion  in  2015.  Apart  from  remittances,  which  are  an  alternative 
investment financing channel in key sectors of our economy such as real estate, diaspora 
entrepreneurs are helping create jobs and stimulate trade.  
 As you are aware, the Government has been implementing measures to tap the enormous 
potential of our diaspora’s knowledge and expertise in order to enhance their contribution 
to  economic  development.  I  also  understand  that  diaspora  diplomacy  has  been  main-
streamed  in  our  foreign  policy,  thereby  providing  the  necessary  framework  for  dialogue 
between the Government and diaspora on pertinent issues to the economy.   
   
The theme of this conference – Diaspora Voting and Youth Empowerment – underscores 
the importance of the  diaspora and  youth participation in the overall development of our 
country.  Given  this  theme,  and  borrowing  from  my  recent  experience  as  a  diaspora 
returnee,  I  would  like  to  highlight  measures  that  have  been  put  in  place  to  enhance  the 
economic environment, and the economic opportunities that are available to the diaspora.   
 First, macroeconomic stability remains paramount. The achievement and maintenance of a 
low  and  stable  inflation  facilitates  predictability  in  the  economic  environment  thereby 
promoting  investment  and  a  sustainable  growth.  Prudent  monetary  policy  has  kept 
inflation within the government target range, and ensured stability in the foreign exchange 
market. In this regard, the CBK moved decisively in the second half of 2015 to deal with 
 1 
rising  inflation  expectations  largely  due  to  increases  in  food  prices,  and  pressures  in  the 
foreign  exchange  market  reflecting  developments  in  the  global  financial  markets.  As  a 
result,  overall  inflation  declined  to  stand  at  6.7  percent  in  November  2016  from  8.0 
percent  in  December  2015.  However,  we  are  closely  monitoring  developments  in  the 
domestic  and  global  economies  which  could  have  implications  on  the  price  stability 
objective. Uncertainties remain with respect to the impact of Brexit, potential resumption 
of  tightening  of  U.S.  monetary  policy,  and  the  future  U.S.  policy  following  the  recent 
political developments. 
 Secondly,  other  measures  are  being  implemented  to  improve  the  business  environment, 
including  investments  in  infrastructure  such  as  the  Standard  Gauge  Railway,  advancing 
the use of information technology in doing business, and ensuring security, among others. 
These  initiatives  are  key  to  promoting  competitiveness  in  the  economy.  In  addition,  the 
growing  youthful  and  entrepreneurial  population  is  a  boon  to  the  business  environment. 
Kenya is ranked the World’s third most reformed country in the World Bank 2017 Doing 
Business  Report.  The  performance  of  the  economy  has  remained  strong,  with  growth 
expected at 6.0 percent in 2016 from 5.6 percent in 2015. On the contrary, growth in the 
major  African  economies  has  been  weighed  down  in  2016  largely  due  to  the  slump  in 
commodity prices. 
 Thirdly,  the  diversification  of  the  Kenyan  economy  in  terms  of  export  products  and 
external markets is a major source of resilience against adverse external shocks. About 40 
percent  of  Kenya’s  exports  are  to  Africa,  while  the  economy  is  not  reliant  on 
commodities.  The  current  account  deficit  has  been  narrowing,  and  is  projected  at  5.5 
percent  of  GDP  in  2016  from  6.8  percent  in  2015  and  9.8  percent  in  2014.  The 
improvement  in  the  current  account  balance  reflects  improved  earnings  from  exports  of 
tea,  coffee,  and  horticulture.  Diaspora  remittances  and  receipts  from  tourism  have  also 
been resilient. The CBK foreign exchange reserves, which stand at 4.8 months of import 
cover,  together  with  the  Precautionary  Arrangements  with  the  IMF  totalling  USD1.5 
billion continue to provide buffers against short term shocks.  
 Fourthly, as you may be aware, the banking sector has continued to play a key role in the 
economy  through  mobilisation  of  savings  and  allocation  of  the  resources  to  key  sectors. 
The CBK is strengthening the banking sector to ensure greater transparency and stronger 
governance,  and  also  to  promote  effective  business  models  and  innovation.  The  Central 
Bank  continues  to  engage  with  financial  service  providers  to  introduce  innovative 
solutions or products in the market in order to boost financial inclusion and lower the cost 
of  financial  services.  The  CBK  is  also  closely  monitoring  the  impact  of  the  recent 
 2 
legislation  to  cap  bank  interest  rates  on  the  economy,  while  implementing  additional 
measures to lower the cost of credit on a sustainable basis. 
 Let me now turn to some of the available investment opportunities, which in my view 
provide the diaspora with an opportunity to participate in the development of our 
economy. I am happy that these products leverage on mobile financial services thereby 
making it easier for investors to place their investments. The Treasury Mobile Direct 
(TMD), which was rolled out in December 2015, offers a channel to access small 
denomination government securities through the mobile phone. The TMD has improved 
the efficiency of the existing domestic debt issuance operations, while also increasing 
retail investors’ participation in the primary auctions for government securities. 
Additionally, the M-Akiba initiative seeks to increase the public’s participation in 
government securities through the existing mobile-phone money transfer services, and 
with a low minimum investment amount of USD30. Plans are underway for the launch of 
the first M-Akiba infrastructure bond.  
 Additional investment channels in government securities, including diaspora bonds, are 
also being considered. In particular, infrastructure bonds are a very popular investment 
channel, tied to the financing of the Government’s long-term infrastructure projects. These 
bonds were introduced in February 2009, and their success has signaled the launch of 
similar bonds by corporates. 
 The diaspora youth and women also have an opportunity to participate in the Government 
gender  and  youth  empowerment  programs.  Currently,  30  percent  of  all  Government 
procurements are allocated to the youth, women, and persons living with disabilities. The 
Government  has  indicated  its  intentions  to  expand  the  opportunities  for  the  youth  in 
procurement through the Access to Government Procurement Opportunities platform. 
 As  I  close,  I  would  like  to  challenge  the  Kenyan  diaspora  to  take  advantage  of  the 
improved business environment and the increasing investment opportunities in the country 
as  a  way  of  participating  in  the  macro-management  of  the  economy.  Let  me  once  again 
congratulate the Kenya Diaspora Alliance for organizing this forum.  
 Thank you! 
 3 
