Mojmír Hampl: An uncertain world
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the 8th Corporate
Research Forum (CRF) International Conference "An Uncertain World: Planning for 2025 and
beyond", Prague, 12-14 October 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Good evening and let me welcome you all here to the premises of the Czech National Bank. I’m
really pleased you have chosen our Congress Centre for your cocktail reception. On behalf of the
Bank  Board  of  the  Czech  National  Bank  I’d  like  to  say  that  we  are  delighted  to  have  such  a
distinguished gathering here today. And I don’t say that just out of courtesy, I really mean it.
When  we  started  organising  this  welcome  speech  with  Richard  Hargreaves,  he  asked  me  to
introduce the Czech Republic in 10 or 15 minutes. I said: “Wow, what a challenge”. Typically I
speak about interest rates, inflation or the exchange rate rather than about typical features of this
country, but then I thought sometimes even a central banker should try to do something useful.
So I put my mind to work.
I will not repeat the known facts to this noble audience of educated people. I’m sure most of you
will have heard about Czech beer, about our former president Vaclav Havel (or Vaklav Hejvl as
many tend to pronounce his name) or about the international success of Czech sports stars in
tennis, ice hockey and sometimes even soccer. Names like Kvitová, Navrátilová, Lendl, Čech
and Rosický won’t be completely unknown to many of you. This in itself is an achievement for a
country of just 10.5 million.
But that’s not all. I tried to jot down a couple of things I hope you will not necessarily know. The
Czech Republic has the highest consumption of beer per head in the world, at roughly 160 litres
per capita. That may not come as a surprise, but what you also might not know is that we have
the highest consumption of pork per head as well, our only close competitor in this regard being
China. According to some European statistics, we also have the highest number of garden pools
per head in the whole of Europe. There is a garden pool per every 50 inhabitants here, while in
wealthier Germany the figure is just one per 103 inhabitants. If you don’t believe this, just take a
look out of your window as you take off from Prague Airport on your way home. So this is about
lifestyle: good beer, heavy food and bathing. Actually, many Czechs would say that this is the
very definition of how to relax and be cool about the world and life.
But this would also be a rather simplistic caricature. So let’s go further. Ours is a country with a
long and entrenched tradition of industrial production and manufacturing. This goes back to the
19th century, to the time of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, when this part of the empire used to
be its industrial undisputed powerhouse. This tradition has survived through wars and totalitarian
regimes to the present day.
Even now, the Czech Republic is the country with the highest ratio of industrial production to
GDP in the whole of the EU and the ratio is higher than in Germany, a fact which many do not
know. And it has actually been rising rather than falling over the last 10 years or so.
This is manifested in the fact that the Czech Republic is the second biggest producer of cars per
head in the world. Moreover, the Czech Republic and Slovakia – which formed a single state until
1993 – are together by far the biggest car-producing countries in the world in per capita terms.
With 150 cars produced per every 1,000 citizens these two countries are well ahead of South
Korea and Germany combined in per head metrics. So whenever you drive your Skoda, Hyundai,
Peugeot, Kia, Volkswagen or even Porsche, don’t be surprised to learn that they were actually
manufactured within a radius of 300 kilometres of Prague. By the way, Ferdinand Porsche, the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
founder of the Porsche car manufacturer, was also born here, 100 kilometres north of Prague.
Many  of  my  friends  in  the  real  economy  say  that  the  Czech  Republic  is  a  country  where
everything  is  produced,  from  wings  for Airbus  and  Embraer  aircraft  (we  are  also  the  biggest
producer  of  ultralight  planes  in  the  world,  for  instance),  through  turbines,  cars,  buses,
locomotives and guns to bearings, brushes and semtex. Whatever you need to produce you will
always  find  at  least  one  factory  capable  of  making  it,  the  anecdotic  evidence  seems  to  be
suggesting.
As exports obviously feed this country, and as we are so close to Germany and the German-
speaking  world,  you  won’t  be  surprised  to  learn  that  Germany  is  by  far  our  biggest  trading
partner, with more than 30% of our exports going there and with the biggest proportion of foreign
investment  in  the  Czech  Republic  coming  from  Germany.  (The  UK  is  roughly  the  tenth  or
eleventh biggest source of investment for this country.) But you might be surprised when I tell
you that the Czech Republic is one of the few countries in the world that has a trade surplus, not
a trade deficit, with Germany. This is also quite unique.
But it’s not all about the economy, so let me turn to a couple of small curiosities which might be
of interest for this audience. I believe some of you use contact lenses, which were invented by
the  Czech  scientist  Otto  Wichterle,  as  well  as  nylon,  for  instance.  The  Czech  scientist  Jan
Jansky was the first to classify blood into four groups. The song “Roll out the Barrel” was written
by the Czech composer Jaromir Vejvoda, and the New World Symphony was composed by the
world famous Czech composer Antonín Dvořák. So you can find at least some Czech marks in
many areas of everyday life.
How about my domain, finance? Well at least one thing originates in this country. You sometimes
pay with US dollars, or Canadian dollars or Australian dollars for that matter, so you should know
that the name dollar comes from the original Czech name tolar – TOLAR – which was a small
silver coin minted in Western Bohemia in the 16th century. Now it is world famous. And while I
am talking about the traces left by the Czech language, I should not forget that there is at least
one  Czech  word  which  has  spread  from  my  very  complicated  mother  tongue  to  almost  all
languages. That word is robot – the invention of Czech writer Karel Čapek. It comes from the
Czech word “robota”, which means unfree and unpaid labour, or corvée in English.
Ladies and gentlemen, I can only hope that I have succeeded in convincing you that this is a
country with a long track record in many areas and that it is not a waste of your time to explore its
history, beauties and treasures, be it here in Prague or elsewhere. I’d say you might find many
other surprises as well.
I  wish  you  every  success  with  your  conference.  Enjoy  it,  enjoy  Prague  and  enjoy  the  Czech
republic.
Thank you very much.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
