N S Vishwanathan: Issues in infrastructure financing in India
Chief Guest's address by Mr N S Vishwanathan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India,
at the 6th National Summit organised by the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of
India  (ASSOCHAM)  on  "Infrastructure  Finance  -  Building  a  New  India",  Mumbai,  15  November
2016.
 I am happy to be here at ASSOCHAM’s Sixth International Summit on Infrastructure financing.
Infrastructure plays a crucial role in economic development of a country. In India, too like many
other  countries,  Infrastructure  development  is  a  critical  aspect  of  our  growth  strategy  and
therefore, the sector gets the importance from all stakeholders commensurate with that role. As
you may be aware, Government has announced the target of Rs 25 trillion (US$ 376.53 billion)
investment  in  infrastructure  over  a  period  of  three  years,  which  will  include  Rs  8  trillion  (US$
120.49  billion)  for  developing  27  industrial  clusters  and  an  additional  Rs  5  trillion  (US$  75.30
billion) for road, railway and port connectivity projects. It is also instructive to note here that only
recently,  in  2016,  India  jumped  19  places  in  World  Bank’s  Logistics  Performance  Index  (LPI)
2016, to rank 35th amongst 160 countries. Infrastructure like ports, roads and airports together
form  one  of  the  six  parameters  for  this  index.  In  the  journey  of  a  country’s  progress  towards
economic prosperity, infrastructure plays a crucial role and obviously, the need for an effective
and  efficient  system  that  provides  financial  resources  to  this  sector  is  just  as  important.  It  is
therefore only timely that ASSOCHAM is organizing this event.
India’s financial system is dominated by banks. NBFCs too play a part in infrastructure financing.
There are NBFCs that specialize in financing infrastructure and certain sector specific NBFCs in
the  Government  Sector.  Of  course,  banks  are  the  predominant  providers  of  finance  to  the
infrastructure sector. The flow of bank finance to infrastructure sector has clocked high growth
rates. The outstanding bank credit to the infrastructure sector, which stood at Rs. 95 billion in
March  2001,  increased  to  Rs.9,853  billion  in  March  2016,  a  compound  annual  growth  rate
(CAGR) of 39.31 percent over the last 15 years. This of course covers the period of excessive
exuberance when it was fashionable to lend for road projects, power and the like, without the
requisite due-diligence. A look at the data:
This  phenomenal  growth  brought  in  its  wake  certain  undesirable  consequences,  like  high
stressed assets. More of this later.
A  few  economic  characteristics  differentiate  infrastructure  assets  from  other  asset  classes.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  characteristics  also  make  it  more  difficult  to  match  investment  demand  and  financing
supply:
Firstly,  infrastructure  projects  are  often  complex  and  involve  a  large  number  of  parties.
Infrastructure often comprises natural monopolies such as highways or water supply, and hence
governments want to retain the ultimate control to prevent an abuse of monopoly power. This
requires complex legal arrangements to ensure proper distribution of payoffs and risk-sharing to
align the incentives of all parties involved.
Secondly,  infrastructure  projects  are  long  term  and  are  therefore  subject  to  various  risks
including those due to changes in policies, delays in clearances, etc. Every event that delays the
implementation of a project leads to cost and time overruns that in turn have a bearing on the
techno-economic  viability  of  the  project  or  would  necessitate  revision  in  the  price  of  the  end-
product. Very often the infrastructure products are meant to serve public good which imposes a
limitation on ability to determine their price.
Thirdly,  where  debt  financing  is  dominated  by  the  banking  system,  the  fundamental  problem
posed by the asset-liability mismatch is critical. In India, the dominance of PSBs may partly offset
this risk because the perceived assurance of government backing provides the requisite flow of
deposits.
Because of these reasons, there are always challenge in financing infrastructure. At the same
time, infrastructure sector will be a key driver for the Indian economy. Given the high priority that
the Government is according to the infrastructure sector, there is no gainsaying the enormous
potential  for  financing  the  sector. As  per  an  estimate,  India  needs  Rs  31  trillion  (US$  454.83
billion) to be spent on infrastructure development over the next five years, with 70 per cent of
funds  needed  for  power,  roads  and  urban  infrastructure  segments.  It  is  essential  that  the
stakeholders take the right steps to participate in this move and also make a decent return from
this opportunity.
Let me quickly recall here some of the important measures that the RBI has taken to help flow of
funds to infrastructure:
1.  In view of the fact that projects take long time to implement during which the interest cost is
part  of  the  project  cost,  the  importance  of  a  specified  time  for  commencement  of
commercial operations is high. Taking into consideration the different reasons due to which
project  implementation  can  be  delayed,  extension  of  time  for  completion  of  projects  has
been  allowed  subject  to  certain  conditions  without  change  in  classification  of  the  loan.
Limited cost overrun financing has also been allowed.
2.  Banks  are  permitted  to  issue  guarantees  favouring  other  lending  institutions  in  respect  of
infrastructure projects, provided the bank issuing the guarantee takes a funded share in the
project at least to the extent of 5 percent of the project cost and undertakes normal credit
appraisal, monitoring and follow up of the project. In other cases, banks are precluded from
issuing guarantees favouring other banks/lending institutions for the loans extended by the
latter, as the primary lender is expected to assume the credit risk and not pass on the same
by securing itself with a guarantee i.e. separation of credit risk and funding is not allowed.
3.  Normally promoters’ contribution towards the equity capital of a company should come from
their own resources and they should not normally grant advances to take up shares of other
companies. However, banks have been permitted to extend finance for funding promoters’
equity in cases where the proposal involves acquisition of shares in an existing company
engaged  in  implementing  or  operating  an  infrastructure  project  in  India,  subject  to  certain
conditions.
4.  Banks have been allowed to structure loans flexibly, (what is called as the 5/25 scheme) so
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that the repayment schedule is aligned with the cash flows.
5.  Banks  can  raise  funds  from  the  market  by  way  of  infrastructure  bonds,  and  the  assets
financed by such funds are exempted from the Priority sector lending requirements and the
funds  raised  are  exempted  from  reserve  requirements.  More  recently,  we  have  allowed
banks to raise such funds by way of masala bonds, as well
6.  An efficient bond market is an important requirement for raising funds for the infrastructure
sector. This will de-risk the banks’ balance sheets as well. We are taking several measures
in this regard. As a part of this we have allowed banks to provide credit enhancement for
bond issuances, subject to certain conditions. In fact we have more recently allowed banks
to jointly provide CE up to 50 percent of the bond issue.
7.  Cost of funds is an important element for infrastructure. At the same time, the financiers at
the  pre-construction  stage  need  to  be  compensated  for  construction  risk.  Important
measures like allowing setting up of IDFs, both as NBFCs and Mutual Funds, to take over
the post construction assets from banks, allowing take out financing etc., have been taken.
8.  We have allowed the debts due to the lenders in case of PPP projects to be considered as
secured  to  the  extent  assured  by  the  project  authority  in  terms  of  the  Concession
Agreement, subject to certain conditions.
9.  In view of certain safeguards such as escrow accounts available in respect of infrastructure
lending, unsecured infrastructure loan accounts which are classified as sub-standard attract
a provisioning of 20 per cent instead of the prescription of 25 per cent for other unsecured
sub-standard accounts. To avail of this benefit of lower provisioning, the banks should have
in place an appropriate mechanism to escrow the cash flows and also have a clear and
legal first claim on those cash flows.
The Reserve bank has provided additional toolkits to banks to deal with stressed assets. A series
of measures were announced after the framework for dealing with stressed assets was put out
in  February  2014.  The  mandatory  need  to  form  JLF  in  SMA2   exposures,  determining  a
Corrective Action Plan or alternative measures to deal with a stressed asset, application of the
flexible  restructuring  scheme  in  existing  cases,  the  SDR,  S4A  etc.,  were  part  of  the  toolkits
provided to banks. Additional time for completion of project was given where there was a change
in  management.  We  have  recently  reduced  the  threshold  for  applying  these  toolkits  to  the
existing cases to cover a larger number of entities.
1
Construction  sector,  which  executes  the  projects  for  the  infrastructure  sector  has  also  been
recently  brought  within  the  purview  of  the  flexible  restructuring  scheme,  so  that  they  are  in  a
position to deal with stress.
I  alluded  to  the  stressed  assets  scenario  in  the  infrastructure  sector.  The  gross  NPAs  of  the
infrastructure  sector  is  about  8  percent  of  the  total  advances  to  that  sector  and  accounts  for
nearly 13 percent of the NPAs of the banking sector. Total stressed assets including restructured
standard assets of infrastructure sector was approximately 17 percent of the total banking sector
exposure to the sector and about 21 percent of the total stressed assets. It is only appropriate
that we take a look at this a little closely.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are several reasons for the higher level of stressed assets in the infrastructure sector.
Firstly,  there  is  a  need  to  properly  structure  the  projects  and  their  financing.  These  are  long
gestation projects that need to have a proper mix of equity and loan funding. The time lines for
completion of project needs to be assessed realistically upfront, so that the date of DCCO is not
artificially  fixed  without  regard  to  the  normal  time  taken  for  executing  such  projects.  While  a
conservative estimate of the completion time will reduce the project cost, it can potentially sow
the  seeds  for  stress  in  the  form  of  time  and  cost  overruns.  If  one  takes  a  close  look  at  the
reasons for extending the time for achieving DCCO, many are anticipatable and would not be
good enough to be considered force majeure.
Second,  in  many  cases,  the  repayment  schedule  was  not  drawn  commensurate  with  cash
flows. There was the prevarication to recover the loan in a much shorter time frame than the
project’s  revenues  would  permit.  This  invariably  stressed  the  entity,  very  often  leading  to
repayments being managed through fresh borrowings and the like. This in turn, adds to the cost
and builds stress. We have addressed this by making clear that banks can recover the loans
over 85 percent of the economic life of the project so that further stress is not built because of
how the repayment schedules were drawn in the past.
Third,  there  were  some  force  majeure  factors  like  change  in  policies,  non-availability  of  raw
material, and the like.
So  what  should  be  done  to  harness  this  potential  opportunity  both  to  contribute  to  the  nation
building and at the same time make it a win-win for all? I think the answer lies in avoiding the
pitfalls of the earlier experience.
We need to get the project appraisal done the right way. Ensure that all risks are identified
and the project schedule is reasonable. Financiers of infrastructure projects should have the
right  risk  appetite  and  also  the  ability  to  assess  the  fundamentals  of  a  project,  the
appropriateness of its design and the reliability of the projections.
It has to be ensured that there is a proper mix of financing instruments and sources, and the
right levels of leverage.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Use of corporate bond market to raise a part of the project funds should be encouraged.
Repayment schedule should be properly drawn up and aligned with expected cash flows.
Pricing of the loans should be commensurate with risk and provide for flexible financing that
recognizes the change in risk profile of the asset.
Way Forward
A paper on Infrastructure financing by BIS states as under:
“On financing side, challenges remain. Currently, infrastructure finance is dominated by direct
equity investments and bank loans. Boosting infrastructure finance will require the broadening of
the potential group of investors and the tapping of the vast financial resources of capital markets.
This, in turn, necessitates a broader mix of financial instruments. Both infrastructure funds and
bonds have great potential. The better and more widespread securitisation of bank loans seems
desirable  to  diversify  risks.  It  may  also  assist  the  development  of  transparent  capital  market
instruments. For emerging markets, financial market development, trusted legal frameworks, and
the development of a long-term investor base are pertinent”
This  is  what  we  should  work  for.  Hopefully,  banks  would  soon  move  towards  credit
enhancement,  so  that  other  players  are  willing  to  subscribe  to  bonds  issued  by  corporates
executing infrastructure projects. It is also necessary that those with long maturity liabilities are
encouraged to provide funds to the infrastructure projects.
This apart, I feel there is a huge potential to raise money by way of issue of green bonds. India’s
commitment  to  the  Paris  Climate  Accord,  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  work  towards
implementing infrastructure projects that are environmentally sustainable because it is both the
need of the hour and there could be alternative sources for raising funds for projects that are
environment  friendly.  We  will  have  to  set  benchmarks  for  evaluation/rating  of  the  emission
prevention/avoidance/reduction that a project brings and harness the financing potential for such
projects.
Let  me  end  by  once  again  thanking ASSOCHAM  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  share  my
thoughts on the subject and I am sure that the deliberations during the day will throw up new and
actionable ideas to facilitate flow of funds for the infrastructure sector.
1
Special Mention Account 2 – where principal and/or interest is overdue for more than 60 days.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
