Rodrigo Vergara: Chile's September 2016 Monetary Policy Report
Presentation  by  Mr  Rodrigo  Vergara,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  of  the  Monetary
Policy  Report  before  the  Honorable  Senate  of  the  Republic,  Santiago  de  Chile,  7  September
2016.
 The Monetary Policy Report of September 2016 can be found at www.bcentral.cl
Introduction
Mr. President of the Senate, Mr. Ricardo Lagos-Weber, honorable senators, ladies, gentlemen,
I thank you for inviting the Board of the Central Bank of Chile to present our Monetary  Policy
Report. As it does in September each year, this issue coincides with the Central Bank’s Report
to the Senate, presenting our vision of the recent macroeconomic and financial developments in
Chile and abroad, together with prospects and implications for monetary policy conduct.
After  more  than  two  years  above  the  tolerance  range,  last  July  the  CPI’s  annual  inflation
descended to 4%. The baseline scenario that I will be sharing with you in a minute assumes, as
do private expectations, that it will continue to approach the 3% target in the coming months, to
close the year at 3.5%.
Why has it been so high for so long? We can blame it on the significant depreciation of our peso,
driven  by  the  much  needed  readjustment  of  an  economy  confronted  with  the  end  of  the
commodity price supercycle, the end of a very pronounced cycle of mining investment, and a
domestic weakening associated with a decrease in the country’s capacity for long-term growth.
The contribution of the Central Bank to this transition has been a more expansionary monetary
policy  that  has  smoothed  the  cycle  and  supported  the  depreciation  of  our  currency,  within  a
flexible exchange rate scheme. Although such depreciation has transitorily increased inflation, it
has aided the necessary resource allocation across sectors. All this has occurred in a context
where inflation expectations and monetary policy credibility have remained intact.
As I mentioned, this Report’s baseline scenario foresees inflation declining further, to converge to
3%  somewhat  sooner  than  we  thought  in  June.  This  assumption  estimates  that,  in  the  short
term, the exchange rate will remain around its levels prevailing at the last statistical cutoff date.
But of course, there are significant degrees of uncertainty, so the risks are still there.
One of our concerns in June regarding the external scenario was the so-called Brexit. However,
and quite unexpectedly, its approval increased the markets’ perception that the developed world’s
monetary  policies  would  stay  highly  expansionary  for  a  longer  period  of  time,  driving  global
financial conditions, particularly those facing the emerging world, to be more favorable than we
assumed in the first half of the year. Despite a partial reversal in recent weeks, the mood of the
markets  is  better  than  anticipated,  even  considering  that  the  Federal  Reserve  is  expected  to
raise its monetary policy interest rate again.
Services  inflation—typically  associated  with  non-tradables—has  not  changed  much  and  is
expected  to  continue  decelerating  gradually.  Second-quarter  data  for  activity  and  demand
brought  no  surprises  either,  and  the  projections  for  this  and  next  year,  which  I  will  analyze  in
more detail in a while, show only marginal changes.
Considering this, we have kept the monetary policy rate (MPR) at 3.5% for several months. At the
same  time,  we  have  changed  the  bias  of  our  monetary  policy  by  stating  that,  if  the  baseline
scenario comes true, there will be no need over the projection horizon to follow through with the
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
increases we had foreseen up to the latest Report.
On the domestic front, like in June, our main concern has to do with the slow growth that the
Chilean economy continues to experience. For this year we expect growth to be in the 1.5% to
2%  range,  and  for  next  year  it  should  be  between  1.75%  and  2.75%.  If  this  is  the  case,  the
economy  will  complete  four  years  growing  on  average  around  2%.  This  is  definitely  not
satisfactory, and is something we must not only worry about, but assume with top priority.
It should be noted that, although in our baseline scenario we expect no further deterioration of the
global economy, neither do we expect a significant recovery of output and demand. This, in some
way, makes it ever more important that, as a country, we deepen our analysis of those domestic
elements that could be holding back growth in our economy.
Let me now present in more detail the macroeconomic scenario we believe to be the most likely
in the quarters to come and its associated risks.
Macroeconomic scenario
In July, annual inflation returned to the tolerance range. As I said, the behavior of the exchange
rate has played a key role in this process, as it allowed us to leave behind the upward effects of
the sharp depreciation the peso experienced in 2013–2015. Considering the average of the ten
days  prior  to  the  statistical  cutoff,  the  dollar  was  trading  at  somewhat  less  than  670  pesos,
equivalent to a nominal appreciation of the peso of around 4% with respect to the close of the
previous Report (figure 1).
The  evolution  of  the  exchange  rate  has  had  visible  effects  on  the  goods  component  of  core
inflation  (i.e.,  the  CPIEFE,  or  CPI  excluding  foods  and  energy).  In  annual  terms,  it  went  from
around 5% early the year, to 3.7% in its latest measurement. Inflation of the services component
of the CPIEFE has made a smoother adjustment, from 5% to 4.5% annually in the same time
span,  reflecting  its  indexation  to  past  inflation  and  output  gaps  that  have  not  widened  much.
Accordingly, and as expected, the total CPIEFE has seen a reduction in its annual expansion
rate.  The  more  volatile  items  in  the  basket  showed  dissimilar  movements  in  the  past  three
months: while annual food inflation rose, energy inflation fell (figure 2).
The  baseline  scenario  of  the  September  Report  assumes  that  the  CPI’s  annual  inflation  will
continue to approach 3% in the coming months, closing 2016 at 3.5%. The CPIEFE will descend
to 3% faster than will headline CPI, and by early 2017 it will be below this mark (figure 3). This
scenario assumes that inflation will converge to the target somewhat sooner than we expected in
June, which partly relies on the exchange rate remaining relatively stable over the short term. As I
said, this is subject to significant degrees of uncertainty, as illustrated by the fluctuations that the
parity has shown in recent months. As a working assumption, our projections consider that the
real exchange rate (RER) will hover around its current levels throughout the projection horizon, in
line  with  the  assessment  that  today  it  is  not  far  from  what  can  be  inferred  from  its  long-term
fundamentals (figure 4).
Globally,  despite  the  reversal  of  recent  weeks,  external  financial  conditions  facing  emerging
economies  have  outperformed  our  projections  in  earlier  Reports  (figure  5).  This  improvement
has been accompanied by the markets’ perception that the expansionary monetary policies in the
developed world will persist for longer. In this context, the changes in expectations regarding the
Fed’s  monetary  policy  conduct  have  been  particularly  important  because  of  both  its  weight  in
financial markets and the uncertainties surrounding it (figure 6). The markets assume a more
gradual normalization of monetary policy than that announced by the Fed. In any case, there are
differing appreciations about how it will resolve the tensions between the dynamics of the real
sector, inflation and exchange rate conditions in the US economy. In Japan, the UK and Europe,
the markets expect policies to remain as expansionary, or be even more so, considering their
weak economic growth rates and projected inflation exceeding their central banks’ targets.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this context, the fraction of fixed-income assets—including long term—with negative rates has
increased  considerably  around  the  world.  I  draw  your  attention  to  this  fact,  because  it  was
unimaginable some years back. Thus, higher risk appetite and the search for yield have pushed
the prices of risky assets up, squeezing sovereign spreads and appreciating currencies vis-a-vis
the dollar (figure 7). In any case, the intensity with which this change in financial conditions will
impact  activity  or  commodity  prices  is  not  so  clear.  In  the  baseline  scenario,  global  activity
projections do not change significantly. For the 2016–2017 biennium average growth in the world
economy is expected to stand at 3.2%, while Chile’s trading partners should grow by 3.0%, also
fairly unchanged from June. The terms of trade will deteriorate less over the projection horizon,
although the trajectories foreseen for the prices of copper and oil are similar to those of June,
expecting prices in 2018 of US$2.3 per pound of copper and around US$55 per barrel of oil (table
1).
Locally,  second-quarter  data  for  domestic  activity  and  demand  confirmed  bounded  economic
growth. GDP posted lower annual growth than in the first quarter, but with a configuration where
natural-resource-related  sectors  —particularly  mining—  showed  less  favorable  performance
while  other  GDP  changed  little,  if  anything.  The  total  consumption  component  of  demand
continued  to  grow  at  around  2.5%  in  annual  terms,  while  investment  posted  positive  growth,
boosted by specific factors associated with imports of machinery and equipment. On the other
hand, during the second quarter investment in construction and other works showed a sharper
than expected fall, with a still weak real estate sector (figure 8).
In this context, this Report’s baseline scenario assumes that GDP will rise between 1.5% and
2.0% this year, considering that the information reviewed for the first half of the year brings no
surprise with respect to our June projections. For 2017, a range is projected for GDP between
1.75% and 2.75%, down from expectations in June. Our forecast for 2017 GDP puts in in the
1.75%  to  2.75%  range,  less  than  we  expected  in  June.  Domestic  demand  minus  inventories
should post a modest recovery in 2017: 2.1% annually, after growing 1.5% in 2016. In any case,
we have upgraded our growth projection for this year from June, because we now estimate a
smaller decrease of gross fixed capital formation, in particular because of the performance of the
machinery  and  equipment  item  in  the  second  quarter.  However,  this  is  partly  offset  by  the
expected  annual  fall  in  construction  and  other  works,  where  a  debilitated  real  estate  sector
stands out.
In 2017, we foresee that gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) will continue to grow around 1%
annually,  still  affected  by  the  drop  in  mining  investment,  but  counterbalanced  by  growth  in
investment in other sectors. As a fraction of GDP, both real and nominal GFCF will still fall short
of  its  2015  figures.  Real  GFCF  will  average  22.7%  of  GDP  in  2016–2017,  while  its  nominal
version will average 21.9% in the same biennium. As for consumption, the changes are smaller,
as it is still expected to grow near 2.5% annually in 2016 and 2017, quite unchanged from 2015
(table 2).
As a working assumption, we estimate that the trajectory of public spending will be consistent
with the fiscal rule and the Administration’s announcements that it will follow a path of budgetary
consolidation. Another input is that the determinants of domestic spending have seen no major
changes  in  the  past  few  months.  Imports  of  goods,  leaving  out  some  specific  factors,  show
bounded growth, while business and consumer confidence remains low by historic standards.
The labor market is adjusting gradually and is expected to adjust further in the baseline scenario
(figure 9).
I  should  stress  that  these  projections  assume  that  the  low  figures  for  actual  and  expected
investment  have  driven  down  both  trend  and  potential  GDP  growth.  May  I  remind  you  that  by
trend growth we mean the growth rate that is possible to achieve in the medium term. Potential
growth differs from trend growth in that it can be affected by temporary shocks to productivity and
constraints to factor use that may alter our productive capacity over the short term, but not in the
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
long. That is why our trend GDP growth estimates are a little higher than our potential growth
estimates.
Our  latest  evaluations  place  trend  growth  at  3.2%,  three  tenths  of  a  point  less  than  year  ago
estimates. Meanwhile, we forecast potential growth for 2016 and 2017 between 2.5% and 3%,
compared  with  the  3%  to  3.5%  range  estimated  last  year  for  the  same  period.  Moreover,
incoming  figures  suggest  that  potential  growth  will  take  longer  to  converge  with  trend  growth.
Anyway, our assessment of the current output gap is not very different from what we foresaw a
year ago. This, because although since then we have revised downward our 2016 GDP growth
figure by something more than one percentage point, at the same time we lowered our estimate
for potential growth and 2015 GDP growth was revised up (figure 10).
In  recent  months,  financial  conditions  from  the  standpoint  of  borrowing  costs  have  remained
favorable. The fees charged in commercial, consumer and mortgage loans are near record lows.
At the same time, growth in the stock of consumer and commercial loans has recovered from a
year ago. The opposite is true of mortgage loans, which have decelerated from earlier this year.
This low credit cost coincides with also low long-term interest rates. The latter responds to both
the expansionary monetary policies in Chile and around the world and more structural conditions
(figure 11). In any case, qualitative information, such as the Bank Lending Survey for the second
quarter and our August Business Perception Report, shows that a weaker demand for credit is
perceived. According to the respondents, this is due to a shortage of investment projects and job
security fears.
Turning to our monetary policy, if the macroeconomic scenario that has been taking shape over
the past few months consolidates, with external financial conditions that, while volatile, are better
than we projected in June, where gaps are bounded and inflation is returning to the target a little
earlier, we see no need to make any new increases in the policy rate over the policy horizon.
Accordingly,  we  use  as  a  working  assumption  that  the  monetary  policy  rate  will  be  kept
unchanged during the projection horizon. As always, any monetary policy measure or adjustment
to the rate will be conditional on the expected effects of incoming information on the projected
inflation dynamics.
Some thoughts I wish to share on monetary policy conduct. For two and a half years, inflation
has been above the Central Bank’s defined tolerance range. The main reason being, as we have
said  time  and  again,  the  increase  in  the  exchange  rate,  which  was  necessary  in  the  new
conditions  facing  the  Chilean  economy.  Because  it  was  a  one-time  shock  and  therefore  with
transitory effects on inflation, tightening the policy was less than optimal.
Most recently, the exchange rate broke the upward trend it followed for several quarters. Actually,
it has dropped compared with its levels early in the year. Symmetric to our previous actions, if for
this  reason  inflation  were  to  fall  temporarily  below  our  target,  we  would  not  apply  a  more
expansionary  monetary  policy,  unless  after  some  time  we  saw  second-round  effects
jeopardizing the return of inflation to 3% over a two-year horizon.
Importantly,  any  changes  in  the  policy  stance  in  either  direction  can  be  warranted  only  if  our
medium-term inflation forecast suggests that it will deviate away from the 3% target. Of course
this would be determined by changes in its fundamentals.
What are the risks we identified in our baseline scenario?
On the external front, one of the main risks is a reversal of the improved international financial
conditions. As I said, the path that the Fed will ultimately take to adjust the policy rate is critical.
An increase in the fed funds rate is very likely within this year, and the markets’ expectations
point  at  very  gradual  subsequent  adjustments.  A  more  aggressive  action  by  the  Fed  could
increase  global  volatility  significantly,  affecting  asset  prices,  capital  flows  and  currencies.  The
Brexit  vote  materialized  one  of  the  risks  outlined  in  June  but,  to  this  date,  its  effects  seem
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
bounded. However, its true consequences are still in the making, so further repercussions on
medium-term growth in the UK and Europe cannot be ruled out. Add to this the concerns about
the soundness of part of European banks, particularly in Italy and Portugal. And let’s not forget
several open electoral processes around the world, whose results could cause a shift towards
more protectionist policies.
In the emerging world, the overall risk outlook has tended to moderate in the past few months.
Accordingly,  concerns  about  China  have  eased,  while  the  Chinese  impulse  policies  have
stabilized the pace of growth. Significant risks remain, however, namely the doubts surrounding
the sustainability of these measures over time, as well as about the Chinese financial system
and real estate sector, among other factors. Moreover, a scenario in which the Fed’s monetary
policy becomes more aggressive may have important negative implications on China. In Latin
America, beyond very recent improvements, adjustments to both public and private spending are
still needed.
Domestically, short-term inflationary risks remain tied to the evolution of the exchange rate and,
therefore, to the risks coming from abroad. In any case, inflation expectations two years out have
remained near 3%. On the output side, the improved external financial conditions could affect
growth  more  than  previously  estimated.  Meanwhile,  business  and  consumer  expectations  are
still in pessimistic territory, which could hold back the recovery of consumption and investment,
triggering a sharper deterioration of the labor market.
Having assessed these risks, we estimate that the risk balance is unbiased for both inflation and
activity.
In a nutshell, inflation has declined as expected, and our forecasts point at a faster convergence
to 3% than we thought in June. Our output and demand outlook is fairly unchanged. There are
still risks in our external scenario, even if its recent evolution surprised us for the better.
Allow me some final reflections.
Final reflections
I  will  end  with  some  thoughts  on  the  capacity  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  to  address  the
economic  cycle.  I  think  we  must  because,  after  years  of  slow  growth  and  within  a  context  of
increasing social demands, pressures on both have become stronger and the way we decide to
confront them will be crucial in the future of our economy and our country.
I see three main challenges:
First, it is obvious that neither monetary nor fiscal policy can flatten out the business cycle, much
less affect the economy’s trend growth. But they certainly can smooth the cycle and help the
economy make sound adjustments when suffering a domestic or external shock.
Anyway, the capacity to  smooth  the  cycle  is  proportional  to  the  medium-term  sustainability  of
these policies. Why? It is very simple: economic decisions —think of investment, for example—
depend  not  only  on  such  policies’  immediate  effects,  but  also  on  how  the  various  economic
agents expect them to continue to affect the economy in the future.
Thus, even if we believe that the effects of some policy action can be very powerful, if the agents
consider that implementing that policy will be inconsistent with the macroeconomic equilibria, its
effects will be diminished and may even be counterproductive.
In the case of fiscal policy, this problem has been properly addressed in our country by way of a
fiscal rule that establishes that fiscal spending must be consistent with the economy’s capacity
to generate earnings in the medium term. This rule has been carefully monitored, and has even
 5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
been replicated in other countries. Ending it could not only result in many problems in the future,
but also lessen the macroeconomic effects of fiscal spending today.
Make no mistake: I am not for total inflexibility, nor am I for mechanically subscribing to a rule, as I
am convinced that flexibility is necessary on certain occasions. This has been the case, actually.
My concern is rather whether we have exhausted these degrees of flexibility. Let me remind you
that just over one year ago the initial structural balance (or zero deficit) objective was modified. In
addition,  to  accommodate  revisions  to  the  long-term  price  of  copper  and  trend  GDP—both
potentially curbing the spending capacity—the Ministry of Finance decided to recalculate the rule
every  year  using  the  new  parameters,  and  from  there  reduce  the  structural  deficit  by  0.25
percentage points of GDP.
No doubt this is one way to adjust gradually to the new boundaries that the rule establishes for
fiscal  spending,  but  it  obviously  implies  that  in  a  cycle  where  the  key  parameters  are  revised
downward, we will be spending above our medium-term revenues for a longer period of time.
The low net debt of the Treasury, courtesy of a responsible fiscal policy, has allowed for this
gradual adjustment without major  surprises.  However,  there  are  limits  and  the  debt  has  been
increasing. In this context, I am particularly concerned that the accumulation of commitments
could end up straining our public finances.
In the case of monetary policy, the limit comes from credibility. There is an explicit objective—the
inflation target—and a market that monitors on a daily basis to see whether our monetary policy
conduct is consistent with achieving that objective.
For  as  long  as  the  market  remains  confident  in  the  Bank’s  capacity  and,  above  all,  on  its
commitment to take inflation to 3% in the two-year  horizon, an expansionary monetary policy will
be successful. The minute we lose that confidence, we will fail.
That is why we are adamant about our concern with inflation expectations, insisting that we will
do whatever it takes for it to stand at 3% over the forecast horizon. The good news is that we
have  succeeded:  despite  inflation’s  high  volatility,  due  mainly  to  the  sharp  variations  in  the
exchange rate, expectations two years out have remained at 3%. This encourages us to keep
our guard up and not to neglect what has been achieved or try to extract from monetary policy
more than it can deliver.
The second challenge is that experience suggests that our first line of action to deal with the
cycle  is  monetary  policy.  This  is  the  main  reason  for  the  expansionary  nature  of  our  policy
making  in  recent  years,  even  with  inflation  being  persistently  above  the  target  range.  Keep  in
mind that the fiscal rule determines a generally acyclical public expenditure, meaning that it runs
independent from the business cycle. Why? Because fiscal policy is typically slow to react and
any change in spending decisions are much more difficult to undo.
Thus, monetary policy is essential to deal with the economy’s cyclical fluctuations. That explains
our  actions.  Since  late  2013  we  have  implemented  a  clearly  expansionary  monetary  policy,
indeed  one  of  the  most  expansionary  among  emerging  market  economies.  Real  short-term
interest  rates  have  been  negative  or  barely  above  zero  for  all  this  time,  helping  medium-  and
long-term rates to be nearly as low as they have ever been.
This  policy  has  not  only  helped  the  economy  to  adjust  smoothly  by  providing  support  to
aggregate  demand;  by  letting  the  exchange  rate  move  freely  it  has  also  contributed  to  the
adjustment of relative prices—a key element to address in these conjunctures. The contrast with
other  episodes  is  evident.  Suffice  it  to  recall  the  costs  associated  with  the  defense  of  the
exchange  rate  in  the  early  1980s  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  during  the  Asian  crisis  and  its
aftershocks in the late 1990s.
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even  if  this  episode  has  driven  inflation  above  the  tolerance  range,  the  main  issue  from  the
standpoint  of  monetary  policy  is  that  inflation  expectations  have  always  been  anchored  to  the
target. And if at some point it seemed that they could deviate, we acted promptly to prevent it.
There is no doubt in my mind that the main reason were the actions of the Central Bank of Chile,
which attest to its commitment with its constitutional mandate to keep inflation low and stable.
This record has played an essential part in our solid reputation.
The third—and especially important—challenge is that we must never lose sight of the fact that
the  benefits  of  boosting  medium-  and  long-term  growth  greatly  outdo  those  of  smoothing  the
cycle.
Hence,  it  is  critical  that  as  a  country  we  put  special  emphasis  on  medium-term  growth.  We
should  think  particularly  carefully  how  it  is  affected  by  the  various  policies  adopted,  and
strengthen those that favor it. Without growth, there are simply no resources to deepen social
policies.
As  I  mentioned  when  I  presented  our  June  Monetary  Policy  Report,  we  are  one  of  the  few
countries  in  the  region  that  have  approached  the  borders  of  development.  In  the  past,  other
countries fell short of the opportunity. Grabbing it depends on us only. Commodity cycles and
international  windfalls  come  and  go.  In  the  long  run,  countries  are  the  masters  of  their  own
destinies, and behind those that developed and provided a better standard of living to their people
are the good public policies they implemented.
Ladies and gentlemen: in a few months I will be concluding the five-year term established by the
Constitutional Law for the governors of the Central Bank of Chile. I believe that, although the past
few years have been quite complex, the joint efforts of the Bank’s staff and Board members have
helped us succeed in our mission. I take this opportunity to thank you for all your support during
this period.
Thank you.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
  8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
      13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
        14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
