REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, AT THE OMFIF-RAMP DISCUSSION ON “NAVIGATING THE 
MULTICURRENCY  RESERVE  ENVIRONMENT”,  Washington,  DC,  6  October 
2016. 1 
 
 
Let me start by expressing my appreciation to the organizers for the invitation 
to participate in this panel.  
 In  recent  years,  central  banks  around  the  world  have  shown  an  increasing 
interest  in  investing  their  international  reserves  in  assets  denominated  in  a 
wider array of currencies. This is explained by a number of reasons, including 
a  more  active  search  for  yield  in  a  low  interest  rate  environment  and 
diversification from a risk management perspective.  
 To what extent is this leading to a multicurrency environment? 
 There  are  a  number  of  attributes  that  a  currency  needs  to  fulfill  to  reach 
international status and take on a significant global role. First and foremost, it 
must  be  seen  as  a  reliable  store  of  value  by  both  private  and  official  non-
                                                           
1 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal.   
 1 
residents,  thus implying that they are willing to hold  assets denominated in 
that  currency.  Secondly,  it  has  to  be  considered  an  efficient  medium  of 
exchange for international transactions, in turn reflected, for instance, in its 
active use in the invoicing and settlement of global trade of goods and services. 
Lastly,  it  should  also  be  widely  regarded  as  a  unit  of  account,  be  it  for 
commercial or financial flows.  
 Undoubtedly, these requirements are difficult to meet, if not unsurmountable, 
for  the  vast  majority  of  national  currencies.  Therefore,  at  present  only  a 
handful can be considered as truly international assets. Naturally, the US dollar 
is the most important among them. According to the most recent IMF data,2 
the US dollar accounts for 63 percent of all allocated foreign exchange reserves 
globally,  more  than  three  times  as  much  its  nearest  competitor,  the  euro. 
Additionally, as the BIS points out in its latest triennial central bank survey,3 
the  US  dollar  is  involved  in  close  to  90  percent  of  all  foreign  exchange 
                                                           
2 See “Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves” (COFER), as of the second quarter of 
2016. 
3 Bank for International Settlements (2016): “Triennial Central Bank Survey: Foreign Exchange Turnover in 
April 2016”, September. Note that since two currencies are involved in each transaction, the sum of shares 
in individual currencies adds to 200% in these figures. 
 2 
transactions, nearly three times as much as the euro, its closest competitor in 
this regard as well. 
New  currencies,  from  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies,  have  been 
added to the stock of global international reserves in recent years. However, 
most of them do not fully meet the requirements to be considered a global 
currency. Furthermore, they remain a tiny portion of the total. If we exclude 
the US dollar, the euro, the British pound and the yen from the estimates, the 
share of other currencies in global international reserves amount to around 7 
percent  at  present.  When  in  addition  to  the  above  the  Swiss  franc,  the 
Australian  dollar,  and  the  Canadian  dollar  are  omitted,  other  currencies 
account for only around 3 percent of the total.  
 The predominance of the US dollar and a few other currencies in the global 
system  is  at  first  glance  incompatible  with  ongoing  changes  in  the  world 
economy. In particular, the rise of emerging market economies (EMEs) as key, 
systemic players at a global scale deserves special attention. Currently, these 
economies are estimated to represent  nearly 60 percent of world GDP, and 
their rates of growth are projected to remain significantly higher than those in 
 3 
the advanced economies (AEs),4 which points to a continued upward trend in 
their  participation  in  the  global  economy.  With  this  in  mind,  it  would  seem 
reasonable to expect  emerging market currencies to play a  more important 
role in the composition of international reserve assets. 
 However, economic size of the issuing country is only one, and not necessarily 
the most  important, determinant of a  currency’s internationalization.  Other 
elements, such as an economy’s role in trade networks; macroeconomic and 
financial  stability;  the  depth,  liquidity  and  openness  of  national  financial 
markets;  and  the  stability  and  convertibility  of  its  currency,  are  important 
contributing factors to the latter’s role in the global arena.  
 Certainly, fulfillment of these conditions is challenging, to say the least. Among 
EME  currencies,  the  Chinese  renminbi  seems  to  be  the  one  most  likely  to 
achieve a significant role in the global system, partly in view of China’s position 
in the world economy, but also because of the interest the authorities of this 
country have shown in the internationalization of their currency, for instance 
through the gradual opening of its financial markets to foreign participation, 
                                                           
4 International Monetary Fund (2016): “World Economic Outlook”, October.  
 4 
the  renminbi´s  inclusion  in  the  SDR  basket,  and  the  negotiation  of  currency 
swap agreements with a significant number of countries.  
Nevertheless, a swift move of the renminbi’s role to rival some of the main AE 
currencies looks at this stage uncertain. On the one hand, previous experience 
with the US dollar during the early 20th century shows that major shifts in the 
international monetary system can occur rapidly. On the other hand, China is 
still  far  away  from  meeting  all  the  above  noted  conditions  to  provide  its 
currency with international status, and the road ahead does not seem to be an 
easy  one.  In  this  respect,  Barry  Eichengreen  has  noted  that  the  race  to  the 
consolidation  of  the  renminbi  as  a  global  currency  should  be  seen  as  a 
marathon, and not as a sprint.5 
 But  irrespective  of  the  above  comments,  would  an  international  monetary 
system with more international currencies be stronger than the present one? 
 In my view, with a long-term perspective in mind, the answer is affirmative. 
For  one,  the  more  individual  economies  that  enjoy  macroeconomic  and 
                                                           
5 Eichengreen, Barry (2015): “China’s Money Goes Global: The How, the When and the Why”, The Milken 
Institute Review, Fourth Quarter. 
 5 
financial stability, are open to trade and financial flows, and have deep and 
liquid capital markets, among others, the more the system as a whole is likely 
to  be  sound  and  efficient.  In  addition,  a  higher  number  of  international 
currencies  entails  greater  possibilities  to  diversify  overall  portfolio  risk,  a 
certainly  valuable  opportunity  for  asset  managers,  and  especially  reserve 
managers.  A  multicurrency  reserve  system,  once  established,  will  probably 
reduce  the  risk  of  a  persistent  overvaluation  of  assets,  including  exchange 
rates. To this, one may add more evenly distributed benefits among countries 
from their role as reserve issuers, such as seigniorage gains and lower interest 
rates on their debt, as well as a decreased risk of major and persistent global 
external imbalances.  
 On  the  other  hand,  it  is  important  to  stress  that  a  multicurrency  reserve 
system, as well as the road leading to it, is not free of difficulties. Take the case 
of renminbi internationalization. This process requires, among other things, a 
comprehensive opening of China’s financial markets to foreign transactions, as 
well as a floating exchange rate. As shown by recent episodes, any moves in 
this  direction  could  have  unintended  consequences,  both  for  the  domestic 
economy  and  for  the  global  financial  system.  More  generally,  experience 
 6 
demonstrates that the process of financial and exchange rate liberalization in 
other countries may be accompanied by periods of turbulence. It should also 
be taken into consideration that, irrespective of the challenges that may be 
faced  in  the  transition  towards  international  status,  the  risk  of  sudden 
portfolio shifts and the consequent potential for exchange rate volatility will 
not disappear under a multicurrency reserve system. In fact, it has been noted 
that a global multicurrency system may lead to greater short-term capital flow 
volatility  and  the  consequent  exchange  rate  adjustments,  as  a  result  of  the 
increased 
substitutability 
between 
currencies. 
Also, 
currency 
internationalization may give rise to other risks, such as a reduced control over 
monetary aggregates. 
 Notwithstanding  these  and  other  challenges,  all  in  all  in  the  long  term  the 
benefits  of  an  international  monetary  system  characterized  by  a  wider 
availability of international currencies should outweigh the potential costs.  
 7 
