Mario Draghi: Interview in El País
Interview with Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, in El País, conducted by
Mr  Xavier  Vidal-Folch  and  Mr  Claudi  Pérez  on  23  November  and  published  on  30  November
2016.
Is Europe at risk?
 The recovery – albeit modest – is robust. We are growing and inflation is improving. Europe’s
GDP has returned to its pre-crisis level, although this has taken seven and a half years. In the
past four years Europe has created four million jobs and the rate of unemployment has dropped
from 13% to 10%. There are still big differences between countries, but fewer differences than
before. The main drivers behind this recovery have been low oil prices and our monetary policy.
This recovery is stronger than past ones because it is based on the increase in consumption and
domestic demand, and not only on exports. The recovery in consumption is essentially due to
rising real disposable income, and the major driver, now that the oil price effect is waning, is our
monetary policy.
But politics could ruin it.
Indeed, political uncertainty is dominant. This year we have suffered a multitude of uncertainties:
first  there  was  the  slowdown  in  China  and  the  stagnation  of  world  trade,  then  the  Brexit
referendum and the election in the United States. The key question is how much this political
uncertainty is going to affect the economic recovery. So far we’ve seen that in the short-term the
response  to  these  uncertainties  has  been  more  muted  than  people  expected.  We’ve  seen
markets reacting quite strongly in the immediate aftermath, but then they’ve recovered to the pre-
event level.
Is there a risk of going back to the 1930s, with its protectionism and authoritarianism?
Let’s look at it one step at a time. All in all the banking sector, and perhaps more generally the
financial sector, is stronger than it used to be before the crisis. But in the medium term it is not
yet clear what the consequences of past, current and future political uncertainty will be. There will
be consequences, that much is certain.
If there is a Brexit in the end.
Which we have to assume. A lot depends on the shape of the final agreement and on how long
negotiations  on  the  final  settlement  will  take..  The  longer  the  negotiations  take,  the  longer  the
uncertainty. It will be more difficult for investors and other economic agents in the UK to make
decisions. Now, the impact of course is going to be stronger on the UK than it is on the EU and
on the euro area, but certainly the UK is a large economy, so it will have an effect here too..
Looking at Brexit, the US election and populism in general, is the international liberal
democratic order at risk?
The key question is whether and how this will affect our European values and how we will go
about  in  protecting  these  values?  The  main  concerns  of  EU  citizens  are  now  immigration,
counter-terrorist security measures, defence and border protection. All of these are supranational
affairs that require a common response. European integration is the appropriate response, but
this has become weaker in recent times, partly because of populist movements. It is increasingly
difficult to make progress with integration, but at the same time citizens want European policies
on security and defence. That’s also a way to build Europe.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Could the impending Italian referendum and elections in other countries result in the
same kind of turbulence we saw in the bond markets in 2012?
I can’t comment on future political events. What we know is we have an objective which is price
stability and we have instruments to achieve that. How can we best contribute to confidence and
stability? Through fulfilling that mandate.
During your term in office, the ECB has saved the euro on two occasions. In 2012, with
€1  trillion  in  liquidity  and  that  phrase  “whatever  it  takes”,  and  since  2014  with
quantitative easing (QE), the asset purchase programme. Will there be a third occasion?
I hope not. The crisis resulted in very difficult times for everyone. We have hopefully learnt the
lessons and the economic policy agenda has been designed on the basis of those lessons.
Did QE and low interest rates prevent a third recession?
Our  measures  have  been  very  effective.  The  financial  fragmentation  between  countries  with
stronger economies and vulnerable countries has been reduced greatly. There was a point in
time when we lowered our interest rates and banks did not pass these on to their customers;
now  they  do.  There  was  a  time  when  countries  and  private  companies  were  paying
tremendously  different  interest  rates  regardless  of  the  different  risk  premia. A  company  with
subsidiaries in two countries paid very different interest rates via each subsidiary, with exactly the
same risk. We all agree that different rates should reflect different risks but in that case the rates
were reflecting other factors. That is no longer the case. Credit provision collapsed and is now
starting to grow again.
But not by much.
Surveys reveal that access to credit is no longer cited as a problem. Three and a half years ago
access to credit was cited by small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) as the second factor
that inhibited investment, and that problem has disappeared. We have also seen that the spread
between the rates at which large companies and SMEs borrow has fallen. When the ECB buys
bonds from large corporations, they are less reliant on bank funding and that frees up space on
bank balance sheets to lend to SMEs.
Won’t your non-standard measures have harmful effects?
We are monitoring financial stability risks, but we see no bubbles in the euro area. There are
house price increases in Milan, Barcelona and some German cities, but they are selective and
limited to specific areas. In order to speak of bubbles there must be a hike in prices and strong
increases in lending. We are not seeing that dynamic. Lending is growing, but at rates of 3%, not
at the 15% we saw before the crisis.
They are causing problems of inequality.
I disagree. Although asset purchases mean asset prices rise, one should never forget that the
single  biggest  cause  of  inequality  is  unemployment.  So  if  you  look  at  the  medium-term
consequences  of  increasing  employment  and  you  match  them  against  the  short-term
consequences of worsening inequality, the overall answer is no, QE doesn’t increase inequality.
The low interest rates are beneficial to many but harmful to some.
We are aware that low interest rates affect the interest rate margins of some banks, but they
also have positive effects on bank profitability by supporting the recovery, reducing loan losses
and increasing the valuation of assets. We also cannot deny that some people, like pensioners
without debt who rent their homes, may be hurt by low interest rates. The only honest answer
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that we can give them is that the low interest rates are essential for a full recovery, and when this
is achieved interest rates will rise.
European growth is mediocre. Unemployment stands at 10%. Inflation is far from 2%. With
these figures, how can the ECB hawks even think of demanding the gradual withdrawal
of unconventional measures, low interest rates and asset purchases?
We have never discussed this in the Governing Council.
In December, will QE be extended beyond March 2017 and the size of monthly purchases
reduced?
This is for the Governing Council to decide and it will do so on December 8. Right now, our latest
introductory statement says that we remain committed to preserving the very substantial degree
of monetary accommodation which is necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation
towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
But the markets are waiting to see the steps you take in December.
This is normal, especially in a context where monetary policy makes use of more instruments
than in the past. We can deliver the appropriate stance by different combinations of instruments,
for instance the amount of monthly purchases or the length of time over which they take place. I
won’t prejudge the debate on the various options.
But it will be serious and intense, won’t it?
Governing Council meetings are always interesting.
For two years, since the speech you made in Jackson Hole, you have been preaching
unsuccessfully to have your expansive monetary policy complemented by an expansive
fiscal  policy.  Now  Brussels  is  proposing  a  stimulus.  Will  you  support  the  European
Commission vis-à-vis the finance ministers?
We are still assessing the proposal. Fiscal policy should support the recovery but also comply
with the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, which have enough flexibility of interpretation to
accommodate extraordinary factors and structural reforms. Compliance with well-designed rules
is essential to create confidence in the markets and credibility for governments: only if there is
trust between countries can we progress towards deeper integration.
Confidence  has  disappeared.  The  rules  were  never  complied  with.  There  have  been
many reforms yet the rules are still being breached. Shouldn’t the rules be replaced with
others?
Fiscal policy in the EU is basically a rules-based process and it is the Commission’s task to
monitor compliance. Let’s take a step back. In monetary policy we have followed a different route:
we  have  moved  from  a  rules-based  system  to  an  institutions-based  monetary  integration
system. Which produces the best results? Judge for yourselves.
What our readers are interested in is your opinion.
Well they can form an opinion on the ECB by judging us on how we comply with our mandate,
price  stability. And  I  would  say  in  spite  of  the  many  crises  of  the  last  six,  seven  years,  we
continue  to  steer  the  ship  towards  this  mandate,  and  we  foresee  that  inflation  will  go  back
towards our objective of an inflation rate below but close to 2% by 2018/2019.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
What was the size of the stimulus you were thinking of when you began to ask for more
active fiscal policies?
The euro area is made up of many different countries, which implies different fiscal policies in 19
countries.  But  if  the  crisis  has  clarified  one  thing  it  is  that  many  Member  States  did  not  have
sustainable fiscal positions. There was no fiscal space to combat the crisis.
The United States has been more flexible with its own rules: its recovery took place
earlier and has been much stronger. Shouldn’t this also make us think of changing the
rules?
The US institutional environment is completely different: it has a genuine federal budget; a fully
integrated financial market and a very different society. So it’s hard to compare. However, if your
question is what makes the two crises different, then that is important because it forces us to
think about the mistakes made before the crisis. They would be the major input in how to design
a programme for after the crisis.
Why are the outcomes of the two crises so different?
One of the main reasons for the financial crisis was the blind deregulation that took place in the
early 2000s and late 1990s. This led to the creation of toxic assets, to market opacity and to the
excesses that triggered the global financial crisis and the recession. In the United States, the
origin  of  the  crisis  was  mainly  financial.  It  then  spread  to  Europe  –  to  its  banks,  to  its
governments, to a very indebted economy, to a banking sector that was also undercapitalised –
and  led  to  a  credit  crunch.  The  damage  was  greater  in  Europe  because  underlying  these
symptoms  was  a  competitiveness  that  had  been  in  decline  for  years  on  account  of  a  lack  of
structural reforms. This crisis taught us several lessons. One is that a fiscal space needs to be
created so it can be used in the event of another crisis. Whoever has such a space can use it;
whoever doesn’t will only be able to alter the composition of the budget: less expenditure, lower
taxes  and  more  public  investment  well  targeted  to  increase  productivity  for  the  country.  The
second  lesson  is  that  the  banking  sector  must  be  strengthened:  the  highest  quality  capital,
common equity tier 1 capital, has gone from 7% before the crisis to around 14% now. And the
third lesson is that reforms are needed to regain competitiveness, so that we are prepared if
problems reoccur. Spain undertook reforms, and therefore its growth is striking and its rate of
unemployment significantly lower than before.
Spain’s GDP is growing strongly, but unemployment is still at around 20%. Spain has the
highest deficit in Europe after Greece. Massive debt. Doesn’t this mean that Spain is still
very vulnerable?
Spain is growing more than others, but it is still vulnerable. It has a high deficit and high public
and private debt. But what is important is that Europe is emerging from the crisis. And Spain is
coming out faster basically because it has undertaken more structural reforms.
Spain’s economy has benefited more than others from the drop in oil prices and low
interest rates by being very much in debt.
The tailwinds have been there for everyone. It is certainly true also that monetary policy is a driver
of the recovery, across the euro area.
Does Spain tend to forget that half of the work has been done by these tailwinds?
It is also true that Spain enacted reforms and repaired its financial sector earlier than others,
which has proved crucial.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a country with a certain fatigue because of the cuts made and the two labour reforms
and the financial and pension reforms, could another round of cuts to the tune of €5.5
billion – as has been demanded by Brussels – be counterproductive?
As  I  said  before,  fiscal  policy  could  complement  our  monetary  policy,  together  with  structural
reforms, in sustaining the recovery. But this should be done in compliance with the existing rules
and where the existing rules are being administered and monitored by the Commission.
If there is another crisis, we cannot rule out a new episode of turbulence in the banking
sector, with weaknesses in several countries. Does the Bank Recovery and Resolution
Directive [which lays down creditor ranking when their money is lost during a banking
crisis] need to be strictly enforced? Should it be disregarded if there is a new financial
crisis?
During the crisis, everyone was insisting that taxpayers must no longer pay any more for the
mistakes  of  the  financial  sector  and  of  the  banks.  The  outcome  was  the  Bank  Recovery  and
Resolution  Directive.  However,  both  the  Directive  and  the  rules  on  state  aid  leave  room  for
interpretation  by  the  Commission.  But  let  me  say  that  the  best  protection  against  rules  that
require  creditors  to  contribute  to  bank  recoveries  –  something  which  is  often  associated  with
serious political and economic problems – is for all banks to have buffers in place in case there
are problems, with assets that can be used easily to absorb losses. That is key.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
