   Lars Rohde: Challenges for the housing market and mortgage sector in 
Denmark 
Speech by Mr Lars Rohde, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the annual meeting 
of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks 2016, Copenhagen, 5 October 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
I have the following three key messages today: 
Developments in the Copenhagen housing market give cause for concern. Annual price 
increases of almost 10 per cent are not sustainable in the long term. This underscores 
how important it is  that housing taxes dampen fluctuations in house prices rather than 
amplifying them. 
The cost of holding more equity is limited – also for mortgage banks. The return on 
equity of  around 10 per cent required by investors in mortgage banks seems to be on 
the high side. 
It  should  be  possible  to  resolve  any  credit  institution  without  major  negative 
consequences  for 
the  economy  and  financial  stability  –  and  without  the  use  of 
taxpayers’ money. It is necessary to adjust the mortgage rules in order to ensure this. 
 Prices in the housing market have risen notably over the last four years. And they are 
still rising.  This applies to houses and especially to owner-occupied flats – but there 
are  large  regional  differences.  For  Denmark  overall,  the  price  level  appears  to  be 
sustainable in view of the development  in interest rates and disposable income. 
But  developments  in  the  Copenhagen  housing  market  give  cause  for  concern. 
Continued price 
increases of almost 10 per cent p.a. are unsustainable in the long 
term. 
We are facing a combination of high interest rate sensitivity and house price growth 
that is on the  verge of being unsustainable in parts of Denmark. Formal tests confirm 
this. Moreover, the option  for future interest rate developments is hardly symmetrical. 
At the current low level of interest  rates, the risk of a 3 per cent increase in interest 
rates is somewhat higher than the probability of a 3 per cent fall. 
The  government  envisages  a  reform  of  housing  taxes  as  part  of  its  2025  plan. 
Fluctuations in house prices can be reduced via appropriate housing taxes. The current 
system of housing taxes  means that the tax rate falls where prices are rising – and 
rises where prices are falling. That is un-  fortunate. It is essential that housing taxes 
once again help to stabilise the economy. This will  benefit both macroeconomic and 
financial stability. A discussion of the level of the housing tax  rate should not stand in 
the way of a reintroduction of a stabilising housing taxation system. 
 Credit institutions are more robust to falling house prices if they have a high share of 
equity fund-  ing. So it is relevant to consider the cost of equity. 
According to the institutions, investors in mortgage banks still require a return on equity 
of around 10 per cent. That seems to be very high. Especially since the risk-free interest 
rate is close  to zero. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   At the same time, market data indicates that last year investors required an average 
return of be-  tween 5 and 7½ per cent on shares in the largest banking groups in 
Denmark. These groups also  include mortgage banks. 
More equity increases funding costs only slightly. This also applies to mortgage banks. 
More equity means that the mortgage bank has larger buffers so that it is safer. Hence, 
the risk premium   falls – and so does the required return on equity. 
The required return on mortgage bonds also falls if a mortgage bank becomes safer. 
However,  the balance principle means that this gain is not reaped by the mortgage 
bank, but by the borrowers. As a result, enhanced capital requirements will have an 
impact on the distribution of borrowers’ costs for interest and administration margins. 
In  the  first part  of  this  year,  there  was  considerable  focus  on  the  mortgage  banks’ 
increases in  administration margins. I would like to emphasise that mortgage banks 
should have the opportunity to make money, just like other businesses. In the debate, 
the increases were to a large ex-  tent linked directly to capital requirements. As I have 
previously  said,  enhanced  capital  requirements may increase  the mortgage banks’ 
costs. But not to such an extent that this can fully ex-  plain the observed increases in 
administration margins. 
When we discuss the costs of regulation, it is important to remember that there are 
also  consider-  able  gains.  For  example,  financial  regulation  helps  to  ensure  a 
sustainable and robust economy  with strong credit institutions. The mortgage banks 
themselves also profit directly from good and  efficient financial regulation as this can 
help to ensure that investors – including non-residents –  have confidence in the Danish 
mortgage banks. 
 Besides capital requirements, an important element of robust regulation of the financial 
sector is  that we make sure that any credit institution – be it a bank or a mortgage 
bank  –  can  ultimately  be  resolved.  Resolution  should  be  possible  without  major 
negative consequences for the economy  and financial stability – irrespective of the 
size and complexity of the institution. This element has not been in place so far. 
In the period leading up to the financial crisis, everyone expected the government to 
step in if a  large and complex credit institution – a SIFI – became distressed. The 
owners of the institution  reaped the profit in good times, but expected taxpayers to 
foot  the  bill  if  things  went  wrong.  This  provided  an  incentive  to  take  higher  and 
irresponsible risks, which increased the risk of a financial  crisis. 
When the financial crisis erupted, the government provided a guarantee of 2½ times 
GDP to buoy  up the financial sector. It is obvious that the government assumed an 
almost unlimited risk on be-  half of the taxpayers. Fortunately all went well. If things 
had  gone  wrong,  they  would  have  gone  very  wrong.  The  problem  was  that  the 
alternatives  were  worse.  There  were  no  instruments  for  handling the situation and 
nobody knew the consequences of a SIFI failure. The collapse of Lehman  Brothers 
proved this. 
So since the financial crisis it has been important to ensure that we never again find 
ourselves in a  situation where society is compelled to come to the rescue of the credit 
institutions.  That  is  why 
the  European  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  was 
introduced in 2014. The new rules are to ensure that the economy and financial stability 
can be protected if a SIFI needs to be resolved. 
This makes it impossible for the owners and creditors of the institutions to take society 
as a hostage so that the government must rescue them. They themselves will have to 
face up to the con-  sequences of unsound decisions and risky actions. In that way, the 
interests of the institutions are  better aligned with those of society in general. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The Recovery and Resolution Directive lays down a new framework for how credit 
institutions  and 
their  creditors  must  absorb  losses.  And  it  gives  the  authorities 
instruments for ensuring that they  actually do this. At the same time, functions that are 
critical to society can be continued. The Directive also requires the authorities to make 
thorough preparations for how to resolve each individual SIFI. 
The institution’s equity is lost first. After that, the institution’s debt is lost or used to 
recapitalise  the institution so that it can continue. 
As a new element, the authorities must lay down requirements for how much of an 
institution’s debt that must be particularly suitable for bearing losses. Creditors funding 
this debt must know  beforehand that they risk losing the money owed to them. This 
risk means that they receive higher interest. 
There are also parts of the institution’s debt that are seen as unsuitable for bearing 
losses, so that  creditors will always get back their money. A sector-financed Resolution 
Fund  has  been  established,  which  will  bear  the  losses  instead  of  the  debt  that  is 
unsuitable for bearing losses. 
The Resolution Fund can be used only if this is necessary in order to safeguard the 
economy and  financial stability. This also requires that owners and creditors have 
borne  a  substantial  share  of  the  losses.  The  requirement  regarding  debt  that  is 
particularly suitable for bearing losses is to ensure that the Resolution Fund is used 
only if the losses are very large. 
In order to resolve a SIFI in an appropriate manner, it is essential that the authorities 
have a well-  prepared plan. The plan should describe how the authorities can assume 
control of the SIFI, re-  structure it so that it becomes viable again, and return it to the 
market. It must be possible to implement this plan swiftly and communicate it clearly 
to the market, as faith in the resolution pro-  cess is essential if it is to succeed. 
With the Recovery and Resolution Directive, it has been ensured at the European level 
that the necessary legislative framework is in place for handling the next financial crisis, 
should it arise.   And yes, it will come. It is important that we are well prepared for it. 
But  we  still  have  a  lot  of  work  ahead  of  us  in  preparing  resolution  plans  for  the 
individual SIFIs before we can say that the job  has been done. 
 Mortgage credit is a key element of the Danish financial system. At the same time, the 
individual  mortgage banks are sufficiently large to be important in themselves. Most 
of the credit granted  within the economy is channelled through the mortgage sector. 
In this respect, Denmark differs  from virtually all other countries. Moreover, mortgage 
bonds  are  deemed  to  be  so  safe  that  the  banks  use  them  in  their  liquidity 
management. So the mortgage banks are closely linked to the  rest of the financial 
sector. Obviously, this makes it essential that the mortgage credit is function- ing both 
in good times and in times of crisis. 
After the financial crisis, the mortgage banks helped to support the economy. They did 
so  by  in-  creasing  lending,  while  the  banks  reduced  theirs.  But  it  should  also  be 
remembered that some circumstances during the financial crisis were favourable to the 
mortgage banks. Interest rates dived sharply. In combination with the widespread use 
of adjustable rate mortgages and deferred  amortisation, this meant that homeowners 
could  service  their  mortgage  loans  even  though  un-  employment  rose  and  house 
prices  fell.  In  other  circumstances  the  outcome  would  have  been  much  worse. 
Fortunately that was not the case. But we cannot count on being so lucky when the 
next crisis hits us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   Mortgage bonds are a very safe product. Legislation provides extensive protection for 
investors.  Even if resolution of a mortgage bank becomes necessary, they are likely 
to get their money back. 
It is difficult to assess the risk that a mortgage bank will have to be resolved at some 
point in the future. It cannot be assessed on the basis of statistics saying that mortgage 
banks have not previously become distressed. 
Firstly, mortgage credit has been systemically important in Denmark more or less since 
its introduction in the late 18th century. So when the going has been tough  for the 
sector, the government has made sure that this would not jeopardise the economy. In 
future, the mortgage banks  must also be able to stand on their own feet in bad times. 
That is a sound principle. 
Secondly,  regulation  of  the  sector  has  changed  substantially  over  the  years.  And 
obviously, the  institutions’ business models have also changed over the last 200 years. 
After all, you cannot say  that the system of motorways in Jutland is 4,000 years old just 
because the Ancient Road Hærvejen runs through the peninsula. 
 At the initiative of Denmark, a special rule relating to mortgage banks was introduced 
in  the  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive.  This  means  that  –  unlike  bank  debt  – 
mortgage bank debt cannot  be  written  down  or  converted  into  new  equity.  Hence, 
the authorities cannot lay down requirement stating how much of a mortgage bank’s 
debt must be particularly suitable for bearing losses. And the Resolution Fund cannot 
be used to protect mortgage bonds against losses. 
However, this special rule  can be applied only if national legislation ensures that a 
mortgage  bank  can  be  resolved  without  major  negative  consequences  for  the 
economy and financial stability. 
The special rule means that if a mortgage banks is to be resolved, we must use the 
liquidation  model already existing in Danish legislation. It is about discontinuing an 
institution  that  has  de- 
faulted,  as  opposed  to  the  EU  rules,  which  are  about 
reconstructing and continuing a credit institution that has in effect defaulted, so that 
the economy and financial stability can be protected. 
The Danish liquidation model implies two key problems. 
Firstly,  the  liquidation  model  will,  in  the  case  of  mortgage  banks,  mean  that  the 
mortgage bank’s  lending is discontinued in a controlled manner as loans are gradually 
repaid. The mortgage bank  will no longer be able to issue new loans. Due to the size 
of the mortgage banks, this means that  the financial sector’s total capacity to grant 
loans becomes insufficient. 
Secondly,  the  mortgage  bond  holders  will  suffer  losses  in  connection  with  the 
liquidation – even if  there are sufficient funds to ensure that they ultimately get back 
their money. The losses will come  in the shape of late payments, lower prices and 
reduced liquidity in the bonds. If there is a risk   that the mortgage bank is liquidated, 
the  price  and  liquidity  of  the  bonds  will  fall  when  uncertainty  arises regarding the 
viability of the mortgage bank. Such losses can undermine confidence in  mortgage 
bonds in general. In that case the other mortgage banks will have difficulty in obtaining 
funding because the risks incurred by mortgage banks are very similar. 
As I have already mentioned, the banks own a considerable share of the mortgage 
bonds. For 
them,  it  will  have  huge  consequences  if  they  suffer  losses  on  these  bonds.  It  will 
increase their required capitalisation in a situation where their capital is already under 
pressure. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   The bottom line is that mortgage bonds are unsuitable for bearing losses. 
The state of the economy would presumably be seriously challenged if a mortgage 
bank were to  become distressed. Liquidation of a mortgage bank would have serious 
implications for financial  stability, for homeowners and hence also for the economy. 
We must not bring Denmark in a situation where there is pressure on the government 
to  guarantee  mortgage  bonds  totalling  1½  times  GDP  if  the  mortgage  banks 
experience difficulties. That will only add to the challenges facing the economy. 
The preconditions for applying the special rule for mortgage banks does not exist. It 
is necessary  to adjust the rules on mortgage credit. It has to be possible to continue 
the activities of the mort-  gage banks that are important to society. 
It will be contrary to the lessons learned from the financial crisis if we meet the future 
without a  viable model for mortgage bank resolution if this becomes necessary. Crisis 
situations may arise unexpectedly and swiftly. When they are here, it is too late to take 
action. So it is important to find  a solution and implement the necessary legislative 
amendments. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
