Yves Mersch: Comments at Financial Services summit
Comments by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
Cumberland Lodge Financial Services Summit, Windsor, 10 November 2016.
Introduction
 Sustainable economic growth in the real economy depends on the soundness of financial
services and their providers;
This simple truth has been amply evidenced by the collapse of credit during the financial
crisis and the subsequent recession. One important type of financial intermediary are central
counterparties (CCPs);
Second, the financial ecosystem is – like the rest of the world – experiencing rapid change
due to technical innovation;
I would like to give a clear signal that innovation should be embraced as the improvement of
financial services can boost the real economy; but I also would like to give a warning that a
certain  level  of  caution  is  needed  when  technological  innovations  are  applied  to  financial
markets in order to avoid any negative consequences.
(i) Central counterparties
CCPs  are  systemically  relevant.  They  have  been  in  the  focus  of  regulators  and  central
banks since the financial crisis.
The growth in central clearing makes CCPs nodes for risk in the system. This is why we
have carried out considerable work at international level to promote that they operate in a
safe and resilient manner.
In  2012  global  standard  setting  bodies  (CPMI-IOSCO)  adopted  key  risk  mitigation
requirements  –  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures  –  which  raised  the  bar
worldwide  for  CCP  supervision. A  global  CCP  work  plan  has  recently  been  launched  to
further strengthen the resilience, recovery planning and resolution of CCPs, which will lead
to further guidance being released in the near future.
Under EU law, each CCP is overseen by a college of supervisors, involving all authorities
that have a relevant interest in its prudent risk management. The colleges act as forums for
information-sharing, ensuring a high level of transparency in the way CCPs operate, which
can prove especially valuable in the event of a crisis.
Brexit creates uncertainty, and raises doubts as to the future of this framework
The prospect of the UK’s exit from the EU creates uncertainty regarding the future of the
supervision of non-euro area CCPs that clear significant amounts of euro currency.
We do not know what the future relationship between the EU and the UK will be, and I do not
wish to speculate on this matter.
We  cannot  be  complacent  with  regard  to  the  regulatory,  supervisory  and  oversight
framework for financial market infrastructures. While it has been considerably enhanced and
strengthened since 2008, its continued development should be ensured when necessary.
We are ready to explore all options within our mandate to ensure we can continue to fulfil our
responsibilities under the Treaty, i.e. promoting the smooth operation of payment systems
and  ensuring  the  effective  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  for  which  the  stability  of  the
centrally-cleared repo segment of euro money markets is crucial.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
(ii) Technical innovation
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  second  point.  How  the  financial  ecosystem  is  experiencing  rapid
change due to technical innovation.
The Eurosystem is responsible for operating two of the systems that form the backbone of
financial markets in Europe, namely TARGET2, the real-time gross settlement system for
the euro, and TARGET2-Securities (T2S), a service for the integrated settlement in central
bank money of securities transactions. The smooth operation of these services is crucial for
maintaining confidence in the euro and to support monetary policy operations. Furthermore,
it  plays  a  central  role  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  European  financial  system  and  in
boosting economic activity.
The Eurosystem market infrastructure is designed to meet the highest levels of safety and
efficiency.  Efficiency  covers  multiple  dimensions:  of  course  it  means  low  costs  for
institutions that use the infrastructure, but it also implies the opportunity for them to benefit
from a range of functionalities that bring added value to the services offered along the value
chain.
The Eurosystem is continuously  looking  for  ways  to  improve  the  efficiency  and  lower  the
costs of its market infrastructure. It also considers how best to respond and take advantage
of technical innovation and meet new user needs, while staying ahead of evolving risks such
as cyber risk. In this regard there is also a need to assess if technical innovation can create
opportunities to improve financial services.
Nevertheless, a certain level of caution is needed when technological innovations are applied
to  financial  markets.  For  innovations  to  be  used  in  the  financial  system  an  essential
requirement  is  that  they  are  proven  safe  in  order  to  avoid  any  negative  consequences.
Consequently,  if  and  when  innovations  are  proven  to  enhance  the  provisions  of  financial
services without harming safety, they should be explored.
ECB working as a catalyst for market integration
As a public authority the ECB will keep a watchful eye on technical innovations and assess
their possible impact on financial markets. We do this work together with standard setting
bodies.
The first condition is that innovations are proven to be safe before they find their way into the
market.
Second, it is equally important to ensure that innovations are adopted to increase efficiency
instead of becoming a hurdle to financial integration and efficiency. In its catalyst function,
the  ECB  uses  its  position  as  “honest  broker”  to  facilitate  the  harmonisation  of  standards
among market participants and the interaction of the industry with other public authorities.
The ECB stands ready to work together with all interested parties in its catalyst capacity to
move towards interoperability of any developed services.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
