Arthur Yuen: Promoting economic and social development in Asia
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Arthur  Yuen,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority (on behalf of Mr Norman Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority),
at the seminar on "President Jin Liqun on the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank’s Operations
and Projects", Hong Kong, 8 November 2016.
President Jin, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 Good  morning.    It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  this  seminar  on  the Asian  Infrastructure
Investment  Bank  (AIIB)’s  Operations  and  Projects,  organised  by  the  HKMA  Infrastructure
Financing Facilitation Office (IFFO).  On behalf of the HKMA, I’m honoured to welcome President
Jin  to  Hong  Kong  to  meet  with  leaders  from  the  financial  and  business  sectors  who  have  an
interest in infrastructure project planning and management.  I am delighted to see the strong level
of interest and the diversity of business leaders represented in the field.
AIIB  is  an  important  establishment  in  promoting  economic  and  social  development  in  Asia. 
Boasting an initial capital of $100 billion and a founding membership of 57 countries, AIIB came
into  operation  in  January  2016  with  a  mandate  in  the  development  of  infrastructure  and  other
productive sectors in Asia, including energy and power, transportation and telecommunications,
rural  infrastructure  and  agriculture  development,  water  supply  and  sanitation,  environmental
protection, urban development and logistics. 
As we are all aware, President Jin has played an instrumental role in shaping up the formation
and the guiding principles of AIIB.  With the huge financing gap for infrastructure development
standing at $8 trillion in the decade to 2020, AIIB will be looking to play a major role in bridging the
shortfall.  Under the strong leadership of President Jin, AIIB would provide a global platform to
coordinate efforts among existing international financial institutions and government authorities to
bring  development  issues  to  light;  it  also  has  the  capability  to  mobilise  the  liquidity  and  field
expertise from investors, financiers and project developers from the private sectors to facilitate
infrastructure development and their related financing activities.
To  the  HKMA,  President  Jin  has  been  a  long-time  friend.    Just  four  months  ago,  we  had  the
honour of President Jin as the officiating guest at the launch of IFFO and a key panel speaker at
our inaugural conference.  President Jin acknowledged that IFFO can be an important contributor
to Asian  infrastructure  by  helping  to  guide  liquidity  from  private  and  institutional  investors  into
productive  investments,  while  also  serving  as  a  platform  for  communication,  cooperation  and
knowledge exchange. 
Today we have the presence of 300 leaders from various sectors including finance, architecture,
building and construction engineering, project management and consulting, project development
and operation as well as professional services, many of you being the senior management of
your leading organisations in the field.  Indeed, Hong Kong possesses a critical mass of financial
professionals which can support the operations of AIIB in areas such as project financing, bond
issuance,  investment,  financial  management  and  foreign  exchange  management.    Moreover,
Hong Kong has expertise in project negotiation, works contracts preparation and management,
international  law  as  well  as  professional  arbitration  services,  enabling  us  to  take  part  in  the
planning, implementation and operation of such projects.
The steadfast implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative also creates opportunities for Hong
Kong to make best use of its strengths as the global offshore RMB business hub and an aspiring
infrastructure  investment  and  financing  platform.    The  setting  up  of  IFFO  would  provide  a
platform for pooling the efforts of investors, banks and the financial sector to offer comprehensive
financial services for various infrastructure projects.  
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since  the  launch  of  IFFO  by  the  HKMA  in  July  2016,  work  has  progressed  very  quickly  and
significant progress has been made on all fronts.  Just last week, our list of partners expanded
from 41 to 54, bringing in new additions from the insurance, banking and legal sectors, as well as
international  business  council  and  corporation  which  are  experts  in  the  infrastructure
development field.  IFFO is also an active participant at various industry forums promoting the
use  of  Hong  Kong’s  platform  for  infrastructure  investments  and  financing  both  locally  and
overseas. 
This morning, President Jin will share with us his views on AIIB’s operations, project planning and
management.    This  seminar  will  be  a  useful  platform  for  constructive  dialogues  among  the
financial  industry,  infrastructure-related  business  sectors,  and AIIB,  to  exchange  views  on  the
latest infrastructural development trends, and how we can harness the opportunities arising from
the establishment and projects under AIIB.
I shall now hand over the time to President Jin for his most anticipated speech.  Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
