Andreas Dombret: Keeping in touch - news from Europe and from
the European banking sector
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
in celebration of the change of office at the embassy in São Paulo, São Paulo, 27 October 2016.
 1. Introduction
Dear Mr Zeidler
Dear Mr Le Grazie
Ladies and gentlemen
First of all, I would like to thank the Consul General for hosting this event here at his impressive
residence  in  São  Paulo.  Mr  Zeidler,  I  must  say,  this  is  a  stunning  working  environment  –
congratulations. For my part, this event is an auspicious occasion where I would like to officially
thank  Mr  Marc  Rennert  as  the  departing  Bundesbank  representative  and  welcome  Mr  Eike
Berner as his successor.
 2. News from Europe and from the European banking sector
But I would also like to use this opportunity to sketch recent developments and, specifically, the
state of Europe and European banks. A lot is happening in the Old World – and the sheer volume
of news may sometimes even be overwhelming, putting into question the value of information. In
fact,  I  don’t  blame  anyone  overseas  for  taking  cover  from  the  bombardment  of  information
coming out of Europe.
European  banks,  in  particular,  have  often  made  it  on  the  front  pages  to  non-European
newspapers and journals. The repercussions of the financial crisis and clean-up operations are
still  putting  a  strain  on  all  parties  involved.  EUbanks  have  since  strengthened  their  capital
positions, which now stand at more than 15%. Prior to the crisis in early 2008, the same ratio
was 6 percentage points lower. As the phase-in of the new regulatory environment continues,
difficult times still lie ahead. Let me add: This isn’t bad news. It is largely still part of the expected
clean-up operations after the financial crisis.
As if this were not enough, banks also find themselves in a wholly different business environment
than a few years ago, characterised by persistent low interest rates and the digital transformation
of  the  entire  banking  sector.  Earnings  from  interest-bearing  assets  still  account  for  the  lion’s
share  of  banks’  earnings  –  for  example,  in  Germany,  where  bank  lending  is  particularly
prominent,  net  interest  income  accounts  for  roughly  75%  of  overall  operational  income.
Traditional money-making strategies in banking are called into question. The same is true in the
face  of  partly  disruptive  digital  innovations.  As  a  result,  nowadays  almost  every  banking
conference and every article on banking points to challenging earnings prospects and the need to
fundamentally overhaul business models.
The thing that European banks have in common is that they are not having an easy time of it
these days. Prominently, bank shares have sharply declined over the past year. Comparing the
EURO STOXX 50 and EURO STOXX Banks indices, bank shares have dropped by over 30%,
while other shares have roughly maintained their market value.
In addition, the European financial sector and the European Union were subjected to another,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
wholly different and quite unexpected challenge. I am speaking of the British referendum, where a
majority  of  British  citizens  voted  against  remaining  part  of  the  European  Union.  The  British
government recently reemphasised its intention to initiate the exit process by the end of March
2017. Depending on the subsequent political negotiations, relations between European Union and
United  Kingdom  may  change  quite  drastically.  For  instance,  financial  institutions  based  in  the
United  Kingdom  might  lose  access  to  the  single  market.  In  any  case,  the  referendum  has
brought the European integration project of an “ever closer union” to a standstill. Furthermore,
Europe is faced with a steep rise in the number of refugees as well as growing nationalism in
response to ubiquitous sources of insecurity. Now it would be ignorant to characterize headwind
to the European project as a new phenomenon. But given today’s high political uncertainties and
disorientation, the European Union is prone to being conceived as the problem rather than the
solution.
 3. Whose responsibilities?
To  sum  up,  Europe  has  recently  proved  to  be  a  reliable  source  of  headlines  for  those  in  the
employ of the international media and the information industry. But for those who need to make
sense of information – be they citizens or financial sector employees – the news overload and
accompanying waves of changes sometimes serve to make this already complex world even
more confusing. It comes as no surprise, then, that disorientation leads to quick accusations and
overly hasty appeals to move in new political directions.
This is observable in the banking sector, where discontent is being increasingly put at the feet of
public authorities. A recurrent move by banks has been to compare past profits one on one with
their  present  outlook.  If  an  unchanged  business  strategy  leads  to  a  poorer  outcome  or
deterioration in prospects, it would make sense to attribute this to the transformed landscape of
low interest rates and stronger regulation.
It  goes  without  saying  that  causal  interactions  exist.  For  example,  it  is  taken  as  read  that
monetary policy has an impact on the banking environment.
However,  first  of  all,  banking  happens  in  a  very  complex  environment  in  which  no  simple
causalities  apply.  In  addition,  banks  are  often  faced  with  rather  idiosyncratic  situations  and
challenges.
More  importantly,  causalities  and  responsibilities  are  not  one  and  the  same.  While  euro-area
monetary policy causes alterations in many parts of the economy, its mandate also prescribes
clear responsibilities – price stability is an overarching goal.
Rather, the transformed landscape urges banks to concentrate on their own responsibilities.  
Banks still play an important role in the market economy. Nevertheless, they are also part of it.
Allusions to the past will not lead us anywhere, simply because there is no customary law that
provides specific banking services with revenue guarantees. If allusions to the past rely on some
shaky profitability indicator, the case is even stronger. As all of you know, the return on equity,
one  of  the  key  indicators  of  profitability,  can  rise  when  returns  increase  or  equity  decreases.
Before the financial crisis, the weakness of banks was due, in part, to their low capital ratios.
High profitability was misleading in quite a few cases. I am convinced that institutions – despite
their  admonitions  –  are  now  comforted  by  the  fact  that  they  have  built  up  their  capital,  which
directly translates into higher risk-bearing capacity. Profitability is very welcome, but it should no
longer be accompanied by low risk-bearing capacity.
Instead,  any  long-term  strategy  for  profitable  banking  must  be  built  on  its  value  added  for
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
customers, business partners and society. As Europe’s low-interest environment persists and
digital  transformation  continues,  the  economic  value  of  banking  services  is  co-evolving.
Adaptation is taking place right now. German banks already increased their share of commission
and fee income last year. Banks will have to lower their high costs and adapt to the digital age in
the years to come.
Which of the traditional business models and organisational set-ups still fit into today’s financial
landscape?  Is  the  revenue  pie  still  big  enough  for  everyone  in  the  banking  sector  to  be
guaranteed  a  slice  in  the  long  run?  These  questions  will  continue  to  be  asked  of  the  banking
sector over the coming years. But forecasts remain presumptuous. While low profitability has
many  root  causes,  there  are  just  as  many  potential  ways  to  provide  relief.  Clearly  though,
banking has become a tough business.
To be fair, public authorities cannot dodge their own responsibilities, but the scope of these is
different. Interestingly though, pointing fingers and shifting responsibility are daily fare in a similar
fashion. This is particularly true with respect to the relationship between Europe and its national
constituents. The British referendum may be regarded as a current example. But there are other
instances.  In  banking  supervision,  a  common  regulatory  framework  in  the  euro  area  that  has
been operational for almost two years now, is directed at dampening national interests. Keeping
institutions  credible  and  effective  is  an  ongoing  task.  And  finding  and  deploying  governance
mechanisms that are congruent with our view of European cooperation will continue to be at the
forefront of our public duties in the future.
 4. Role of Bundesbank representatives
Ladies and gentlemen, in a world of broadband internet and market movements synchronising
within seconds across the globe, one might question why there is a need to work together like we
do here in São Paulo. But, as I have outlined for Europe and the European sector, filtering and
interpreting  our  complicated  world,  remains  a  challenge.  This  remains  especially  true  with
respect to the globalised financial sector. High-quality information and close cooperation have not
lost their value – in fact, I deem them more important than ever. The Bundesbank’s network of
international  representatives  is  in  place  to  comprehensively  observe  economic  developments
and the expected evolution of financial markets from within key countries and regions.
Our representation here in São Paolo is no exception. Economic ties are on the rise – just take
the increase in direct investment from the euro area to Brazil from 1.6% in 2008 to almost 4% in
the first quarter of this year. Exchanging expertise and nurturing fruitful personal networks with
central banks, financial authorities, supervisory authorities, banks and others is more important
than ever.
Dr  Marc  Rennert  has  represented  the  Bundesbank  in  South America  since  December  2012.
During  this  time,  he  has  played  a  vital  role  in  substantially  stepping  up  the  exchange  of
information  between  the  Bundesbank  and  the  region’s  central  banks  foremost  in  Brazil,
Colombia, Peru, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay.
During his time here in São Paulo, Dr Rennert has been committed in particular to deepening
ties with the Banco Central do Brasil. One of his milestone achievements was undoubtedly the
preparation  of  a  memorandum  of  understanding  formalising  close  cooperation  between  the
Banco Central do Brasil and the Bundesbank with respect to knowledge transfer and education
and training opportunities for staff members. More than 12 projects have already been carried out
since the MoU was signed in 2015, and the list of projects in the pipeline is very long.
Last  but  not  least,  Dr  Rennert’s  profound  expertise  on  macroeconomic  and  political
developments in the region has helped shape opinion at the highest echelons of the Bundesbank.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In view of Dr Rennert’s excellent achievements here in São Paulo, I am delighted that he will be
applying  his  skills  and  expertise  to  a  strategic  position  in  the  Directorate  General  Financial
Stability from January onwards.
I am very pleased to present Dr Eike Berner as the new Bundesbank representative at our office
here  in  São  Paolo,  starting  on  1  December.  I  am  certain  that  Mr  Berner  is  a  very  suitable
successor  for  this  position.  During  his  time  at  the  University  of  Kiel,  he  acquired  a  thorough
understanding  of  international  trade  by  pursuing  academic  research  and  lecturing  on  the
economic analysis of trade. At the Bundesbank, he joined the ranks of the International and Euro-
Area Macroeconomic Analysis Division of the Directorate General Economics. Since his arrival,
he  has  made  significant  contributions  to  our  economic  analyses  of  euro-area  topics  and
countries. Having worked in diverse macroeconomic and political fields, he has become quite the
versatile  economic  expert.  Thanks  to  his  expertise,  openness  and  dedication,  he  has  already
paved the way to success here in São Paolo.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
