BANK OF UGANDA 
    Speech by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, 
Governor, Bank of Uganda  
 Chief Guest 
 The Annual Dinner of the Uganda Institute of Banking and 
Financial Services 
 Friday, November 25, 2016 
Kampala Serena Hotel 
 1 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. 
 Let  me  begin  by  commending  the  Institute  of  Banking  and  Financial  Services 
for  the  excellent  work  it  is  doing,  especially  in  providing  professional  training 
for  staff  of  the  financial  services  industry.  The  Institute  is  making  a  truly 
invaluable contribution to the success of the industry in Uganda. 
 As  we  approach  the  end  of  the  year,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
reflect on the last 12 months from the standpoint of the banking industry and 
try to draw some lessons. We cannot deny that it has been a difficult year for 
the industry, with very low asset growth, a sharp deterioration in asset quality 
and a decline in returns on equity.   
 The  key  challenge  has  been  the  rise  in  nonperforming  loans  (NPLs),  from  3.8 
percent  of  the  total  loans  of  commercial  banks  in  September  2015  to  7.7 
percent in September 2016. Over the year to September 2016, the commercial 
banks had to make provisions of Shs 345 billion for NPLs, which is double the 
amount set aside in the previous 12 months. These provisions squeezed profits, 
with  average  after  tax  returns  on  equity  falling  to  14.9  percent  in  the  12 
months  to  September  2016  compared  to  17.1  percent  in  the  previous  12 
months. The squeeze on bank profitability would have been much worse were it 
not  for  the  fact  that  banks  widened  their  net  interest  margins.  The  high 
interest  rates  which  prevailed  over  the  course  of  most  of  the  last  12  months 
helped  banks  to  recoup  some  of  the  losses  they  suffered  as  a  result  of  bad 
debts.  
 On  a  more  positive note,  the  latest  quarterly  data  indicates  that  we  may  have 
passed the peak of NPLs in the banking system. In absolute terms, the value of 
NPLs fell by 6 percent between July and September of this year, although it is 
still too early to be very confident that NPLs are really on a downward trend.  
 The  deterioration  in  loan  quality  has  been  one  of  the  major  factors  impeding 
the  growth  in  lending  to  the  private  sector.  Over  the  12  months  to  September 
2 
 2016, the value of loan applications rose, albeit at a relatively modest 7 percent 
compared  to  the  previous  12  months,  whereas  the  value  of  loans  actually 
approved  by  banks  fell  marginally,  by  2  percent.  This  suggests  that  the  main 
constraint  to  loan  growth  has  been  on  the  supply  side  of  the  credit  market 
rather  than  on  the  demand  side,  with  banks  turning  down  loan  applications 
because of concerns about borrower creditworthiness or the realisable value of 
loan collateral, given the saturated state of the property market.  
 As you are all aware, the Bank of Uganda had to intervene in Crane Bank and 
take  it  into  statutory  management  in  November.  The  cause  of  Crane  Bank’s 
distress was non performing loans, which had risen to more than 20 percent of 
its total loan portfolio and which left it significantly under capitalised. Because 
it  is  a  systemically  important  bank,  we  intend  to  resolve  Crane  Bank  in  a 
manner which preserves its core functions and services to customers.  
 Fortunately,  all  of  the  other  commercial  banks  are  meeting  their  capital 
adequacy  requirements.  One  of  the  most  important  strengths  of  our  banking 
system, and the key to its resilience, is the strong capital buffers which banks 
hold.  In  aggregate,  the  banking  system  holds  total  capital  equivalent  to  22.5 
percent of its risk weighted assets, which affords it with large buffers to absorb 
adverse  shocks.  This  conclusion  is  also  borne  out  by  the  macro  stress  tests 
which  the  BoU  carries  out  on  a  regular  basis  as  part  of  its  financial  stability 
monitoring  and  which  show  that  it  is  the  large  capital  buffers  held  by  banks 
which is the main source of their resilience to withstand adverse shocks.  
 What  are  the  causes  of  the  rise  in  NPLs  in  the  banking  system?    There  are 
macroeconomic,  sectoral  and  a  variety  of  idiosyncratic  factors  which  have 
contributed  to  the  problems.  On  the  macroeconomic  front,  the  rise  in  interest 
rates in 2015, which was necessitated by inflationary pressures, combined with 
exchange rate volatility increased the stress on borrowers. At the sectoral level, 
there  have  been  problems  in  the  commercial  real  estate  sector,  where  heavy 
investment in recent years has led to oversupply in the market with the result 
that  occupancy  rates  have  fallen  and  many  owners  have  not  been  able  to 
generate sufficient income to service their loans. Mounting government arrears 
to suppliers and contractors has also contributed to NPLs while borrowers with 
3 
 business  in  South  Sudan  have  suffered  losses  because  of  the  acute  political 
and  economic  problems  in  that  country.  The  idiosyncratic  problems  mainly 
pertain  to  failures  among  borrowers  themselves,  such  as  the  diversion  of 
borrowed  funds  from  their  intended  uses.  These  factors  are  not  mutually 
exclusive.  For  example,  a  poorly  managed  business  will  find  it  much  more 
difficult  to  survive  a  sectoral  or  macroeconomic  shock  than  a  well  managed 
business.  
 What  lessons  for  the  future  can  we  draw  from  the  difficulties  we  have  faced 
over  the  last  year?  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  areas  where  we  can 
strengthen banking sector performance and resilience.  
 First,  banks  need  to  strengthen  their  credit  management  to  mitigate  credit 
risks.  One  crucial  area  which  needs  to  be  addressed  is  that  of  currency 
mismatches.    Foreign  currency  loans  account  for  43  percent  of  total  bank 
loans,  but  the  majority  of  borrowers  operate  businesses  in  the  non  traded 
goods  sectors  of  the  economy.  Even  if  borrowers  of  foreign  currency  loans 
which  operate  in  non  traded  sectors  price  their  output  in  dollars,  as  many 
owners of commercial property do, they are still vulnerable to shifts in the real 
exchange  rate,  because  their  customers  do  not  earn  dollars.  Exchange  rate 
depreciation raises the real value of dollar denominated loan repayments but it 
does  not  enhance  the  capacity  of  non  traded  goods  businesses  to  earn  more 
income.  Banks  should  restrict  foreign  exchange  lending  to  companies  which 
sell their output on the global market rather than the domestic economy, such 
as exporters. In general banks must be careful in evaluating the capacity of the 
prospective  borrower  to  continue  servicing  a  loan  in  the  event  of  plausible 
shocks to revenue streams or debt servicing costs.  
 Secondly, one of the reasons why lending rates of interest remain high is that 
banks  incur  heavy  operating  costs    Annual  operating  costs  as  a  percent  of 
average bank assets are as still as high, at more than 7 percent, than they were 
10  years  ago.  As  a  percentage  of  their  earning  assets,  banks’  operating  costs 
average  nearly  11percent.  These  costs  must  be  covered  from  the  interest  rate 
spread  and  non  interest  income;  hence  it  is  not  surprising  that  interest  rate 
spreads are high in Uganda. Over the long term, we need to lower lending rates 
4 
 in  Uganda  in  a  sustainable  manner,  to  support  the  growth  of  private  sector 
business,  but  this  will  only  be  possible  if  banks’  operating  costs  can  be 
reduced.  
 Thirdly, as I noted above, it is the large capital buffers which banks hold which 
ensure  the  stability  of  our  banking  system.  Average  capital  adequacy  ratios 
exceed  the  statutory  minimums,  by  11.8  and  10.5  percentage  points 
respectively for core and total capital. In line with the Basel III reforms and the 
agreements reached between the central banks of the East African Community, 
we  are  raising  the  minimum  statutory  capital  adequacy  ratios  at  the  end  of 
December 2016, to lock in most of the higher capital that banks currently hold. 
The  minimum  core  capital  requirement  will  be  raised  to  10  percent  of  risk 
weighted assets and banks will also be required to hold a capital conservation 
buffer  of  2.5  percent  of  their  risk  weighted  assets.  The  domestically 
systemically important banks will also be subject to a capital surcharge. Most 
of the banks in Uganda already hold sufficient capital to meet the new capital 
requirements, so they will not have to mobilise additional capital. However, the 
new capital requirements raise the floor on the amount of capital which banks 
must  hold  and  so  will  help  to  ensure  that  banks  continue  to  hold  very  strong 
capital buffers. Strong capital buffers are the foundation of sound banking and 
hence  I  believe  that  the  revisions  to  the  capital  adequacy  ratios  will  enhance 
public confidence in our banking system.  
 To conclude, ladies and gentlemen, I hope that next year will see a resumption 
of more robust growth in the banking sector and especially in bank lending to 
the private sector. With inflationary pressures having eased over the course of 
2016, the BoU has reduced the policy interest rate and I hope that banks will 
now pass on this reduction to  their borrowers. Banks also  need to strengthen 
their credit policies and begin to tackle the problem of high operating costs.   
 Thank you for listening. 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
GOVERNOR 
 5 
