Peter Praet: Interview in Die Zeit
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Die Zeit, conducted by Ms Lisa Nienhaus and Mr Mark Schieritz on 12 December, and published
on 14 December 2016.
 Mr Praet, you are a member of the Executive Board of the ECB and thus part of an international
elite that is really hated by the new right-wing political movements. Do you feel threatened by
that?
Peter Praet: No, but I am worried. As a European institution, we look at how much people trust
us. People like the euro, but the latest Eurobarometer survey shows that trust in the European
institutions has strongly declined in recent years. This is true for the whole of Europe as well as
for national institutions, not only for the ECB. But for us too.
No wonder, when savers no longer get any interest!
That is not the reason. In recent years, i.e. during the period of low interest rates, the approval
ratings  have  not  changed  significantly.  The  strong  downturn  came  in  2008  as  a  result  of  the
financial crisis. That is when trust plummeted. The reasons were, above all, economic. Before
2008  we,  and  most  economists,  predicted  that  the  euro  area  would  carry  on  growing
continuously. But then came the recession following the financial crisis and we never reached
the predicted economic strength. Shortly afterwards came the sovereign debt crisis, the second
recession and the rescue programmes with their cutbacks. So expectations were raised much
too high and could not be fulfilled. That is a great disappointment for many people.
So everything is the fault of the financial crisis. The ECB itself has nothing to do with it?
Central  banks  didn’t  see  the  crisis  coming  at  an  early  stage  either.  In  the  years  before  the
financial  crisis,  credit  growth  was  very  high,  not  only  in  Europe,  benefiting  from  relatively  low
interest  rates  in  some  countries.  We  gave  several  warnings  at  the  time  about  the  excessive
liquidity  in  the  markets.  When  the  crisis  then  erupted,  people  realised  that  Europe  was  not
properly prepared for a situation like this.
What was missing?
The toolkit was insufficient to respond to critical developments. There was no common banking
supervision, there were no institutions for the stabilisation or resolution of banks, and there were
no macroprudential instruments. That increased the effects of the crisis. Central banks have just
one instrument to achieve price stability – the interest rate. It is difficult to counter a complex
situation  with  this  instrument  alone.  However,  we  have  made  good  progress  in  stabilising  the
foundations of Monetary Union.
The  European  elites  did  that  too.  But  the  people  are  clearly  not  happy  with  that.  Ultimately,  it
comes  down  to  the  euro,  without  which  there  would  be  no  problems.  Was  the  euro  itself  a
mistake?
No. The crisis only illustrated that the euro had been created within an incomplete institutional
framework.  However,  we  should  not  forget  what  we  owe  to  the  euro.  Before  Monetary  Union
there  were  repeated  economic  shocks  owing  to  strong  fluctuations  in  exchange  rates.  That
created trade barriers. In addition, you must always consider the alternative. Take Germany, for
example:  without  the  euro,  the  currency  would  have  risen  very  strongly  in  value  during  the
financial crisis. For a country that exports a lot, that is a problem. I rather doubt that the country
would have been better off than it is now – and it is likely that interest rates would have been
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
pushed down very strongly in this case too.
At present everyone is saying that the elites have lived too long in their filter bubbles and did not
notice the rise in populism. Does that apply to you too? Do you live in the ECB bubble?
For us, diversity in opinions and views is an important basis for good decisions. On the ECB’s
Governing Council, we have the 19 governors of the national central banks who are there in a
personal capacity and not as representatives of their countries. That enriches the debate and our
perspective on the world. And, conversely, they are also able to explain our decisions in their
countries.  We  ourselves  regularly  go  to  the  European  Parliament,  and  occasionally  national
parliaments.
For example, Mario Draghi spoke at the German Bundestag a few weeks ago.
And you?
I try to exchange views with different people as often as I can. For example, I’ve been to events
for German small and medium-sized enterprises, and I take part in a lot of panels. Just recently I
met the President of the Bavarian building societies, among others, in this way. Both sides learn
from  such  events.  The  Germans  are  critical,  but  they  are  always  polite,  I  find.  Most  people
understand me better after such events. But usually they still don’t think that what we are doing is
good.
Do  you  sometimes  meet  tough  critics?  For  example,  members  of  Alternative  for  Germany
(AfD), a party that came into being quite specifically as a protest against the euro rescue policy?
We  are  open  to  dialogue  with  our  critics. And  we  also  engage  in  such  dialogue  on  a  regular
basis, not least in the European Parliament.
At the moment, interest rates are rising all around the world. Only the ECB is resisting the trend
and is leaving interest rates low. Are you losing touch?
The  picture  is  not  at  all  as  uniform  as  you  describe.  In  the  United  States,  for  example,  the
economic recovery is far more advanced than in the euro area, unemployment is lower and the
rate of inflation is higher. That is why the US economy can cope with higher interest rates. We
have not got that far yet.
Why not? Unemployment is falling in Europe too, and there is growth – and the oil price is rising.
It is true that the recovery is firming. However, the speed is still moderate and inflation is still
some distance from a sustainable path back to the target value. That is why we have decided to
extend our government bond purchase programme until the end of next year. We have, however,
reduced the scale of the monthly purchases by €20 billion as of April.
Is that the beginning of the exit from the trillion euro programme?
No. We want to continue the level of monetary policy support that we have been administering to
the European economy so far.
So, what would have to happen for you to be prepared to exit?
It  would  have  to  be  apparent  that  there  was  a  sustained  convergence  in  the  rate  of  inflation
towards our objective of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
That can change quickly. In the financial markets it is expected that the US economy will receive
a boost because Donald Trump wants to reduce taxes and increase public spending. Europe
would also profit from that if we could export more.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are signs of a looser fiscal policy in the United States in future, which is expected to lead to
higher  growth  rates.  But  that  alone  will  not  be  enough.  The  important  thing  is  to  make  the
economy more productive. Another outstanding question is protectionism, which would of course
be damaging, including for Europe. Trump is not President yet. We do not know exactly what he
is planning, and we should therefore be cautious.
So you want to continue flooding the world with money. You have already purchased bonds for
over a trillion euro. At the end of the programme planned so far, it will be €2.3 trillion.
We are not flooding anyone. People only ever talk about the billions of additional central bank
money that we are making available. But hardly anyone mentions the fact that money and credit
growth are fairly moderate. Our measures are thus aimed at stimulating this weak money and
credit growth.
How can that be explained to someone who is not a central banker?
Both central banks and banks can create money through lending to the economy. If the banks
are only doing so hesitantly, we can make financing conditions more attractive and so create
incentives for more generous lending. As long as the overall money supply is not growing very
quickly, that is not a cause for concern and does not lead to excessive inflationary pressures.
That means you are doing everything right, but no one understands?
I didn’t say that, but when interest rates reach zero, monetary policy becomes very complicated
to  explain.  The  central  banks  have  not  exhausted  their  options,  but  they  have  to  resort  to
unconventional means, such as the purchase of government bonds.
Here  in  Frankfurt,  property  prices  have  risen  by  20%  in  one  year.  That  is  not  very  hard  to
understand. Is that the next crisis in the making?
We follow developments in the financial markets very closely. In some regions we are indeed
seeing a strong rise in property prices, but it is still not a Europe-wide phenomenon. Moreover,
such a boom is only really dangerous when it is financed on credit. However, the issuance of
building loans is only growing very slowly.
In the event of a crisis, are you capable at all of responding in time? After all, countries like Italy
are so highly indebted that they might not be able to cope with higher interest rates.
I can take this worry off your shoulders. When the time for higher interest rates comes, then we
will increase interest rates. The countries would also be able to cope with that. Many of them
have used the period of lower interest rates to extend the maturities of their loans. When interest
rates rise, that will not therefore lead immediately to a significant rise in the cost of servicing the
debt. That does not mean that high debt levels are not a problem, but they do not restrict the
ECB’s room for manoeuvre.
Italy  is  already  causing  us  concern  today.  The  big  problem  is  the  ailing  banks.  The  new
Government is considering State aid. Does that make sense?
The European rules permit that. Even Germany put public money into the banks at the height of
the crisis. At that time, Italy did not. In my view, much more important than the question of where
the money comes from is that there is a clear-out in the banking sector. There are too many
banks in Italy and they are not profitable enough.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
