Janet Yellen: The economic outlook
Testimony  by  Ms  Janet  L  Yellen,  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, US Congress, Washington DC, 17 November
2016.
 Chairman Coats, Ranking Member Maloney, and members of the Committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to testify before you today. I will discuss the current economic outlook and monetary
policy.
The economic outlook
The  U.S.  economy  has  made  further  progress  this  year  toward  the  Federal  Reserve’s  dual-
mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Job gains averaged 180,000 per
month from January through October, a somewhat slower pace than last year but still well above
estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment
rate, which stood at 4.9 percent in October, has held relatively steady since the beginning of the
year. The stability of the unemployment rate, combined with above-trend job growth, suggests
that the U.S. economy has had a bit more “room to run” than anticipated earlier. This favorable
outcome  has  been  reflected  in  the  labor  force  participation  rate,  which  has  been  about
unchanged this year, on net, despite an underlying downward trend stemming from the aging of
the  U.S.  population.  While  above-trend  growth  of  the  labor  force  and  employment  cannot
continue indefinitely, there nonetheless appears to be scope for some further improvement in the
labor market. The unemployment rate is still a little above the median of Federal Open Market
Committee  (FOMC)  participants’  estimates  of  its  longer-run  level,  and  involuntary  part-time
employment remains elevated relative to historical norms. Further employment gains may well
help support labor force participation as well as wage gains; indeed, there are some signs that
the pace of wage growth has stepped up recently. While the improvements in the labor market
over  the  past  year  have  been  widespread  across  racial  and  ethnic  groups,  it  is  troubling  that
unemployment  rates  for  African  Americans  and  Hispanics  remain  higher  than  for  the  nation
overall, and that the annual income of the median African American household and the median
Hispanic household is still well below the median income of other U.S. households.
Meanwhile, U.S. economic growth appears to have picked up from its subdued pace earlier this
year. After rising at an annual rate of just 1 percent in the first half of this year, inflation-adjusted
gross domestic product is estimated to have increased nearly 3 percent in the third quarter. In
part,  the  pickup  reflected  some  rebuilding  of  inventories  and  a  surge  in  soybean  exports.  In
addition, consumer spending has continued to post moderate gains, supported by solid growth in
real  disposable  income,  upbeat  consumer  confidence,  low  borrowing  rates,  and  the  ongoing
effects of earlier increases in household wealth. By contrast, business investment has remained
relatively soft, in part because of the drag on outlays for drilling and mining structures that has
resulted from earlier declines in oil prices. Manufacturing output continues to be restrained by the
weakness in economic growth abroad and by the appreciation in the U.S. dollar over the past two
years. And while new housing construction has been subdued in recent quarters despite rising
prices,  the  underlying  fundamentals—including  a  lean  stock  of  homes  for  sale,  an  improving
labor market, and the low level of mortgage rates—are favorable for a pickup.
Turning  to  inflation,  overall  consumer  prices,  as  measured  by  the  price  index  for  personal
consumption expenditures, increased 1-1/4 percent over the 12 months ending in September, a
somewhat higher pace than earlier this year but still below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. Much
of this shortfall continues to reflect earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy
imports. Core inflation, which excludes the more volatile energy and food prices and tends to be
a better indicator of future overall inflation, has been running closer to 1-3/4 percent.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
With regard to the outlook, I expect economic growth to continue at a moderate pace sufficient to
generate some further strengthening in labor market conditions and a return of inflation to the
Committee’s 2 percent objective over the next couple of years. This judgment reflects my view
that monetary policy remains moderately accommodative and that ongoing job gains, along with
low oil prices, should continue to support household purchasing power and therefore consumer
spending.  In  addition,  global  economic  growth  should  firm,  supported  by  accommodative
monetary policies abroad. As the labor market strengthens further and the transitory influences
holding down inflation fade, I expect inflation to rise to 2 percent.
Monetary policy
I will turn now to the implications of recent economic developments and the economic outlook for
monetary policy. The stance of monetary policy has supported improvement in the labor market
this year, along with a return of inflation toward the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. In September,
the  Committee  decided  to  maintain  the  target  range  for  the  federal  funds  rate  at  1/4  to  1/2
percent and stated that, while the case for an increase in the target range had strengthened, it
would, for the time being, wait for further evidence of continued progress toward its objectives.
At  our  meeting  earlier  this  month,  the  Committee  judged  that  the  case  for  an  increase  in  the
target  range  had  continued  to  strengthen  and  that  such  an  increase  could  well  become
appropriate relatively soon if incoming data provide some further evidence of continued progress
toward the Committee’s objectives. This judgment recognized that progress in the labor market
has continued and that economic activity has picked up from the modest pace seen in the first
half  of  this  year.  And  inflation,  while  still  below  the  Committee’s  2  percent  objective,  has
increased somewhat since earlier this year. Furthermore, the Committee judged that near-term
risks to the outlook were roughly balanced.
Waiting for further evidence does not reflect a lack of confidence in the economy. Rather, with
the  unemployment  rate  remaining  steady  this  year  despite  above-trend  job  gains,  and  with
inflation continuing to run below its target, the Committee judged that there was somewhat more
room for the labor market to improve on a sustainable basis than the Committee had anticipated
at the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, the Committee must remain forward looking in setting
monetary policy. Were the FOMC to delay increases in the federal funds rate for too long, it could
end  up  having  to  tighten  policy  relatively  abruptly  to  keep  the  economy  from  significantly
overshooting both of the Committee’s longer-run policy goals. Moreover, holding the federal funds
rate  at  its  current  level  for  too  long  could  also  encourage  excessive  risk-taking  and  ultimately
undermine financial stability.
The  FOMC  continues  to  expect  that  the  evolution  of  the  economy  will  warrant  only  gradual
increases in the federal funds rate over time to achieve and maintain maximum employment and
price  stability.  This  assessment  is  based  on  the  view  that  the  neutral  federal  funds  rate—
meaning  the  rate  that  is  neither  expansionary  nor  contractionary  and  keeps  the  economy
operating on an even keel—appears to be currently quite low by historical standards. Consistent
with this view, growth in aggregate spending has been moderate in recent years despite support
from the low level of the federal funds rate and the Federal Reserve’s large holdings of longer-
term  securities.  With  the  federal  funds  rate  currently  only  somewhat  below  estimates  of  the
neutral  rate,  the  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  likely  moderately  accommodative,  which  is
appropriate  to  foster  further  progress  toward  the  FOMC’s  objectives.  But  because  monetary
policy is only moderately accommodative, the risk of falling behind the curve in the near future
appears limited, and gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be sufficient to get to a
neutral policy stance over the next few years.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Of course, the economic outlook is inherently uncertain, and, as always, the appropriate path for
the federal funds rate will change in response to changes to the outlook and associated risks.
Thank you. I would be pleased to answer your questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
