William C Dudley: Opportunities for economic growth in Puerto Rico
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  to  representatives  of  Puerto  Rico's  business  and  academic  communities,
San Juan, Puerto Rico, 29 November 2016.
 Jason  Bram,  Tony  Davis, Andrew  Haughwout  and  Joseph  Tracy  assisted  in  preparing  these
remarks.
I am very pleased to be here and to have this opportunity to speak with representatives of Puerto
Rico’s business and academic communities.  In my remarks, I will discuss the lessons learned
from municipalities in the United States that have faced crises over the years―such as New
York  City―and  what  those  outcomes  might  imply  for  Puerto  Rico  as  it  seeks  to  restore  and
sustain economic growth.  I will also touch briefly on the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey, a
new survey from the New York Fed that focuses on the business performance, financing needs
and borrowing experiences of firms across the Island.  As always, what I have to say reflects my
own  views  and  not  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal  Reserve
System.
My meeting with you today is part of the New York Fed’s continuing efforts to understand what is
going on at the grassroots level within our Federal Reserve district.  We plan these trips so we
can interact with a diverse group of stakeholders.  These meetings help me get a more complete
picture of economic conditions on the Island and a fuller understanding of the major issues and
concerns.  This is the third time we have visited Puerto Rico in the past five years.
Yesterday, I met with Governor-elect Rosselló to discuss the transition into his new role and the
key challenges for his upcoming term.  I also spent time with members of El Colaboratorio, a
shared  workspace  organized  by  the  Foundation  for  Puerto  Rico.    I  attended  a  roundtable
discussion with local businesses and spoke with former and current members of several of the
New York Fed’s advisory councils.
Earlier this morning, I met with the heads of a number of financial institutions and the University
of  Puerto  Rico’s  interim  president,  Celeste  Freytes.    Following  this  visit,  I  will  meet  with  the
leadership  from  Parallel18,  an  economic  development  initiative  that  attracts  early-stage,  high-
potential startups to Puerto Rico.  Finally, I will join the leadership of the Boys and Girls Clubs of
Puerto Rico for a discussion on the organization’s initiatives and a site visit to one of the clubs to
learn about workforce development programs and youth services.
As we all know, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has been through a very rough 10 years.  The
economy has been in a long slump that could easily be called a depression.  Residents have
endured a terrible drought, periodic blackouts and a fiscal crisis.  I don’t need to elaborate on all
of the struggles Puerto Rico continues to face.  The Island has been suffering from a vicious
cycle.    As  employment  declines,  people  move  to  the  mainland  to  find  jobs.    Accordingly,
economic  activity  and  tax  revenues  decline,  forcing  the  government  to  raise  taxes  and  cut
spending, which further reduces employment and prompts still more residents to move.  At this
point,  the  outlook  for  anyone  who  has  been  living  here  must  be  bleak,  and  it  may  be  hard  to
imagine this situation turning around anytime soon.  And yet, history tells us that a turnaround,
though not inevitable, is indeed achievable. 
Lessons from past crises
New York City is probably the most famous example of a municipality that experienced a major
fiscal crisis, recovered and is now thriving.  New York City’s experience is viewed, in retrospect,
as a major success, and some, including myself, have pointed to it as a hopeful example of what
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
could come to pass in Puerto Rico.  But, there are important caveats to the New York City story
and its applicability to the Commonwealth.
Like Puerto Rico, New York City experienced a number of years of both political and economic
pain as a result of its fiscal crisis in the 1970s.  On the political side, New York City residents lost
a large measure of their ability to chart their own fiscal direction for several years.  Decisions
about  tax  and  spending  policies  were  removed  from  elected  city  officials.    The  Emergency
Financial  Control  Board  was  empowered  to  review  all  fiscal  decisions  of  local  officials  and
demand  changes  to  the  city’s  budgets.    Part  of  the  city’s  tax  base  was  dedicated  to  bond
repayment—essentially handing it over to the city’s creditors.  For 10 years, the city could not
access the debt markets without support from the state.
The economic pain was also very real.  More than 70,000 city government workers were cut from
the payrolls in 1975 and 1976.  City residents faced dramatic service reductions—fire houses
closed, schools and police precincts had fewer resources, and crime continued to rise for many
years.
It is also important to note that New York isn’t the only U.S. city that has been through a major
fiscal  crisis.    Cleveland,  Philadelphia,  Washington,  D.C.  and,  most  recently,  Detroit  have  all
struggled to manage their budgets, and all ultimately reached a point when they were unable to
pay their bills.  As a result, these cities lost their fiscal autonomy to one degree or another.  In the
case of New York City, this turned out relatively well, as the short-run loss of decision-making
power led to a strong economic rebound that eventually restored the city’s ability to finance its
own choices.
So, is New York City’s experience really all that instructive for Puerto Rico?  With the advantage
of hindsight, it now seems almost obvious that New York City’s fiscal crisis was only going to be
a  detour.    The  city’s  economy  had  many  fundamental  strengths,  so  it  only  needed  some
assistance to get back on track.  Still, it’s worth pointing out that this was by no means clear at
the outset the crisis in the mid-1970s.  Then, many commentators looked at New York City and
other large cities as outmoded forms of economic activity, unlikely ever to recover.
While we do not have great measures of economic activity for cities, population change is a good
indicator of how attractive a place seems to be.  By that measure, New York City at the time was
seen to have very poor prospects—the city’s population fell by over 10 percent during the 1970s. 
So, New York City’s eventual bright future was far from clear as its fiscal crisis was unfolding.
Of course, not every city that has faced a fiscal crisis has the same track record.  Relative to
cities  that  had  similarly  grim  outlooks,  New  York  City’s  rebound  has  been  much  stronger.    In
Detroit, there are hopeful signs, but it’s too soon to tell how things will turn out.  Both Washington,
D.C.  and  Philadelphia  experienced  multiple  decades  of  population  declines  leading  up  to  their
crises. These population declines reversed in the 2000s.  Washington, D.C.’s population actually
grew  over  5  percent  between  2000  and  2010,  a  rate  even  faster  than  that  of  New  York  City. 
Cleveland’s fiscal reforms, on the other hand, were less comprehensive, and the city has never
really turned itself around.  Its population in 2010 was less than half the level of 1960.
The  different  performances  across  cities  reflect  the  complex  interplay  of  native  endowments,
economic conditions and fiscal outcomes.  As in Puerto Rico, the fiscal woes of many of our
largest  cities  have  been  closely  related  to  long-term  economic  transformations—essentially,
changes in the industrial specialization that occurred in those particular places.  In the case of
New York City, the transformation was from manufacturing to services, and it took a generation
to complete.  The city’s management of that transition was far from perfect, and the fiscal crisis
was the major manifestation of that failure.  The institutions set up to respond to the crisis were
crucial to ensuring that fiscal policy didn’t continue to amplify the problems associated with the
economic transition.  For a city to turn its circumstances around, it must navigate this economic
transformation, identify what will define its comparative advantages going forward, and then build
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
anew around those sources of strength.
The road to recovery
A successful fiscal reform first requires a regime in which local officials recognize and accept
the reality of the changing economic situation, and set spending budgets accordingly.  This part
is fairly straightforward, because it produces the simple policy dictum that borrowing—in all its
forms—must be strictly limited.  Of course, knowing what to do and actually getting it done are
different things, especially when politics are involved.  As a result, the record suggests that it can
be  extremely  helpful  to  have  some  kind  of  independent  fiscal  monitor  in  place  on  an  ongoing
basis.  It’s important that this monitor be insulated from the direct influence of politics, giving it
freedom to deliver objective analysis that may at times be very unpopular.  In Washington, D.C.,
this  took  the  form  of  the  Office  of  the  Chief  Financial  Officer;  in  New  York  City  it  is  the
Independent  Budget  Office,  which  is  modeled  after  the  Congressional  Budget  Office.    These
monitors have proven invaluable in keeping policymakers and the public informed on budgetary
matters,  and  in  providing  apolitical  expertise  to  assist  in  keeping  budgets  on  a  sustainable
course. 
The second major component is a successful completion of the economic transformation, which
is  a  critical  factor  for  reversing―rather  than  simply  halting―a  city’s  decline,  establishing  a
virtuous cycle of rising growth and strengthening fiscal outcomes.  New York City had the huge
benefit  of  its  comparative  advantage  in  finance—an  industry  that  was  poised  for  sustained
growth in the post-fiscal-crisis period of the 1980s through the 2000s.  Still, the city weathered a
lot  of  shocks  during  that  period,  including  the  9/11  terrorist  attacks,  the  financial  crisis  and
Hurricane Sandy.  It’s also worth pointing out that New York City is still prospering, even though
employment in its finance sector has stagnated.  This illustrates the need for cities to continually
look  for  new  areas  of  growth,  such  as  health  care,  technology,  and  leisure  and  hospitality
services.
This is why PROMESA (the Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act)
emphasizes  long-term  growth,  and  why  the  New  York  Fed  has  been  focused  on  identifying
impediments to the Commonwealth’s growth.  Since 2012, we have released two major reports
and several shorter analyses—most of which appeared in our Liberty Street Economics blog—
presenting  ideas  that,  if  implemented,  might  help  to  make  the  Island  more  competitive  and
reverse its economic decline.  These ideas have ranged from the very narrow and technical to
the  very  broad—from  improving  the  quality  of  Commonwealth  financial  reporting  to  bolstering
growth through education and job training to build the Island’s human capital.
Since I’ve identified managing the ongoing economic transformation as a major component of a
successful plan for Puerto Rico, let me summarize a few themes on that front.  Most of these
feature  an  important  role  for  the  Commonwealth’s  government,  underscoring  the  fundamental
importance of getting public policy right as a means of restoring economic growth.
First, it is important to reduce the cost of doing business on the Island as a way of encouraging
business  growth  and  increasing  the  demand  for  labor.    We  have  put  forward  many  ideas  to
consider here, ranging from ones targeted at hiring—such as giving Puerto Rico more autonomy
over setting its minimum wage policy—to more general ideas like streamlining regulation.  One
thing  that  we’ve  repeatedly  emphasized  is  the  need  to  find  efficiencies  in  the  Island’s  energy
industry.    Commercial  customers  on  the  Island  pay  roughly  20  cents  per  kilowatt  hour  for
electricity—nearly double the mainland average.  Island residents and businesses, as you are
well aware, are also burdened with exceptionally high water utility bills.  It is also important to
think hard about the supply of labor—the willingness of people to work, and the education and
skills that they have to bring to the market.  Labor supply is equally important, but less widely
discussed than the demand side of the market.  Labor force participation is lower at all ages in
Puerto Rico than on the mainland.  This is a crucial impediment to growth, and addressing it
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
requires  innovative  policy  options.    One  idea  to  address  this  problem  would  be  to  extend  the
Earned Income Tax Credit to Puerto Rico.  In addition, the structure of the Commonwealth’s tax
system creates disincentives to work in the formal sector, and suggests that tax reform could
produce a growth dividend as well as a more reliable source of revenue.  On top of the low labor
force participation is the well known and deeply concerning high level of out-migration.  In addition
to the lack of labor demand, it seems likely that quality-of-life concerns such as high crime rates
are playing a role in these decisions.  This underscores the importance of basic public service
delivery and is another example of the interplay between fiscal and economic outcomes.
Another important dimension of labor supply involves the skills that workers bring to the market. 
Many of these skills are acquired while in school.  Our research indicates that test scores for
school-age  children  on  the  Island  are  low,  suggesting  that  there  is  an  opportunity  for
improvement in the quality of public education.  One clear lesson from recent research in urban
and regional economics is that the collective skills of the people living in an area are a critical
ingredient for its growth prospects.  Improving the education available to residents can pay large
dividends over time.
I  know  that  this  list  seems  long,  and  none  of  issues  I  have  raised  are  easy  to  address. 
Nonetheless, I am confident that Puerto Rico has started on the road to recovery.  In the current
environment, it’s hard to see beyond the immediate crisis to a brighter future for Puerto Rico, but
that has been said of other places that have come back stronger than ever.  Getting the fiscal
situation in order is an important first step.  The factors leading up to the crisis took many years
to  develop,  and  history  shows  that  a  successful  recovery  from  a  crisis  also  takes  time.    It  is
important to recognize that fact and to stay the course.
Before I conclude, let me briefly discuss our new survey.  Earlier this month, the New York Fed
released the Puerto Rico Small Business Survey, which focuses on the business performance,
financing needs and borrowing experiences of firms across the Island.  The survey is intended to
fill  important  knowledge  gaps  and  flag  potential  economic  growth  opportunities  for  the
Commonwealth.  It was designed with input from partners here in Puerto Rico, and we are very
grateful for their cooperation.
Key findings reveal that firms are persevering through Puerto Rico’s economic crisis, though a
majority  reported  declining  revenues.    Managing  cash  flow  is  a  top  concern,  ranking  above
concerns  about  rising  business  costs.    There  is  significant  demand  for  credit,  with  the  most
common reason being the need to meet operating expenses.  For about half of all small firms,
credit needs were under $25,000.  Lastly, about 80 percent of firms do not sell online or export
their wares or services.  Firms see this as a growth opportunity, ranking programs in support of
increasing sales—to the federal government, via online commerce and through exports—as their
top  training  need.    We  hope  that  the  survey  will  provide  useful  insights  into  a  key  economic
sector and help inform policy to support Puerto Rico’s recovery.
Thank you for your kind attention.  I would be happy to take a few questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
