  Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Alpha, Beta, Gamma – measured risk-taking 
and dynamism amidst challenging times 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Joint  General  Membership  Meeting  of  MART-ACI-
IHAP-TOAP-NASBI-FMAP, Makati-City, 22 September 2016. 
 It is always a pleasure to speak before the six industry associations because you cover the 
breadth  of  the  Philippine  financial  market.  From  among  you  come  the  counterparts  of  a 
typical investor – traders, brokers, asset managers and underwriters. You span the spectrum 
of the domestic yield curve. You cover both public and private corporate sector funding and 
investment requirements. You deal in peso and foreign currency. In other words, ladies and 
gentlemen,  you  could  move  the  money,  capital  and  fx  markets.  And  therefore  you  have 
power to drive these markets to help raise the growth trajectory of our economy. 
A call to action, upfront! 
Normally that is how I would end a speech during your General Assembly. I would normally 
call you to action, just before I close. And I have done so, for over a decade now. 
You  may  wonder  why  I  have  chosen  to  begin  my  remarks  with  an  admonition  this  time, 
instead of putting it off to the end. By tradition, I address this General Assembly only once a 
year. I don’t believe we have anything else scheduled in the 9 months and 10 days remaining 
in  my  second  and  final  term.  Nine  months  or  three  quarters  is  a  long  time.  Of  course,  a 
basketball game has four quarters, but many basketball games have been won (or lost) in 
the last two minute. In over a decade together, we have built a sound banking system. We 
raised  the  bar  for  professionalism  among  your  ranks.  We  elevated  financial  consumer 
protection  high  on  your  radar  screens,  beyond  it  being  just  an  advocacy.  In  other  words, 
we’ve had a good run, so far, ladies and gentlemen. Let’s not drop the ball. Instead, lets go 
for that lay-up, take the three-point jump shot, sink all our free-throws and do the slam dunk 
to ensure we finish this game strong. 
For  certain,  the  Philippines  is  in  a  relatively  strong  position  compared with  many  AEs  and 
EMEs, even in the region, but we can aim to do better. We can make the financial market an 
even more effective and safe catalyst for economic growth. In the next few minutes therefore 
I hope I can encourage you towards this goal, but first let me put this in perspective. 
Putting this in context 
If we take a step back and look at all the actions of policymakers around the world, the end 
goal  has  really  been  to  restore  the  appetite  of  investors,  so  they  would  move  along  the 
financial  risk  spectrum,  encourage  asset  creation  and  in  the  process,  reinvigorate  real 
demand that will spur growth and job creation. 
But  this  transmission  mechanism  has  bumped  against  animal  spirits  that  have  somehow 
been curtailed by the GFC. The GFC and sovereign debt crises have brought about acute 
liquidity  shortage  during  the  crunch  that,  in  turn,  encouraged  higher  demand  for  risk-free 
assets  and  cash  holdings.1  This  increased  preference  for  liquidity  could  have  potentially 
contributed to the global savings glut, and may also explain why amidst abundant liquidity, 
both growth and inflation remain weak. 
                                                
1  Low Profile: Why Rates and Yields Will Remain Depressed, 24 August 2016, Roubini.com 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Another viewpoint is that structural factors have hindered the revival of risk-taking. Potential 
output growth has declined since the GFC, reflecting the impact of aging, and slowing capital 
and productivity growth in advanced economies.2 Therefore, the opportunities for real returns 
are  scarce,  and  the  subdued  global  growth  dynamics  limit  sustainable  returns  from 
investments. 
A role for the market 
This is where you, market players, come in. You need to put back on your economic risk-
taking hats (as opposed to your financial risk-taking hats only). I know that whether you are 
working  on  behalf  of  clients  or  for  your  own  proprietary  position,  you  all  have  a  “return 
function”, some probably call it a “budget”. And typically, this is made up of your alpha risks 
and your beta risks. In basic math representation, consider the Cartesian graph with the Y 
axis  as  portfolio  return  and  X  axis  as  market  return.  Your  own  return  could  then  be 
represented by Y=alpha (or the Y intercept) plus beta (or the slope) times X. In other words, 
Y=a +bX. You may recall this from high school algebra. How high above zero your starting 
point is, will be determined by your alpha, and how steeply you wish your returns to move 
across combinations of portfolios will depend on your beta. Because the expectation is that 
over  time  your  returns  should  rise,  it  is  important that  you  clearly  map  out  your  alpha  and 
beta risks. 
Alpha: where the core return lies 
In  the  context  of  my  remarks  tonight,  alpha  is  determined  by  your  macro  conditions  –  the 
outlook for growth and inflation, as well as the presence of institutions. In the Philippines, we 
have had 70 consecutive quarters of positive GDP growth nestled by inflation that has been 
below the upper end of the government target range since 2009. 
The  strengths  of  the  Philippine  economy  are  plentiful,  in  contrast  to  other  key  emerging 
economies  elsewhere.  Domestic  demand  conditions  are  supported  by  solid  private 
household  consumption  and  investment;  buoyant  business  and  consumer  sentiment;  and 
adequate  credit  and  domestic  liquidity.  Our  current  estimates  also  point  to  a  continued 
productivity growth in the medium term, backed by upbeat domestic demand and favorable 
demographics. 
Recent banking sector indicators continue to indicate solid asset growth, improving quality of 
loans, and capitalization above international norms; yet the agenda is long in terms of forging 
a financial system that strongly enables economic growth. 
Clearly, we are standing on a solid foundation. And, we can further build on that foundation 
by strengthening our institutions. In particular through capital market reforms. Year in, year 
out, we talk about a capital market roadmap. Let’s not make that a roadmap which leads to 
no-where. Industry leaders, there are many low-hanging fruits – the OIS, the general repo, 
the single price for bond trading. I am told there are just one or two more wrinkles to these. 
The end goals are clear – a more reliable and transparent benchmark process. Tapusin na 
natin ito. Masyado nang matagal. 
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  adopted  the  Interest  Rate  Corridor  in  June  so  that  through 
calibrated auctioning, the transmission of monetary policy would improve. That said, I think it 
is  important  to  remind  everyone  here  that  the  IRC  is  an  operational  adjustment.  The  BSP 
policy rate remains the key indicator for our view on inflation. The recent auctions showed 
that you are becoming more familiar with the IRC system and are responding positively to 
higher auction sizes. You can expect further upward adjustments to the auction sizes. The 
                                                
2 
IMF World Economic Outlook 2015 and 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  objective is to siphon off a sufficient amount of liquidity such that the gap between the policy 
rate and the term auction rates would have narrowed and are more closely aligned. Together 
with  refinements  in  auction  sizes,  we  will  continue  to  implement  the  agreed  phase-out  of 
access by trust entities to the ODF and TDF windows by June 2017. 
As  conditions  warrant,  we  may  also  consider  reductions  in  our  reserve  requirement  ratio, 
which is one of the highest in the region. Indeed, we continue to gear towards more market-
oriented policy instruments. 
Further  to  market-oriented  policies,  the  recent  FX  liberalization  measures,  particularly  the 
easing  of  documentary  requirements  for  larger  volumes  of  transactions  and  allowing 
resident-to-resident fx transactions should help bring more of the fx transactions back to the 
formal banking sector. 
To  recap,  alpha  is  where  the  core  of  your  return  lies.  And,  it  is  only  as  good  as  your 
fundamental environment is. Refinements to our operating capacity would therefore allow us 
to build on these positive fundamentals. As market participants you have to see that these 
refinements create the potential for “excess returns”. 
Beta: market risks, watching for the upside 
Now, let’s move on to beta, or the slope of your return curve. In general, the larger the beta, 
the steeper the return curve. Stated differently, higher returns mean higher risks. A typical 
portfolio  manager  would  take  some  high  beta  risks  and  mix  these  with  low  beta  risks  to 
achieve an ideal-risk return portfolio. In other words, managers would assemble his or her 
basket  of  assets  based  not  just  on  individual  risk/return  ratios,  but  by  how  each  asset 
contributes to a portfolio’s overall risk and return. 
The  same  is  true  for  the  BSP.  We  look  at  the  bigger  picture  in  calibrating  our  policies  to 
promote  stability.  We  look  at  the  pressure  points  from  both  the  external  and  domestic 
sectors, and then adjust our tools accordingly. 
Top on this list of pressure points are policy actions of AE central banks. Last night the Fed 
kept  its  target  funds  rate  steady.  Fed  watchers,  who  analyzed  every  nuance  after  the 
statement was released, highlighted the “divide” in the Fed, which could, down the road, lead 
to more difficulty in communicating their policy intent. Yesterday afternoon, the BOJ added 
“yield curve targeting” to its policy framework, signaling that short term rates would remain 
negative.  Earlier  this  month,  the  ECB  also  held  rates  but  signaled  it  was  open  to  more 
stimulus. With these AE policy meetings “out of the way” for now (so to speak), there could 
be  a  halt  in  the  recent  spate  of  outflows  from  EMEs,  a  slowing  in  currency  depreciation 
pressures in the near-term and reduced market volatility. 
As  for  China,  there  are  no  new  policy  prescriptions  coming  from  authorities  lately,  but  we 
remain  watchful  of  the  potentially  bumpy  path  along  its  transition  from  an  export-led  to  a 
consumption  and  services  driven-economy.  We  would  also  be  monitoring  developments 
during the transition to Brexit not only on the UK economy, but also in the rest of the EU. 
The  BSP  is  helping  provide  the  market  with  an  anchor  during  these  uncertain  times  by 
staying on the policy strategy that we have been using. For monetary policy, this means we 
will continue to be guided by our outlook on inflation, which right now remains manageable. 
As you know, today, the MB decided to keep policy rates steady. While inflation in 2016 is 
forecast to average below the lower end of the target range at 1.7pct, we see this gradually 
rising to within the target range in 2017–2018. The balance of risks surrounding the inflation 
outlook appears to be tilted to the upside, with pending petitions for utility rates and excise 
taxes on petroleum products. 
In  terms  of  the  exchange  rate,  we  will  continue  to  let  the  exchange  rate  be  broadly 
determined  by  market  forces.  But  if  there  is  excessive  volatility,  then  we  have  room  to 
provide or withdraw dollar liquidity as appropriate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Let me digress a bit here, this wasn’t in the original draft of my speech. But let me deal with 
the  elephant  in  the  room.  I  know  you  are  not  newbies  to  volatility.  Therefore  I  think  it  is 
important that, in all the sociopolitical events surrounding the market today,  we should not 
lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  our  macrofundamentals  are  solid  and  that  these  were  built  over 
years  of  deliberate  conscientious  reforms.  Admittedly,  markets  are  run,  sometimes  “over-
run”, by sentiment. So, I admonish you to keep your feet on the ground and not be “carried 
away.” 
The  BSP  has  the  tools  to  help  ride  out  the  volatilities.  We  can  also  employ  targeted 
macroprudential tools to bring about a more directed influence on market behavior, if and as 
warranted. 
In turn, we expect that the market would take measured risks – lend to viable projects that 
generate jobs, create client-suitable products, utilize your liquidity not just for financial assets, 
make  your  capital  work!  Our  regulations  and  our  policy  framework  are  geared  towards 
providing  a  balanced,  safe  and  sustainable  operating  environment  for  you.  Therefore  you 
have every reason and opportunity to steer your risk-return profile, in a measured way, to a 
higher gradient (or beta). 
Gamma: what’s next? 
So far, we’ve talked about alpha, then beta. Next on the Greek alphabet is Gamma. Gamma 
in  finance  is  the  first  derivative  of  delta  (which  itself  is  the  change  in  option  pricing).  For 
purposes of my talk tonight, let us consider gamma simplistically as a measure of how fast 
something is changing speed, i.e., the second derivative. 
The operating environment we are in is changing, and the rate at which it is changing is quite 
fast. It may still, however, take some time for the fundamentals of the global economy to fully 
recover  and  therefore  surprises  may  continue  to  impact  our  shores.  Nevertheless,  our 
favorable  fundamentals,  coupled  with  ample  policy  space  and  tools,  and  supported  by  a 
proactive reform agenda, gives us confidence that the risks in the horizon are manageable. 
Clearly,  these  factors  support  a  positive  basis  not  only  for  measured  risk-taking  but  also 
dynamism in the industry as we continue to deepen our capital markets and further increase 
the efficiency of financial intermediation. 
Final thoughts 
Alpha, Beta, Gamma... Let me conclude by saying that gamma can also stand for Go! We 
need industry players like you to GO and seize the opportunities that are being offered by a 
robust growth momentum. The economy has what it takes to overcome “headline risks”, but 
you  must  GO  and  create  opportunities  that  will  enhance  our  overall  competitiveness  as  a 
destination for doing business. 
On that note, I wish you all a productive and profitable year ahead of you. Mabuhay kayong 
lahat! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
