 Page 1 sur 8 
   Asociación de Mercados Financieros Annual Financial Convention 
Madrid, 21 November 2016 
François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Banque de France 
Europe facing a new political economy 
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Thank  you  for  your  invitation.  I  am  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  speak 
here  in  Madrid  today  with  my  friend  Governor  L.  Linde,  in  the  midst  of  the 
Spanish  financial  community,  and  in  a  country  which  has  demonstrated  its 
active commitment to the European project since it joined the European Union 
thirty years ago. We have come a long way in Europe and our common history 
and  past  success  will  help  us  look  ahead  in  these  challenging  times.  The 
Brexit referendum in June and Mr. Trump’s victory two weeks ago have indeed 
come  as  shocks  for  Europe:  both  have  increased  uncertainty  and  are  raising 
questions about the European identity. How should we, as Europeans, react?  
Not  by  less  Europe:  this  would  clearly  be  a  mistake  if  we  want  to  collectively 
master  our  own  destiny  in  this  new  world.  But  by  a  better  Europe,  a  more 
focused  and  efficient  one.  In  concrete  terms,  we  need  to  adapt  in  two  ways: 
first, by building actively on our economic and social assets – among them our 
single currency and monetary policy; second, by coming together around a few 
new select priorities – including tackling the current “investment crunch”.   
   I. First, Europe’s assets in the new “political economy”.  
Page 2 sur 8 
Let  me  start  with  a  brief  remark  about  terminology.  For  a  long  time, 
economic thinkers used the term “political economy” to refer to the discipline 
that we now call “economics”. Adam Smith, David Ricardo or Léon Walras, to 
name but a few, were some of its exponents. Despite its 400 year-old history, 
the  term  “political  economy”  had  in  the  last  decades  gradually  lost  its 
importance  as  a  comprehensive  way  of  understanding  economic  issues.  And 
yet  it  could  now  be  returning  to  the  forefront,  given  the  strong  interactions 
between  politics  and  economics.  At  the  international  level,  we  cannot  yet 
predict  what  Mr.  Trump’s  presidency  will  really  be  like,  but  we  can  expect  a 
deep  political  shift,  with  consequences  for  American  economic  policies. 
Besides,  the  electoral  cycle  will  continue  in  Europe,  starting  with  the  Italian 
referendum in December. To state the obvious, the first certainty is that we are 
facing a lot of uncertainty. How will Europe overcome this? I sincerely hope not 
by  “waiting  and  seeing”,  but  rather  by  sticking  to  and  building  further  on  its 
three  shared  economic  and  social  assets:  its  single  currency,  its  single 
market,  and  its  unique  social  model.  We must actively build on them, and 
not lazily rest on our laurels: pride should not be confused with complacency.  
First,  with  the  euro,  we  share  a  solid  currency  which  is  recognised 
worldwide.  The  vast  majority  of  euro  area  citizens  are  attached  to  it  (68% 
according  to  the  latest  Eurobarometeri).  Moreover,  in  a  world  of  uncertainty, 
European monetary policy is a yardstick of stability. Within the ECB Governing 
Council, around Mario Draghi, we take very seriously the task entrusted to us 
by the European Treaties of maintaining price stability, meaning medium-term 
inflation  of  close  to  but  below  2%.  Our  monetary  policy  has  safeguarded  the 
euro  area  against  the  threat  of  deflation  in  recent  times,  and  is  achieving 
tangible progress towards our inflation target: inflation rose to 0.5% in October 
and should exceed 1% in early 2017. It is supporting demand while narrowing 
the output gap, which has been reduced from -2.4% in 2014 to -1.0% in 2016 
according  to  European  Commission  estimatesii.  The  Eurosystem  has  already 
 Page 3 sur 8 
 provided  ample  liquidity  to  the  European  economy:  our  holdings  under  the 
expanded  asset  purchase  programme  amounted  to  nearly  EUR  1,400  bn  in 
October 2016.   
We  can  take  stock  of  this  progress,  while  remaining  alert  to  the  latest 
financial developments and their mixed economic effects: the rise in the equity 
market  but  also  in  the  long  term  interest  rates;  the  appreciation  of  the  dollar 
but  quasi-stability  of  the  global  euro  exchange  rate;  and  the  increase  in 
inflation  expectations.  We  should  be  both  confident  in  our  progress,  and 
vigilant  with  respect  to  our  environment.  Until  March,  we  will  go  on 
implementing  exactly  what  we  said  we  would:  our  clear  success  today  in 
purchasing  a  volume  of  EUR  80  bn  of  assets  per  month,  including  corporate 
bonds,  is  the  best  guarantee  of  our  credibility  tomorrow.  I  am  fully  confident 
that in our next monetary meetings, in the coming months, we will decide, in a 
pragmatic  approach,  about  the  best  evolution  after  March  of  all  our  available 
tools: QE, TLTRO and forward guidance on interest rates. And we have many 
options  open  regarding  the  size  and  length  of  instruments  like  our  APP, 
excluding either a sudden stop of its contribution to our accommodative policy 
in March, or the continuation of the same contribution forever. 
Second,  we  in  Europe  share  a  large  single  market.  It  is  a  tremendous 
asset  which  belongs  to  us  all,  the  27.  It  is  no  coincidence  that  access  to  the 
single  market  lies  at  the  heart  of  the  Brexit  debate.  We  cannot  prejudge  the 
outcome  of  the  future  negotiations,  but  we  can  be  sure  of  one  consistency 
principle:  access  to  the  single  market  must  continue  to  go  hand-in-hand  with 
strict acceptance of all its rules. There can be no cherry-picking or free-riding. 
And we must obviously preserve the single European trade policy, if we want 
to exist in the trade negotiations to come worldwide. 
Third,  we  share  a  common  social  model  (slide  2)  which  combines  high 
standards of public service and relatively low levels of inequality – much lower 
than in American society. And this has been achieved in a market economy. At 
a  time  when  globalisation  may  leave  many  behind  in  advanced  economies, 
 Page 4 sur 8 
 when the debate about inequalities is coming back to the forefront – and these 
are real challenges behind the populist wave –, now is not the moment to give 
up  on  our  social  model.  But  this  ambition  must  be  clear-sighted:  in  some 
countries like France and Italy, the high cost of the model and its disappointing 
performance  in  terms  of  growth  and  employment  calls  for  an  acceleration  in 
reforms  in  the  right  direction  (slide  3).  Several  European  countries,  including 
Germany  and  Spain,  are  showing  the  way  forward:  they  have  succeeded  in 
carrying out wide-reaching reforms that are compatible with our shared social 
model.  Progress  has  been  made 
in  all 
four  key  areas:  Enterprise, 
Employment,  Education  and  Expenditure  reduction.  And  these  reforms  are 
delivering  results  today:  in  recent  years,  GDP  and  employment  have  grown 
much faster in the “reforming” countries, than in France or Italy for instance.  
 II. Beyond our existing assets, we in Europe must put our joint energies 
into mastering our common destiny.  
Europe needs all Member States to play their part in the common effort. It 
needs  France,  as  well  as  Spain  and  its  constant  European  commitment.  For 
this  to  be  a  success,  projects  for  strengthening  Europe  have  to  be  carefully 
selected and prioritized; and we must not only talk about them, we must give 
ourselves the practical means to achieve concrete results. In a nutshell: “few, 
well, till the end”, or in Spanish if I may, “poco, bién, hasta el final”. There are 
of course non-economic areas: to name a few, defence and border protection; 
climate change; or youth education and training – an Erasmus Pro programme 
should  be  a  priority  for  the  unskilled  and  unemployed  youth,  which  is  our 
common  tragedy  in  France,  Spain  and  Italy.  But  in  the  economic  field,  much 
remains  to  be  done  as  well.  Although  we  have  succeeded  with  monetary 
union,  we  must  make  progress  towards  economic  union  –  so  that  monetary 
policy does not remain the only game in town.  
 Page 5 sur 8 
 1.  The  first  economic  priority  is  to  address  the  root  causes  of  Europe’s 
continuing  subdued  growth;  and  a  major  one  is  what  I  call  the 
“investment crunch”. 
(Slide  4)  Many,  following  Ben  Bernanke’s  speech  of  March  2005,  have 
rightly  talked  about  the  “global  saving  glut”  that  was  putting  pressure  on  the 
world’s economies. At present, saving remains high, due to the combination of 
emerging  market  economies’  surplus  and  advanced  countries’  aging 
populations. However, (slide 5) what has dramatically changed since the 2007-
08  crisis  is  investment,  which  has  dropped  sharply  as  a  share  of  GDP  in 
advanced economies. In the euro area, the total investment to GDP ratio has 
dropped  by  around  3  points  since  the  2007  peak  and  has  only  slightly 
recovered since. The gap between savings and investment is therefore huge: 
the  current  account  surplus  reached  EUR  350  billion  on  a  yearly  basis  in 
August  2016,  which  is  more  than  3%  of  GDP.  This  “investment  crunch”  – 
rather than the “saving glut” – is holding back our growth.  
It  is  true  that  part  of  the  decline  in  total  investment  since  the  crisis  has 
come from a drop in real estate investment: it was booming before the crisis, 
especially  in  countries  experiencing  real  estate  bubbles  such  as  Spain.  But 
what matters the most for our long term growth is business investment – and 
more  precisely  “productive  investment”  (slide  6):  this  includes  investment  in 
research  and  development  and 
industrial  machinery,  as  opposed 
to 
investment in construction which in itself does not spur innovation. One issue 
for concern is that the productive investment rate has long remained below its 
pre-crisis  level  in  the  euro  area. What  is  more,  it  has  been  weaker  in  France 
and Spain than in the euro area as a whole, although it has been recovering in 
recent  years  especially  in  Spain.  These  developments  have  translated  into  a 
striking  change in  businesses’ behaviour (slide 7): since mid-2009,  euro  area 
non-financial  corporations  have  turned  from  net  borrowers  into  net  lenders, 
thereby fuelling the euro area current account surplus.    
 Page 6 sur 8 
 2.  To  address  the  “investment  crunch”,  we  need  a  comprehensive 
therapy, both economic and financial.  
On the economic side, business investment depends indeed on two levers 
(slide  8).  The  first  one  is  expected  demand.  Banque  de  France  researchiii 
based on a panel of 22 advanced economies shows that over the 1996-2014 
period  it  has  been  the  main  determinant  of  the  slowdown  in  business 
investment (negative contribution of 80%). The second lever is confidence or, 
in  other  words,  the  level  of  uncertainty  (17%).  Concretely,  rules  have  to 
become simpler  and more stable for entrepreneurs. In France and Spain,  we 
are still far from the best performers in the latest World Bank ‘Doing Business’ 
ranking: we came in 29th and 32nd respectivelyiv.  
But alongside the economic levers,  financial  levers play a role too (slide 
9).  As  Europe’s  economy  is  close  to  the  “technological  frontier”,  businesses 
need  to  innovate  more.  As  such,  they  need  to  be  able  to  take  more  risks, 
which means more equity financing, rather than debt financing. But Europe is 
lagging behind:  equity  capital  amounts  to  only  52%  of  GDP  in  the  euro  area, 
compared  with  121%  in  the  United  States.  In  addition,  (slide  10)  the  cost  of 
equity  (CoE)  has  remained  astonishingly  high  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  – 
more than 9% for large listed companies in the euro area according to Banque 
de  France  calculations  –  despite  the  sharp  fall  in  interest  rates  over  the  last 
two decades. This means that the risk premia have increased. The high CoE 
could prompt companies to give priority to dividends and share buybacks over 
investment – we have seen this situation occurring in the United-States.  
So, in practice, what is the way forward? Obviously, as I argued earlier, we 
need economic and social reforms at the national level. But a large part of the 
solution  lies  at  the  European  level  as  well:  (slide  11)  as  of  today,  Europe 
needs  what  I  call  a  “Financing  and  Investment  Union”  (FIU)  to  steer 
abundant  savings  into  productive  investment.  The  FIU  would  merge  together 
the  initiatives  already  in  place,  which  do  not  deliver  sufficient  results:  the 
Capital  Markets  Union  of  course,  but  also  the  Juncker  Plan  and  the  Banking 
  Union.  We  need  to  put  the  pieces  of  the  puzzle  together  in  order  to  magnify 
their 
impact 
through  synergies.  There  are 
two  objectives: 
increased 
diversification  of  firms’  financing  –  with  more  equity  financing,  and  higher 
resilience  of  the  euro  area  thanks  to  private  risk-sharing  across  domestic 
Page 7 sur 8 
borders.  
3. Beyond the “Financing and Investment Union”, which is the first step, 
I believe that Europe should move forward on two further concrete steps. 
  The second step, after the FIU, is a collective  economic  strategy for the 
euro  area.  Growth  and  employment  will  be  stronger  in  Europe  if  we  combine 
more reforms  where they are needed, such as in France and Italy, and more 
fiscal support in those countries with room for manoeuvre, such as Germany. 
In  practice,  for  such  a  collective  economic  strategy  to  exist,  the  euro  area 
needs to overcome the current sense of distrust. So it needs an institution that 
fosters confidence: it could consist of a euro area “Finance Minister”. He would 
be responsible for defining the collective strategy with the Eurogroup, and for 
ensuring  it  was  implemented  in  each  country.  He  would  also  be  tasked  with 
managing  a  reinforced  ESM  (European  Stability  Mechanism).  In  terms  of 
timing,  this  second  step  can  only  reasonably  come  after  the  elections 
scheduled for next year in some euro area countries, as it requires modifying 
the European Treaties. 
The third step, in the longer term, would be to complete the Economic and 
Monetary Union with a European fiscal capacity. This involves gaining more 
trust from Member States, to avoid it being seen as a one-way “transfer union”. 
A  genuine  euro  budget  would  be  a  stabilisation  tool  and  could  include,  for 
example, a European-wide unemployment insurance scheme. It could also be 
used  to  finance  certain  “European  public  goods”  such  as  digital  technology, 
the  energy  transition  or  the  integration  of  refugees.  And  in  the  long  term,  it 
could directly issue common debt and even raise taxes. 
   Page 8 sur 8 
Let  me  sum  up.  To  withstand  the  current  global  headwinds,  we  in  Europe 
must  safeguard  our  three  common  economic  and  social  assets.  And  we 
cannot just wait for better conditions: as a central banker, I have given you my 
views  on  the  path  we  can  take  in  the  economic  area.  It  is  now  time  for 
Europeans to embark on some decisive actions to be able to look to the future 
with  confidence.  As  put  by  José  Ortega  y  Gasset,  the  famous  Madrid-born 
philosopher:  “Life  is  a  series  of  collisions  with  the  future;  it  is  not  the  sum  of 
what we have been, but what we yearn to be”. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                           
i European Commission, Standard Eurobarometer 85, July 2016.  
ii European Commission, European economic forecast, Autumn 2016. 
iii Matthieu Bussière, Laurent Ferrara and Juliana Milovich, ‘Explaining the recent slump in investment: the role 
of expected demand and uncertainty’, Banque de France WP No. 571, September 2015. 
iv World Bank, Doing business 2017 report. 
 