Yves Mersch: Distributed ledger technology - role and relevance of
the European Central Bank
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  22nd  Handelsblatt  Annual  Conference  "Banken-Technologie",  Frankfurt  am  Main,  6
December 2016.
Introduction
 Today’s  discussions  have  revolved  around  digitalisation  and  new  technologies  and  how  they
might  change  the  banking  business  of  tomorrow.  Roy  Charles  Amara,  a  researcher  and
scientist, once said that “we tend to overestimate the effect of a technology in the short run and
underestimate  the  effect  in  the  long  run”.  The  internet  is  a  case  in  point.  Some  of  the  wilder
predictions  during  the  “hype”  phase  never  came  to  pass.  That  said,  no  one  can  deny  how
powerfully  it  has  insinuated  itself  into  our  daily  lives,  fundamentally  changing  how  we
communicate and process information, and no one can know where it will take us next.
Whether  or  not  we  will  overestimate  distributed  ledger  technology  (DLT)  in  the  short  run  and
underestimate it in the long run remains to be seen. However, I am sure we can agree that DLT
currently stands in the limelight. A lot has been said about the potential impact of DLT on the
roles  and  services  of  central  banks.  In  particular,  questions  related  to  whether  or  not  central
banks should move central bank money to DLT and whether there is a need for issuing central
bank digital currency. Consequently, I think it’s time to frame the discussion. This speech will:
1.  outline the ECB’s position on DLT;
2.  discuss possible scenarios for adoption; and
3.  shed light on the global interaction between central banks in the field of DLT.
Financial innovation transforming market infrastructure services
The internet, mobile phones and tablets have changed the way we communicate, the way we
shop,  the  way  we  store  information  –  frankly,  the  way  we  live.  The  financial  industry  is
experiencing  similar  change.  We  refer  to  it  as  FinTech  –  innovations  that  could  result  in  new
business models or products with disruptive potential in the financial sector. DLT is a focal point
in  FinTech  as  its  perceived  opportunities  are  the  key  motivation  for  market  participants,
infrastructure providers and central banks to explore the technology.
In our reflections around DLT, we need to bear in mind that the possible impact of DLT depends
on how market players ultimately decide to embrace it. In the abstract, three scenarios can be
imagined: (i) individual market players try to use DLT mainly to improve their internal efficiency.
This would not have large effects on the financial ecosystem; (ii) a group of core market players
adopt DLT and gain a critical mass enabling whole market segments to shift to DLT; or (iii) a
more  revolutionary  scenario  of  a  peer-to-peer  world  without  intermediaries  emerges.  Many
discussions  around  the  benefits  of  DLT  had  the  third  scenario  in  mind,  but  from  what  we
observe, real use cases on DLT seem to focus mainly on the first and second scenarios.
There is not the shadow of a doubt that the journey has started, but from today’s perspective, it is
difficult to assess the magnitude of the impact DLT could have on the financial sector and what
the time frame for implementation could be. Some see DLT having substantial impact on the
financial ecosystem within the next five to ten years. While I don’t want to join the club of crystal
ball gazers, allow me nevertheless to stress that the implementation of a DLT environment may
be a multifaceted endeavour. From the experience gained with the implementation of TARGET2-
Securities,  we  are  aware  that  functional,  business,  harmonisation,  governance,  legal  and
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
regulatory aspects are of key relevance and need to be thoroughly considered.
Embracing change in the financial market infrastructure
Let  me  start  by  saying  that  the  exploration  of  technological  innovation  is  high  on  the  ECB’s
strategic agenda. The ECB is always on the lookout for ways to improve the efficiency and lower
the costs of its market infrastructure. It considers how best to respond to and take advantage of
technical innovation and meet new user needs, while staying ahead of evolving risks such as
cyber risk. Work is conducted in close cooperation with the market and revolves around making
liquidity management, within the fields of payment transfers, securities settlement and collateral
management, more efficient.
Let  me  illustrate  with  two  examples  of  how  the  ECB  embraces  change.  Last  year  the
Eurosystem,  which  comprises  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area,
launched a central bank service called TARGET2-Securities (T2S). Just like DLT, it was called “a
game  changer”.  T2S  is  changing  the  European  post-trade  landscape  not  only  by  offering  an
integrated settlement service in central bank money for securities transactions, but also because
it  has  brought  post-trade  harmonisation  beyond  what  has  been  seen  before.  Together  with
TARGET2,  the  Eurosystem’s  cash  transfer  system,  T2S  forms  the  cornerstone  of  financial
markets in Europe.
My  second  example  is  the  strategic  reflections  on  the  future  of  the  Eurosystem  market
infrastructure. Investigative work has started in three key areas: (i) the consolidation of TARGET2
and T2S; (ii) settlement services to support instant payments; and (iii) a Eurosystem collateral
management system. Work in those three areas is closely interconnected. It revolves around
making  liquidity  management  within  the  fields  of  payment  transfers,  securities  settlement  and
Eurosystem collateral management more efficient. Efficiency and innovation are the drivers for
the future market infrastructure.
Use of DLT in market infrastructures operated by central banks
It is important to note that there is no single DLT, that we are speaking of a variety of different
fabrics, the design of some solutions being tailored to the specific needs of the financial industry.
There is no “single blockchain to rule them all”. The ECB has considered a range of DLT models
currently under development. These differ in a number of dimensions, including the way updates
are validated, network architecture and permissions, the level of data sharing and replication, and
the  set  of  cryptographic  tools  used  to  ensure  integrity.  That  said,  question  marks  over
implementation  remain.  There  are  substantial  functional,  operational,  governance  and  legal
aspects that need to be weighed very carefully before thinking about possible mass adoption in
the  field  of  market  infrastructure  services.  Indeed,  DLT  is  still  in  its  relative  infancy  as  a
technological development and it is too early to say with any certainty whether and how it could
change the financial ecosystem.
It cannot be stressed enough that any technology-based market infrastructure service needs to
be  mature  enough  to  meet  high  requirements  in  terms  of  safety  and  efficiency.  These
requirements are taken very seriously by the ECB, not only in its role as operator but also as one
of the European authorities overseeing the safety of financial markets. Against this background,
the  ECB  cannot,  at  this  stage,  consider  basing  our  market  infrastructure  on  a  DLT  solution.
However, in its role as operator of TARGET2 and T2S, it remains open to considering innovative
solutions in the field of DLT and beyond, if and when such technologies are proven and they are
adopted by the users of the Eurosystem infrastructure. With this in mind, and as DLT solutions
are constantly evolving, we continue to assess, also through the conduct of practical DLT use
cases, whether advances in DLT-based solutions could lead to service levels on a par with or
maybe  even  higher  than  TARGET2  and  T2S.  In  doing  so,  we  focus  on  concrete  questions
(e.g.  can  today’s  liquidity-saving  features  be  offered  through  smart  contracts)  in  contrast  to
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
following a greenfield approach.
In order to lead the way the ECB has engaged in international collaboration. Together with the
Bank of Japan, we agreed to launch a joint research project which studies the possible use of
DLT for market infrastructure. The project is expected to release its main findings next year. This
work can help define how new technologies can change the global financial ecosystem of today
and ensure that central banks are adequately prepared.
However, we will certainly keep market developments and market needs in mind. Many players
have been vocal on the need for efficient use of central bank money in a DLT environment. Ideas
have been sparked and generic concepts are being developed by market players, sometimes in
cooperation with central banks, on how to "inject" central bank money into the DLT world.
These initiatives sometimes seem to go beyond the idea of a central bank bringing its settlement
services on DLT and maybe they could alter or even call into question the role the central bank
currently plays as operator. Some initiatives allocate the role of a "notary" to the central bank –
controlling the amount of central bank money circulating in a DLT environment. Others foresee
that a trustee ensures that the values circulated in a DLT-based solution are fully backed by a
corresponding amount of central bank money held "off-chain". For this discussion, it is important
to clarify that a payment can be considered to be in central bank money if – and only if – the
beneficiary  has  a  claim  on  the  asset  of  the  central  bank  –  either  directly  or  by  means  of  an
explicit  commitment  of  the  central  bank.  Anything  else  remains  commercial  bank  money
regardless of the technology used.
Depending on how potential solutions to bring central bank money onto distributed ledgers are
designed, they go beyond functional, operational and legal questions around DLT. They touch
upon questions of monetary policy implementation and the role of central banks as infrastructure
providers. Against this background, the Eurosystem jointly needs to assess the matter from the
various angles as far as it concerns the euro as settlement asset.
The  discussion  around  central  bank  money  on  DLT  is  closely  linked  to  the  question  of  who
should  have  access  to  such  money.  Issuing  central  bank  money  on  a  distributed  ledger  for
settlement among current holders of TARGET2 accounts could be done in a way that changes
little  of  how  central  banks  perform  their  functions.  Nevertheless,  broadening  access,  possibly
even to the man or woman on the street, is often discussed under the heading “digital central
bank  currency”.  It  would  change  the  way  different  actors  interact  in  financial  markets  and
requires multidisciplinary research. We are considering various facets such as: What should be
the features of digital central bank currency (to what extent should it resemble cash, e.g. feature
of  anonymity)?  To  what  extent  should  convertibility  of  digital  central  bank  currency  into
commercial bank deposits and cash be restricted, if at all? (If conversion were unrestricted, bank
runs may evolve faster and impact the funding base of banks.) How would it impact banknote
production costs and seigniorage income? How would it impact monetary policy transmission,
and what would it mean for (non-standard) monetary policy measures?
Catalyst
This leads me to my last point. Besides the ECB’s role as operator we also act as a catalyst for
European market integration.
Financial  market  integration  is  high  on  the  agenda  of  the  ECB.  Our  two  market  infrastructure
platforms  –  Target2  and  T2S  –  have  integrated  the  financial  market  substantially  and  are  an
essential cornerstone in the Commission’s project to build a capital markets union. With various
DLT  solutions  emerging,  there  is  a  risk  that  this  could  lead  to  fragmentation,  with  new  silos
established.  Therefore,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  ensure  that  any  services  developed  are
interoperable, not only by ensuring standardisation at the technical level but also by harmonising
business and legal domains.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
More specifically, we see three layers of harmonisation that are useful to promote integration of
financial markets:
Regulatory/legal harmonisation refers to the need that a common set of rules be applied
to  the  provisions  of  any  given  service  across  jurisdictions,  and  to  the  implications  that
applicable domestic laws can have even on third parties.
Functional harmonisation refers to the agreement over a set of business rules that allow
business  to  be  done  across  markets,  such  as  market  opening  times  or  the  set  of
information to be exchanged when a transaction is processed.
Technical  harmonisation  refers  to  the  detailed  set  of  standards  to  be  adopted  when
carrying out a process, e.g. messaging formats.
Each of these three harmonisation layers requires coordinated efforts among a different set of
entities.  The  ECB,  in  its  catalyst  role,  will  promote  innovation  by  involving  all  relevant
stakeholders  and  thereby  foster  change  which  underpins  the  safety  and  efficiency  of  financial
markets.  In  this  vein,  it  will  help  facilitate  a  discussion  to  ensure  that  potential  DLT-based
solutions – of a public or industry nature – are interoperable with other market solutions based on
DLT. We believe that it will benefit all prospective users of the technology, since public authorities
and market participants agree that the big potential of DLT lies in its network effect.
In addition, within the ECB, we have recently established a DLT task force as part of the post-
trade harmonisation agenda within the T2S governance framework. Its objective is to assess the
potential  impact  of  DLT  on  harmonisation,  from  both  the  T2S  and  the  wider  European
perspective, with a view to supporting other T2S governance bodies advising the Eurosystem in
this  respect.  It  is  vital  that  such  work  takes  place  in  the  context  of  T2S  to  allow  proactive
collaboration  with  the  market.  Facilitating  functional  harmonisation  ex  ante  –  in  a  coordinated
effort with all relevant stakeholders – can ensure that innovations that are proven to be safe can
be  adopted  without  harming  market  integration.  Our  overriding  objective  will  continue  to  be
fostering integration and avoiding fragmentation.
Conclusion
New technologies will have a profound impact on the financial market. It is essential that these
technologies are explored, analysed and tested to ensure that tomorrow’s market infrastructure
is not only efficient and innovative but also remains safe and resilient. Exploring the potential of
new technologies such as DLT is high on the ECB’s strategic agenda.
To conclude, let me recap a few key points:
The  ECB  considers  new  technologies  as  essential  to  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  our  market
infrastructure. However, it’s time to frame the discussion. I think the potential of DLT in the field of
market  infrastructures  revolves  around  two  fundamental  concepts  of  central  bank  money  on
DLT:
First, can central bank settlement services themselves be operated in a DLT environment?
Today, DLT is not ready for mass adoption and not sufficiently mature for use in our central
bank market infrastructures (given the high requirements of safety and efficiency). Future
use needs to be explored, and this is what we are doing based on concrete use cases (i.e.
can  DLT  meet  the  TARGET2/T2S  service  levels).  As  new  technologies  don’t  stop  at
borders, we have furthermore decided to cooperate with the Bank of Japan to explore the
potential future use of DLT for central banking services in a more global context.
Second,  how  could  a  central  bank  interface  and  interoperate  with  DLT-based  settlement
services which are not necessarily offered by the central bank itself? For example, it needs
to be assessed whether “a central bank could inject and control the amount of central bank
money circulating in a DLT environment”. Or whether, for example, a private sector trustee
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
could  ensure  that  the  values  circulated  in  a  DLT-based  solution  are  fully  backed  by  a
corresponding amount of central bank money held "off-chain”. Such concepts could alter the
existing  central  bank  role  as  operator  and  impact  monetary  policy  implementation.
Therefore, joint analysis by the Eurosystem will be required.
We are on a journey which could radically alter the financial ecosystem as we know it. The ECB
is committed to be part of this journey.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
