Page 1 sur 7 
   8th International Insurance Conference: “Towards the insurance of 
tomorrow” – Paris, 14 October 2016 
Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, Chairman of the Autorité de 
Contrôle Prudentiel et de Résolution and Governor of the Banque de 
France  
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
 I  am  very  happy  to  be  here  today  for  this  8th  International  Insurance 
Conference - the first to be organised under the aegis of the French Insurance 
Federation  -  and  I  would  particularly  like  to  extend  my  regards  to  the 
federation’s Chairman, Bernard Spitz, as well as to its vice-chairmen. Although 
I  have  met  you  all  several  times  in  the  past  year,  this  is  the  first  time  I  have 
participated in an event in my capacity as Chairman of the ACPR, the Autorité 
de  Contrôle  Prudentiel  et  de  Résolution.  Rest  assured  that  at  the  ACPR,  I  - 
indeed  we  -  regard  the  insurance  sector  as  every  bit  as  important  as  the 
banking sector. With a total of 826 licensed firms in France in 2015, oversight 
of  the  insurance  sector  is  a  vital  part  of  our  mission  to  safeguard  financial 
stability – which, alongside monetary strategy and the provision of services to 
the economy, forms part of my threefold mandate as Governor of the Banque 
de France.  
Page 2 sur 7 
 As  supervisors,  we  are  concerned  on  a  daily  basis  with  the  theme  of  this 
conference:  the  insurance  industry  of  tomorrow.  Indeed,  given  the  speed  at 
which  things  are  evolving,  tomorrow’s  insurance  landscape  is  already  very 
much present today. Among the many changes you are being forced to adapt 
to  –  technological,  environmental,  macroeconomic  and  regulatory  –  I  would 
like to look in particular at two key challenges: the persistent low interest rate 
environment,  and  the  profound  changes  to  the  regulatory  framework  with  the 
entry into force of Solvency 2.  
I. First, the challenge of low interest rates 
 On this issue, it is important not to lose sight of the broader picture: low rates 
are not solely the result of monetary policy, they are also a consequence of the 
global  savings  glut;  and  the  current  low  rate  environment  is  not  just  having 
negative  effects, 
it 
is  also  producing  benefits 
that  should  not  be 
underestimated.  If  the  ECB  had  not  acted  to  lower  interest  rates,  we  would 
have even lower inflation today – and the deadly threat of deflation - and less 
growth in France and Europe. This would be detrimental for insurers as well as 
banks.  In  addition,  low  rates  are  having  a  direct  positive  impact  on  insurers’ 
balance  sheets:  the  unrealised  capital  gains  on  past  purchases  of  securities 
have increased significantly. In 2015, they amounted to EUR 271 billion.1 
 Of course, the fact that this low interest rate environment is persistent means 
that  regulatory  authorities  need  to  be  vigilant  and  that  the  insurance  sector 
needs  to  adapt.  This  applies  in  particular  to  life  insurance,  France’s  leading 
savings  product,  with  an  average  outstanding  investment  of  EUR 24,000  per 
                                                      
1 ACPR, 2015 Annual Report, October 2016. The figure shows the unrealised capital gains recorded by all insurance companies 
(including mutual and provident insurers) on all asset classes. The unrealised gains on the bond holdings of insurers covered by 
the Insurance Code amounted to EUR 151 billion in 2015. 
Page 3 sur 7 
inhabitant. The low interest rate environment is squeezing insurers’ profits: it is 
creating  a  situation  where  the  returns  on  new  securities  added  to  investment 
portfolios are lower than the rates paid out on insurance policies. In response, 
insurers have already started to lower the rates paid to policyholders: in 2015, 
they  fell  by  an  average  of  25  basis  points  compared  with  the  previous  year. 
However,  this  is  still  insufficient  when  compared,  in  particular,  with  the  fall  in 
10-year  OAT  yields:  a  drop  of  80  basis  points  over  the  same  period. I  would 
therefore  urge  insurers  once  again  to  show  moderation  and  to  be  realistic 
when  setting  rates  of  return  on  euro-denominated  life  insurance  policies  for 
2016. 
 The  low  rate  environment  also  raises  a  fundamental  question  about  the 
diversification of savings products. 2015 was marked by a shift among savers 
towards  unit-linked  products:  net  inflows  almost  doubled  compared  with  the 
previous  year,  to  EUR 11.4  billion,  while  inflows  into  euro-denominated 
products  declined  by  25%  to  EUR 10.5  billion.2 However,  unit-linked  policies 
are  almost  certainly  not  the  only  answer,  especially  as  their  rise  in  popularity 
will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  a  high  standard  of  financial  information,  to 
ensure that policyholders are fully aware of the associated risks.  
 Public  authorities  and  industry  professionals  need  to  combine  forces  and 
continue  looking  for  ways  to  redirect  French  savings.  Without  necessarily 
making it an issue in the upcoming electoral debate, the solution could aim to 
be compatible on three levels: with the low interest rate environment, with the 
need  to  better  channel  resources  towards  productive  investment  –  and 
therefore corporate equity – and with the expectations of savers. Prompted by 
the increase in life expectancies and the need to prepare for retirement, savers 
are  adopting  increasingly  long-term  investment  horizons:  they  are  more 
                                                      
2 ACPR, 2015 Annual Report, October 2016. 
Page 4 sur 7 
concerned  with  the  security  of  their  investments  than  with  liquidity.  Taking 
inspiration  from  the  new  Euro-croissance  policies,  it  makes  sense  to  offer 
savers new, complementary forms of saving products that are less liquid and 
include some form of long-term capital guarantee, and that allow them to take 
advantage of the higher returns offered by equities over the long run. We also 
need,  at  the  very  least,  to  avoid  any  tax  distortions  that  might  penalise  these 
products more than liquid and risk-free investments. 
 Given the current low rate environment, the ACPR is taking care to ensure that 
insurers  remain  alert  to  the  risks  of  adverse  developments  and  take 
appropriate  measures  to  counter  them.  For  this  reason,  as  part  of  the  2015 
preparations  for  the  Own  Risk  and  Solvency  Assessment  (ORSA),  it  asked 
insurers  to  conduct  an  in-depth  analysis  of  the  impact  of  persistent  low  rate 
scenarios on their solvency, finances and ability to meet their commitments. In 
addition, this year EIOPA is conducting a Europe-wide stress test. For France, 
the  scope  of  this  exercise  is  particularly  broad:  the  ACPR  has  extended  it  to 
cover 90% of the market, compared with the 75% specified by EIOPA. Unlike 
bank stress tests, insurance stress tests are not “fail or pass” and as a result 
will not lead to the application of additional capital requirements. The findings, 
to be published by mid-December, will make it possible to determine precisely 
how  exposed  the  insurance  market  is  to  the  risks  linked  to  the  low  rate 
environment.  The  ORSA  exercise  and  stress-tests  will  enable  the  ACPR  to 
identify  weaknesses,  and  we  fully  intend  to  discuss  any  counter  measures  to 
be put in place with the establishments concerned.  
 Lastly, there is the proposal, under the draft Sapin law, to extend the powers of 
the  French  macroprudential  authority,  the  HCSF,  to  the  insurance  sector. 
There is no point trying to turn this into a controversy; indeed doing so would 
only  be  counterproductive  for  the  protection  of  policyholders.  Let  me  say  this 
Page 5 sur 7 
unequivocally:  there  is  no  threat  to  the  savings  of  French  investors,  and  no 
question of making changes to the terms of their policies. On the contrary, our 
responsibility,  after  the  crisis  we  have  experienced,  is  to  better  protect  the 
rights of policyholders, and by that I mean all policyholders. The sole purpose 
of this measure is to enable us to protect French savers in the event of serious 
and exceptional threats to financial stability. If ever it were needed, we would 
be sure to use it appropriately and in the collective interest.  
 II.  Second  major  challenge  for  the  insurance  sector:  the  complete 
overhaul of the regulatory framework 
 The Solvency 2 Directive came into force in the European Union on 1 January 
this  year  after  10  years  of  difficult  negotiations.  Despite  what  critics  say,  this 
overhaul of the regulatory framework was necessary. The previous framework, 
which  dated  back  to  the  1970s,  was  no  longer  adequate.  It  did  not  take  into 
account  the  true  nature  of  risks:  capital  requirements,  for  example,  were 
independent of asset allocation. The new supervisory framework now includes 
requirements 
relating 
to  governance,  cooperation  between  European 
supervisors in the same group, reporting and transparency vis-à-vis the market. 
The  principles  of  Solvency  2  are  not  perfect  but  they  do  represent  genuine 
progress:  investment  freedom  in  return  for  compliance  with  the  "prudent 
person"  principle,  joint  valuation  of  insurance  assets  and  liabilities,  and  the 
taking into account of "long-term guarantees" to mitigate the effects of financial 
market volatility on capital. 
 That  said,  there  are  a  number  of  developments  that  would  be  desirable.  A 
review phase of the standard formula and the long-term guarantee package is 
scheduled  at  the  European  level  for  2018-2020.  This  step  provides  an 
opportunity for improvement in at least three areas: 
Page 6 sur 7 
-  Firstly, the simplification of the regulatory framework. The complexity of 
the  standard  formula  is  neither  desirable  for  the  industry  which  has  to 
produce  these  new  calculations,  nor  for  supervisors,  nor  for  financial 
markets. 
-  Secondly,  insurers  should  remain  a  genuine  lever  for  financing  the 
economy. The insurance sector is the largest institutional investor in the 
European Union, with almost EUR 9,800 billion invested in the economy 
in 2015. You have often brought this issue up with me... and it has now 
been clearly identified at the European level. There are already plans for 
improvements in two areas, upstream of the review phase: infrastructure 
corporates  on  the  one  hand  –  EIOPA  has  proposed  a  revision;  high-
quality  securitisation  products  on  the  other.  More  generally,  it  is 
essential to consider the potential deterrent effect of Solvency 2 on more 
“risky” 
investments,  which  are  necessary 
to  ensure 
the  proper 
functioning of our economy: equities, whether listed or unlisted, loans to 
SMEs  and  MTEs  but  also  green  assets  or  investments  in  innovative 
companies. 
-  Finally,  we  know  that  Solvency  II  is  more  volatile  than  the  previous 
regime.  Measures  have  already  been  integrated  to  limit  the  procyclical 
effects  of  a  market  value-based  balance  sheet.  It  is  worth  mentioning 
the  matching  adjustment, 3 the  volatility  adjustment 4 and  the  symmetric 
adjustment  for  equity  risk, 5  which  complement  a  set  of  transitional 
measures  to  ensure  a  gradual  entry  into  force  of  the  new  regime.  The 
effectiveness  of  these  measures  should  be  assessed  in  the  coming 
years, and if it proves inadequate, amendments should be proposed. 
                                                      
3 which takes account of the reality of asset-liability matching. 
4 which adjusts changes in bond spreads not linked to default risk. 
5 which adjusts the capital charge according to the position in the equity cycle. 
 Page 7 sur 7 
  I  could  also  have  talked  about  digital  technology,  or  climate  change;  I  know 
you  are  already  dealing  with  these  issues.  Going  forward,  however,  there  is 
one thing we can be sure of: in a world of uncertainty, and therefore of volatility, 
the  business  of  insurance,  your  business,  will  remain  central  to  two  key 
challenges: protecting against risks and preparing for the long term. Insurance 
is a strength, both for France and for its economy. As the industry continues to 
evolve,  rest  assured  that  the  ACPR’s  staff  will  remain  fully  committed  to 
supporting you day-to-day. Thank you for your attention. 
 