John Iannis Mourmouras: Implications of the UK vote to leave the
EU – a view from the South
Panel  intervention  by  Professor  John  Iannis  Mourmouras,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of
Greece, at the Bank of Italy-OMFIF Main Meeting, Rome, 22 September 2016.
 Intervention  in  a  panel  meeting  with  Lord  (Norman)  Lamont,  former  UK  Chancellor  of  the
Exchequer, Ambassador Antonio Armellini, and Philip Middleton, Deputy Chairman, Ernst and
Young, OMFIFAdvisory Board, moderated by Fabio Pannetta, Deputy Governor, Banca d’Italia,
at the Banca d’Italia-OMFIF Main Meeting in Rome (Italy) on 22 September 2016. 
Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect
those of the institutions I am affiliated with.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  take  part  in  such  a  distinguished  panel.  On  this  very  important
matter of implications of the UK vote to leave the EU, I would like to focus on a couple of issues:
Firstly, on the potential effects of Brexit on the dynamics of European integration and indeed offer
a southern point of view and, more particularly, make five points from the South on the Brexit
vote.  Secondly,  I  will  examine  the  implications  of  Brexit  on  what  central  banks  do  in  terms  of
monetary policy, including the ECB.
1.  A SOUTHERN VIEW ON BREXIT’S IMPLICATIONS FOR THE EU 
The  European  Union  is  currently  facing  crises  on  multiple  fronts  (anaemic  growth,  high
unemployment,  persistently  low  inflation  close  to  deflation,  a  debt  crisis,  an  ongoing  migrant
crisis), but Brexit represents the biggest medium- to long-term challenge of all. 
Point number 1: A deeper look into some European failures that influenced the Brexit
vote 
Euroscepticism  is  now  a  strong  sentiment  in  Europe.  Populist,  authoritarian  parties  are  in
government  or  in  a  ruling  coalition  in  nine  (9)  countries  of  the  EU.  This  is  an  alarming  figure.
Referendums in Italy and Hungary, and national elections next year in the Netherlands, the Czech
Republic,  France  and  Germany,  are  expected  to  reinforce  this  eurosceptic  mood.  Eurocrats
should take note of this reality. 
 Beyond the obvious economic concerns which triggered the UK vote to leave the EU, everyone
agrees that the EU needs to address the issue of its democratic deficit and accountability. This is
obviously  not  resolved  with  a  European  Parliament  that  maintains  two  seats:  a  real  seat  in
Brussels and a symbolic seat in Strasbourg, costing the EU, and thus European taxpayers, €114
million per year. The EU is perceived as a sclerotic and costly organisation that fails to adapt to
the changing circumstances in a world of rapid upheavals. At the same time, persistent austerity
policies  –  quite  often  ill-designed  –  adopted  in  Southern  European  countries  increase  the
rejection  of  the  European  project  even  in  countries  such  as  Greece  or  even  Italy,  which  had
always been pro-integration and where public opinion was always in favour of the EU.
In addition, it has long been argued that the European Union remains a ‘market without a state’.
This quote perhaps summarises the debate on European integration over the last 40 years at
least. The most frequent complaint regarding the way the EU works is that it is governed by an
elite  of  unelected  technocrats  through  several  independent  European  institutions  and  bodies
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(including the ECB). 
In light of the above issues of democratic deficit and accountability, Europeans are increasingly
disenchanted  with  the  EU,  as  shown  by  the  rise  of  populist,  authoritarian  parties.  Support  for
populist political parties with eurosceptic credentials has been rising, that is, parties which are by
nature more Eurosceptic and less oriented towards reforms, which of course the South badly
needs. As a result, this is a major downside risk to debt sustainability in this part of the euro
area. 
Point number 2: Mushroom of referenda and political contagion 
For  continental  Europe,  Brexit  represents  a  shock  to  the  institutions  and  norms  that  underpin
markets, albeit different from the euro break-up fears of 2012, the global financial crisis of 2008
or the bursting of the high-tech bubble of 2001. The origins of previous financial crises can be
located  in  multiple  factors  that  are  linked  with  the  financial  system  and  the  economic  cycle,
respectively: imbalances in trade or capital flows between EU Member States; a combination of
decades-long excessive borrowing, risky investments, and lack of transparency in the financial
sector; and the speculative mania around the shares of so-called “dot-com” companies and the
subsequent collapse of the speculative bubble. The risk is not financial contagion, like in 1998.
Instead, it represents a contagious political development. No matter whether we have a full-blown
or a light Brexit, the political risk for the continent is that referendums may mushroom across
Europe in a tug-of-war between populist forces and the political establishment and elites. Brexit
has  the  potential  to  unleash  centrifugal  forces,  leading  perhaps  to  a  breakup  of  the  euro,
especially if such a referendum were to be held this time in a major eurozone country. Perhaps
such a referendum is more likely in a southern eurozone country. 
Of  course,  democracy  is  the  very  foundation  of  our  civilisation,  but  sometimes  even  well-
intentioned initiatives can produce unintentional consequences (as we have seen with the UK
vote). 
The  public  not  only  in  Europe  (but  also  on  this  side  of  the  little  pond)  seems  to  have  lost
confidence in the political and economic establishment to come up with visionary solutions that
are also pragmatic and improve things for most people. 
In  2017  we  will  be  celebrating  60  years  of  European  integration.  Europe  has  emerged  as  a
standard-bearer of freedom, democracy, the rule of law. So we should not be complacent about
populist parties using the refugee issue as a key fear factor for European voters and turning it
into a major campaign theme to tell the EU to keep out of migration and human rights issues. It is
particularly  worrying  to  see  Member  State  governments  turning  the  EU  into  the  enemy  for
domestic  purposes.  The  agreed-upon  migrant  relocation  scheme  is  founded  on  solidarity,  the
very basic principle of European integration that has helped the EU become the major trading
bloc around the world that is has become. 
Point number 3: Duality and the way forward for the EU 
The theoretical debate about the EU’s post-Brexit future has seen three predominant scenarios:
an EU that falls apart/disappears, an unchanged EU that continues to muddle through trying to
cope  with  its  underlying  problems  or  an  EU  that  integrates  further,  or  at  least  some  Member
States moving forward, some others choosing to stay back. One idea that has circulated a lot in
the context of the Brexit debate – which I concur – that a balance between national sovereignty
and European solidarity and prosperity may be found in duality, i.e. two “Europes” coexisting in a
broader  European  construct,  independently  from  one  another.  One  would  be  a  political  union
(either taking the form of a federal state or a confederation of nations) to complete the EMU and
beyond, which is the vision of the EU’s founding fathers (Jean Monnet, Robert Schuman, Altiero
Spinelli).  The  other  would  be  based  on  market  liberalisation,  forming  an  outer  rim  of  a  new
European construct, in which Britain could obviously play a leading role, if it so wishes. 
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For Southern European countries of course, the 1-billion-dollar question is the following: if this
dual architecture becomes a reality in the EU (definitely not likely before the German elections)
will the South of Europe be part of a “new eurozone” [a proper fiscal union, with a banking union ,
a defence and a political union], or will it be left behind in a secondary, outer circle of countries?
This is something I would not like to speculate about here today, and to be frank with you not
ever! But it’s not a matter of wishful thinking, it’s a matter of tough realism. 
Point number 4: Coup d’état in Turkey – Migrant crisis 
Clearly, Brexit is an issue for the whole of Europe and Southern Europe will not be immune to the
implications of Brexit, for instance because of tourism, external demand, etc. However, coming
from  one  of  the  countries  located  on  the  EU’s  external  border,  which  has  received  massive
influxes  of  refugees  from  war-torn  countries  such  as  Syria  (we  have  all  seen  the  pictures  of
boats  washed  ashore  in  Lampedusa,  Gibraltar,  or  the  Greek  islands  of  Northern Aegean),  it
would rather be an omission on my behalf not to discuss the more urgent problem for Southern
European countries right now, which if it escalates further in the next 6-12 months may affect the
rest of the EU and eventually present an existential threat to the European Union itself. Migration
needs to be recognised as a major policy issue that will play a critical role in shaping the EU’s
future  and  it  is  definitely  an  issue  that  should  not  be  underestimated.  We  have  seen  last
fortnight’s  election  results  in  Berlin  and  three  weeks  ago  in  the  German  Chancellor’s  own
constituency (Mecklenburg-Vorpommern) with the anti-immigration, right-wing (AfD) party gaining
significant ground. It is urgent to tackle the migrant crisis and the linked labour mobility issue. 
I am particularly worried about recent developments in Turkey following the attempted coup and
the impact this will have on the migrant crisis, as a major challenge for the EU’s future. Against
the backdrop of an escalating migrant crisis, the UN Declaration adopted two weeks ago in New
York which calls for a more equitable sharing of the burden for hosting the world’s migrants and
refugees becomes even more relevant. Take, for instance, the recent EU deal with Turkey, which
has  promised  to  accept  migrants  back  to  its  territory  in  exchange  for  financial  aid.  That  was
based on a premise that Turkey was a safe country for refugees. Lots of international analysts
cast  doubts  on  this  after  the  latest  bout  of  political  instability  and  the  heavy  crack-down  on
suspected dissidents in the military, the judiciary and even higher-education in our neighbouring
country.
Point number 5: The British reform benchmark to be followed by South-eastern Europe 
Despite Brexit, the UK could be used as a reform benchmark by South-eastern European states
to be emulated in a number of ways. According to the OECD, the UK has the least regulated
labour market and is second to the Netherlands as the least regulated product market in Europe.
The UK also has low taxation (a corporate tax rate of 20% and there is speculation that this will
go down to 15% as an incentive to foreign firms to stay in Britain after Brexit). 
South European countries would stand to gain a lot by starting to resemble Britain in a number of
areas,  including  the  attraction  of  FDI,  public  sector  accounting,  transparency,  rule  of  law  and
strong institutions including an efficient public administration plus credible government financial
management. This should be the agenda for the whole of South Europe in the years to come,
with or without adjustment programmes, namely using the UK as a benchmark, except one thing:
Brexit! 
1
2.  IMPLICATIONS OF BREXIT FOR CENTRAL BANKS
a. Less (?) monetary policy divergence
The  Brexit  vote  triggered  a  broad-based  reassessment  of  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy
globally. With improving headline growth still perceived as fragile in most advanced economies,
and inflation still persistently low, the distinct response from major central banks to the Brexit
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
uncertainty can be described as dovish: policy rates would stay “low for longer”. The Bank of
England cut the policy rate by 25 basis points (it is now 0.25%), and expanded the government
bond purchase scheme by £60 billion, bringing the total to £435 billion. It also established a new
corporate bond purchase program of £10 billion, and launched a new Term Funding Scheme that
will provide funding for banks at rates close to the monetary policy rate. Forward interest rates for
December 2017 quickly dropped to the new level of the policy rate, reflecting the view that a quick
policy reversal was not expected. 
 Following the Brexit shock in the US, a 2016 rate rise is not fully priced in the market with the
implied probability of a Fed rate hike in December 2016 to be around 55% today. The Bank of
Japan in its last policy meeting launched a novel kind of monetary easing as it set a cap on 10-
year  bond  yields  and  vowed  to  take  action  to  overshoot  its  2%  inflation  target.  Its  decision
demonstrates that central bankers are still willing to experiment with new monetary policy ideas,
as inflation remains too  low.  Some  observers  characterised  this  shift  as  probably  the  biggest
innovation  in  monetary  policy  since  the  introduction  of  negative  deposit  rates  by  the  Danish
central bank in the summer of 2012!
 Finally, at its latest GC meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it will extend
its QE programme beyond March 2017 if needed. 
So far, there is some encouraging evidence from the ECB’s ongoing QE programme. In more
detail: Loan growth continued to recover gradually. Lending to companies grew by 1.9% year-o-
year, while household lending grew by 1.8%. A significant improvement has also been observed
in Eurosystem banks’ composite cost of debt financing, which declined in July to a new historical
low, after broadly stabilising in the second quarter of 2016. Also, banks reported a further net
easing of credit standards on loans to enterprises in the second quarter of 2016, suggesting a
continued improvement in financing conditions for corporate loans. Across the largest euro area
countries, overall terms and conditions eased across all larger countries except for Germany. In
most of the large euro area countries, in particular, France and Italy, banks continued to report a
narrowing  of  margins  on  average  loans  in  net  terms.  Margins  on  riskier  loans  widened  in  net
terms in Spain and Germany. Furthermore, composite lending rates on loans to euro area NFCs
(corporate loans) and households (i.e. mortgages) fell by around 100 basis points. The reduction
in bank lending rates was especially strong in vulnerable euro area countries, indicating reducing
fragmentation in euro area financial markets. Over the same period, the spread between interest
rates charged on very small loans (loans of up to €0.25 million) and those charged on large loans
(loans of above €1 million) in the euro area followed a downward trend. This indicates that small-
and  medium-sized  enterprises  have  generally  been  benefiting  to  a  greater  extent  than  large
companies from the decline in lending rates. 
b. QE vs. negative rates 
Staying  in  the  eurozone  and  taking  as  a  given  fact  that  we  will  move  towards  more
accommodative monetary policy in  the  months  ahead,  a  more  open  question  is:  which  policy
instrument will be used? More QE or further negative rates? This is the essence of the monetary
policy debate in the eurozone today. 
Clearly, there are limits to persistent negative rates, namely the underlying question is how far
and  for  how  long  they  can  actually  go.  There  are  a  number  of  concerns  including  banks’
profitability, how negative rates may act as an anaesthetic to euro area governments especially
in the euro area’s southern periphery, taking into account that the fiscal space gained from lower
debt  service  costs  may  result  in  a  slower  implementation  of  necessary  fiscal  and  structural
reforms. 
Policy  rate  cuts  to  negative  levels  have  generally  been  reflected  in  corresponding  declines  in
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
money market rates and short-term government bond yield. In turn, the fall in bank wholesale
funding  costs  has  helped  lower  lending  rates,  but  to  varying  degrees  across  countries.  In
addition,  there  are  concerns  about  the  political  and  institutional  feasibility  of  negative  rates  as
their  long-term  effects  are  still  unknown.  Most  importantly,  their  effectiveness  is  put  under
question during a recession, if this were to emerge in the near future. 
I would personally, in my professorial hat, prefer to see more QE rather than further negative
rates. If this is the case, the next question is where could more QE in the eurozone come from?
In other words, does the ECB have the tools for more QE stimulus? 
Well, there are several options. From changing the parameters of the current QE programme
like,  for  instance,  buying  bonds  below  the  deposit  rate,  increasing  the  33%  issue  share  limit,
dropping the capital key allocation, or even adding new securities to the pool of eligible assets
such as bank bonds or equity. 
c. The limits of central bank actions: a role for governments? 
In closing, it is worth reminding the words of President Mario Draghi , who said recently: “[low
interest rates]… are not the problem. They are the symptom of an underlying problem, which is
insufficient  investment  demand,  across  the  world,  to  absorb  all  the  savings  available  in  the
economy.”  Along  the  lines  of  the  previous  caveat  by  President  Draghi,  one  could  add,  for
instance, that in countries with fiscal space, and/or at a eurozone-wide level, extra spending on
infrastructure  investment  especially  in  today’s  environment  of  extremely  low  long-term  rates
would  clearly  increase  low  demand  in  the  eurozone,  enhance  its  potential  trend  growth  rate,
make the task of monetary policy much easier and finally contribute to public debt sustainability in
many  countries.  In  other  words,  the  time  has  come  to  use  policy  tools  other  than  monetary
policy, including fiscal and structural ones. 
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
A more detailed account on this can be found in my HABA-New York speech (October 2016).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
