Pentti Hakkarainen: Monetary policy - which road ahead
Notes  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  for  the  session
"Monetary  Policy:  Which  Road Ahead?",  Frankfurt  European  Banking  Congress,  Frankfurt  am
Main, 18 November 2016.
Let me start by pointing out my own perspective on the issues we are discussing. I approach
these  problems  from  the  point  of  view  of  someone  who  is  mainly  preoccupied  with  financial
stability and banking supervision. This may color my remarks to some extent.
  Recent monetary policy has been characterized by historically record low interest rates. It has
been often pointed out that the low interest rate environment poses significant challenges to the
banking  system.  It  also  supports  some  asset  prices.  The  impact  of  low  interest  rates  on
asset prices has drawn some criticism from those who are worried by the possible reversal of
the price increases.
It  is  a  little  misleading  to  interpret  the  possible  problems  generated  by  low  interest  rates  as
negative “side effects” of expansionary monetary policy. Let me explain why.
Monetary  policy  is  not  the  ultimate  reason  why  interest  rates  are  so  low.  Low  rates  are  a
symptom of the underlying economic situation. They reflect weak long-term growth trends and
the long macroeconomic slump that we have experienced after the last financial crisis.
The  most  important  reason  for  the  present  situation  can  be  found  in  the  condition  of  the
nonfinancial business sector. Years of low growth expectations and the continued low business
confidence have depressed real productive investment. This lack of investment demand in turn
has led to a situation where the natural rate of interest is very low.
Monetary  policy  has  had  to  adapt  itself  to  this  situation.  This  has  been  necessary  in  order  to
pursue  price  stability.  If  monetary  policy  had  not  reacted  to  the  decline  of  the  natural  rate  of
interest, price stability would have been at risk, and the situation in the financial sector could be
worse than it is now.
So, while I would not deny that the low interest rates pose some challenges for financial markets
and financial institutions, these challenges are not the result of monetary policy, but they are the
result of structural problems in our economies. The present stance of monetary policy is actually
also a side effect of the prevailing business conditions.
Although  accommodative  monetary  policy  has  been  necessary,  monetary  policy  can  hardly
generate sustained recovery on its own. It is not enough. A recovery will require better business
conditions,  especially  in  the  countries  and  regions  where  the  investment  activity  has  recently
been the lowest.
In  other  words,  structural  reforms  are  required  which  open  new  frontiers  for  productive
investment and improve profitability. That opens up the way to a higher natural rate of interest,
and generally more normal monetary and financial conditions.
The title of the previous session was “How to reform Europe”.  In the same way as the whole EU,
we in the small euro area countries face the need to reform our economies. Monetary policy is
common for the whole area. In other policy areas we must adjust accordingly, while improving
incentives for sustainable growth in our countries.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We must be realists and admit that we do not know much yet about the effectiveness of macro-
prudential instruments. This is no reason to neglect macro-prudential policy, however. It is just
one  more  reason  to  be  very  vigilant  with  regard  to  what  is  happening  in  the  asset  markets,
especially in the real estate market.
The  title  of  a  recent  IMF  seminar  on  rethinking  macro  policy  is  to  the  point:  “progress  or
confusion?”. The present common macro-prudential toolbox in the euro area is quite limited but
there is more diversity at the national level. I for one would prefer a simple and more unified set of
macro-prudential  instruments  to  confusing  heterogeneity.  In  integrated  banking  markets,  the
available macro-prudential instruments should be identical or similar across countries.
The  practical  problems  are  not  trivial.  The  implementation  of  the  instruments  in  practice  is
complicated, and especially the timing of their use is subject to a lot of uncertainty. 
The purpose of the macro-prudential policy should be to prevent fragilities from building up in the
financial system during periods of low interest rates. In the present situation, the most important
place where this might be happening is in the housing market.
One  thing  to  look  at  would  be  the  risk  weights  on  housing  loans.  Banks  using  the  internal
modelling  approach  have,  in  some  cases,  been  able  to  posit  very  low  risk  weights  for  their
housing loan portfolio. This may be distortionary from the macro-prudential point of view: It may
direct too large a share of the credit supply on the housing market, and reduce the interest of
banks to new business lending.
The present situation is very different in different countries, also within the euro area. In some
countries  and  regions,  we  are  seeing  significant  increases  in  household  indebtedness.  But  in
some other parts of Europe, increases in new indebtedness are not the main concern, but more
the backlog of old debts. Different situations require different policy responses.
In the longer run, I hope and believe that a more unified approach to macro-prudential policy will
evolve for the euro area at least.
The Nordic countries and especially Sweden provide a very interesting case with some useful
lessons. I would like to mention just two.
First,  low  interest  rates  in  an  environment  of  reasonable  growth  may  lead  to  a  quite  large
increase in household indebtedness. Much of new credit will be directed to the housing market,
perhaps even disproportionately so.
Second,  good  cooperation  between  monetary  policy  makers  and  macro-prudential  authorities
would be beneficial for designing the appropriate policy response.
 Central  banks  in  different  countries  have  broadly  similar  responsibilities.  They  aim  at  price
stability  in  the  medium  run,  and  support  economic  activity  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with
medium term price stability.
While the objectives of the different central banks are not too different, the cyclical position of
different countries and regions can be more different. This is unavoidable.
It  is  well  understood  that  in  this  kind  of  situation  the  main  responsibility  of  each  central  bank
relates  to  the  stability  of  its  home  currency  and  the  stability  of  its  home  economy.  To  think
otherwise would be unrealistic. Any financial repercussions that result from this fact are part of
the normal course of events and the market participants should be well aware of that.
  2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Talking point on fiscal policy as a complement or alternative to monetary policy:
As the Governing Council of the ECB has indicated, there are three points which are relevant to
the use for fiscal policy today:
Fiscal policy must comply with the fiscal rules of the European Union. Full and consistent
implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  over  time  and  across  countries  remains
crucial to ensure confidence in the fiscal framework.
Second,  having  said  that,  fiscal  policies  should  support  the  economic  recovery  where
possible.  However,  it  is  difficult  to  give  generalized  prescriptions  for  this,  because  the
starting position of different countries is not the same. Much depends on the local starting
position and local conditions.
Third,  all  countries  should  strive  for  a  more  growth-friendly  composition  of  fiscal  policies.
This  applies  to  tax  policies,  but  also  the  expenditure  side,  where  high-quality  investment
should be prioritized.
 Especially here at the European Banking Congress I would like to highlight the responsibility of
the banking industry itself for shaping our future. Decisions made in banks play an important role
both in monetary policy transmission and in ensuring the necessary financial stability.
Two main issues in particular should be borne in mind, not just by the authorities, but also by the
banks themselves:
With some banks performing well and some less so, restructuring and consolidation of the
sector should continue, restoring a better functioning banking system for Europe.
At the same time, competition must be enhanced. In particular, I am thinking about banks’
cross-border  activities.  We  would  benefit  in  many  ways  from  having  area-wide  banking
groups, reflecting the spirit of the Banking Union. Banks should compete across borders in
the  full  range  of  their  activities,  not  just  in  “easier”,  more  standardized  products  such  as
housing loans.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
