Hiroshi Nakaso: FinTech - its impacts on finance, economies and
central banking
Remarks by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the University of Tokyo
- Bank of Japan Joint Conference on "FinTech and the Future of Money", Tokyo, 18 November
2016.
Introduction
 Undoubtedly,  we  are  living  in  the  age  of  remarkable  innovation  in  information  technology.  It  is
fascinating  to  consider  how  it  might  change  the  future  of  finance  and  economies.  In  order  to
address  these  unprecedented  and  intellectually-challenging  issues,  close  communication
between academics and practitioners is essential. Accordingly, today’s conference focusing on
the future of money, jointly held by the University of Tokyo and the Bank of Japan, is of great
significance.
Today’s conference has been made possible due to the close relationship of trust between the
Center  for Advanced  Research  in  Finance  (CARF)  of  the  University  of  Tokyo  and  the  Bank.  I
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  our  deepest  appreciation  to  Professor  Ueda,
Director of CARF, Professor Yanagawa and the staff of the CARF for their support in holding this
conference. My speech today will focus on this key word of “trust".
I.  Innovation in information technology and FinTech
Information technology and financial service
After the rapid economic expansion in the second half of the 20th century, developed countries all
over  the  world  are  now  facing  the  common  challenge  of  how  to  raise  their  growth  potential.
Looking back at history, many major companies that supported the economic growth of the 20th
century,  such  as  those  in  the  iron  and  steel,  automobile  and  petrochemical  industries,  were
established after 1900. For example, U. S. Steel was established in 1901, Ford in 1903, Royal
Dutch Shell in 1907, and GM in 1908, and they quickly grew to lead the economy. This suggests
that, when new technologies reach a take-off stage at which they can be used for business, they
have the potential to completely and rapidly change the economic landscape far beyond what
could have been expected at the infancy stage of innovation.
Compared to those manufacturing industries, financial industry has a relatively old history: some
banks’  history  can  trace  their  history  back  to  the  Renaissance  period.  This  is  because,
infrastructures such as “money” and “ledgers,” which constitute the basis for financial services,
have been around far longer than the basic technologies of the recent manufacturing industries
such as automobiles.
Nonetheless, many people now expect that rapid innovation in information technology will have a
substantial impact particularly on financial services. In my view, there are two reasons behind
such possible linkages between recent information technology and financial services.
First,  the  financial  service  industry  can  be  regarded  as  “information  industry,”  since  financial
services  such  as  payment  and  settlement,  investment  decisions  and  risk  management  are
based on wide-ranging information processing.
Second, some of recent inventions in information technology such as blockchain and distributed
ledger technology (DLT) have the potential to significantly affect “money” and “ledgers,” which
are  the  basic  infrastructure  for  financial  activities.  Such  possible  impacts  of  information
technology  on  money  and  ledgers  raise  many  interesting  issues  from  the  perspective  of
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic theory, as illustrated by the theme of today’s conference.
Technological backgrounds of FinTech
Next, I would like to focus on the context of technological innovations behind “FinTech.” In my
view, these innovations can be categorized into three types.
The first category includes “blockchain” and DLT, which were invented in 2008 with the concept
of “bitcoin."
In the second category, there are artificial intelligence, or AI, and big data analytics, which are
evolving in line with dramatic increases in computing power.
The third type of technological innovation includes the cellphone and smartphone, which have
become new means of accessing financial services. Indeed, the appearance of “iPhone” in 2007
triggered new wave of devices for accessing various financial services and influenced business
models of the financial industry.
These technologies differ in terms of the degree of application to business. Although blockchain
and DLT, which were born in 2008, are attracting attention as a flagship technology in FinTech,
most of the efforts toward putting the technology into practice are still at the experimental stage.
In contrast, many firms are now competing with each other to provide financial services through
smartphones and apps.
II.  Impacts of FinTech on financial services
Next, I would like to focus on the possible impacts of FinTech on financial services.
Unbundling and restructuring of financial services
First of all, FinTech would have the potential to “unbundle” and “restructure” the existing financial
services.
Most  commercial  banks  take  deposits,  and  engage  in  both  processing  payments  and  making
loans.  The  consequent  “fractional-reserve”  banking  accompanied  by  “maturity  transformation”
can be a cause of bank-runs, which sometimes triggered crises in the past. This is why central
banks  serve  as  a  “lender  of  last  resort  (LoLR)”  mainly  for  banks  in  order  to  prevent  financial
crises.
On the contrary, non-bank FinTech companies do not take deposits. Some of them focus solely
on  payment  services,  while  others  provide  fund  intermediation  services  such  as  P2P  lending
without using their own balance sheets. Moreover, many FinTech companies are trying to realize
“economies  of  scope”  through  combining  financial  services  with  other  activities  related  to  e-
commerce, sharing-economy businesses and big data analytics in order to deliver new added-
value.
"Globalizing” financial services
Moreover,  FinTech  has  the  potential  to  “globalize”  basic  financial  services  through  enhancing
“financial  inclusion.”  Not  only  in  advanced  economies  but  also  in  developing  and  emerging
economies where financial services are not yet widespread, cellphones and smartphones are
now  spreading  rapidly,  and  FinTech  has  opened  up  the  possibility  of  providing  basic  financial
services through these new instruments.
"Personalizing” financial services
Furthermore,  FinTech  may 
facilitate  “personalized” 
financial  services.  Cellphones  and
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
smartphones have characteristics of “personalized” tools, and FinTech now makes it possible to
analyze individual customers by utilizing big data. By combining such new tools with analytics
methodology, FinTech may make it easier for the industry to provide more customized services.
Also,  new  technologies  of  FinTech  can  be  used  to  explore  the  frontiers  of  financial  services
through  “dynamic”  customization.  For  example,  buying  insurance  policy  can  impair  the
policyholders’  incentives  to  be  sufficiently  cautious,  and  such  “moral  hazard”  is  an  inherent
problem  of  insurance.  In  this  regards,  blockchain  technology  is  expected  to  enable  “smart
contracts”  for  various  purposes,  such  as  continuously  adjusting  automobile  insurance  fees  in
accordance with driving behavior of each policyholder. As this case illustrates, smart contracts
might have the potential to overcome “moral hazard” by leveraging new information technology.
"Virtualizing” financial services
In accordance with the development of information technology, hard infrastructure such as brick
& mortar branches and ATM machines may not be prerequisites for providing financial services.
In this regard, I have found similar characteristics between such changes in business models
and  the  recent  “Pokémon  GO”  boom.  Game  companies  used  to  focus  on  popularizing  the
necessary hardware such as DS, X-BOX and PlayStation before releasing game software. In
contrast, “Pokémon GO” suddenly became popular worldwide because people can start playing
it simply by downloading the app to their own smartphones.
It is technically possible to imagine a “virtual bank,” which owns no tangible infrastructure and
instead  uses  the  internet,  smartphones,  cloud  computing, AI,  and  DLT  to  provide  access  to
financial services, to make investment decisions and to manage risks.
New issues
Although FinTech has many upsides, it brings new issues regarding payment, settlement and
financial stability.
First of all, we need to consider whether and how FinTech will change the structure of settlement
and other financial services. At the Pittsburgh Summit in 2009, the G20 leaders agreed that all
standardized  OTC  derivatives  contracts  should  be  cleared  through  central  counterparties
(CCPs).  With  the  introduction  of  new  technologies  such  as  DLT,  how  might  these  new
“decentralization-oriented”  technologies  affect  the  “tiered”  settlement  structure  with  centralized
bookkeepers?
Also, regulatory and supervisory authorities obtain much information through the balance sheets
of financial institutions, and many regulatory frameworks such as capital requirement, leverage
ratio and liquidity standards impose constraints on these balance sheets in order to achieve and
maintain  financial  stability.  In  the  case  of  nonbank  P2P  lending  firms,  it  is  difficult  to  obtain
sufficient  information  regarding  financial  intermediation  from  their  balance  sheets.  Moreover,
imposing constraints on these balance sheets may not be very effective for influencing their P2P
lending  activities. Accordingly,  financial  authorities  need  to  consider  how  they  can  obtain  the
necessary information for maintaining financial stability.
Ironically,  innovation  in  information  technology  has  simultaneously  brought  about  various  new
tactics  for  cyber  threats.  In  addition,  financial  networks  are  becoming  increasingly  accessible
through open gateways such as the internet and smartphones. This makes it more and more
important to take appropriate measures against cyber threats in order to ensure the stability of
the payment, settlement and financial systems.
III.  Economic implications of FinTech
Next, I would like to examine the possible impacts of FinTech on the economy.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Obviously,  finance  is  a  great  creation  by  humans.  By  using  very  sophisticated  information
processing  systems  bundled  as  finance,  human  beings  can  continuously  allocate  a  finite
resource to productive areas with potential. This, in turn, has served as a dynamic driving force
for humans’ building of economic society. Therefore, if innovation in information technology and
FinTech enhance the efficiency of finance, it will and should eventually contribute to economic
development.
"Financial  inclusion”  stimulated  by  FinTech  clearly  illustrates  the  positive  feedback  between
finance and the economy. If people in developing countries gain new access to financial services
through FinTech, they will gain opportunities to expand business such as e-commerce and e-
learning,  which  are  currently  hampered  by  constrained  access  to  payment  services.  In  this
manner, FinTech is expected to contribute to economic development.
However, in developed countries where basic financial services are already widespread, it would
not be easy to quantitatively assess the impacts of FinTech on the economy through existing
economic statistics.
For instance, if banks, while reducing the cost of maintaining their bricks & mortar branches,
improve services through free apps downloaded to each customer’s smartphone, it would not be
very certain how existing economic statistics reflect the economic impacts (i.e., the decrease in
fixed  investments  and  the  improvement  of  free  apps).  Also,  if  FinTech  stimulates  the
development  of  sharing-economy  businesses,  how  to  reflect  the  consequent  increases  in
utilization rates of various idle assets, such as unused rooms in individual houses and parked
cars in front yards, in economic statistics will be another interesting issue. These examples give
rise to the challenging issue of how economic statistics can grasp the increases in economic
welfare caused by innovations in information technology.
Moreover, if FinTech stimulates economic transactions through the internet and smartphones as
well as business applications of DLT, it might become increasingly difficult to identify the physical
“location” where transactions take place and the relevant ledgers are kept. This could lead to a
variety of issues including those related to regulation and taxation.
IV.  Central banking and FinTech
As stated in the theme of today’s conference, FinTech encourages us to think about the future of
money and central banking.
"Information” and “Trust"
Most central banks were born after the establishment of modern nation-states and have been
serving  as  the  single  issuer  of  sovereign  currency  as  their  liabilities.  These  historical  facts
illustrate that central banks inherently have characteristics as “centralized bookkeepers.” In view
of such “centralized” attributes of central banks, people are interested in the issue of how the
new “decentralization-oriented” technologies such as blockchain and DLT will influence the future
of currency and central banking. Such interest is linked to the specific question of: what happens
if virtual currencies such as bitcoin reach a significant circulation?
Indeed,  if  virtual  currencies  such  as  bitcoin  are  to  be  widely  used  to  purchase  goods  and
services directly, there should of course be influences on monetary policy. At present, however,
the  consensus  view  in  various  international  forums  is  that  virtual  currencies  are  unlikely  to
overwhelm sovereign currencies. This issue is deeply related to “trust,” which is indispensable to
all financial activities.
Needless  to  say,  finance  is  an  activity  of  creating  added  value  through  making  links  among
multiple entities such as “payer” and “payee” or “lender” and “borrower.” Those financial activities
always have to be supported by “trust” among such entities.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In order for any asset to be used and accepted as currency, it must have sufficient “trust” among
a wide range of users. In this respect, “bitcoin” attempts to create a “chain of trust” from scratch,
but  this  requires  substantial  costs  for  the  electric  power  needed  to  verify  transactions  called
“mining” and to manage encryption keys. Therefore, if we already have an entity with sufficient
trust, it is rational and efficient to make that entity issue the currency as the single issuer as its
liabilities.  Because  of  this  economic  rationality,  in  most  countries  today  central  banks  issue
sovereign currencies in a centralized manner, even though they are newcomers in the history of
finance.
Co-existence of “Centralized” and “Decentralized” Frameworks
Although the information processing capacity of humans is limited, “trust” dramatically enhances
the  efficiency  of  information  processing.  If  we  cannot  trust  others,  we  must  always  carry
hundreds of keys with us and manage them. This would make life very difficult!
Finance has supported economic society by enabling advanced information processing through
making  effective  use  of  “trust,”  such  as  trust  in  payment  instruments  and  trust  in  information
managed through ledgers. If such “trust” in financial activities is lost, the efficiency of information
processing  will  be  severely  damaged,  causing  huge  turmoil  in  financial  markets  and  the
economy. Also, if it is necessary to pay huge costs to maintain trust such as by keeping all the
ledgers closely and continuously monitored by all the relevant entities in order to ensure they are
not altered, then economic and financial activities would be substantially hindered.
In a similar vein, if people have to worry about possible fluctuations of the value of the payment
instruments received as settlement of past transactions, it becomes difficult for them to allocate
their limited resources to forward-looking activities. In this respect, central banks are legally and
institutionally  destined  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  value  of  the  currency,  and  by  using  the
central bank currency people can save their limited resources from being ineffectively spent.
Also, in the practice of bitcoin transactions, encryption keys have sometimes been entrusted to a
third party in a centralized manner, but there have been some incidents such as the failure of Mt.
Gox  in  2014.  In  this  case,  people  tried  to  avoid  the  cost  of  managing  keys  accompanying
decentralized-type information processing by entrusting their keys to a third party, Mt. Gox. But
their trust was destroyed by the misconduct of the third party. In this regard, the problem of the
Mt. Gox case did not stem from DLT itself but was similar to classic cases of misconduct in the
financial industry. As this case illustrates, decentralization-oriented technologies will not eliminate
centralized  frameworks  due  to  the  limited  information-processing  capacity  of  financial  service
users. Furthermore, this incident clearly showed that maintaining “trust” is critically important in
any financial services, regardless of the types of applied technologies.
I believe that it is entirely possible and desirable to realize the co-existence of “trusted centralized
systems” and “decentralized systems,” used as and when necessary. We need to make a great
effort  to  design  the  optimum  framework  for  economic  society  through  utilizing  the  available
technologies.  These  frameworks  should  take  into  consideration  the  various  incentives  of
economic entities to ensure people’s “trust,” which is indispensable to financial activities.
Information technology and central banking
The  central  bank  is  the  only  entity  that  can  provide  “central  bank  money”  without  constraints.
Central  bank  money  has  “finality”  in  the  sense  that  people  no  longer  have  to  worry  about
“payment  unwinding”  or  “the  issuer’s  credit  risk.”  Formerly,  the  central  bank  provided  central
bank  money  solely  through  paper-based  and  printing-related  technologies  such  as  banknotes
and paper-based ledgers. With the development of the economy, the central bank has adopted
newer  technologies,  improved  its  own  infrastructure  and  continuously  provided  advanced
infrastructure  such  as  electronic-based  wholesale  RTGS  systems.  If  the  central  bank  had
rejected digital technologies and only provided banknotes as payment instruments with finality,
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
then economic development would have been substantially constrained.
As this fact illustrates, the central bank must appropriately adopt available technologies so as to
provide the optimal core infrastructure for economic society. That means the central bank itself
must keep abreast of technological innovation.
Banknotes are payment instruments with finality and can be used at any time, by any one, and in
this regard some have recently argued that the central bank should issue its own digital currency
as  a  substitute  for  banknotes.  Their  argument  for  central  bank  digital  currency  seems  to  be
based  on  the  increased  awareness  of  the  costs  of  processing  and  storing  paper-based
banknotes, and they ask the central bank to adopt the newest information technology in order to
satisfy the needs of the economy. I guess that this issue will be one of the topics discussed in
today’s conference.
The Bank of Japan has no specific plan at present to issue digital currencies as a substitute for
banknotes.  Nonetheless,  the  Bank  will  make  utmost  efforts  to  deeply  understand  new
technologies  including  blockchain  and  DLT.  The  Bank  will  also  continue  to  conduct  various
research and analyses of these new technologies, while seeking the possibility of improving its
own infrastructure through applying them in future.
The issue of central bank digital currency raises diverse topics that are attracting attention from
academics. For example, to whom should the central bank provide its account, as technological
innovation  changes  the  financial  structure  and  the  list  of  financial  service  providers?  To  what
extent should the central bank provide “finality” to economic society? How should the information
linked to payment transactions be handled? The Bank, in close cooperation with academics, will
make its best effort to deepen its understanding of such issues.
Conclusion
Looking back at the history of human beings, technological progress has fundamentally helped to
increase  people’s  welfare  and  develop  the  economy,  though  it  has  sometimes  been
accompanied by negative aspects such as the use of technologies in wars and environmental
pollution.
Thus,  policymakers  should  strive  to  maximize  the  benefits  of  technological  progress  while
minimizing  its  negative  aspects.  Since  recent  innovations  in  information  technology  have  the
potential  to  cause  impacts  particularly  on  financial  services,  how  to  deal  with  recent  financial
innovation  symbolized  by  the  word  “FinTech”  will  be  the  key  to  designing  the  economic
landscape in the 21st century.
In dealing with financial innovation and FinTech, there are many new and challenging issues. In
order to overcome those issues, we need to cooperate with a wide-range of entities, including
private businesses and academics in particular.
Today’s  conference,  co-hosted  by  CARF  of  the  University  of  Tokyo  and  the  Bank,  clearly
illustrates  that  new  information  technology  is  raising  many  issues  for  economic  theories  and
central bank practices. I firmly believe that this conference provides an important opportunity for
academics, practitioners and central bankers to tackle the new challenges.
I sincerely hope that today’s conference will be a fruitful opportunity for all of you.
Thank you for your attention.
References
Brainard, Lael (2016), “The Use of Distributed Ledger Technologies in Payment, Clearing and
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Settlement,” Remarks at Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, April 14, 2016.
Broadbent,  Ben  (2016),  “Central  banks  and  digital  currencies,”  Speech  at  London  School  of
Economics, March 2, 2016.
Carney,  Mark  (2016),  “Enabling  the  FinTech  transformation:  Revolution,  Restoration,  or
reformation?” Speech at Lord Mayor’s Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London
at the Mansion House, June 17, 2016.
Haldane,  Andrew  (2015),  “How  long  can  you  go?”  Speech  at  the  Portadown  Chamber  of
Commerce, September 18, 2015.
He, Habermeier, Leckow, et al., (2016), “Virtual Currencies and Beyond: Initial Considerations,”
IMF Staff Discussion Note, January, 2016.
Iwamura, Mitsuru and Kanda, Hideki (1995), “Data-Hogo No Gijutsu To Hou (Law and technology
for data protection),” July 1995.
Mersch, Yves (2016), “Distributed ledger technology – panacea or flash in the pan?” Speech at
Deutsche Bank Transaction Bankers’ Forum, April 25, 2016.
Nakamoto, Satoshi (2008), “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System” November, 2008.
Wilkins,  Carolyn  (2016),  “FinTech  and  the  Financial  Ecosystem:  Evolution  or  Revolution?”
Remarks at Payments Canada, June 17, 2016.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
