REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “MONETARY  POLICY  IMPLEMENTATION  IN  A 
COMPLEX  ENVIRONMENT”,  AT  THE  ABERDEEN  NYC  EMD  POLICY  MAKER 
POWER LUNCH. New York City, October 11, 2016. 1 
 
My  sincere  thanks  to  Aberdeen  Asset  Management  for  the  invitation  to 
participate in this event.  
 The  primary  mandate  of  the  Banco  de  México,  enshrined  in  the  country’s 
Constitution, is to aim at low and stable inflation. To this end, monetary policy 
is  conducted  within  a  framework  supported  by  two  main  pillars:  an 
independent central bank and an inflation targeting regime with a 3 percent 
objective for the annual rate of growth of consumer prices. In this context, the 
Banco de México seeks an efficient convergence of inflation to the target, that 
is to say, at the lowest possible cost in terms of economic activity. 
 At  present,  monetary  policy  in  Mexico  is  implemented  in  a  rather  complex 
environment.  On  the  one  hand,  the  level  of  output  is  below  the  estimated 
potential,  and  the  available  forecasts  suggest  that  this  gap  will  remain  in 
negative  territory  through  end-2017.  In  addition,  consumer  price  inflation 
displays a favorable behavior and has been persistently below the 3 percent 
target.  However,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Mexican  peso  has  recorded  an 
important  depreciation  over  the  last  couple  of  years,  and  continues  to  be 
subject to significant pressures. Naturally, this raises question marks about the 
accompanying risks to inflation. 
                                                           
1 The views expressed in this document are strictly personal.   
 1 
 Let  me  elaborate  on  the  macroeconomic  situation  under  which  monetary 
policy is carried out at present. 
 After the decline observed in the second quarter of the year, economic activity 
has resumed a moderate rate of expansion, fueled by private consumption and 
services,  on  the  demand  and  supply  fronts,  respectively.  An  accurate 
assessment  of  the  economy’s  position  during  the  first  half  of  this  year  is 
challenging, among other reasons since national account figures are distorted 
by seasonal factors which are difficult to correct. However, there are grounds 
to believe that economic activity has begun a phase of deceleration. 
 The most recent information suggests a lower growth trend for both private 
consumption  and  services,  and  the  remaining  components  of  aggregate 
demand  and  supply  remain  stagnant.  Although  labor  market  indicators 
provide  mixed  signals,  they  are  generally  consistent  with  a  gradual 
deceleration  of  economic  growth.  The  overall  rate  of  unemployment  has 
continued to fall, approaching levels observed prior to the crisis, but the pace 
of employment growth has lost some momentum and nominal wage increases 
remain contained. In this context, a negative output gap is observed. 
 It is reasonable to expect that the expansion of economic activity will continue 
during the remainder of this year and in 2017. In fact, the anticipated upturn 
of industrial output in the United States, if materialized, would contribute to a 
more  balanced  economic  recovery 
in  Mexico  through 
its 
impact  on 
 2 
manufacturing output and exports. In this respect, it is worth noting that there 
are some early signs of a revival of production in the manufacturing industry, 
and  that  this  sector’s  external  sales,  though  still  sluggish,  seem  to  have 
stopped declining. On the other hand, the expansion of GDP is likely to remain 
below potential and downside risks persist. 
 It  is  true  that  economic  growth  in  Mexico  has  been  low  vis-à-vis  the 
population’s  needs. However, the shocks which  have affected the economy 
have  to  be  taken  into  consideration  for  an  objective  assessment  of  its 
performance.  In  particular,  it  is  important  to  take  into  account  that  the 
industrial sector in the United States has been in recession since early 2015, 
and  that  GDP  annual  growth  in  that  country  has  decelerated  continuously 
since  the  second  quarter  of  that  year.  Notwithstanding  the  close  long-term 
correlation between these two aggregates and economic activity in Mexico, 
the latter has shown resilience to this shock. The efforts of structural reform 
carried out in Mexico in recent years are clearly an important factor behind 
this result. 
 As noted previously, general inflation has shown a favorable performance. It 
stands  at  2.97  percent  as  of  September  of  this  year,  thus  accumulating  17 
months below the 3 percent target, including 8 consecutive historical minima 
in 2015. The importance of these results is underlined when it is taken into 
consideration that since early September 2014 the peso has depreciated by 
some 45 percent with respect to the U.S. dollar. Although depreciation of the 
exchange rate has had some effect on inflation, so far, the pass-through has 
 3 
been  concentrated  on  the  prices  of  merchandise,  with  no  second  round 
effects. 
 General inflation is projected to increase gradually during the rest of this year 
towards levels slightly above 3 percent, and to fluctuate around this figure in 
2017,  but  it  should  be  noted  that  the  latter  is  subject  to  some  uncertainty, 
since  the  proposal  to  liberalize  gasoline  prices  starting  in  2017,  which  may 
affect the evolution of inflation, is still under consideration by Congress. Going 
further  forward  into  the  medium  to  long  terms,  survey-based  inflation 
expectations remain well anchored, although still a tad above the target. 
 While  demand  pressures  on  prices  are  likely  to  remain  subdued  given  the 
expectation of a negative output gap throughout next year, the outlook for 
inflation presents, in my opinion, risks tilted to the upside. The possibility of a 
rebound in the prices of agriculture and livestock, present for some time given 
below-trend  increases,  is  already  materializing.  However,  recent  experience 
suggests that its effects on overall inflation should be transitory. Therefore, 
the evolution of the exchange rate continues to represent the main risk for 
inflation. The possibility of a higher pass-through to prices has increased as a 
result of the additional peso depreciation in recent weeks and the potential 
for further pressures on the peso in the short term, especially in view of the 
upcoming presidential election in the United States.  
 Depreciation  of  the  peso  is  explained  by  a  combination  of  external  and 
domestic factors. Naturally, the anticipated normalization of monetary policy 
 4 
in the United States has been a source of apprehension. In addition, as already 
noted,  uncertainty  regarding  the  outcome  of  the  electoral  process  in  that 
country has been reflected in the behavior of the peso, in view of the potential 
implications  for  Mexico’s  economy.  The  situation  has  been  further 
complicated  by  weak  oil  prices,  a  generalized  situation  of  uncertainty  in 
international  financial  markets,  and  the  use  of  the  peso  as  a  hedging 
instrument  against  risks  in  other  emerging  market  economies  and  for 
speculative purposes. On the domestic front, distress is mainly related to the 
evolution of public finances and, to a lesser extent, the widening of the current 
account deficit.  
 In a situation characterized by a negative output gap, low inflation and well 
anchored inflation expectations, on the one hand, but higher risks for inflation, 
on the other, the target for the overnight inter-bank interest rate  has  been 
increased four times since late 2015 to date. 
 The  first  increase,  of  25  basis  points,  took  place  as  a  response  to  a 
corresponding adjustment in the target range for the federal funds rate in the 
US.  The  reasons  are  straightforward.  In  view  of  close  links  between  the 
Mexican  and  US  economies,  an  environment  of  widespread  nervousness  in 
international financial markets, a very open capital account in Mexico and high 
peso-dollar exchange rate levels, a narrowing of the interest rate differential 
between the US and Mexico could have resulted in disorderly capital outflows, 
and risks for inflation and financial stability.  
  5 
Subsequent increases in the monetary policy interest rate in Mexico of 50 basis 
points each in February, June and September are explained by a number of 
common factors: the expectation of an upward trend for inflation even in the 
absence of further shocks; risks for inflation and its expectations deriving from 
a  sharp  depreciation  of  the  exchange  rate;  the  possibility  of  a  higher  than 
anticipated level for the peso-dollar rate for a significant period; potential non-
linear effects of the exchange rate on prices; and the adverse signaling that 
could result from the absence of decisive action in the face of evident perils 
for  inflation.  Naturally,  adjustment  of  the  monetary  policy  stance  has  been 
considered fundamental to fulfill the constitutional mandate of the Banco de 
México, based on the premise that maintaining a low and stable inflation rate 
represents the best contribution of the Central Bank to economic growth.  
 In spite of the accumulated tightening of the monetary policy stance in Mexico 
since late last year, the impact of the higher target for the reference rate on 
domestic  economic  activity  has  been  alleviated  by  a  flattening  of  the  yield 
curve. Interest rate increases have been concentrated on the short end of the 
curve, while rates for longer maturities have actually declined.  
 Looking forward, it is difficult to evaluate the possible trend of the monetary 
policy rate in Mexico in the very short term, especially in view that some of the 
factors  that  have  recently  affected  the  most  the  peso-dollar  rate,  and 
particularly  the  electoral  process  in  the  United  States,  could  dissipate  or 
accentuate in coming weeks. Looking beyond this special period, against the 
background of an output gap that is expected to remain negative throughout 
 6 
next year, interest rates in Mexico are likely to be significantly affected by the 
evolution of interest rates in the United States.  
 Markets  continue  to  anticipate  a  further  tightening  of  the  monetary  policy 
stance in that country, although at a very gradual pace. To the extent that it 
responds  to  the  need  to  contain  inflation  and  maximize  employment,  this 
should be good news for the world and Mexico’s economies. Furthermore, as 
the experience with the increase of the federal funds rate in late 2015 shows, 
if well communicated, it need not be a source of disruption in international 
financial  markets.  However,  for  the  reasons  I  underlined  above,  should 
conditions  similar  to  those  prevailing  at  present  persist,  an  increase  in  the 
federal funds rate without a monetary policy response in Mexico would give 
rise to major risks.  
 More  generally,  in  accordance  with  the  Central  Bank’s  mandate,  monetary 
policy  in  Mexico  will  continue  to  focus  on  the  attainment  of  the  inflation 
target. This implies a careful monitoring of all determinants of inflation and its 
medium- to long-term expectations. However, special attention will be paid to 
the  exchange  rate  in  light  of  its  potential  pass-through  to  consumer  prices, 
without  implying  an  objective  for  the  exchange  rate,  and  to  the  relative 
monetary policy stance between Mexico and the US. In addition, considering 
the uncertainties related to estimates of the output gap, a careful assessment 
of demand pressures on prices will also be carried out. In any event, the Banco 
de México will adjust its monetary policy stance with all due flexibility, at the 
 7 
moment and in the magnitude that conditions require it, to consolidate the 
efficient convergence of inflation to the 3 percent target. 
 Obviously, efforts on the monetary policy front alone would be insufficient to 
preserve  macroeconomic  stability.  Action  is  also  fundamental  on  the  fiscal 
side, especially in view of the concern surrounding the current situation and 
outlook for public finances. 
 The  economic  program  for  2017  presented  to  Congress  by  the  Ministry  of 
Finance envisages a surplus in the primary balance for the first time since 2008. 
Accordingly,  the  Public  Sector  Borrowing  Requirements  (PSBR),  the  most 
comprehensive measure of the deficit, should display next year a reduction 
equivalent to 1.2 percent of GDP with respect to 2015 (and 1.7 percent with 
respect to 2014). As a result of these measures, the historical balance of the 
PSBR as a share of GDP is projected to peak this year and to follow a downward 
trend  subsequently. 
It  will  be  essential  to  adhere  strictly  to  these 
commitments and to be ready to take additional measures if needed.  
 The implementation of the above fiscal actions should also alleviate concerns 
deriving from the increase in the current account deficit. Even though part of 
the  needed  adjustment  has  taken  place  through  depreciation  of  the  real 
exchange rate, macroeconomic policy support is required to ensure an orderly 
performance of the economy. Indeed, since the increased  external deficit is 
explained mostly by the decline in public revenues, in turn the result of the fall 
in  both  prices  and  output  of  oil,  fiscal  policy  represents  the  most  adequate 
 8 
instrument to tackle this imbalance. In addition to this, and from a medium- to 
long-term perspective, structural reform is essential to increase oil output and 
exports, which should in turn make the rebalancing efforts more sustainable. 
Action on the monetary policy front should only be considered if the current 
account  deficit  poses  risks  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  inflation  target 
through its effects on the exchange rate. 
 Intervention in the foreign exchange market can also play a role in coping with 
the  challenges  deriving  from  exchange  rate  volatility.  The Foreign  Exchange 
Commission, integrated by representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the 
Banco de México, has made clear that anchoring of the Mexican peso will be 
sought through the preservation of strong economic fundamentals. However, 
it  has  also  been  underlined  that  discretionary  intervention  in  the  foreign 
exchange market cannot be discarded should exceptional circumstances arise. 
 To conclude, I just want to note that while Mexico’s economy has performed 
relatively well in a rather difficult environment, as evidenced by the resilience 
of economic activity and the low rate of inflation, the need to strengthen its 
economic fundamentals has increased. This implies action on several fronts: 
adherence  to  a  monetary  policy  approach  emphasizing  prudence,  a 
strengthening of public finances that ensures a sustained decline in the share 
of public debt in GDP, the implementation of any policies required to ensure 
the  preservation  of  financial  stability,  and  continued  strengthening  of  the 
domestic sources of growth. 
 9 
