Andreas  Dombret:  What's  the  state  of  play  in  Germany's  banking
sector?
Statement  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the press conference to unveil the Deutsche Bundesbank's Financial Stability
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2016.
1. Between more Europe, and less
Ladies and gentlemen
 Before  I  delve  into  the  risk  situation  in  Germany’s  banking  sector,  let’s  look  back  at  the  past
12 months – a period which, in a nutshell, saw the sector oscillate between more Europe, and
less.
It was the second year in which the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) was in operation. Over
the past 24 months, the ECB has been directly responsible for overseeing the euro area’s largest
banking groups, which now number 129, of which 21 are German institutions. By adding “more
Europe” to the realm of banking supervision, the SSM is clearly paying ever greater dividends,
and I am confident that we can iron out any issues that remain.
We took a step of a different sort towards “more Europe” at the beginning of the year, which saw
the  establishment  of  the  second  pillar  of  the  European  banking  union  –  the  Single  Resolution
Mechanism (SRM).
And  judging  by  the  European  Commission’s  agenda,  there  are  to  be  further  steps  in  this
direction. I’m talking about the plans to establish the third pillar of the banking union: the European
Deposit Protection Scheme (EDIS). But this is an initiative that should be viewed with a degree of
caution, because the conditions for creating a single deposit guarantee scheme still haven’t been
fulfilled. Just take the areas of fiscal and economic policy in Europe, which are still firmly in the
national realm and have a major bearing on the health of each country’s banking system. As long
as we haven’t created a common set of European rules for these policy areas, establishing the
EDIS would result in the fallout of misguided national policymaking being passed on to savers
across the entire euro area.
And there is also the fact that banks continue to carry huge amounts of sovereign bonds issued
by their home countries on their balance sheets. And yet again, these are exposures that are not
backed by capital. If a single deposit protection scheme were put in place, the community might
end  up  shouldering  the  risks  associated  with  general  government  debt.  Furthermore,  the
problems surrounding non-performing loans are still unresolved in a number of countries, which
means the risk situation differs strongly from one national banking system to the next. I will return
to this particular point later in my statement today.
While  a  recently  published  draft  report  by  Esther  de  Lange  at  the  European  Parliament  does
already address some of the criticism levelled at the Commission proposal, that paper indicates
that the proposed initial re-insurance phase starting in 2019 will still take place without any risk-
reduction measures whatsoever. That would be inacceptable in my view.
My conclusion from this is that we should stick to the current system – harmonising the national
deposit insurance schemes – as long as many outstanding issues remain unresolved.
For all the progress  that  has  been  made  towards  deeper  integration,  European  unity  suffered
something of a setback on 23 June this year. That was the day on which the UK electorate voted
against the country’s continued membership of the European Union. That brings us to the topic
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of “less Europe". I won’t wade into the political debate today, but focus instead on what Brexit
means for financial markets.
Five months on from the UK referendum, we can say that the European financial system has
done  a  pretty  good  job  overall  of  absorbing  the  outcome  of  the  vote.  Apart  from  a  bout  of
heightened financial market volatility, notable share price losses, particularly among bank stocks,
and  the  sharp  depreciation  of  sterling,  the  Brexit  vote  did  not  unleash  any  turmoil  in  financial
markets, nor, might I add, was there ever any risk of a financial crisis. There are two reasons for
this.  First,  the  good  level  of  resilience  that  has  now  been  achieved  in  the  European  financial
system. Second, and no less important, the response shown particularly by the Bank of England.
Nonetheless, the long-run repercussions of the Brexit vote will only really come into view when
we get a better idea of the outcome of the forthcoming exit negotiations.
The signals which the UK government is currently sending out would appear to suggest that a
“hard Brexit” might be in store – that is, the UK would leave not just the EU but also the European
Economic  Area.  That  would  spell  the  end  of  the  current  EU  passporting  regime  –  an
arrangement  which  presently  enables  financial  institutions  domiciled  in  the  UK  to  offer  their
products and services across the entire European Economic Area. It also permits continental
European institutions to do business in the UK.
If the UK were to leave the European Economic Area, the question facing some business areas
in the financial sector will be whether the UK’s future supervisory regime will be equivalent to the
one on the continent. Assuming we do see a hard Brexit, I expect the UK wouldn’t want to unravel
the accomplishments of EU regulation and that its future regulatory measures would be geared
to global and European standards.
Come  what  may,  what  matters  for  us  in  the  EU  is  that  we  continue  to  press  ahead  with  our
flagship  financial  market  projects  –  first  and  foremost  the  capital  markets  union  –  even  after
the UK leaves the EU, and that we reinforce the EU’s financial system. In doing so, we must
make sure that the door is open for close cooperation with the UK authorities. This is the context
in which I see the scheduled merger between Deutsche Börse and the London Stock Exchange,
for,  once  merged,  the  enterprise  could  serve  as  a  bridge  between  the  UK  and  EU  financial
markets  and  ensure  continuity,  such  as  in  the  clearing  of  euro-denominated  financial
instruments.
Let me now turn to the current risk situation in the German banking sector.
 2. German banking sector still stable ...
I’ll start with the good news: German institutions have substantially increased their capital levels –
and thus their resilience as well – since 2010.
The  tier  1  capital  ratio  of  the  German  banking  system  as  a  whole  rose  by  just  a  slim
0.16 percentage point between June 2015 and June 2016, leaving it broadly unchanged at its
year-end  2015  level  of  15.7%.  But  this  underlines  the  long-term  trend  improvement  in  capital
adequacy, which is the key determinant of any banking sector’s resilience. In early 2008 – the
year of the global financial crisis – the tier 1 capital ratio averaged no more than roughly 9.1%.
A  major  effect  that  impacted  positively  on  the  tier  1  capital  ratio  in  Germany  came  from  the
decline  in  risk-weighted  assets  since  2008.  That  is  to  say,  banks  have  stepped  up  their
investment in assets with lower capital requirements.
The results of this year’s EBA stress test confirm that the German institutions which took part in
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
that exercise are more robust to macroeconomic shocks today than they were just a few years
ago. To sum up – there can be no doubts as to the solvency and liquidity of the German banking
sector.
 3. … but profitability is too feeble by international standards
Yet having a stable capital base alone isn’t enough to ensure sustained resilience. Banks need to
generate sufficient profits as well.
Let’s  start  by  looking  at  Germany’s  major  banking  multinationals.  Compared  with  their  total
assets, these institutions have slightly improved their operating income, which is up from 1.31%
in 2009 to 1.51% in 2015.
However, the major banks saw their return on total assets dip again for the first time last year.
While it is true that the provisions made by one major institution had a negative impact on the
return on total assets in Germany, if we exclude that particular institution, the remaining group of
banks saw an increase in return on total assets, at 0.35%. All in all, that figure is still low by
international  standards,  however.  German  banks  as  a  whole  are  likewise  lagging  behind  the
international field – their aggregate return on equity, for example, languishes at just under 6%.
What’s causing these problems? The diagnosis is relatively simple. Profitability is exceedingly
weak among German credit institutions, and the persistent low-interest-rate environment is only
making  matters  worse.  Credit  institutions  whose  business  models  are  heavily  geared  to  net
interest  income,  in  particular,  might  encounter  serious  medium  to  long-term  problems  if  the
phase of rock-bottom interest rates persists. The longer rates remain low, the more the pressure
on net interest income in Germany will intensify.
But  for  now,  we  can  cautiously  sound  the  all-clear,  particularly  for  small  and  medium-sized
German  institutions,  because  although  the  low  rates  are  leaving  a  dent  in  their  profits,  most
banks and savings banks are still bearing up. Net income from traditional interest business for
German banks as a whole was down by €0.9 billion at €78.1 billion, but that decline was offset by
an increase in net fee and commission income, which was up by €1.2 billion at €30.5 billion.
Credit cooperatives and savings banks – institutions that are heavily reliant on interest business,
relatively speaking – also managed more or less to maintain the previous year’s net figure. 
But the low-interest-rate environment is also posing a threat to the financial system. As higher-
yielding legacy loans mature, they are being replaced by ones generating lower returns, some of
which have longer tenors.
Moreover, the narrow spreads between short-term and long-term interest rates are squeezing
the margins that banks can generate from maturity transformation. Together, these effects are
crimping  net  interest  income.  Furthermore,  banks  are  recording  stronger  flows  of  short-term
deposits, which increases their exposure to interest rate risk. Ever since 2011, we have been
seeing an almost steady rise in the Basel interest rate coefficient, which is a measure of interest
rate risk. What this means for German credit institutions is that they should actively manage and
hedge their higher interest rate risk – having an adequate capital base helps as well.
A major risk associated with a low-interest-rate environment materialises when that spell comes
to  an  end.  In  this  scenario,  pre-tax  net  income  would  probably  suffer  a  short-term  slump,
especially if interest rates were to climb abruptly following a long period of low rates. This would
not only generate present-value losses in the short run, but might also cause interest expenses
to outpace interest income in the medium term. Moreover, German institutions are now carrying
more risky assets in their books than they were just five years ago. Not just that: they are also
extending the average residual maturity in their proprietary business, which is exposing them to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
more credit default and market risk.
But from a long-term vantage point, an interest rate hike would help the banking sector recover
and  regain  stability. And  that’s  precisely  why  it’s  so  important  for  the  banking  system  to  be
adequately  capitalised,  since  that  would  help  it  cushion  shocks  over  a  short  to  medium-term
horizon.
Supervisors  are  closely  monitoring  German  institutions  in  this  setting.  Following  on  from  our
exercises in 2013 and 2015, we at the Bundesbank are planning to conduct another survey on
the low-interest-rate environment next year among the institutions we supervise directly – this
time with added interest rate, credit and market risk stress tests. We hope this survey will give
us an insight, early on, into any critical and risky developments in the banking sector and assist
supervisors in their dialogue with institutions.
Past survey results tell us that credit institutions are responding to the new setting and pushing
up  their  earnings  from  commission  business  –  which  includes,  amongst  others,  account
management  and  payment  fees  –  and  also  increasingly  passing  on  negative  interest  rates  to
major customers. We have also been seeing a steady flow of consolidation and mergers in the
savings bank and cooperative sectors.
For all the progress we have made, there’s still one topic that continues to worry me. Roughly
eight years on from the onset of the financial crisis, a number of European banks are still saddled
by  disturbing  amounts  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs).  Therefore,  scaling  back  these  legacy
exposures is one of the foremost aims of banking supervisors in the euro area, and rightly so.
There are two main reasons why we’re interested in NPLs. One, they make banking systems
more vulnerable because they drive up both capital requirements and funding costs. Two, they
make it harder for the banks in question to supply credit; this, in turn, puts the brakes on growth
in the euro area. As a consequence, NPLs don’t just weigh on credit institutions’ earnings; they
also intensify solvency risk and obstruct economic activity in Europe.
In this context, I would like to highlight the public consultation on the draft guidance to banks on
NPLs  which  was  initiated  by  the  ECB  and  ran  until  yesterday.  Equipped  with  this  guidance,
banking supervisors will be in a position to uniformly assess banks’ internal handling of NPLs as
part of their regular supervisory dialogue.
But as far as financial stability in Germany is concerned, I see no immediate cause for alarm.
NPLs are far less of a problem in the German banking system than they are in some of the other
euro-area countries. At roughly 2%, the NPL rate in Germany last year was well down on the
euro-area  average.  That  figure  also  includes  non-performing  shipping  exposures,  and  they
certainly do worry me because there are still no signs that the economic situation in the shipping
industry is about to recover. It goes without saying, then, that we shall continue to keep a close
eye on banks with substantial exposures to shipping loans.
As for the institutions saddled by NPLs, we expect them to take measures that are conducive to
promptly reducing legacy exposures and bolstering their resilience. These measures include not
just thoroughly cleansing their balance sheets of both existing and anticipated losses but above
all conducting appropriate credit risk management and holding an adequate level of capital.
 4. Conclusion
In summary, there are three points I would like to highlight.
First, the supervisory environment for banks has become even more European since our
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
last  Financial  Stability  Review,  and  for  good  reason.  The  establishment  of  the  Single
Resolution  Mechanism  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  marks  another  major  milestone.
However,  before  we  take  any  further  steps  towards  deeper  integration,  we  should  now
gauge  whether  all  the  groundwork  has  been  laid,  and  as  far  as  the  European  Deposit
Insurance Scheme is concerned, we shouldn’t take the second step before the first.
Second, German banks have boosted their stability still further – equity capital ratios are up
again, leverage is down again. That’s good news.
Third, persistently weak earnings are taking their toll on German banks. The low-interest-rate
environment will particularly make itself felt at small and medium-sized institutions over a
medium to long-term horizon. Institutions will need to tackle these challenges head on if they
are to safeguard their stability and profitability. My advice to them is this: there’s no blueprint
for  guaranteed  success.  But  what  I  can  say  is  that  besides  regularly  reviewing  their
business  models,  credit  institutions  should  also  consider  further  mergers,  a  more
streamlined branch network and other cost-cutting measures.
Thank you very much.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
