 Address by Lesetja Kganyago 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank 
at the Annual Convention of the South African Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry (SACCI) 
Emperors Palace, Johannesburg  
20 October 2016 
  Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  address  the  annual  convention  of  SACCI.  The 
theme of institutions and competitiveness is particularly apt in today’s economic and 
political  environment.  Strong  and  sound  institutions  are  essential  for  the  smooth 
functioning of society, as they prescribe the behaviour of individuals, and set out the 
“rules  of  the  game”.  Well-functioning  institutions  are  what  investors  look  for  when 
making  long-term  decisions  to  invest  in  a  country.  Institutions  and  the  institutional 
framework  are  generated  over  time  through  interactions  in  society  in  general,  and 
are  dynamic  and  endogenous.  In  other  words,  they  change  over  time  and  can  be 
expected  to  both  affect,  and  be  affected  by,  the  current  political  and  economic 
dispensation.  Furthermore,  institutional  arrangements  in  society  are  often  self-
perpetuating  with  strong  institutions  creating  incentives  for  further  institutional 
improvements  and  vice  versa.    But  their  dynamic  nature  means  that  we  cannot  be 
complacent, and we have to resist attempts to undermine strong institutions. 
Often people think of competitiveness in terms of the exchange rate. However, this is 
only  one  limited  aspect  of  competitiveness.  While  relative  prices  matter,  it  is  the 
institutions  that  underpin  the  economy  that  count.  The  exchange  rate,  to  a  certain 
extent, simply reflects the strength or weakness of institutions, or changes or threats 
to their integrity. 
In the recent Global  Competitiveness Report, the areas in which South Africa fared 
well  are  those  that  are  underpinned  by  strong  institutions  and  governance  such  as 
the    strength  of  auditing  standards,  the  protection  of  minority  shareholder  interests, 
the efficacy of corporate boards and the efficiency of the legal framework and judicial 
independence. The soundness of banks is also highly ranked.  South Africa was one 
of  the  relatively  few  countries  whose  banking  system  emerged  largely  unscathed 
from the global financial crisis. 
In my address today I will reflect on the place of the Reserve Bank within the current 
institutional framework, the relationship between the exchange rate, competitiveness 
and  institutional  strength,  and  make  a  few  comments  on  the  financial  stability 
mandate.  
The Bank’s role in South Africa’s institutional landscape  
The  Bank  has  a  long  and  proud  history  of  supporting  South  Africa’s  institutional 
strength.  In  fact,  in  June  the  Bank  celebrated  its  95th  anniversary.  The  role  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  and  its  independence  is  clearly  enshrined  in  the  Constitution.  The 
South  African  Reserve  Bank,  in  pursuit  of  its  primary  objective,  must  perform  its 
functions  independently  and  without  fear,  favour  or  prejudice,  but  there  must  be 
regular  consultation  between  the  Bank  and  the  Cabinet  member  responsible  for 
national  financial  matters.”  But  this  notion  of  the  Reserve  Bank  as  an  independent 
institution  is  often  misunderstood.  Independence  does  not  mean  that  we  sit  in  our 
glass  and  granite  tower  and  make  decisions  independently  of  the  needs  of  the 
economy or of the overall goals of government policy.   
In this respect, it is useful to distinguish between goal independence and operational 
independence  with  respect  to  monetary  policy.  Goal  independence  refers  to  the 
setting of the objectives of monetary policy, while operational independence relates 
to the implementation of the mandate that is given to the central bank.  Globally it is 
generally, although not exclusively, the case that monetary policy objectives are set 
by elected representatives of the country. That is how it should be. But these policy 
objectives  can  only  be  set  within  the  constraints  of  what  monetary  policy  can 
achieve, and not what some people would like it to achieve.  
 2 
Monetary policy independence usually relates to operational independence, and has 
its roots in the need to prevent monetary policy being used for political expedience. 
In particular, to avoid the so-called “political interest rate cycle” phenomenon where 
rates are lowered in advance of elections and then raised again thereafter.  
This dichotomy is in fact consistent with the Constitution of South Africa, where it is 
stated that the primary objective of the Bank is to “protect the value of the currency in 
the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  The  Constitution 
therefore  does  not  give  the  Bank  goal  independence,  but  our  operational 
independence is explicit. The inflation targeting framework, which is a good example 
of an evolving institutional structure, aligns well  with this aspect of the  Constitution. 
The  goal  of  monetary  policy,  the  inflation  target,  is  set  by  government.  The  current 
target is for us to be within a range of 3-6 per cent. But within that context, the Bank 
has full  operational independence to implement appropriate  policies to achieve that 
goal. We are given the responsibility for protecting the value of the currency, but we 
are also  accountable for this responsibility.  Government cannot dictate interest rate 
policy  to  the  Bank,  and  the  requirement  to  consult  regularly  with  the  Minister  of 
Finance  does  not  undermine  our  independence,  but  is  a  mechanism  to  ensure 
effective macroeconomic coordination and information sharing. 
To us, protecting the value of the currency means maintaining the purchasing power 
of  the  rand  in  South  Africa  by  containing  inflation.  By  adjusting  monetary  policy  or 
through  its  communications,  the  MPC  aims  to  influence  both  demand  conditions  in 
the  economy,  as  well  as  the  inflation  expectations  of  businesses  and  consumers. 
The  commitment  to  an  inflation  target  acts  as  a  signal  to  these  stakeholders  that 
broad-based  price  or  unit  labour  cost  increases  above  the  target  will  influence  the 
monetary policy stance.  
Through  this  process  the  SARB  is  working  to  build  the  credibility  of  the  inflation 
target to the extent that, during inflation spikes, labour unions and businesses do not 
meaningfully raise their expectations for future inflation. Achieving this goal ensures 
that  the  country  avoids  an  inflation  spiral  wherein  wage  demands  and  price 
increases  persistently  ratchet  up  in  response  to  current  inflation  outcomes. 
Embedding the inflation target within the minds of the general public, through various 
 3 
communication strategies and initiatives, is a task which the Bank has been working 
at for the past sixteen years.  
The  inflation  targeting  framework  is  a  good  example  of  an  institutional  structure 
which reduces uncertainty for businesses and households. This increased certainty, 
in  turn,  facilitates  long  term  investment  and  economic  growth  and  this  is  the  main 
contribution that the Bank can make to balance and sustainable growth.  At the same 
time, maintaining price stability helps to protect the poor in particular, who are most 
vulnerable  to  the  ravages  of  inflation.  It  also  helps  to  prevent  the  erosion  of  our 
international competitiveness, a point to which I will return later. 
In  recent  years,  the  Bank  has  been  confronted  with  a  challenging  economic 
environment  in  which  GDP  growth  has  been  slowing,  with  a  deteriorating  inflation 
outlook. In order to avoid a persistent breach of the inflation target, the MPC began a 
gradual interest rate hiking cycle in January 2014. Since then the repo rate has been 
increased by 200 basis points. Part of the challenge has been that inflation has been 
driven  primarily  by  supply-side  factors,  particularly  the  exchange  rate  and  food 
prices.  Our  approach  has  been  to  try  and  look  through  these  shocks  and  focus  on 
second  round  effects.    Given  the  persistence  of  inflation  expectations  at  the  upper 
end of the target range, and wage settlement rates in excess of inflation, it has been 
difficult to avoid a tightening cycle. 
More recently there has been some improvement to the inflation outlook. The Bank’s 
latest inflation forecast is for an average of 6,4 per cent in 2016, 5,8 per cent in 2017 
and  5,5  per  cent  in  2018.  The  moderating  inflation  trajectory  reflects  recent  policy 
tightening  by  the  Bank,  an  expected  deceleration  in  food  price  growth  and  an 
improvement in the exchange rate outlook relative to previous forecasts. The MPC is 
of the view that should the forecasts materialise, the hiking cycle may be nearing its 
end.  However, this does not mean the interest rate reductions are imminent, as we 
would like to see inflation more firmly within the target range on a sustainable basis 
over the forecast horizon. We are also clear that the bar for any future rate cuts has 
been set very high.  
  4 
Although  our  mandate  is  inflation,  it  does  not  mean  that  we  ignore  growth 
considerations. The Constitution states that what  we do should be in the interest of 
balanced  and  sustainable  growth  in  the  Republic.    We  have  to  be  clear,  however, 
about  what  monetary  policy  can  achieve  in  this  respect.  Our  view  is  that  long-term 
trend growth or potential output is determined by real factors in the economy. These 
include  infrastructure,  education,  labour  and  product  market  efficiency,  productivity 
growth, and institutional strength, to name a few. Monetary policy can only impact on 
cyclical variations of growth around the growth trend.  Monetary policy cannot be an 
engine  for  sustained  growth.  This  requires  structural  reform,  in  order  to  arrest  the 
declining trend of potential output that we have observed over the past few years. 
However, implementing structural reform is difficult and it requires strong institutions 
and  political  management.  Some  of  it  requires  changes  in  processes  that  are 
expenditure neutral, for example product market reforms, and changing competition 
laws  or  labour  laws,  while  others  could  require  huge  investment  layouts,  as  in  the 
case  of  infrastructure.  These  are  political  decisions,  which  are  often  difficult,  and 
inevitably involve entrenched interests. It is often difficult to get societal buy-in or to 
change  expenditure  priorities  when  the  country’s  requirements  are  diverse  and  the 
means limited. In South Africa, we do have a structural reform framework in the form 
of  the  National  Development  Plan,  which  has  been  adopted  by  all  parties.  It  is  not 
the plan that is lacking, rather its implementation.  
It is far easier to look for a quick fix such as monetary policy.  This is not a peculiar 
South  African  phenomenon,  however.  Monetary  policies,  in  conjunction  with  fiscal 
policies, were instrumental in avoiding worse outcomes to the global financial crisis. 
But monetary policy is not the appropriate policy to raise potential output. Yet, in the 
absence  of  meaningful  structural  reforms,  the  focus  globally  remains  on  monetary 
policy  to  provide  the  solution.  This  creates  a  challenge  for  central  banks.  As 
Mohamed El-Erian has noted in his recent book, central banks are now seen as the 
“only game in town” due to slow progress in the implementation of structural reforms. 
This  inability  to  do  so  creates  unreasonable  expectations  for  monetary  policy  to 
achieve  objectives  that  it  is  not  competent  to  deliver.  Ultimately  it  could  lead  to  an 
undermining of central bank credibility and institutional strength, even in those areas 
where it is best suited to operate. 
 5 
The exchange rate and competitiveness 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  when  people  think  about  global  competitiveness,  the 
exchange  rate  immediately  comes  to  mind.  Central  Banks  talk  about  the  exchange 
rate  and  global  competitiveness,  we  are  referring  to  the  real  exchange  rate,  or  the 
nominal  exchange  rate  adjusted  for  inflation  differentials  between  South  Africa  and 
its trading partners. A depreciation only improves competitiveness if it is not eroded 
by  higher  inflation.  In  other  words,  if  it  is  a  real  depreciation.  So  the  Bank’s 
contribution to keeping inflation low is relevant in this respect. 
Our constitutional mandate to protect the value of the currency is often interpreted as 
a  mandate  to  keep  the  nominal  exchange  rate  stable.  In  the  absence  of  other 
shocks,  the  exchange  rate  should  remain  stable  if  our  inflation  rate  is  the  same  as 
that of our trading partners. But assuming our inflation rate is higher and we attempt 
to  maintain  a  stable  exchange  rate  (and  assuming  that  we  have  the  means  to  do 
that),  our  real  exchange  rate  will  in  fact  be  appreciating.  In  other  words,  we  will  be 
losing  competitiveness,  as  the  cost  of  producing  goods  domestically  will  have 
increased  relative  to  our  competitors.  This  persistent  overvaluation  of  the  currency 
will not be sustainable. 
Since  the  beginning  of  2011,  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  has  depreciated  by 
26,8 per cent, in contrast to the  nominal effective  depreciation of  41,9  per cent. So 
on this measure we are more competitive, but we have not seen a strong adjustment 
to this, as evident in the persistent current account deficit. 
There  are  a  number  of  possible  explanations  but  I  will  highlight  a  few  points.  It  is 
important  to  understand  what  the  key  drivers  of  the  depreciation  have  been. While 
there are a whole range of factors that impact the rand on a day to day basis, terms 
of  trade  changes  and  capital  flows  have  been  among  the  key  underlying  drivers  or 
determinants. Falling commodity prices since 2011 have been an important factor in 
the  weakening  of  the  rand.  This  does  not  necessarily  provide  an  impetus  for 
increased  production  of  commodities,  but  rather  it  shields  the  rand  value  of  mining 
output.  It  does  make  non-mining  exports  more  attractive,  and  that  is  how  the 
adjustment is supposed to  work. In other  words, a real  depreciation is supposed to 
be positive for growth. 
 6 
Capital flows are multidimensional. Some are driven by interest rate differentials, and 
the current global low interest rate environment makes emerging markets a desirable 
portfolio  investment  destination.  These  inflows  have  given  support  to  the  rand  over 
the past few  years. But periodic reversals of these flows, for example during  global 
risk-off  scenarios  and  risks  of  interest  rate  increases  in  the  US  have  impacted 
negatively on the rand. Portfolio inflows into equity markets are growth sensitive, and 
this  explains  why  non-residents  have  been  net  sellers  of  South  African  shares  in 
recent months. 
To some extent, the rand has followed the pattern of commodity-producing emerging 
market economies over the past few years in response to changes in terms of trade 
and  the  pattern  of  global  capital  flows.  However,  there  have  been  important 
divergences  relating  to  domestic  idiosyncratic  events  which  have  resulted  in 
heightened  perceived  political  risk,  and  reflected  in  the  weaker  exchange  rate.  The 
increased  risk  premium  is  often  associated  with  falling  business  confidence.  The 
resulting  exchange  rate  depreciation  is  consequently  unlikely  to  be  a  big  boost  to 
investment and exports. Rather, it will reflect weakening institutions. The adjustment 
is  then  unlikely  to  come  about  through  increased  exports,  but  through  import 
compression,  in  the  form  lower  investment  and  consumption  expenditure.  A 
weakening currency in the face of heightened political risk is therefore not a sign of 
increased  global  competitiveness,  and  is  unlikely  to  be  accompanied  by  higher 
growth.  
Currently, South Africa remains under threat of a possible downgrade from the rating 
agencies to sub-investment grade. One of the explicit factors contributing to some of 
the agencies maintaining our investment grade rate in the past few months has been 
the  strength  of  some  of  our  critical  institutions.  There  is  no  doubt  that  should  a 
downgrade transpire, it will be reflected in the exchange rate (to the extent that it is 
not already reflected). This will not be a sign of increased competitiveness, rather an 
adjustment  to  a  deterioration  in  our  competitive  standing  globally  as  an  investment 
destination.  The  impact  of  strong  institutions  on  our  global  competitiveness  cannot 
be underestimated. 
   7 
The financial stability mandate 
Aside from price stability, the Bank has now also been given an explicit mandate to 
oversee  financial  stability  as  envisaged  in  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill 
(FSRB), which is currently before Parliament. The bill defines financial stability in two 
important ways. Firstly, it is the ability of financial institutions to provide products and 
services  within  the  confines  of  the  law,  without  interruption,  regardless  of  changing 
economic  circumstances.  Secondly,  it  means  that  the  public  has  confidence  in  the 
financial sector and its ability to function appropriately.  The FSRB also provides for 
a  Twin  Peaks  approach  to  financial  sector  regulation,  which,  when  enacted,  will 
expand the SARB’s scope of prudential regulation beyond banks, to include insurers 
and  financial  market  infrastructures,  resulting  in  the  establishment  of  the  “Financial 
Sector  Conduct  Authority”  focusing  on  the  conduct  of  financial  institutions towards 
their  clients.  Whilst  South  Africa’s  financial  sector  is  widely  seen  as  globally 
competitive  and  soundly  managed,  the  reforms contained  in  the  FSRB  are  likely  to 
add  additional  institutional  strength  in  this  sector.  This  is  because  an  explicit 
separation  between  the  conduct  and  prudential  regulator  will  allow  for  improved 
oversight.  
 The  responsibility  of  ensuring  financial  stability  and  the  soundness  of  financial 
institutions and the financial sector is complementary to the Bank’s current mandate 
of  price  stability.    Both  objectives  are  seen  as  necessary  conditions  for sustainable 
and balanced long-term economic growth. Furthermore, financial stability provides a 
platform 
for 
the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy.  Without  a  well-
functioning financial  sector,  it  is  impossible  to  effectively  transmit  monetary  policy 
through the economy.   
 The  Bank  constantly  strives  to  strengthen  the  public’s  confidence  in  our  financial 
sector  because  it  is  only  through  the  assurance  of  financial  stability  that  South 
Africans  will  save  and  invest  for  the  long  term.  This  institutional  strength  also 
contributes  to  giving  confidence  to  foreign  investors  to  invest  in  the  country.  While 
the role of the Bank in regulating and supervising the individual banks has been well 
established, (i.e microprudential oversight), we also have an important evolving role 
to play in macroprudential oversight. Here the focus is on the financial system as a 
 8 
whole and our role is to monitor and act against financial excesses that threaten to 
undermine the broader economy.  
 The  pre-Crisis  approach  by  central  banks  was  that  they  did  not  have  the  ability  to 
recognise bubbles and the best they could do was to clean up after the bubble had 
popped.  Central  banks  also  believed  that  price  stability  and  micro-prudential 
supervision were sufficient to ensure broader financial stability. However, the Global 
Financial  Crisis  taught  us  that  financial  excesses  can  emerge  during  times  of  low 
inflation and strong individual bank metrics. The current view is that these excesses 
should  be  nipped  in  the  bud  by  appropriate  policies  that  constrain  lending,  either 
through  macroprudential  policies  directed  at  the  particular  market  segment,  or 
through some form of targeted brakes on bank lending or higher interest rates. Our 
approach  currently  is  for  interest  rate  policy  to  be  focused  on  inflation,  and  for  the 
Bank’s Financial Stability Committee (FSC) to use other macroprudential policies to 
moderate  financial  stability  risks.  While  our  tool-kit  is  still  being  refined,  we  have 
implemented the framework of a countercyclical buffer for banks which  will  be over 
and above the capital requirements of individual banks. This provides the FSC with a 
tool to change capital requirements in order to protect  the banking system from the 
boom  and  bust  phases  of  the  financial  cycle,  and  is  an  integral  part  of  the 
internationally agreed standards for risk-based capital requirements. Currently, given 
the weak state of bank lending, this buffer is set at zero.  
 Concluding remarks 
In  many  ways,  strong  institutions  are  constraints  on  the  abuse  of  political  and 
economic power that society puts in place. As such, there is always the danger that 
there  are  incentives  for  some  to  undermine  some  of  these  institutions.  We  must 
therefore  ensure  that  strong  institutions  are  supported  by  society.  It  is  important  to 
regularly  question  whether  our  institutional  arrangements  are  providing  the  right 
incentives to the stakeholders in our society. Furthermore, we must ensure that our 
institutions encourage broad-based participation in the economy and do not give rise 
to  alternative  forms  of  collusion  between  interest  groups.  But  it  is  also  important  to 
bear  in  mind  that  institutions  are  not  static.  We  live  in  a  changing  world,  and 
 9 
institutional change is inevitable. But we must ensure that change is positive and in 
the interest of the broader society. 
The Bank will continue to pursue its constitutional mandate within a flexible inflation 
targeting  framework  without  fear  or  favour.  We  have  built  a  strong  reputation  as  a 
respected  institution  within  our  young  democracy.  Together  with  the  National 
Treasury  we  will  continue  to  strive  to  bring  about  a  stable  macroeconomic 
environment, conducive to long term growth and development. 
Thank you. 
  10 
