William C Dudley: New York City's return from the brink
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Lotos Club, New York City, 19 October 2016.
 It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here this evening at the Lotos Club, one of
America’s oldest and most distinguished literary clubs. I am, of course, very happy to participate
in tonight’s public affairs dinner and to accept the Lotos Award of Distinction.
Tonight I would like to take a moment to discuss some of New York City’s recent history and its
return from the economic brink.  Aside from being a story of historical interest, I believe there are
lessons  embedded  in  New  York  City’s  experience  that  are  relevant  to  other  cities  and
municipalities that find themselves struggling today. As always, what I have to say reflects my
own views and not necessarily the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal
1
Reserve System.
Given  the  historical  relevance  of  today’s  date,  it  seems  appropriate  to  start  by  recalling  what
happened on this day 29 years ago.  In what has come to be known as “Black Monday,” the U.S.
equity market suffered one of its steepest one-day drops in history, with the Dow Jones Industrial
Average falling 508 points—a decline of more than 20 percent.  This capped one of the worst
weeks  ever  for  the  U.S.  stock  market.    Many  feared  the  worst  for  the  U.S.  economy—and
especially for New York City.  After all, the stock market crash in 1929 was followed by the Great
Depression.
As a young economist working on Wall Street, I certainly was worried—the situation didn’t seem
consistent with future job stability.  I went out that evening and bought myself a leather jacket.  If I
lost my job, I wanted to leave with something on my back, something tangible.  As it turned out,
although the city’s economy and Wall Street did indeed sustain a steep downturn, both were able
to recover and to prosper.  Not only was there no depression, the economy avoided falling into
recession.  And, importantly to me, I was able to keep both my job and my leather jacket. 
In retrospect, the 1987 crash was just a hiccup in what ultimately turned out to be a remarkable
upturn in the city’s performance and prospects.  However, to really understand this story of the
city’s resilience, we need to take a look back at one of the darkest periods in New York City’s
history: the 1970s. 
I  remember  New  York  City  in  the  1970s  from  my  freshman  days  at  Columbia  University. 
Columbia was a great place to be a young student.  There were engaging professors and I had
the  opportunity  to  read  the  great  books  of  the  university’s  core  contemporary  civilization
curriculum.  Recognizing the strong literary traditions of the Lotos Club, I would also note that I
had the fortune of reading some of the great works of Middle English, including Chaucer.  I also
enjoyed being on both the freshman wrestling and golf teams—even if it was an odd pairing and
our teams were not very good.  
In contrast to Columbia, the city seemed much less attractive.  From my perspective as a naïve
17-year-old from suburban Massachusetts, it seemed outright dangerous and dirty.  The danger
was driven home immediately.  One of my roommates was robbed his first day during a walk
through one of the nearby parks.  He didn’t understand, nor did I at the time, that certain places
near Columbia weren’t very safe, even during daylight hours.
While  you  could  avoid  the  crime  by  being  careful  where  you  went  in  the  city,  there  was  no
avoiding  the  pollution.    During  this  period,  New  York  City  still  had  considerable  manufacturing
activity,  many  apartment  buildings  burned  low-grade  oil  and  incinerated  trash,  and  this  was
before  the  days  of  automobile  catalytic  converters.    This  confluence  meant  that  grit  was
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
everywhere,  and  even  for  the  non-fastidious—which  I  admit  I  was  one—showers  were  an
absolute necessity on a daily basis.  Sometimes it was so bad that you couldn’t see across the
Hudson River, which was just a few blocks away! 
In order to understand the situation the city faced in the 1970s, we have to look back a decade
earlier.  The 1960s were a time of hope and promise for New York City, with the World’s Fair, the
opening of the Verrazano Bridge, and the beginning of construction of the World Trade Center.
 The city benefited from a booming stock market and strong overall job growth. 
My  memories  of  New  York  City  during  that  period  were  very  glowing.    Visiting  from
Massachusetts,  I  remember  going  to  the  World’s  Fair  and  to  a  Mets  game  at  the  new  Shea
Stadium—heady stuff for an 11-year-old.  As a boy who planned to be a nuclear physicist when
he grew up, I particularly recall the General Electric exhibit at the World’s Fair that highlighted the
potential of hydrogen fusion as a future power source.  Although that turned out to be like flying
cars—always somewhere just over the horizon—it was exciting to contemplate as an aspiring
scientist.    Unbeknownst  to  me,there  were  also  some  ominous  signs  for  the  city.    The  city’s
manufacturing sector was losing jobs at a worrisome pace, population growth had slowed to a
crawl, crime was on the rise and racial tensions were growing. 
As the sixties unfolded, there were also a number of major strikes affecting public services, most
notably  the  1968  teachers’  strike.    Perhaps  most  importantly,  the  city’s  finances  were  on  a
reckless path.  Despite growth in the economy and the tax base, the city was taking on more
short-term debt, relying increasingly on state aid and grossly underfunding its pensions.  This is a
familiar story where the seeds of future fiscal problems are sown during better economic times.
 In effect, a combination of a strong U.S. economy, a bull market on Wall Street and various
forms  of  fiscal  gimmickry  masked  the  increasing  underlying  fiscal  stresses  that  the  city  was
experiencing. 
By 1970, when I arrived, some of this good fortune ended when the U.S economy was hit by
recession and a bear market in equities began.  What followed was a massive economic slump
in New York City—what would generally be described as a depression.  Some of the numbers
are staggering: from 1970 to 1975, New York City saw a 6 percent decline in its population, a 15
percent drop in employment and a 50 percent surge in the murder rate.  The combination of the
need to roll over debt from the prior two decades, a shrinking tax base and increased costs of
debt—which sometimes had been used to finance operating expenses—caused fiscal problems
that  forced  the  city  to  cut  services  and  raise  taxes.   A  continued  bear  market  on  Wall  Street
exacerbated the situation.  In effect, New York City looked to be in a vicious cycle with companies
shrinking,  closing  or  moving  out.    The  result  was  fewer  jobs,  an  exodus  of  people,  declining
property values, rising crime rates and eroding tax revenues.  This meant fewer firemen, police
and teachers, which led, in turn, to more crime and poorer educational opportunities.  Put simply,
it was a horrible dynamic that looked difficult to reverse. 
At the end of 1975, New York City faced perhaps its darkest moment and greatest challenge of
the modern era when it ran out of money to pay for basic services.  The city’s persistent deficits
caused the financial sector to lose confidence in the city’s ability to repay its debts, and the city
lost its ability to borrow.  
Yet,  this  moment—when  the  outlook  appeared  bleakest—turned  out  to  be  an  historic  turning
point  for  the  city.    The  reforms  that  were  subsequently  imposed  by  the  state  and  federal
governments through the Emergency Financial Control Board were quite tough in many ways. 
There was plenty of pain to go around, and just about every stakeholder―including city officials,
lenders, city workers and residents, to name just a few―shared in the sacrifice.
The city’s extraordinarily large level of short-term debt was refinanced into long-term debt owed
to the newly formed Municipal Assistance Corporation (MAC).  To make this debt marketable to
the  public,  MAC  was  given  control  over  the  city’s  sales  tax.    Revenues  from  that  tax  were
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
dedicated to repayment of the MAC debt, and the city could keep only what was left over.
Fundamental to the deal was the creation of the Emergency Financial Control Board, which was
empowered to monitor proposed city budgets to ensure that they were in balance.  This change
alone was very consequential: taxes increased and spending fell sharply over the latter half of the
1970s.  By 1982, the city’s inflation-adjusted wage bill had fallen by almost 30 percent, and real
investment in the city’s infrastructure fell by more than three-quarters and didn’t reach its 1974
levels until the early 1990s.
The  city  gave  up  a  significant  amount  of  its  autonomy  in  exchange  for  the  relief  it  received. 
Ultimately,  however,  the  reforms  that  were  forced  on  the  city  created  a  responsible  and
transparent budgeting process that has served the city well to this day. 
By early 1976, the U.S. economy was recovering from a deep recession, and employment in
New York City’s financial sector was once again on the rise.  Overall employment in New York
City began to recover by 1977, and unemployment began to decline. By the end of the decade,
there were signs of hope, but it wasn’t at all clear yet whether the city was back on solid footing.
 While employment did rebound modestly, the city’s population was still declining, crime was still
rising and the city was still having trouble borrowing.  It would be 10 years after the initial crisis
before the city was able to borrow again on its own in the public markets.
By the mid-1980s, the resiliency of the city’s economy was becoming more apparent.  City-wide
employment barely declined during the wrenching recessions of the early 1980s—the first time in
a long while that the city’s economy had out-performed the nation’s.  In the next few years, job
growth picked up sharply and real estate markets soared, a clear sign that a growing number of
people had regained confidence in the city.  But, even during the booming 1980s, crime rates
continued to increase—it wasn’t until 1990 that crime rates peaked and began a long downward
trend.
I returned to New York in 1983.  The draw was an employment opportunity in finance.  At the
time, the city’s circumstances were improving but crime was still high, and there were still lots of
problems  caused  by  years  of  underinvestment.    For  example,  I  recall  that  the  New  York  City
subway system at the time was a near-wreck, with train speeds sharply reduced in many areas
due to poor track conditions and dilapidated infrastructure. 
But, the seeds of improvement were in place.  The financial services industry was beginning a
long boom marked by financial market innovation and the rapid development of the nation’s debt
capital markets—a boom that ended with the financial crisis.  When I arrived, the build-out of the
Battery Park City neighborhood was just starting.  My first year, I lived at Gateway Plaza, which
was the first big apartment complex in Battery Park City.  However, it was early days and the
nearest grocery store was about half a mile away north on West Street!  
Although a major economic downturn throughout the Northeast in the early 1990s took its toll on
New York City—especially on employment and home prices—the city’s population continued to
grow and its crime rate began to decline.  While the city has had a number of ups and downs
since the early 1990s, in tandem with the United States, the general trend has been upwards. 
The city withstood a terror attack, financial crisis and natural disaster.  Following the attack on
the World Trade Center in 2001, there was uncertainty over whether this would be a permanent
setback for the city.  However, the city rebuilt and recovered and Lower Manhattan has evolved
into  a  vibrant  commercial,  cultural  and  residential  area.    Gateway  Plaza  is  still  there,  but  the
Battery  Park  City  neighborhood  today  is  now  fully  developed  and  well-established.    There  are
even several grocery stores!
The  city  weathered  the  recent  financial  crisis  and  the  Great  Recession  far  better  than  many
would have anticipated.  Although employment in the securities industry has stagnated after the
decline  due  to  the  Great  Recession,  the  city  has  found  new  sources  of  dynamism,  including
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
rapid growth in the technology sector and the further development of tourism.  The number of
technology workers in New York City has doubled to about 125,000 in the past decade.  That
sector  is  now  is  nearly  as  big  as  the  securities  industry.   And  New  York  City  had  56  million
visitors last year, nearly double the total of 25 years earlier.  
In  2011,  an  important  milestone  was  reached:  payroll  employment  surpassed  its  previous  all-
time peak, from 1969, and it has grown strongly since then.  Crime rates have fallen significantly
across the city since 1990, and real estate values have surged. 
One consistent source of strength for the city has been immigration.  Over this period, New York
City benefited from a sizable influx of immigrants, which more than offset out-migration in many
neighborhoods.  To illustrate this, let’s take a look at one such neighborhood in Brooklyn, Sunset
Park, that was losing residents to the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s.  As property values fell,
new migrants from Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and Central America moved in.  By
1990,  Hispanics  comprised  about  half  of  all  Sunset  Park  residents.    These  new  residents
developed  a  thriving  community,  which  boosted  property  values.    There  was  also  an  influx  of
Chinese residents, and part of Sunset Park has come to be known as Brooklyn’s Chinatown. 
There  are  many  other  examples  where  immigrants  revitalized  whole  neighborhoods:  Russian
and Ukrainian immigrants in Brighton Beach; Chinese and Korean immigrants in Flushing; and
Indian immigrants in Jackson Heights, just to name a few. 
So, has it been all good news for New York City in recent years?  Certainly not.  Many challenges
remain.    One  by-product  of  a  strong  economy  and  real  estate  market  has  been  a  decline  in
housing  affordability,  and  an  increase  in  homelessness.    It  is  estimated  that  there  are  over
60,000 homeless people in New York City today—almost double the number from 10 years ago
and more than four times as high as in the early 1980s.  Moreover, poverty rates remain high in
many  parts  of  the  city,  and  the  education  system  can  certainly  be  improved.    Yet,  a  strong
economy  and  a  sound  fiscal  position  at  least  provide  the  means  to  devote  resources  to  help
address these ongoing problems. 
This  turnaround  of  New  York  City  illustrates  that  reviving  a  city  in  trouble  is  indeed  possible.
There are some useful lessons from New York City’s experience.  First, it is often darkest before
the dawn.  Cities in fiscal distress are like individuals suffering from addiction: they often have to
hit bottom and reach out to others for help before they can begin to recover.  New York City hit
bottom in 1975, and that created the impetus for reform.  Second, in such situations, cities often
have  to  give  up  fiscal  control  for  a  time.   Accepting  a  Control  Board  and  operating  under  its
mandates  was  a  painful,  but  necessary,  step  toward  rebuilding  the  city’s  fiscal  health  and
regaining access to financial markets.  Third, when sound reforms are implemented it still takes
a long time to achieve fruitful results, so it is important to stay the course.  Fourth, although a
strong economy, good fiscal position and transparency in government will not automatically solve
every problem, they provide a strong foundation.
So, what does the future hold for New York City?  An important aspect of a city’s vitality is the
ability  of  its  residents  to  develop  the  skills  necessary  to  be  successful  and  to  achieve  their
dreams.   A  big  asset  for  the  city  is  its  access  to  affordable  education.    Each  year,  tens  of
thousands  of  low-to-moderate-income  New  Yorkers—many  of  them  immigrants—send  their
children to one of the city’s specialized high schools.  When it comes time for college, many of
these same students have access to universities in the CUNY and SUNY systems.  A recent
highly  regarded  study  assessed  how  much  of  an  opportunity  kids  born  to  less  advantaged
families in different parts of the United States have of moving up in the world.  New York City
ranked 10th out of the 50 largest U.S. metro areas.  The Big Apple should strive to be number
one in this ranking by continuing to improve access to quality and affordable education and to job
training.  We should all do our part to help make this happen.
2
Also, it is important to remember that the measure of a city’s well-being is much broader than
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
how  many  are  employed  and  the  level  of  economic  activity.    As  Paul  Allen,  co-founder  of
Microsoft, explained:
In my own philanthropy and business endeavors, I have seen the critical role that the arts play in
stimulating creativity and in developing vital communities…the arts have a crucial impact on our
economy and are an important catalyst for learning, discovery, and achievement in our country.
Through the fiscal crisis, into the 1980s and to the present day, the city maintained its status as a
center of culture and the arts.  The efforts of the city and the state, starting in the mid-1980s, to
redevelop  the  Theatre  District  and  Times  Square  area  played  an  important  role  in  revitalizing
tourism.  But, of course, the city’s well-deserved reputation for culture and arts goes well beyond
Broadway—to  the  hundreds  of  Off-Broadway  and  neighborhood  theaters,  museums,  music
venues  and  organizations  like  yours.    Supporting  this  cultural  infrastructure  is  important  to
maintaining a vibrant economy and a bright future.
The experience of New York City, which has gone from crisis to vibrancy, shows that the past
need not be prologue for the future.  It also shows that a well-managed regime of fiscal control
can help begin the process for future recovery.  Other cities and regions are at different points in
this journey.  Puerto Rico, for example, which has been in recession for many years and which
defaulted  on  its  debt  obligations  earlier  this  year,  is  at  a  particularly  critical  juncture.    On  the
positive  side,  the  fact  that  Congress  has  enacted  legislation,  the  Puerto  Rico  Oversight,
Management  and  Economic  Stability  Act,  or  PROMESA,  does  provide  a  way  forward.    The
prospect  for  good  fiscal  stewardship  has  improved  and  this  is  an  essential  first  step  in  the
Island’s recovery.  As I have noted elsewhere, there are significant opportunities for action that
can leverage the Island’s strengths to foster economic growth.  These include its bilingual adult
population, an open economy occupying a central position in the Caribbean, wide experience as
host to international corporations and close economic ties to the U.S. mainland.  However, much
as New York City took time to recover, so too will it take time for Puerto Rico to recover from its
crisis of the last decade.
The future of Puerto Rico is yet to be determined.  However, the experience of New York City
suggests that a turnaround is possible even when underlying conditions appear dire.  New York
City is a compelling example of what is possible when you leverage your citizens’ ingenuity and
capacity  for  reinvention.    It  shows  what  can  be  achieved  with  the  appropriate  discipline  and
effort. 
Thank you for your kind attention.
1
2
Jason Bram, Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing these remarks.
Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The
Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 4,
2014.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
