  
 
Norman T L Chan: China’s reform and liberalisation – the positioning and 
future of Hong Kong 
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at a 
roundtable,  organized  by  Pacific  Pension  &  Investment  Institute,  Hong  Kong,  27  October 
2016. 
 Mr Lionel Johnson, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning to all of you! 
1. 
I  would  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  of  you  and  to  express  my  sincere 
thanks to Pacific Pension & Investment Institute for inviting me to speak at today’s 
Roundtable. 
What I will do today is to talk about the role that Hong Kong plays in China’s reform 
and opening up, which has led to the miraculous accomplishment of the growth 
story of China over the last three to four decades. 
I  am  sure  that  you  are  familiar  with  China’s  growth  story.  However,  I  still  think  it 
useful if I try to recap on what has happened. In 1980, the Chinese economy was a 
mere US$200 billion. Now, it is the second largest economy in the world with a size 
of close to US$11 trillion in 2015. The IMF’s forecast is that China’s GDP will further 
expand to US$16 trillion by 2020. During the 35-year period from 1980, China has 
managed to lift 700 million people who earned less than US$1 a day out of poverty 
and  transformed  itself  into  a  nation  with  a  per  capita  GDP  of  around  US$8,000 
lately.  Much of China’s outstanding economic and social accomplishments can be 
attributed  to  its  bold  and  unprecedented  reform  strategies,  particularly  in  moving 
towards  a  model  which  allows  the  private  sector  and  foreign  capital  to  play  an 
increasingly important role in, using the words of Deng Xiaoping, a “market-based 
economy with socialist characteristics”. The reform and opening programme is still 
continuing. 
Put it in another way, China’s growth story at the initial stages was about opening up 
China to the outside world. This makes sense because when the reform first started 
in  the  1980s  there  was  serious  shortage  of  necessary  capital  and  technology  to 
develop  its  industrial  base.  So  a  major  pillar  of  the  reform  strategy  has  been  to 
attract foreign direct investments (FDIs) into China. 
As  a  result,  China’s  FDIs  has  grown  phenomenally  over  the  past  three  decades, 
reaching US$136 billion in 2015, making it the second largest destination of FDIs in 
the world, only next to the USA. 
In this context, it is important to note that, Hong Kong has always been the largest 
source of FDI into China, accounting on average for around 50–60% ever since the 
FDI data became available in 1986. This means that both local as well as foreign 
enterprises  have  been  using  Hong  Kong  as  the  main  gateway  for  venturing  into 
Mainland China to help turn China into the factory of the world. This is not surprising 
at  all  if  one  understands  the  fact  that  Hong  Kong,  which  has  created  and 
accumulated  enormous  amount  of  capital  and  wealth  in  the  past  few  decades, 
enjoys unique advantages in making it a lot easier for companies wishing to tap into 
the rapidly growing Chinese market, not only in terms of production and supplies but 
also in terms of a huge and rapidly expanding consumer market. 
About 10 years ago, China has entered into a new phase in its growth story. This 
new phase came about because, over the years, China has gradually developed its 
own  technology  and  accumulated  surplus  capital  which  could  be  usefully  and 
profitably  deployed  in  the  overseas  markets.  China’s  overseas  direct  investments 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
2 
  (ODIs)  grew  from  virtually  nothing  in  2005  to  over  US$146 billion  in  2015,  which 
actually  surpassed  the  amount  of  FDIs  that  went  into  China  in  the  same  year. 
Looking  ahead,  as  China  will  continue  to  gain  technical  and  financial  know-how, 
China’s “reaching out” programme has now become an integral part of the growth 
strategy of China. There are now 110 Chinese companies on the 2016 Fortune 500 
list, 13 of which made their debut this year. Three of the top five companies are from 
China. Only the US has more companies on the list than China. It is only natural to 
expect that more and more major Chinese enterprises will reach out and become 
truly global companies in the next 10 to 20 years. I believe this trend of “going out” 
will  definitely  intensify  as  China  pushes  forward  its  latest  Belt  and  Road  (B&R) 
Initiative. 
Again, in China’s reaching out efforts, Hong Kong has consistently been the largest 
destination of China’s ODIs, taking up around 50–60% of Mainland’s total flow over 
the past decade, just like the case for FDIs. Behind these striking statistics lies the 
important  fact  that  most  Chinese  companies  prefer  to  use  Hong  Kong  as  the 
springboard for reaching out to the overseas markets. In theory, a Chinese company 
wishing  to  invest  overseas  could  go  direct  to  the  country  in  which  the  investment 
project  is  located.  In  fact,  many  Chinese  companies  did  just  that  in  the  earlier 
phases of reaching out. However, more and more Chinese companies have found it 
easier and more convenient to reach out to the rest of the world through Hong Kong. 
This  is  because  Hong  Kong  offers  a  number  of  important  advantages  for  these 
Chinese companies, including the ease of obtaining a wide spectrum of finance at 
different  stages  of  the  overseas  investments,  the  availability  of  a  large  pool  of 
bilingual  talents  and  a  cluster  of  highly  qualified  legal,  accounting  and  related 
professional  support  services  firms. With  the  proximity  to  the  Mainland  and  under 
the  One  Country,  Two  Systems  arrangements,  Hong  Kong’s  unique  advantages 
have helped attract many Mainland corporates to Hong Kong in their ODI ventures. 
What  would  be  of  greater  relevance  and  interest  to  today’s  audience  who  are 
institutional  investors  is  the  fact  that  the  Chinese  financial  markets  have  been 
growing very rapidly in the last two decades. The sum of China’s stock and bond 
markets  capitalisation  has  risen  to  a  size  of  US$16 trillion  last  year,  equivalent  to 
around 140% of China’s GDP. But comparing this ratio to the developed countries 
and some more mature emerging market economies, China’s financial markets still 
have  much  room  to  grow  alongside  the  opening  and  liberalisation  of  its  capital 
account. 
So how has Hong Kong been contributing to China’s financial market reforms and 
development?  First,  Hong  Kong  is  the  most  important  equity  fund  raising  centre 
outside of the Mainland for the Chinese corporates. In the past 25 years, there have 
been 951 Mainland corporates listed in Hong Kong, raising a total of US$300 billion 
in  IPOs  and  US$347 billion  in  secondary  offerings.  As  a  result,  Hong  Kong  has 
consistently attained the world’s top rankings as an equity fund raising centre over 
the last 15 years or so. 
As you know, a company seeking listing in Hong Kong will need to meet our usual 
high  governance,  accounting  and  disclosure  requirements,  which  are  fully  in  line 
with the international standards. So for a Mainland company to succeed in an IPO 
listing in Hong Kong, it is not just foreign capital that it wishes to attract. Listing in 
Hong  Kong  also  helps  impose  stringent  external  discipline  for  these  Mainland 
companies to revamp their corporate governance, management and risk culture. 
The  upgrading  of  corporate  governance  standards  was  particularly  evident  at  the 
height of China’s banking sector reform, when Hong Kong’s capital market helped 
the major Chinese state-owned banks to turn around and raise sizable funds from 
international investors through the Hong Kong stock market in the mid-2000s. You 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
 may  recall  that  it  was  a  period  in  which  the  Mainland’s  banking  and  financial 
systems went through some serious challenges, while the Chinese A-share IPO was 
suspended  between  2005  to  2006  due  to  the  launch  of  the  non-tradable  share 
reform. 
Again, Hong Kong was fortunate to have played a pivotal role at the critical stage of 
China’s banking sector reform. These major Chinese banks made very good use of 
the  Hong  Kong  market  in  their  IPOs,  a  point  that  can  be  illustrated  by  the  much 
larger  amounts  of  capital  raised  through  H-share  IPO  in  the  Hong  Kong  stock 
market compared with that raised through A-share market on the Mainland. 
I  am  sure  you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  internationalisation  of  renminbi  (RMB), 
which  began  in  2009,  is  another  crucial  strategy  of  the  reform  and  opening  up  of 
China. RMB internationalisation has made very significant progress in the last seven 
years,  with  RMB  becoming the fifth  largest global  payment  currency,  according to 
the latest figures from SWIFT, behind USD, EUR, GBP and JPY. Last year, more 
than 20% of China’s external trade was denominated and settled in RMB, compared 
to almost zero in 2009. As from 1 October this year, RMB has become one of the 
currencies of IMF’s Special Drawing Right basket. As Mainland corporates continue 
to  reach  out  and  expand  their  trade  and  investment  in  the  B&R  region  and 
elsewhere,  there  will  undoubtedly  be  wider  use  and  acceptance  of  RMB  as  a 
currency for trade, financing, payment and store of value. 
In the context of RMB internationalisation, Hong Kong is the global hub for offshore 
RMB businesses. Hong Kong has the largest RMB liquidity pool outside Mainland 
China totalling around RMB1 trillion in 2015, and RMB trade settlement handled by 
banks  in  Hong  Kong  amounted  to  RMB6.8 trillion  in  2015.  Hong  Kong  is  also  the 
largest  RMB  financing  centre  outside  Mainland  China,  with  the  largest  RMB  dim-
sum bond and loan markets. The average daily turnover of our RMB RTGS system 
was around RMB1 trillion in 2015. According to SWIFT, Hong Kong has about 70% 
of  the  global  RMB  payments.  The  average  daily  turnover  of  Hong  Kong’s  RMB 
foreign exchange market reached US$77 billion in April 2016, having expanded by 
over 50% from three years ago, according to the latest BIS Triennial Survey. Lastly, 
the CNH Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rate fixing (CNH HIBOR fixing) launched in 
2013, has become a significant piece of financial infrastructure for the offshore RMB 
market,  providing  a  benchmark  for  a  variety  of  RMB  interest  rate  instruments, 
thereby helping foster the development of the RMB offshore market. 
The  HKMA  also  designated  two  years  ago  seven  banks  as  Primary  Liquidity 
Providers (PLPs) for offshore RMB market in Hong Kong (i.e. CNH market). These 
PLPs  are  expected  to  expand  their  market-making  activities  in  Hong  Kong  for 
various  CNH  instruments,  and  make  good  use  of  the  Hong  Kong  platform  in 
promoting  their  global  offshore  RMB  business.  In  return,  the  HKMA  provides  a 
dedicated repo facility of RMB2 billion to each of the PLPs so as to facilitate more 
efficient liquidity management when they carry out more market-making and related 
activities in the CNH market. Having reviewed the operation of the PLP regime in 
the past two years, we are of the view that it has proved to be a useful arrangement 
to promote market development and help smooth market volatility when there is a 
sudden  surge  in the  demand for  RMB  liquidity  in  the  offshore market. The  HKMA 
has therefore decided to expand the PLP regime and to enhance the transparency 
of CNH market liquidity by disclosing the usage of the liquidity facilities offered by 
the HKMA. Further details will be announced later today. 
Ladies and gentlemen, Hong Kong has all along played a crucial and irreplaceable 
role  to  intermediate  trade,  direct  investments,  and  portfolio  flows  into  and  out  of 
China. Putting it simply, Hong Kong serves as a bridge linking Mainland China with 
the rest of the world. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
 For the global institutional investors and asset managers like you, there has been 
gradual and incremental opening up of the Mainland capital markets. You can now 
access the Mainland markets, initially through the QFII and then RQFII schemes, as 
well as the liberalisation of China’s interbank bond market. In this connection, it is 
useful  to  note  that  the  majority  of  asset  managers  with  QFII  quotas  have  set  up 
offices  in  Hong  Kong  as  their  platforms  for  managing  their  investments  in  the 
Mainland markets. 
In addition, the launch of Shanghai-Hong Kong Stock Connect in November 2014 
and the upcoming Shenzhen-Hong Kong Stock Connect by the end of this year has 
opened  up  a  major  corridor  for  global  investors  to  access  the  A-share  markets 
through  the  platform  in  Hong  Kong.  I  am  sure  Charles  Li,  Chief  Executive  of  the 
Hong Kong Stock Exchange, will tell  you more about the Stock Connect later this 
morning. 
Today, over 60 out of the top 100 global money managers have a presence in Hong 
Kong. Some of the most prominent asset owners have also chosen Hong Kong as 
their base to conduct China and pan-Asia  investments. These include the likes of 
Canadian Pension Plan Investment Board, Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan, China 
Investment  Corporation,  Church  Pension  Fund  and  the  list  goes  on.  The  growing 
community of asset owners should continue to draw more asset managers to Hong 
Kong, creating a virtuous cycle in our asset management eco-system. 
It  is  our  firm  belief  that  the  B&R  Initiative  would  be  a  key  component  in  the  next 
phase  of  China’s  ODI  story. With  this  in  mind,  the  HKMA  has  recently  set  up  the 
Infrastructure Financing Facilitation Office (IFFO). IFFO aims to provide a platform 
for key industry stakeholders to exchange information and share experience, and to 
make  better  use  of  Hong  Kong  in  servicing  the  growing  infrastructure  investment 
and financing needs in the region. If you are interested in the work and activities of 
IFFO, please visit the HKMA website for more details. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by making this final point about the China 
growth  story.  As  institutional  investors  who  manage  huge  amounts  of  money  for 
your clients, you have to take a view on whether or not the China growth story is a 
real and credible story and, if so, whether or not you want to be part of this growth 
story by investing in it. If you subscribe to the China growth story, then there comes 
the question of how best to invest in the Chinese markets. Any investments, as we 
all know, entail not just opportunities but also risks. It is absolutely crucial you pick 
the right place and platform for you to access the  Mainland financial markets and 
manage the associated risks prudently. It is an important choice because you wish 
to be using a platform that offers the best hard as well as soft infrastructure for good 
investments to be made on a day to day basis. I hope that you, just like many of 
your  peers,  will  agree  with  me  that  the  optimal  place  and  platform  for  managing 
financial and portfolio flows into and out of China is Hong Kong. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
