Ong Chong Tee: Financial integration – a collective effort towards
efficient and resilient markets
Speech  by  Mr  Ong  Chong  Tee,  Deputy  Managing  Director  (Financial  Supervision)  of  the
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Launch Event for EU-Asia -Pacific Forum on Financial
Regulation, Singapore, 14 October 2016.
 Mr  Olivier  Guersent,  Director  General  for  Financial  Stability,  Financial  Services  and  Capital
Markets Union (European Commission)
Dr Michael Pulch, EU Ambassador to Singapore,
Mr Ashley Alder, Chair of the IOSCO Board and Chief Executive of Hong Kong SFC, 
Mr Ryozo Himino, APRC Chairman and Vice-Minister of International Affairs, Japan FSA, 
Mr Paul Andrews, IOSCO Secretary General, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
On behalf of all my colleagues at the MAS, let me extend a warm welcome to everyone at this
launch event of the EU - Asia- Pacific Forum on Financial Regulation.
It  is  a  privilege  and  honour  for  the  MAS  to  host  this  inaugural  forum  on  financial  regulation
between  the  EU  authorities  and  members  of  the  IOSCO  Asia-Pacific  Regional  Committee
(APRC). This launch event will no doubt set the stage for the in-depth closed-door discussions to
follow over the course of today.  
The impetus for this forum is a recognition that the financial markets of Europe and Asia are
increasingly  inter-connected.  One  measure,  for  example,  is  the  total  portfolio  assets  held  by
investors from the largest five EU economies , in the Asia and Pacific region . This has grown
from  around  US$240  billion  in  December  2001  to  over  US$820  billion  in  December  2015
(according to IMF statistics). And this growth has been positive each year except for a decline
during the last global financial crisis. In the same period, total portfolio investment assets held by
investors from the Asia and Pacific region in these same European markets have grown from
3
US$420 billion to over US$930 billion.
1
2
Therefore, developments in each of our jurisdiction and region can have a significant spill-over
impact on the other. Financial regulators form one important stakeholder group and platforms for
dialogue  and  sharing  such  as  in  this  forum  will  be  helpful  in  promoting  greater  mutual
understanding and cooperation.
Importance of regulatory cooperation
I am sure that everyone in this room will agree on the importance of regulatory exchanges and
co-operation.
Asia-Pacific jurisdictions including Singapore play host to many European financial institutions
which  are  active  and  significant  participants  in  our  respective  financial  markets.  Such  cross-
border and cross-region participation have benefitted both regions.
For example, the recognition of LCH.Clearnet and the Singapore Exchange Derivatives Clearing
by  MAS  and  EU  authorities,  respectively,  provide  local  market  participants  and  European
Financial  Institutions  a  choice  of  where  to  clear  their  transactions.  More  importantly,  the
recognition  will  allow  market  participants  to  comply  with  their  respective  jurisdiction’s  central
clearing  requirements  when  they  are  effected,  thus  avoiding  duplicating  or  conflicting
requirements.  Beyond  clearing,  MAS  also  recognises  Europe-based  exchanges  such  as  ICE
Futures,  London  Metal  Exchange,  and  Eurex  Deutschland,  which  allows  financial  institutions,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
traders, and finance and treasury centres based in Singapore to have access to a wide range of
risk management instruments. 
With  this  experience,  MAS  has  fine-tuned  our  approach  to  the  recognition  and  regulation  of
overseas players, including European exchanges and clearing houses, in our markets. In setting
our standards and the methodology to determine equivalence, we have aligned ourselves with
international standards such as Principles of Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI).  We have
also clarified the factors that we will take into consideration in determining whether an overseas
player  has  “substantial  and  reasonably  foreseeable  effect  in  Singapore”  and  hence  requires
4
recognition by the MAS . 
However, beyond just standards and rules, regulatory cooperation can promote appreciation for
each other’s regulatory framework, and to lay the foundation for an outcomes-based approach in
equivalence assessments.
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  this  has  been  the  spirit  guiding  the  interaction  among  regulators,
including with our European colleagues.  For instance, in, 2014, the EC recognised the central
counterparty  (CCP)  regulatory  regimes  of  several Asia-Pacific  jurisdictions  – Australia,  Hong
Kong,  Japan,  Singapore  and  Korea  -  as  equivalent  on  the  basis  of  an  “outcomes  based
approach”. This was also seen in September 2016 with the positive opinion issued by ESMA on
the grant of the AIFMD passport to Singapore and other Asia-Pacific jurisdictions.
I am confident that this constructive engagement in which regulators across our regional blocs
have worked together will continue in other equivalence assessments, such as in the areas of
financial benchmarks and organised markets or trading platforms. As we have learnt from past
experience, greater clarity in equivalence assessments, including in relation to timing, can help
provide  greater  certainty  and  thereby  support  the  continued  participation  of  European  market
participants in overseas markets and vice versa.
International standards and peer assessments as basis for equivalence assessment
Allow  me  to  highlight  one  area  where  international  standards  and  peer  assessments  have
allowed a good basis for equivalence assessment – for financial market infrastructure (FMI).
Market  functioning,  and  therefore  financial  stability,  is  dependent  on  the  continuity  and  orderly
operation of services provided by these infrastructures. The multilateral nature of FMIs also mean
that their services are often cross-border and accessed by a wide range of market participants.
Since the development of the PFMI by IOSCO and the BIS Committee for Payments and Market
Infrastructures (CPMI), these standards have been used by many regulators including Singapore
as a key basis for comparability assessments. CPMI-IOSCO has also been conducting Level 2
assessments of jurisdictions’ implementation of the PFMI. Assessments of the EU, Japan, US
and Australia are complete, and assessments of Singapore and Hong Kong are under way. Such
peer  assessments  against  international  standards  will  help  to  promote  greater  understanding
and alignment amongst various jurisdictions’ frameworks.
Peer assessments have also helped to identify and close gaps at the entity level. For instance,
the  recent  Level  3  assessment  by  CPMI-IOSCO  on  the  implementation  of  the  PFMI   by  ten
CCPs  (including  SGX-DC)  helped  to  identify  gaps  and  shortcomings  which  CPMI-IOSCO
expects to be addressed by the CCPs and their respective regulators by the end of the year.  As
outstanding issues are addressed and the progress tracked, regulators should also have greater
confidence in undertaking their equivalence assessments of CCPs that their domestic market
participants can access. This can then provide greater certainty to global market participants.
5
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Improving market access for CCPs
Singapore,  as  with  other  jurisdictions,  will  be  commencing  our  clearing  mandate  next  year
thereby  enhancing  the  role  of  CCPs  as  a  risk  mitigating  tool.  However,  a  clearing  mandate
cannot  be  effectively  implemented  if  access  to  CCP  remains  an  issue  for  counterparties,
particularly smaller players.  We share similar concerns to those that have been expressed by
ESMA.
In this regard, it is noteworthy that ESMA has looked into possible ways to improve CCP access
and has, for example, proposed indirect clearing arrangements which strikes a balance between
having an appropriate level of indirect client protection and counterparty risk. I hope today’s forum
will allow MAS and other regulators to learn from ESMA’s insights.
To enable a wider range of market participants – including those based outside Singapore -  to
have direct access to CCPs in Singapore, MAS will allow our CCPs to introduce self-clearing
and remote clearing memberships.  This benefits not only the participants but the CCP and the
system as a whole; with a larger and more diversified pool of participants, the impact on the CCP
due to a default of any single particular participant would be reduced.
Self-clearing  can  also  widen  CCP  access  on  cost-effective  terms  and  allow  proprietary
derivatives  trading  firms,  such  as  buy-side  players,  to  join  CCPs  as  members  and  thereby
reduce  their  counterparty  and  fellow  customer  risks.  CCPs  will  have  the  flexibility  to  design
suitable self-clearing models, taking into account the risks and needs of self-clearing members.
We have seen recent innovations by Eurex and CME to allow certain market participants which
are not allowed to take part in the CCP risk mutualisation as a result of their mandates, to self-
clear on the CCP.
Remote  clearing  will  allow  offshore  participants,  which  do  not  currently  have  a  presence  in
Singapore, to join our CCPs, thus bringing about new, additional liquidity to local markets. The
increased  breadth  and  depth  of  the  markets  in  turn  benefits  onshore  members  which  will
continue to be key players in our domestic markets.  At the same time, such memberships allow
offshore firms to gain familiarity with the local market and to deepen their participation.
There  are  some  understandable  concerns  if  remote  or  self-clearing  can  undermine  financial
stability in domestic markets. In Singapore, our regulatory standards and expectations will not
change.  We will only allow CCPs to admit self-clearing or remote clearing members if they have
put  in  place  adequate  admission,  ongoing  monitoring  and  risk  management  frameworks. 
Beyond equivalence assessments, we will consider the formation of supervisory colleges for our
CCPs should they be deemed as internationally active.
Putting recovery and resolution plans in place
Allow me to share a final set of remarks on recovery and resolution plans. Even as we continue
to strengthen the resilience and accessibility of CCPs, we must continue our efforts to ensure
that recovery and resolution plans for CCPs are in place.  There have been greater focus and
thought given to arrangements to deal with default risks but it should also be recognised that
other risks such as custody and investment risks can also pose a threat to a CCP's viability.
Hence, in line with the CPMI-IOSCO report on Recovery of Financial Market Infrastructures, MAS
expects and will place priority to ensure our CCPs have clear arrangements to enable custody
and  investment  losses  to  be  allocated  in  a  way  which  allows  CCPs  to  be  solvent  and  can
continue to provide its critical services.  At the same time, there must be appropriate governance
arrangements and incentive structures to promote prudent risk management on the part of the
CCP.  Such arrangements can include providing transparency to member firms, having “Skin-In-
The-Game”  (SITG)  contributions  from  the  CCP,  and  putting  in  place  oversight  structures  to
oversee such safeguards.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
  
It has been said that regulators are pessimists in our DNA and always inclined to worry about
things going wrong – and certainly, we cannot ignore the possibility of the failure of key FMIs no
matter how remote, and this may occur in FMIs overseas. I started my speech this morning,
noting the increasing connectedness between markets. This is true in the ‘life’ of a CCP - and
can be true in its ‘death’ too. The failure of an internationally active CCP, that provides critical
services in multiple jurisdictions, will have significant cross-border impact. When a CCP fails, its
members are inevitably affected. Such members are likely to also have relationships with other
financial institutions, or may trade and clear on other trading venues and CCPs. Through these
network of interdependencies, the default of a CCP can trigger destabilising effects not only in
the home market it serves directly, but outside of it.
It is therefore important for authorities of jurisdictions that may be affected by a CCP’s failure to
participate  in  that  CCP’s  resolution  planning.  Similar  to  the  establishment  of  Supervisory
Colleges  to  support  ongoing  supervisory  co-operation,  setting  up  Crisis  Management  Groups
(CMG) for CCPs will allow the cross-border impact to be considered in resolution planning. In a
failure situation, when resolution actions are time-sensitive, it may be necessary to limit the size
of a CMG to enable efficient and effective discussions. But in normal times, resolution planning
can  benefit  from  a  broader  participation  of  relevant  authorities.    Such  inclusive,  ongoing
cooperation  and  information  sharing  builds  trust  and  understanding.    It  will  also  enhance  the
effectiveness  of  resolution  implementation  by  pre-empting  host  regulators  from  taking  actions
that may be incompatible with the home regulator’s resolution actions, due to a lack of clarity or
awareness over the home regulator’s intended actions. 
Conclusion
In conclusion, the issues confronting regulators today are wide ranging. This event is an excellent
showcase of how regulators can come together to share our experiences and to keep each other
apprised  of  developments  in  our  respective  regions.  For  instance,  Europe’s  Capital  Markets
Union project is an exciting development which we look forward to learning more about from our
European colleagues. With various market integration initiatives also underway in Asia, there is
room for us to exchange views and to learn from each other.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
France, Germany, Italy, Spain, UK.
Australia, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, New Zealand, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, and
Thailand.
Data source: IMF.
MAS’  Guidelines  on  the  Regulation  of  Clearing  Facilities,  revised  ,  set  out  the  circumstances  under  which
overseas clearing houses are required to be regulated in Singapore, and how we approach the regulation of
such entities.
In relation to financial risk management and recovery practices.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
