Amando Tetangco: 2016 outstanding microentrepreneurs – leading
the way to success
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the 14th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards (CMA), Manila, 6
December 2016.
 It is always a pleasure to be in the company of microentrepreneurs and fellow advocates of the
development of the microfinance industry in our country. 
I look at this annual event as a gift — an early Christmas gift. The finalists and the winners of the
Citi  Microentrepreneurship Awards  give  us  many  reasons  to  celebrate  —  their  courage,  their
creativity, their tenacity and their success.  In so many ways, you inspire confidence and serve
as role models among those who are just starting their own micro ventures.
And from you, the other stakeholders of the microfinance industry learn how we can help sustain
your  viability  and  growth  —  this  includes  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas,  the  Microfinance
Council of the Philippines, the banks including Citi, NGOs and other service providers.
In  the  process,  we  are  able  to  craft  better  policies  and  programs  to  keep  the  microfinance
industry  strong  and  healthy.  This  synergy  between  microentrepeneurs  and      other  industry
stakeholders has produced solid results. 
 On  our  part,  the  BSP,  since  2000,  has  been  nurturing  a  policy  environment  that  enables  the
delivery  of  commercially  sustainable  microfinance  in  the  banking  sector.  We  liberalized
regulations  by  reducing  barriers  and  providing  incentives  while  balancing  them  with  risk
management measures.
liability  arrangements,  cash 
In particular, we took into account the unique characteristics of microfinance such as the use of
group 
frequency
amortizations, and having less documentary requirements. Our policy is working as intended, as
banks get more involved in microfinance.
flow  based  and  character 
lending,  high 
Let me share some highlights. As of June 2016, there were 169 banks involved in microfinance –
most  of  them  rural  banks  in  the  countryside.  Combined,  they  have  more  than  1.6  million
microentrepreneur  clients  (from  391,000  in  2002)  with  aggregate  outstanding  loans  of  P11.7
billion, an almost five-fold increase from the levels in the early 2000s (P2.6 billion in 2002). The
banks have also empowered these clients to save, many of them for the first time.  At present,
these  microentrepreneurs  have  accumulated  savings  of  P  5.2  billion.    In  addition,  the
microfinance sector has become a market for microfinance products like micro-insurance and
micro-housing loans.
Because of the significant strides we have made together, the Philippines is considered a global
leader in microfinance. For five years in a row – between 2009 to 2013—  the global survey on
microfinance by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) ranked the Philippines as number one in
the world in terms of regulatory framework for microfinance.
EIU has since amended its survey to measure financial inclusion. In this survey we also rank as
a global leader:  in 2016, the EIU ranks Peru and Columbia as the top two, while the Philippines
and India are third in the world and first in Asia with the most conducive environment for financial
inclusion. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Improvements in overall access to financial services in the Philippines is also reflected in the
World Bank Findex, the global database for financial inclusion. It said formal account ownership
among Filipino adults increased from 26.6% in 2011 to 31.3% in 2014, with higher growth among
low income and less educated segments of our population.
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  Our  CMA  awardees  for  this  year  are  among  the  most  diverse  set  of
winners,  coming  from  a  range  of  industries.   But  they  have  two  things  in  common:    1)  they
demostrate how financial inclusion and microfinance can unlock opportunities and 2) they serve
as catalysts for the development of their ventures in various areas. 
1
Indeed,  our  efforts  to  build  an  inclusive  financial  system  result  in  better  access  to  financial
products  and  services 
to  seize  economic
opportunities. 
individuals  and  enterprises 
that  empower 
And we continue to develop enabling policies and regulations to reach unserved and underserved
markets. Last March, for instance, we issued BSP Circular 908 or the Agricultural Value Chain
Financing  Framework  which  aims  to  address  agricultural  credit  risks  by  shifting  the  focus  of
lending  from  individual  farmers  and  fisherfolks  to  the  whole  value  chain  .    This  will  benefit
microenterprises that are involved in value chains as it provides an opportunity to open up credit
2
to all the players in the chain.  
As designed, the AVCF Framework not only addresses financing constraints of small players but
also allows them to take on other challenges such as access to markets, business development,
and technology.  In other words, it is a response by the BSP to various issues that hamper the
potential for growth of MSMEs.  
Given  the  multiplicity  of  challenges,  a  collective  and  collaborative  approach  is  the  most  ideal
strategy  to  promote  inclusive  growth.  Closer  coordination  of  various  players  will  ensure  that
complementarities  and  synergies  are  identified  among  and  across  efforts  and  unnecessary
duplications minimized. 
On  a  broader  scale,  this  coordinated  approach  is  also  the  value  proposition  of  the  National
Strategy for Financial Inclusion (NSFI), the platform for public and private sector coordination to
ensure  synergy  of  efforts  for  a  systematic  approach  to  countrywide  development  through
financial inclusion. 
This is exactly the type of coordination that has made the CMA a success.  For 14 years now, we
—  the BSP, Citibank, Citi Foundation and Microfinance Council of the Philippines, Inc. (MCPI),
together  with  the  members  of  the  National  Selection  Committee  and  the  Country  teams,  and
other  microfinance  advocates  –  have  worked  together  to  constantly  improve  the  design  and
implementation of the program. Thank you everyone!
And most of all, we thank and congratulate our CMA winners and finalists, as well as the other 
microentrepreneurs across the country for your steadfast and dedicated efforts that make lives
better  not  only  for  your  families  but  also  for  your  communities.  Maraming  salamat  sa  inyong
lahat!
Mabuhay ang CMA Winners natin! 
Mabuhay ang Filipino microentrepreneurs!  
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
1
National winner Honie Navor (granite and tiles), Luzon winner Richiel Vargas (gloves, bonnets, and armbands),
Visayas winner Angelita Dagoc (guitars), Mindanao winner Marcelina Occena (herbal oils).  Others are special
awards for agri (organic fertilizer), community leadership (pastries and candies), green/sustainable business
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
(recycled rubber tires), and youth (tablea and coffee). 
2
A  value  chain  is  defined  as  a  set  of  actors,  suppliers,  processors,  and  aggregators  who  conduct  linked
sequence of value-adding activities involved in bringing a product from its raw material stage to the consumers.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
