 1ST ANNUAL GENAFRICA ASSET MANAGERS LIMITED CONFERENCE 
Leisure Lodge, Diani 
 NAVIGATING THROUGH TURBULENT TIMES 
Remarks by Dr. Patrick Njoroge 
Governor, Central Bank of Kenya 
December 2, 2016 
 As Prepared for Delivery 
 Good morning! I am indeed honored to speak before this distinguished forum.  
 I would like to express my thanks to the organizing committee of this conference for the 
invitation to participate in this session, and to deliver the keynote address. Let me also 
acknowledge the important role of the GenAfrica Asset Managers Limited in the economy 
particularly with respect to pension fund management and property investment advisory. 
Although your investment philosophy is to achieve investment returns without exposing 
clients’ assets to unnecessary risk, we have seen heightened uncertainties in the domestic 
and global economies which require closer monitoring. 
 The theme of this conference – Navigating through Turbulent Times – resonates with the 
challenges that most emerging and developing economies are going through as they seek 
to deliver on their mandates of ensuring macroeconomic stability and promoting growth. 
These economies, Kenya included, have become more integrated with the global 
economy, and are therefore exposed to external shocks largely through the linkages in the 
financial markets, foreign direct investment flows, as well as commodity prices. 
  
Growth in Sub-Saharan African (SSA) region has been held back in 2016 by the weak 
global economy, the decline in commodity prices, and uncertainty in the financial markets. 
In particular, SSA growth is projected to decelerate to 1.4 percent in 2016 from 3.4 
percent in 2015, and from an average of 5.3 percent in the period 2010–2014. This is the 
slowest growth for the region in twenty years. The outlook for the global economy is 
confounded by uncertainties around the impact of Brexit and political developments in the 
U.S. Given these risks, and in line with the theme of this forum, I would like to provide 
some highlights on the outlook for Kenya’s economy, and to outline some of the measures 
we are implementing to mitigate the risks.   
 Kenya’s economy has remained strong, growing at an average of 5.6 percent during the 
period 2011-2015, which was higher than the SSA average growth of 4.3 percent. The 
growth averaged 6.1 percent in the first half of 2016 and is projected at 6.0 percent in 
2016, up from 5.6 percent in 2015. This outlook is underpinned by continued public and 
private sector investment, strong agriculture performance, increased private consumption, 
and a stable macroeconomic environment.  
 Improved business conditions reflected in a stable macroeconomic environment, security, 
and infrastructure development have created a conducive and predictable environment for 
investment, and economic activity. According to the World Bank 2017 Doing Business 
Report, Kenya climbed 16 ranks to position 92 from 108 in 2016 and is the World’s third 
most reformed country. These developments reflect the ongoing reform effort by the 
Government to improve the business environment. 
 Prudent monetary policy has kept inflation within the government target range, and 
maintained stability in the foreign exchange market. Despite the significant pressures on 
food prices, inflation was 6.7 percent in November 2016 compared with 7.3 percent in 
November 2015, and 6.5 percent in October 2016. Non-food non-fuel inflation remains 
relatively stable. The CBK remains cognisant of the adverse effects of food and oil price 
shocks on inflation.  
 Kenya’s external position remains resilient despite the weaker global growth prospects.  
The current account deficit is expected to narrow to 5.5 percent of GDP in 2016 from 6.8 
percent in 2015 largely reflecting a decline in the value of imports of petroleum products 
and machinery and equipment. In addition, export earnings from tea, coffee, and 
horticulture have stabilised, while diaspora remittances and receipts from tourism have 
improved. These developments continue to support stability in the foreign exchange 
market despite the uncertainty in the global financial markets following the U.S. elections, 
and the potential for a resumption of tightening of U.S. monetary policy. The CBK foreign 
exchange reserves, which stand at 4.8 months of import cover, together with the 
Precautionary Arrangements with the IMF totalling USD 1.5 billion continue provide 
buffers against short term shocks.  
  The continued achievement of the CBK’s price stability objective has provided an 
adequate policy space for the economy to withstand external shocks. In addition, the 
floating exchange rate regime has allowed continued adjustment of the exchange rate to 
shifts in the demand for and supply of foreign exchange, while ensuring that reserves are 
only used to smoothen short term volatility in the exchange rate. 
 Nevertheless, risks to the economy remain largely with regard to the uncertainty 
surrounding future trade relationships with the U.K. and E.U. following Brexit, as well as 
uncertainty over the signing and subsequent ratification of the EU–EAC economic 
partnership agreements (EPAs). Kenya has significant trade links with Europe, as our 
main foreign exchange earners notably tea, horticulture and tourism exports are to the EU 
region. The government has already intensified efforts in the EAC region to renew the 
EPAs.  
 The diversification in Kenya’s export products and external markets is expected to 
moderate any adverse effects of external shocks on exports. A significant share of Kenya’s 
exports, about 40 percent, is exported to Africa, and these economies are not dominantly 
reliant on commodity exports. We are also closely monitoring the impact of the recent 
elections in the U.S. on trade given that the U.S. accounts for about 7 percent of Kenya’s 
total exports; largely through the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) 
framework.  
 Before I conclude, I would like to reiterate that the CBK is strengthening the banking 
sector to ensure greater transparency and stronger governance, and also to promote 
effective business models and innovation. As you may be aware, the financial sector 
continues to support the transformation of our economy, and to contribute to economic 
growth. The CBK is closely monitoring the impact of the recent legislation to cap bank 
interest rates on the economy, while implementing additional measures to lower the cost 
of credit on a sustainable basis. These measures include promoting innovation in the 
banking sector leveraging on ICT, and strengthening the Credit Reference Bureaus to 
provide for a credit scoring framework.  
 Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen, allow me once again to applaud GenAfrica Asset 
Managers Limited for organizing this forum. 
 Thank you! 
 