Dimitar  Bogov:  Seventy  years  of  central  banking  activities  in  the
Republic of Macedonia
Speech by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, at the
ceremony  of  marking  70  years  of  central  banking  activities  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  and
order award by his excellency Dr Gjorge Ivanov, President of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje,
19 October 2016.
 Honorable President of the Republic of Macedonia, Your Excellency,
Dr. Gjorge Ivanov, 
Distinguished Members of Parliament and representatives of the Government,
Honored Excellencies, 
Esteemed guests, ladies and gentlemen,
It is my pleasure and honor, on behalf of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia and on
my  own  behalf,  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  to  His  Excellency,  the  President  Dr.  Gjorge
Ivanov for the high recognition he has awarded to the National Bank tonight. I would also like to
thank all of you for being present at the celebration that marks this great anniversary.
It is a great honor to be awarded the “Order of Merits for Macedonia” by the head of state, in the
year when the National Bank celebrates 70 years of central banking activities in the Republic of
Macedonia. This award is a great recognition for the overall work of the National Bank. It is strong
confirmation  of  the  enormous  contribution  of  the  Bank  to  the  state  all  these  decades  –  as  a
central institution of the monetary system and a key pillar of macroeconomic stability.
These  70  years,  the  National  Bank  has  gone  through  various  stages  of  transformation  and
evolutionary development. It has operated in various systems of social and political order. Over
the years, it changed both its name and address. It has gradually acquired competencies and
built  its  functions.  With  the  constitution  of  independent  Macedonia  and  the  declaration  of
monetary autonomy, it established itself as an institution – carrier of the functions of a modern
central bank. Today, I can proudly say that the National Bank has grown into a modern and highly
professional  institution,  enjoying  credibility  domestically,  and  appreciated  and  recognized
internationally.
The National Bank has been maintaining price stability in the Macedonian economy for 20 years
through a stable exchange rate. The inflation rate in the past 20 years has averaged about 2%,
which  is  a  level  comparable  to  developed  countries,  placing  us  among  the  most  successful
economies in transition. The financial stability has been successfully maintained by promoting
sound,  safe  and  competitive  banking  sector  that  successfully  defy  risks  and  delivers  robust
credit growth. By achieving these two legally delegated objectives, the National Bank creates the
best  conditions  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  therewith,  serve  the  well-being  of  the
Macedonian society.
Yet, besides its primary activity, the National Bank has vigorously built capacities in other areas.
As  a  result,  today,  the  Bank  has  a  modern  foreign  reserves  management  system  in  place;
effective  risk-based  supervision;  plays  an  active  role  in  the  financial  market  development;
operational,  oversight  and  catalyst  role  of  the  payment  systems;  enjoys  a  strong  analytical
capacity which is continually being upgraded and carry out active scientific research. Eventually,
the way we decided to mark the anniversary confirms that the National Bank has always known
to go beyond its specialty and focus on broader social interests, such as educating the public.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, we have focused many of the activities of this anniversary to the financial education,
with the school children being our primary target group. We believe that our task, which is the
same for many central banks worldwide, is to educate the public and to disseminate financial
literacy as a general public good.
The National Bank has thus far repeatedly shown that it is serious, sound and mature institution
that knows how to deal with challenges, to respond to internal and external shocks, speculative
attacks  on  the  domestic  currency.  It  has  demonstrated  capacity  to  deliver  price  stability,
exchange rate stability and soundness of the banking sector in difficult times. It has justified the
confidence of citizens, which is the largest asset for a central bank.
Distinguished quests,
For me it is a great honor and privilege that the National Bank is honored with high award by His
Excellency, the President during my term as a governor. I feel the need at this ceremony to pay
tribute  to  all  deserving  persons  of  history,  who  left  inerasable  trace  in  the  development  and
building of the institution and in the establishment of the monetary system of the country. Here I
would mention Dr. Todor Mirovski, as the first director of the Regional Office of the National Bank
of  FNRY  of  the  then  National  Republic  of  Macedonia.  Then,  Mr.  Aleksandar  Bogoev  who
succeeded him in office shortly afterwards, and his successor, Mr. Trajan Ivanovski. I would also
pay  tribute  to  Mr.  Bozidar  Dare-Dzambaz  who  served  as  a  finance  minister  at  the  time  of
establishing  the  central  banking  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  To  Mr.  Vladimir  Polezhinoski  –
Polezhina as a Macedonian representative of the body that adopted the Decision that made the
dinar a Yugoslav currency. To academician Ksente Bogoev, who also served as a governor of
the National Bank of Yugoslavia. To the Governors of the National Bank in the Socialist Republic
of Macedonia, Mr. Stojan Kjosev, Andon Makraduli and Risto Filipovski. I would pay special tribute
to the first prime minister of independent Macedonia, academician Nikola Kljusev, who was one
of the main protagonists not only of the monetary independence, but also as a maker of other
decisions  of  that  time,  which  meant  completion  of  statehood.  There  is  also  the  academician
Petar Hristo Ilievski, known as the man who gave the name of the Macedonian denar. I also pay
tribute to my predecessors in office in the independent Macedonia, governors Borko Stanoevski,
Ljube Trpeski and Petar Goshev and to all management structures of the Bank, both current and
former, largely present here tonight. I extend special thanks and recognition to all generations of
employees  of  the  National  Bank,  that  dedicated  their  work  life  to  the  institution,  and  have
contributed  with  maximum  commitment  and  professionalism  to  the  continuous  growth  and
development of the National Bank. This order is your merit, but also a responsibility to continue
delivering great results. To continue investing in constant upgrade and to protect the reputation of
the institution, thus helping it to come closer to the family of the central banks of the Member
States of the European Union.
I am convinced that in the next period the National Bank will continue to build and develop itself,
and will successfully accomplish its mandate!
May we celebrate this great event for many years!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
