  Cyril Roux: Insurance pricing and supervision 
Opening remarks by Mr Cyril Roux, Deputy Governor (Financial Regulation) of the Central 
Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Committee  on  Finance,  Public  Expenditure  and  Reform,  and 
Taoiseach, Dublin, 6 October 2016. 
 I would like to thank the Oireachtas Finance Committee for the invitation to meet with you 
today. General insurance protects people from financial losses that would disrupt their lives 
or  businesses.  Having  the  appropriate  insurance  in  place,  which  pays  out  when  needed, 
enables consumers and businesses to conduct their business on a day-to-day basis. 
Before I delve into insurance pricing and supervision, let us remember that behind the cold 
numbers of motor insurance premiums and claim costs that show up in insurance accounts 
and in the bills we receive, lie the losses suffered in road accidents. On the one hand, rising 
insurance  premiums  affect  consumers  and  businesses.  On  the  other,  we  know  how 
devastating road traffic accidents can be on the lives of victims and their families. Reducing 
the  number,  severity  and  cost  of  road  accidents  is  a  worthwhile  policy  goal  in  itself.  As  a 
secondary  benefit,  it  would  provide  ground  for  sustainable  insurance  premiums.  Low 
premiums with high payouts cannot last and ultimately result in failure and further consumer 
detriment. It is against this backdrop that I would like to set out the role of the Central Bank in 
the area of insurance and then to give an overview of the motor insurance market in Ireland. I 
will also briefly cover areas of focus for the Central Bank, together with some thought on how 
to address the challenge of increasing costs. 
Role of the central bank 
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  has  two  specific  mandates  as  regards  insurance.  It  is 
responsible for the prudential supervision of insurance companies authorised in Ireland. It is 
also  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  conduct  of  business  in  Ireland,  also  referred  to  as 
consumer  protection.  We  describe  this  dual  role  and  how  we  discharge  it  in  our  Annual 
Performance Statement, which has been provided to the Committee. 
Prudential supervision seeks to ensure that insurance firms remain solvent. That is to say, 
that insurers are able to pay claims in full, as they fall due. Because claims are paid long 
after the premiums are set, this requires a forward looking assessment, with respect to the 
entire  business  of the  insurance  and reinsurance  company,  of  its  state of  solvency,  of  the 
establishment  of  technical  provisions,  of  its  assets  and  capital.  The  Central  Bank  is 
responsible  for  looking  after  the  solvency  of  insurance  companies  incorporated  in  Ireland, 
whether or not they belong to international groups. 
However,  when  they  do,  supervision  takes  place  in  an  international  college  of  supervisors 
chaired by the supervisory authority of the head of the group. Such is the case for all major 
domestic insurers such as AXA, Allianz and RSA, with FBD being the exception. 
Insurance Directives have prescribed for decades that prudential supervision of (re)insurance 
undertakings, including that of business they pursue through branches or under the freedom 
to  provide  services,  shall  be  the  sole  responsibility  of  the  home  member  state.  As  such, 
foreign insurance firms such as Aviva and AIG, Zenith and Enterprise, Qudos, and Setanta, 
are incorporated, authorised and subject to prudential supervision by foreign authorities, and 
not by the Central Bank. 
In the area of business conduct, the Central Bank has put in place a consumer protection 
framework  to  protect  the  interests  of  consumers  in  dealing  with  insurers.  The  consumer 
protection  framework  also  applies  to  European  insurers  selling  in  Ireland  on  a  freedom  of 
establishment  basis  or  a  freedom  of  services  basis.  The  consumer  protection  framework 
includes  codes  and  regulations  which  set  out  standards  for  firms  when  dealing  with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  consumers, including when selling insurance policies, handling claims and renewing policies 
as well as the provision of information and dealing with complaints. 
The Central Bank does not have a role in the setting of premiums, and like all supervisory 
authorities in the European Union, is explicitly prohibited by European law from doing so by 
Article 181 of the Solvency II Directive. This is a long-standing prohibition carrying over from 
Solvency  I.  In  carrying  out  its  dual  mandates  of  prudential  and  conduct  of  business 
supervision,  insurance  regulators  throughout  Europe,  including  the  Central  Bank,  cannot 
intervene on premium rates, but must rely on other instruments. 
This is because the European single market for insurance has been set up by EU legislators 
on the basis of free market principles. This is in keeping with the guiding spirit of the Treaty 
of Rome. The contention underpinning this institutional choice is that over the medium term, 
the  free  play  of  market  forces  brings  benefits  to  consumers  which  outweigh  their  costs. 
However,  it  also  means  that  the  volatility  of  prices  for  insurance  services  cannot  be 
constrained by the Central Bank. 
Ultimately,  insurance  rates  are  driven  by  the  money  coming  into  insurance  companies 
relative to the costs they subsequently experience, in a similar way to any other commercial 
concern.  But  year-to-year  insurance  rates  are  also  strongly  impacted  by  the  competitive 
environment faced by insurance firms. Prices are affected by the underwriting or insurance 
cycle which plays out over a number of years. 
Insurance firms may fail when poorly selecting risks or underpricing their policies, which is 
known as ‘underwriting risk’. This, together with limited shareholder support, is likely to have 
been the main driver of the failure of Setanta in Malta and Enterprise Insurance in Gibraltar, 
although only their local prudential supervisors are in a position to tell. The Central Bank has 
adopted  an  intrusive,  forward  looking  and  proactive  supervisory  approach,  including  in 
relation  to  underwriting  risk.  Our  supervision  is  conducted  through  a  combination  of 
approaches, including off-site activities and comprehensive on-site inspections. When we are 
not  satisfied  with  the  governance,  monitoring  and  management  of  risks,  including 
underwriting  risks,  we  issue  time-bound  requests  for  remedial  action.  Such  requests  can 
include  revised  business  and  capital  plans,  forms  of  contingent  capital  such  as  parental 
support and strengthened reinsurance cover. 
In  discharging  our  statutory  objective  in  Consumer  Protection  to  ensure  that,  in  regulating 
firms, the best interests of consumers are protected, the Central Bank has focused on: clarity 
of  price  disclosure  by  firms;  strong  suitability  requirements  to  make  sure  that  any  product 
sold is suitable for the consumer’s needs, and that any product recommended to a consumer 
from a range of products is the most suitable from the range available (having regard to the 
consumer’s individual circumstances and needs); and ensuring that consumers get relevant 
information sufficiently in advance to equip them to shop around. 
Motor insurance market 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  motor  insurance  market  and  the  way  it  operates.  The  Irish  motor 
insurance market is concentrated across 8 firms, which are mostly part of large international 
groups. There is also an active intermediary sector selling motor insurance on behalf of the 
insurers.  These  non-life  firms  sell  a  variety  of  property  and  casualty  insurance  policies  – 
there are no pure motor insurance companies among them. 
These  firms  receive  premiums  from  policyholders  and  investment  income  from  their 
investments, while they pay out claims to policyholders and injured third parties, commission 
to their distributors, expenses to their staff, interest and dividends to their capital providers, 
and premiums to their reinsurers. 
For non-life insurance companies in Ireland, the balance of costs and revenues has been off 
kilter for several years. Premiums and investment income have decreased while claim costs 
have  increased,  leading  to  sustained  losses.  Regulatory  returns  submitted  to  the  Central 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Bank  for  companies  subject  to  prudential  regulation  in  Ireland  for  Irish  motor  risk  shows 
combined underwriting losses of €684 million for the years 2013, 2014 and 2015. 
The returns submitted to the Central Bank by companies subject to prudential regulation in 
Ireland or operating as a branch show that the gross premium for Irish motor business was 
€1.26  billion  in  2015.  This  represents  a  reduction  of  25  per  cent  from  the  2005  gross 
premium.  On  the  other  hand  in  2015,  gross  claims  incurred  (which  represent  the  total  of 
claim payments and changes to reserves for the expected cost of settling outstanding claims) 
were €1.3 billion, which represents an increase of 42 per cent from 2005 with much of this 
increase arising since 2012. 
The  non-life  insurance  industry  has  also  been  significantly  impacted  by  the  prolonged  low 
interest rate environment. Non-life insurers balance their underwriting results with investment 
income, mostly interest income from investments in government and highly rated corporate 
bonds.  In  a  low  interest  rate  environment,  a  much  lower  investment  income  cannot 
compensate underwriting losses to nearly the same extent. 
The bulk of the insurance firms’ payouts are through claim costs. Injury claim costs account 
for the majority of motor claim costs and, due to the length of time it can take to settle these 
claims, the true or final cost for an insurer does not emerge for a number of years after they 
have  set  the  premium  and  sold  a  policy.  However,  there  are  a  number  of  changes  in  the 
claims  environment  in  recent  years  contributing  to  a  greater  overall  cost.  These  changes 
include an increase in claims frequency as a result of increased economic activity and miles 
travelled.  Average  claim  costs  are  also  increasing,  particularly  for  bodily  injury  claims 
because of a number of factors, including changes in court limits, the introduction of Periodic 
Payment Orders and the potential impact of lower discount rates. The Aspiro judgement is an 
additional factor of claim cost inflation. 
In  the  face  of  increasing  premium  rates,  the  consumer  protection  framework  provides  that 
consumers  must  be  given  at  least  15  working  days’  notice  prior  to  renewal  providing  an 
opportunity to choose an alternative provider. Based on external market research, it is clear 
that price is the main driver of consumer switching behaviour. 
Supervisory areas of focus 
Last  year  the  Central  Bank  conducted  a  bodily  injury  review  to  investigate  the  trends  in 
frequency  and  severity  of  these claims  and  the  quality  of firms’  approach  and  governance 
around  the  issue. We found  a  clear  if  disparate trend  towards  both greater frequency  and 
cost  of  bodily  injury  claims.  We  also  found  slower  settlement  rates,  uneven  data 
management quality,  and  instances  where  boards  exercised  less monitoring  and  oversight 
than required. This highlighted that some firms were lagging behind peers in taking the full 
measure  of  emerging  claims  in  their  technical  provisions  and  estimates  of  ultimate  claim 
costs. We issued recommendations to individual firms and made clear our expectation that 
up-to-date claims data inform reserving as appropriate. 
This year the Central Bank undertook a sample review of motor insurance underwriting and 
pricing  to  investigate  each  firm’s  governance  of  its  underwriting  and  pricing  methodology, 
assumptions and decision making. We found that there was a significant time lag between 
increasing claim costs being experienced and the revision of pricing assumptions. Some of 
this  was  due  to  firms  underestimating  the  extent  to  which  claim  cost  increases  were 
structural and not cyclical, and some was due to firms taking commercial decisions to delay 
increasing prices in order to hold market share in the face of some competitors pricing much 
lower than break-even. The delay in incorporating fully in premiums rates the current trends 
in  claims  experience  contributed  to  suppressed  premium  increases,  followed  by  a  large 
upswing in premiums. Had prices risen earlier and more gradually, some of the heavy losses 
firms have experienced here over the last few years, in particular those firms that engaged in 
very low pricing, would have been avoided, and consumers would have started to pay higher 
premiums earlier, albeit at a more gradual pace. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  In addition, given the patchy experience of foreign firms selling motor insurance into Ireland 
on a freedom of establishment or freedom of services basis, the Central Bank is engaging 
directly with the relevant home state regulators to ensure that they have a full understanding 
of the issues affecting the Irish market and to request they act accordingly. The Central Bank 
is strongly proactive in this regard. We provide our counterparts with clear information about 
claims  in  Ireland  and  remind  foreign  regulators  of  their  responsibilities  towards  Irish 
policyholders.  Indeed,  as  already  mentioned,  the  Solvency  II  directive  squarely  places  the 
sole  responsibility  of  financial  supervision  of  foreign  firms  on  foreign  regulators,  and 
prescribes that the home state regulator verifies for the entire business the state of solvency, 
its assets and its technical provisions. 
Working toward a solution 
As I mentioned at the outset, average premium rates over the cycle are driven by the overall 
claims  charge,  if  not  exclusively.  Policy  actions  that  would  result  in  a  reduced  level  and 
uncertainty  of  claims  would  contribute  to  reducing  the  rise  of  average  premium  levels  or 
might even reverse the trend. 
This Committee has heard the many strands that would contribute to that worthwhile goal. 
Let  me  start  with  comments  that  are  relevant  to  the  topic  but  lie  outside  the  remit  of  the 
financial supervisor. All actions that would reduce the number of road traffic accidents would 
be welcome. Typical among those are improved infrastructure, stringent enforcement of road 
safety rules, or continued enhancement of public awareness about the preventable causes of 
accidents. 
This Committee has heard as well the extent of fraudulent claims and uninsured driving that 
is  said  to  prevail.  Policy  actions  that  would  help  reduce  either  would  also  help  reduce  the 
claims charge that is ultimately to be borne by premiums. 
Finally, the Committee has heard about the role and effectiveness of the Injuries Board, and 
how it has contributed to speedy and fair settlements that avoid unnecessary legal costs. 
I would now stress that greater certainty and reduced volatility of the claims factors would 
benefit consumers and create a more stable reserving environment. Multiple decisions over 
the  last  three  years,  although  taken  for  valid  reasons,  have  had  an  opposite  side-effect. 
Since  insurance  companies  need  to  book  reserves  with  a  risk  margin,  the  greater  the 
uncertainty,  the  greater  the  claims  estimates.  I  can  only  welcome  the  publication  of  the 
revised Book of Quantum and hope it will steer very broadly compensation settlements and 
decisions in the future. 
All these policy actions would give a foundation for more sustainable insurance premiums. 
Because of the many strands of work involved, the Department of Finance is leading a multi-
departmental  ‘Insurance  Policy  Review’.  The  Central  Bank  contributes  to  this  work  and 
shares what information it has at an aggregate level to assist the Government to decide on 
next steps. 
Closing remarks 
The  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  focus  on  the  adequate  protection  of  policy  holders  and 
beneficiaries in accordance with its dual role of ensuring the solvency of Irish insurers and 
adherence to its consumer protection framework. 
The Central Bank recognises that the significant increases in the price of insurance have an 
impact on consumers, and is committed to working with this Committee, the Department of 
Finance  working  group  and  other  stakeholders  as  is  appropriate  to  the  mandate  of  the 
Central Bank. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
