  Secular stagnation and the policy response: any parallels in South Africa? 
An address by Mr Daniel Mminele,  
 Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the RMB / Morgan Stanley ‘Big Five’ Investor Conference  
 Cape Town 
27 September 2016 
 1.  Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning 
 It is a pleasure and an honour to address this year’s ‘Big Five’ Investor Conference, 
and  I  should  start  by  thanking our  hosts,  RMB  and  Morgan Stanley,  for  inviting  the 
South African Reserve Bank (SARB) to be part of the proceedings.  
 The topic which I have been asked to discuss today – that of secular stagnation and 
the type of policy response  required in such circumstances – is highly relevant, not 
just for advanced economies but also for an emerging country like South Africa.  
 For a while now, there has been little excitement about global economic prospects, 
the  story  essentially  being  one  of  a  continued  subdued  recovery  not  short  of 
downside  risks  in  an  environment  characterised  by  relatively  high  levels  of 
uncertainty and volatility. Global economic growth has generally been  soft since the 
Global  Financial  Crisis  and  has  consistently  fallen  short  of  consensus  expectations 
for a ‘return to trend’. This recurrent problem has led both public- and private-sector 
economists  to  search  for  explanations  to  this  apparent  medium-term  economic 
 1 
stagnation,  to  separate  its  cyclical  and  structural  drivers,  and  to  look  for  the  most 
appropriate  policy  responses.  As  you  are  well  aware,  what  exactly  constitutes  the 
‘new normal’ or the ‘new trend’ continues to be a subject of much debate. Concerns 
are also being raised that too much is being expected of monetary policy in dealing 
with  the  problem.  In  South  Africa,  too,  growth  has  slowed  by  more  than  was 
generally  expected  a  few  years  ago,  and  the  debate  about  appropriate  policy 
responses is equally ongoing.  
 I  shall  begin  my  remarks  today  with  some  general  observations  about  secular 
stagnation, followed by looking at the causes of slower growth in South Africa before 
addressing the role of monetary policy in terms  of appropriate responses; I will end 
with a brief outlook for monetary policy in South Africa. Many of you would have read 
the statement released less than a week ago after the conclusion of the most recent 
meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). 
  2.  The debate about secular stagnation 
Economic developments in advanced economies continue to challenge conventional 
economic wisdom. In the last five years, on average, economic growth in the United 
States (US) has posted moderate annual gains of 2,0 per cent, well short of the 3,2 
per  cent  average  posted  in  the  15  years  prior  to  the  2008/09  recession.  In  the 
eurozone  and  Japan,  economic  performance  has  been  even  more  disappointing. 
Furthermore,  while  employment  creation  has  been  dynamic  in  the  US  and  has 
improved in the eurozone (albeit to a lesser extent), productivity growth has lagged, 
falling  well  short  of  pre-recession  norms.  Increasingly,  economists  estimate  that  a 
large  part  of  this  productivity  and  economic  growth  slowdown  is  structural.  The 
Organization  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (OECD),  for  instance, 
estimates that potential GDP1 growth among its members will have slowed to 1,6 per 
cent  this  year  from  the  average  paces  of  2,0  per  cent  in  the  period  between  2001 
and 2010 and 2,8 per cent in the period from 1991 to 2000.  
                                                            
1 gross domestic product 
 2 
While  the  evidence  of  sustainably  slower  growth  is  there  for  everyone  to  see,  the 
drivers of that slowdown remain the object of intense debate. Some economists talk 
of  ‘secular  stagnation’,  which  incidentally  is  not  a  new  expression,  having  been 
coined  by  economist  Alvin  Hansen  in  the  1930s.  Former  US  Treasury  Secretary 
Larry  Summers  recently  summarised  ‘secular  stagnation’    as  a  situation  where  an 
imbalance occurs ‘resulting from an increasing propensity to save and a decreasing 
propensity  to  invest’,  the  result  being  that  ‘excessive  saving  acts  as  a  drag  on 
demand,  reducing  growth  and  inflation,  and  the  imbalance  between  savings  and 
investment pulls down real interest rates’.2   
 This  would  suggest  that  it  is  a  lack  of  demand  –  be  it  consumer  or  corporate 
investment  demand  –  that  causes  the  weakness  in  trend  growth  and  productivity. 
Whether this is a temporary consequence of a  ‘debt overhang’ (specifically the high 
degree of consumer and corporate leveraging up to the Global Financial Crisis) or a 
more permanent behavioural change remains open to debate.  
 Other  economists,  though,  argue  that  the  slowdown  in  productivity  is  of  a  more 
supply-driven  nature.  For  the  likes  of  Robert  Gordon,  the  ‘low-hanging  fruits’  of 
innovation have already been picked and we are now entering a  period of reduced 
technological progress, the consequence of which will be a structurally lower pace of 
total  factor  productivity.3  While  such  a  proposition  remains  controversial,  other 
economists  point  towards  a  lower-than-expected  diffusion  of  previous  technological 
gains  –  especially  from  firms  operating  at  the  ‘technological  frontier’  to  the  less 
productive ones – or to a decreasing rate of business start-ups as explanations for 
the trend slowdown in productivity.4 
 Whereas  the  causes  of  this  trend  growth  slowdown  remain  open  to  debate,  the 
consequences  for  monetary  policymakers  in  advanced  economies  have  been 
relatively  straightforward.  Faced  with  lower  potential  real  GDP  growth  and  with 
                                                           
2 “The age of secular stagnation: What it is and what to do about it”, Lawrence H. Summers, published 
in Foreign Affairs, 15 February 2016 
3 “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds”, Robert J. 
Gordon, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 18315, 2012 
4 See, for instance, “The Future of Productivity”, OECD, 2015 
 3 
difficulties in lifting inflation rates to what were historically regarded as low targets (to 
around  or slightly below 2 per cent), central banks have maintained looser monetary 
policies for longer than in previous cycles.  
 Equally,  they  have  scaled  down  their  estimate  of  the  ‘neutral’  real  interest  rate.  A 
couple of months ago, former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke highlighted 
how persistent undershoots of economic growth and inflation had led the US Federal 
Reserve to scale down its estimate of the long-term equilibrium Fed funds rate from 
4,25  per  cent  in  2012  to  only  3,0  per  cent,  a  level  which  the  FOMC  last  week 
trimmed  to  2,9  per  cent.5  Effectively,  central  banks  have  been  concerned  that  the 
monetary  policies  implemented  in  recent  years  –  because of  a  lower  neutral  rate  – 
may not have been as loose as required by economic circumstances. Furthermore, 
they  have  been  worried  that  lower  equilibrium  rates  could  limit  the  room  for  policy 
stimulus through conventional means in the event of a new negative shock hitting the 
advanced economies. 
  3.  The causes of South Africa’s slower growth 
To  what  extent  do  these  advanced  economy  developments  apply  to  South  Africa? 
Looking at the economic performance of the past few years, there is no denying that 
domestic  real  GDP  growth  has  slowed  and,  in  a  similar  fashion  to  developed 
economies,  it  has  also  consistently  fallen  short  of  forecasts  for  even  a  moderate 
recovery in the year or two ahead. From an average of 4,8 per cent in the five years 
prior  to  the  2008/09  recession,  GDP  growth  slowed  to  an  average  of  only  2,1  per 
cent in the period between 2010 and 2015 – and it is not expected to exceed 0,4 per 
cent in 2016, a rate which entails falling per capita income. A significant part of this 
slowdown is estimated to be structural. Consequently, the SARB has scaled down its 
estimate  of  potential  real  GDP  growth  to  1,4  per  cent  this  year from  more  than  2,0 
per  cent  five  years  ago  and  as  high  as  4,0  per  cent  prior  to  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis.  Average  worker  productivity  has  echoed  some  of  the  trends  of  advanced 
                                                           
5 “The Fed’s shifting perspective on the economy and its implications for monetary policy”, B. 
Bernanke, Brookings Institution, 8 August 2016 
 4 
economies,  slowing  from  an  average  of  2,6 per  cent  in  the  2000s  to  as  low  as  a 
negative 1,1 per cent year on year in the first quarter of this year. 
 However,  it  would  be  misleading  to  attribute  this  slowdown  in  South  African  trend 
growth and productivity to the same causes (identified or suspected) as in advanced 
economies.  True:  the  slowdown  in  global  growth  has  had  direct  implications  for 
South Africa, especially as growth in advanced economies has become less import-
intensive, limiting the room for relatively small, open emerging market economies to 
engineer export-led recoveries in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis. As of 
the  second  quarter  of  2016,  South  Africa’s  export  volumes  were  only  2,6  per  cent 
above their 2008 peak. Equally, the slump in commodity prices that  commenced in 
2011 has weighed on the value of South African shipments abroad and on corporate 
profits,  in  turn  undermining  employment  and  capital  spending,  especially  in  the 
mining sector. 
 Nevertheless, some of the explanations most commonly put forward to explain weak 
growth in advanced economies do not seem to apply to South Africa. For example, 
on the demand side, there is no evidence that the 2008/09 recession has ushered in 
a higher propensity among households to save a larger share of their income.  Over 
the past five years, the household saving ratio has stood, on average, at a negative 
1,6 per cent of disposable income,  slightly  lower than in the previous five years.  At 
the same time, from a supply-side point of view, South Africa is arguably distant from 
the ‘technological frontier’; even a slower rate of innovation in advanced economies 
should  therefore  not  preclude  faster  domestic  productivity  growth,  provided  that  a 
greater  share  of 
industrial  sectors  adopts  more  efficient  and  sophisticated 
technologies.  Indeed,  most  upper-middle-income  economies,  with  income-per-head 
levels broadly similar to South Africa’s, have experienced, on average, higher growth 
in GDP per capita in recent years. 
 Other  explanations  must  therefore  be  sought  for  the  domestic  economy’s  poor 
performance  in  recent  years.  A  structural  shortage  of  skills,  which  limits  the 
economy’s ability to properly utilise its labour supply, has long been recognised and 
may have worsened over time amid ongoing poor educational outcomes. In addition, 
 5 
infrastructure  constraints,  particularly  in  the  electricity  and  transportation  sectors, 
appear  to  have  weighed  on  investment  in  new  capacities,  as  they  limit  the  viability 
and  increase  the  logistics-related  costs  of  new  projects.  Fortunately,  progress  is 
being  made  with  addressing  the  particular  bottleneck  around  electricity  supply. 
Another  important  issue  has  been  policy  uncertainty  about  the  tax  and  regulatory 
environment, which probably undermined expansion, in particular in sectors such as 
mining. 
 Empirical  evidence  that  drivers  of  slower  economic  growth  are  different  in  South 
Africa from those in advanced economies may be found in the relative response of 
inflation. As I’ve mentioned earlier, inflation in the developed world has consistently 
fallen short of targets despite ample monetary stimulus, but it has remained elevated 
in South Africa. Admittedly, domestic demand is weak, which has helped to limit the 
pass-through  of  rand  depreciation,  in  recent  years,  to  final  inflation  readings. 
Nonetheless,  inflation  expectations  –  as  measured  by  the  Bureau  for  Economic 
Research  –  have  remained  stuck  at  around  the  upper  end  of  the  SARB’s  inflation 
target  range,  displaying  no  obvious  sensitivity  to  slowing  economic  growth  and 
contrasting with a declining trend observed in most advanced economies. 
  4.  The rationale for a different monetary policy response 
Let  me  now  come  to  the  issue  of  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  to  this 
new economic paradigm.  
 Because  South  Africa  has  suffered  a  trend  deceleration  in  growth  (as  did  the 
advanced  economies)  and  because  central  banks  in  the  latter  responded  with 
aggressive  stimulus,  some  people  have  been  asking  whether  the  SARB  might  not 
have been able to do more to support domestic activity. However, as I have already 
highlighted,  the  drivers  of  weaker  economic  growth  were  different  in  South  Africa, 
and many consequences differed too. One would therefore be mistaken in assuming 
that a  ‘one  size  fits all’  policy  response  would  also  be  appropriate  for  our  domestic 
situation. 
  6 
In the advanced economies, large-scale monetary easing and unconventional policy 
measures  at  first  aimed  to  restore  the  proper  functioning  in  money  and  asset 
markets, which was in jeopardy at the height of the Global Financial Crisis. At a later 
stage,  these  policies  strove  to  facilitate  the  healing  of  stretched  private-sector 
balance  sheets  while  ensuring  that  both  the  supply  of  and  the  demand  for  credit 
continued to expand. In many ways, the key challenge was to prevent a broad-based 
‘credit  crunch’  which  could  have  triggered  widespread  defaults,  exacerbated  the 
fragility of banks’ balance sheets, and threatened a debt-deflation spiral. 
 Such  concerns  were,  however,  far  more  muted  in  the  case  of  South  Africa.  While 
they  deteriorated  somewhat  around  the  time  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  market 
perceptions of domestic banks’ credit risk never escalated to levels that would have 
threatened  shortages  of  liquidity  in  the  interbank  market.  In  fact,  banks  remained 
adequately capitalised throughout the 2008/09 recession, and while the rates of non-
performing  loans  increased  significantly  as  economic  activity  contracted,  this  move 
was  later  reversed.  Private-sector  credit  continued  to  grow,  albeit  at  a  lesser  pace 
than  prior  to  the  recession,  but  with  a  notable  reorientation  of  new  lending  from 
mortgages towards other forms of (mostly unsecured) credit. 
 This  is  not  to  say,  however,  that  the  SARB  did  not  quickly  respond  to  the  rapidly 
changing economic conditions at the time. In fact, the central bank aggressively cut 
its repurchase rate from a pre-recession high of 12,00 per cent in December 2008 to 
7,00 per cent nine months later. Compared with the previous interest rate cycles of 
the past 20 years, this was an unusually large move over an unusually short period 
of  time.  Further  easing  followed  in  2010  and  2012,  bringing  the  policy  rate  to  5,00 
per  cent,  the  lowest  since  the  early  1970s.  Real  forward-looking  interest  rates, 
obtained  by  subtracting  broad-based  inflation  expectations  two  years  ahead  (as 
measured by the Bureau for Economic Research) from the nominal repurchase rate, 
remained in negative territory from mid-2009 to early 2015, indicative of a prolonged 
accommodative stance. 
 Many  economic  indicators  suggest  that  this  loosening  of  monetary  policy  helped 
economic agents to deal with the most severe consequences of the recession – and 
 7 
hence  limit  both  its  length  and  magnitude.  For  instance,  South  African  households 
were able to reduce their leverage ratio without any major cutbacks in consumption. 
(Household debt expressed as a share of disposable income fell from a peak of 87,8 
per cent in the first quarter of 2008 to 75,1 per cent in the second quarter of 2016.) In 
fact, over the past five years, private consumption has grown by an annual average 
of  2,6  per  cent,  significantly  exceeding  the  pace  of  real  GDP  growth.  At  the  same 
time, the rate of home repossessions has edged consistently lower following a post-
recession peak in 2011, and is now at very low levels. Insolvencies and liquidations 
have followed a similar path. 
 In other segments of the economy, though, monetary policy stimulus has had less of 
an impact, although evidence suggests that this was not due to an insufficiently low 
level of real interest rates. Of particular concern to the SARB has been the weakness 
in  private  fixed  investment,  which  has  declined,  as  a  share  of  GDP,  from  14,8  per 
cent in 2008 to 12,3 per cent in the second quarter of 2016. If it continues, weakness 
in  investment  risks  perpetuating  the  current  phase  of  slow  economic  growth  as  it 
results  in  slower  expansion  and  growing  obsolescence  of  the  capital  stock,  in  turn 
also  negatively  impacting  on  potential  growth.  However,  anecdotal  evidence  and 
surveys  suggest  that,  rather  than  the  level  of  borrowing  costs,  it  is  the  level  of 
uncertainties  about  future  demand,  the  weaker  price  of  commodities  as  well  as 
political  and  regulatory  uncertainty  that  are  responsible  for  such  weakness  in  fixed 
investment. 
  5.  Why the South African Reserve Bank needed to raise interest rates 
In early 2014, economic and market fundamentals came to a juncture that justified a 
tightening of the  SARB’s  monetary stance, lest inflation be allowed to rise to levels 
inconsistent  with  its  price  stability  mandate.  The  combination  of  weakening  GDP 
growth,  a  widening  current  account  deficit  (under  the  joint  effect  of  deteriorating 
terms  of  trade  and  the  limited  sensitivity  of  import  and  export  volumes  to  real 
exchange rate depreciation) as well as low real domestic interest rates complicated 
South  Africa’s  external  financing,  resulting  in  a  marked  depreciation  of  the  rand.  In 
fact,  the  rand  weakened  not  just  against  the  world’s  major  currencies  but  also 
 8 
against  ‘peer’  emerging  market  currencies  and  those  of  other  commodity-exporting 
countries,  suggesting  a  deterioration  of  international  investor  confidence  in  South 
Africa’s credit quality and macroeconomic fundamentals. 
 To  avoid  the  rapid  rand  depreciation  feeding  into  significantly  higher  inflation  and 
leading  to  an  unhooking  of  inflation  expectations  (which,  as  I’ve  mentioned  before, 
remained uncomfortably close to the top end of our target range), the SARB raised 
its repurchase rate by 200 basis points in six instalments between January 2014 and 
March  2016  to  the  current  7  per  cent.  I  must  stress,  however,  that  this  pace  of 
interest  rate  increases  has  been  gradual  compared  with  previous  phases  of  policy 
tightening, for instance those initiated in 1998, 2001 and 2006. In addition, while the 
rate  hikes  have  resulted  in  a  reduced  degree  of  monetary  stimulus,  it  is  difficult  to 
argue  that  they  have  taken  the  monetary  policy  stance  into  outright  restrictive 
territory:  at  around  1,0  per  cent,  the  forward-looking  real  interest  rate  remains  low 
compared  with  the  average  of  the  past  15-20  years.  The  flexible  nature  of  our 
inflation-targeting framework, which enables us to focus on medium-term projections 
for  inflation  rather  than  on  the  most  recent  developments  in  the  CPI6,  has  allowed 
the  central  bank  to  raise  rates  in  a  gradual  manner,  taking  into  account  the 
weakness of the domestic economy and the lack of demand-driven upward pressure 
on  prices.  It  is  worth  repeating  that,  in  the  absence  of  demand-side  pressures,  the 
gradual  hiking  cycle  was  in  response  to  our  concern  that  repeated  shocks  would 
drive  inflation  persistently  above  the  target  range  and  pull  with  it  inflation 
expectations and wage growth unmatched by productivity gains. 
  6.  The way forward: the outlook for South Africa’s monetary policy 
In light of the reduced degree of monetary stimulus, a debate has emerged in recent 
months  on  whether  the  SARB  should  implement  additional  rate  hikes  at  all  –  and 
even whether we could afford to reverse part of the last two years’ hikes. This debate 
intensified  towards  the  middle  of  August,  building  on  a  sustained  recovery  in  the 
rand’s  exchange  rate  from  early  2016  lows  and  on  several  months  of  lower-than-
                                                           
6 cosumer price index 
 9 
expected  inflation  readings.  By  the  23rd  of  August,  the  forward-rate  agreement 
(FRA)  curve  had  become  almost  entirely  flat,  suggesting  that  as  many  market 
participants  saw  room  for  a  possible  easing  of  policy  as  for  additional  rate  hikes. 
Since  that  date,  renewed  fluctuations  in  the  rand’s  exchange  rate,  partly  driven  by 
investor  perceptions  of  domestic  risk,  have  altered  the  slope  of  the  FRA  curve. 
Nonetheless,  how  close  we  might  be  to  the  peak  in  the  current  interest  rate  cycle 
remains a key focus of investors. It would not surprise you that the MPC has similarly 
been  seized  with  this  matter,  as  policy  decisions  become  rather  finely  balanced 
when one approaches possible turning points.  
 As  indicated  in  previous  policy  statements,  the  MPC  has  felt  in  recent  months  that 
several developments, both global and domestic, have allowed it to press the pause 
button  in  the  rate-hiking  cycle.  Since  the  start  of  2016,  monetary  policies  in  large 
advanced  economies  have  remained  accommodative  while  the  fears  of  a  sizable 
devaluation of China’s currency have subsided and commodity prices have posted a 
moderate recovery. Financial market volatility also subsided surprisingly quickly after 
the  unexpected  Brexit  outcome  (certainly  relative  to  the  severity  of  the  underlying 
event and its possible consequences), and expectations of a policy adjustment in the 
US increasingly moved away from the Federal Reserve meeting in September. This 
prompted renewed capital flows into emerging markets and allowed a recovery in the 
rand since the beginning of the year, even though short-term exchange rate volatility 
remains high. On the domestic front, inflation readings, especially for the core rate of 
CPI  inflation,  increased  by  a  lesser  amount  than  the  SARB’s  econometric  models 
had projected earlier in the year. This may be a sign that the lower pass-through of 
foreign exchange depreciation to final inflation readings, which had been observed in 
the  aftermath  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  has  persisted  so  far  into  the  current 
cycle. 
 These  developments  have  supported  a  lowering  of  the  SARB’s  projected  trajectory 
for both headline and core CPI inflation. Headline inflation is now expected to return 
to within the target range earlier than previously expected, and with a lower peak in 
the fourth  quarter of this year,  while the core measure is no longer seen breaching 
6,0 per cent.  
 10 
 Despite the improvement in the balance on the current account in the second quarter 
of  the  year,  South  Africa  is  likely  to  continue  running  significant,  structural  current 
account deficits in the near- to medium-term future, owing in part to our reliance on 
imported  capital  goods  for  domestic  infrastructure  needs  and  the  challenges  of  our 
mining  industry.  In  light  of  this  reliance  on  foreign  capital,  the  South  African  rand 
remains  at  risk  of  sudden  changes  in  global  investor  sentiment.  Other factors  pose 
an  upside  risk  to  inflation,  including  the  possibility  of  faster  wage  settlements  as 
unions seek offsets for a quicker pace of headline CPI increases and the odds that a 
persisting  drought  could  keep  food  prices  higher  than  currently  projected.  Finally, 
there is no certainty that the pass-through from rand depreciation – whose dynamics 
we are yet to fully understand – will remain as low as it has been in recent years. At 
the  same  time,  though,  inflation  could  surprise  on  the  downside,  for  instance  if  the 
recent  upward  momentum  in  the  rand’s  exchange  rate  is  sustained  or  if  increased 
rainfall triggers a marked drop in grain prices. 
 At this stage, the MPC views the risks to the most recent forecast to be more or less 
balanced;  it  has  therefore  indicated  that,  in  light  of  the  new  forecast,  we  may  be 
close  to  the  end  of  the  tightening  cycle.  However,  such  ‘guidance’  remains 
conditional on the absence of the risks highlighted materialising in the near future. 
 Indeed,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  causes  of  the  reduced  risks  to  the  inflation 
outlook will persist in coming quarters, and the MPC has been careful to convey that 
some  of  the  factors  which  have  had  a  favourable  impact  on  the  inflation  outlook 
could  reverse  quickly,  in  which  case  the  view  that  we  are  close  to  the  end  of  the 
tightening cycle would need to be reassessed. The MPC has also indicated that the 
bar  to  interest  rate  cuts  is  high.  More  than  ever,  policy  must  remain  dependent  on 
forthcoming data and events, and continued vigilance is warranted. 
      11 
7.  Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  let  me  reiterate  that  the  SARB  remains  committed  to  achieving  its 
mandate of price stability, but it acts in a flexible manner, taking into account the real 
cycle  of  the  domestic  economy  and  the  way  in  which  it  affects  the  price  formation 
process. It is our belief that this flexible approach has allowed the economy to better 
withstand the recent shocks from global developments and the end of the commodity 
price ‘super-cycle’  while allowing us  to fulfil our mandate of  contributing to financial 
stability.  
 However, I must also stress that there are limitations to how far the SARB – or any 
other  central  bank,  for  that  matter  –  can  support  economic  activity.  Because  of  the 
unique nature of their mandates, there are only a limited number of tools that central 
banks,  including  ours,  have  at  their  disposal.  Over  the  last  few  years  –  in  a  global 
environment  where  elevated  public  debt  levels  have  constrained  the  use  and 
potential  effectiveness  of  fiscal  policy  and  where  voter  discontent  often  makes 
policymakers  shy  of  implementing  structural  reforms  –  the  tendency  has  grown  to 
view central banks as ‘the policymakers of last resort’, with a prime responsibility for 
rekindling economic growth.  In the words of well-known commentator Mohamed El-
Erian, they are increasingly seen as ‘the only game in town’. While the allocating of a 
disproportionate burden to central banks should be avoided, their responsibilities are 
certainly not to be minimised: low and stable inflation, together with ongoing financial 
stability and a proper functioning of financial markets, is a necessary precondition for 
sustained, long-term, inclusive economic growth.  
 Thank you. 
     12 
