Haruhiko Kuroda: The virtues of international cooperation among
central banks
Remarks by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a reception to celebrate the
30th anniversary of the Bundesbank’s Representative Office, Tokyo, 22 May 2017.
Good evening, Ladies and Gentlemen.
 It is a great honor to be invited to this reception celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Deutsche
Bundesbank  in  Tokyo.  I  would  like  to  extend  my  sincere  congratulations  to  Dr.  Dombret,
Executive Board Member of the Bundesbank, Ms. Moede, Representative of the Tokyo office, and
other staff members of the Bundesbank.
Throughout these 30 years, the Bundesbank has positioned its Tokyo office as the hub for its
activities  in Asia,  and  has  shown  its  strong  commitment  to  Japan.  I  would  like  to  highlight  in
particular, the expansion of the functions of the Tokyo office with the establishment of a trading
office in 2012, just one year after the tragic Great East Japan Earthquake.
Looking  around  at  all  the  faces  gathered  here  to  celebrate  this  anniversary  event,  I  must
commend  the  Bundesbank  Tokyo  office  on  their  great  success  in  establishing  a  deep  and
extensive network in the local community.
Over the past 30 years, there have been significant advancements in the global economy. The
growth  rate  of  trade  volume,  which  until  the  1980s  followed  a  similar  rate  to  real  GDP,
significantly outpaced real GDP from the 1990s to the mid-2000s. One of the contributing factors
was the expansion of global value chains from the late 1980s with the end of the Cold War, when
large  amounts  of  direct  investment  began  to  flow  into  countries  of  the  Eastern  bloc,  such  as
China, the member states of the former Soviet Union, and Eastern Europe, as they entered into
the  global  economy.  Both  Germany  and  Japan  played  pivotal  roles  in  this  new  wave  of
globalization.
The  advancement  of  globalization  over  the  years  has  brought  about  stronger  relationships
among countries and regions, both economically and financially. On the other side of the picture,
as evident in the case of the Asian currency crisis 20 years ago or the global financial crisis that
erupted 10 years ago, negative shocks are more likely to transcend national borders.
In this situation, international cooperation among central banks has become ever more important.
In  terms  of  the  relationship  between  Germany  and  Japan,  the  Bank  of  Japan  established  a
representative office in Frankfurt in 1956. Making the most of the representative offices in each
other’s countries, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan have always enjoyed the
timely, candid, and fruitful exchange of information and views, notwithstanding the geographical
distance between the two countries.
Dr. Dombret, who is with us today, is the Executive Director for International Relations. Tonight, I
want  to  mention  another  of  his  many  important  roles,  as  “Head  of  the  Money  Museum.”  The
Deutsche Bundesbank refurbished its Money Museum last December. Unfortunately, I have not
yet had the chance to visit the museum myself, but according to our staff at our representative
office in Frankfurt, the new Museum offers a number of innovative displays that captivate visitors.
They  have  told  me  that  the  displays  show  the  Bundesbank’s  deep-rooted  belief  that  “Geld  ist
Vertrauenssache,” or “money is a matter of trust,” in other words, its strong commitment to price
stability.
The environment surrounding central banks is forever changing. Nevertheless, one thing I am
sure will never change is that our two banks will continue to work closely together to fulfil our
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
common mission of achieving price stability.
I would like to close my remarks with the heartfelt wish for continued friendship and cooperation
between the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Bank of Japan, as well as between Germany and
Japan. Thank you for your kind attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
