Luci Ellis: Women in the economy and in economics
Speech by Ms Luci Ellis, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
ACT Launch of the Women in Economics Network, Canberra, 20 March 2017.
 Many thanks to Zoya Dhillon, Tanya Livermore and Tim Atkin for assistance with the graphs and
other material in this talk, and to many other colleagues for helpful comments and suggestions.
Thank you to the Women in Economics Network for the invitation to speak at its ACT launch. It is
an incredible honour. It is also very pleasing to see that this network has been formed. As I’ll
discuss later in my talk, economics has struggled with an image – and a reality – of being a
male-dominated profession. This is true both in Australia and in many other countries, and it is
more of an issue in economics than in some other quantitative disciplines. Networks such as
these  are  instrumental  in  helping  to  break  down  barriers.  That’s  needed,  because  there  are
considerable  barriers  to  achieving  a  more  equal  participation  of  both  sexes  in  the  profession,
consistent with the true distribution of talent.
Women in the Australian economy
Before I get to the topic of the economics profession, I’d like to make some brief remarks on the
story of women in the Australian economy. I can’t do this story justice in the time available, but
perhaps some of the facts I highlight can help illuminate where Australia is in terms of equality of
the sexes, and how we got there.
Economic and social changes often come from deep structural drivers. Sometimes, they come
instead from long-lasting effects of business cycle developments. It’s easy to confuse the two.
Many commentators do so, pointing to structural causes, such as skills mismatch, when cyclical
developments, like slow labour market recoveries after recessions, might be just as plausible.
We must therefore be careful about interpreting shifts in the labour market, including changes to
the pattern of male and female employment. It isn’t always clear what is deep and structural,
what  is  cyclical  and  temporary,  and  what  is  initially  cyclical  but  ends  up  having  long-running
effects.
Cyclical developments can indeed have lasting implications. One particularly striking example is
that  recessions  in  Australia  have  resulted  in  permanent  reductions  in  the  level  of  full-time
employment  for  teenagers  (Graph  1).  The  technical  term  for  this  kind  of  path  dependence  is
‘hysteresis’.  Another  way  to  describe  it  might  be  that  ‘extinction  is  forever’.  There  was  a
background  trend  of  increased  school  retention,  but  it’s  amazing  how  that  effect  was  so
concentrated in recessions and their aftermath. There’s a gender angle here, too, because the
effect is starker for males than females. It isn’t entirely clear why that is, but it might have had
something to do with decisions to employ apprentices.
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Structural,  or  perhaps  we  should  say  ‘non-economic’,  factors  can  also  have  profound
implications for economic outcomes.
On the demographic side, we are seeing the effects of an ageing population, driven partly by
increasing longevity, and partly by the end of the post-war baby boom and the ageing of the
generation  born  in  that  boom.  The  end  of  the  baby  boom  also  saw  an  increase  in  the
average age that people partnered and became parents (Graph 2). The post-war period was
the anomaly here. The current median age of first parenting is only a little above where it
was a century ago. If we look at Western European countries, it turns out that partnering and
parenting in one’s mid-to-late twenties has been the norm for several centuries there.1
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the social side, we see the long-lasting effects of the integration – or perhaps we should
say  the  reintegration  after  the  post-war  period  –  of  women  into  the  labour  force.  Female
labour force participation and employment has increased by around 15 percentage points
since the mid 1970s, though it has levelled out more recently and is still noticeably lower
than for males (Graph 3).
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Social  and  demographic  changes  are  mediated  through  and  in  turn  affect  institutional
arrangements.  Australia’s  unusual  wage-setting  system,  starting  from  the  1907  Harvester
judgement until the 1990s, was centred on a judicial process. The social presumption behind that
process (until at least the late 1960s) was that men had a family to support, while women did not.
(This  led  to  much  commentary  about  the  number  of  non-existent  wives  and  children  being
supported on men’s wages.) Unequal pay was therefore enforced by that process until the equal
pay decisions of 1969 (equal pay for equal work) and 1972 (equal pay for work of equal value).
It is common to assume that if wages are lifted by the powers of the state, rather than by the
forces  of  supply  and  demand,  employment  of  the  affected  group  will  fall.  That  is  not  what
happened to women in the 1970s. As the graph above shows, female employment increased,
participation  increased,  and  a  wider  range  of  occupations  opened  to  women.  That  outcome
should be seen in the context of the substantial increase in educational attainment for both males
and females in the post-war period (Graph 4). Much of that increase had already occurred before
the equal pay decisions. Following those decisions, the gap between the sexes on this measure
(which was never very large) narrowed noticeably, perhaps partly because equal pay increased
the payoff to female education. (Free university education probably helped as well.) In fact it is
now the case that women are more likely than men to have a tertiary education (Graph 5).
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
  5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
The conclusion I draw from this is that, prior to those equal pay decisions, women were not being
paid their marginal product. But employers did not respond to this cost differential by substituting
male workers with cheaper female workers. Perhaps that was partly because of a (false) social
presumption that female workers were less skilled. Occupational segregation also helps prevent
substitution between different groups, in this case between the sexes.
Lest you think that this is all old history and irrelevant to the present day, it is worth recalling that
there are women who were in the workforce at the time of the equal pay decisions who are still in
the  workforce  today  or  only  recently  retired;  the  second  equal  pay  decision  happened  in  my
lifetime. It’s also important because the dynamics of these large social changes are quite slow
moving. They take effect at a generational frequency. To take one example, participation rates of
older  workers  –  both  male  and  female  –  have  risen  noticeably  over  the  past  decade  or  so
(Graph 6).
Part of this might be a response to increased employment opportunities in specific fields during
the mining investment boom. And part of it might have been a response to rising pension ages
and concerns that retirement savings might not be adequate. But for older women, some of the
shift  could  also  be  a  cohort  effect.  The  generations  of  women  with  higher  labour  market
participation rates than their predecessors were also more likely to remain in the labour force as
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
they approached and passed conventional retirement ages.
Occupational  segregation  is  another  feature  of  the  labour  market  that  shifts  only  slowly.
Decisions made as teenagers affect occupational choices over one’s entire career. That’s still
the  case  even  nowadays,  when  people  are  expected  to  make  several  "career  changes"
throughout their working lives. And as you can see from this graph, the Australian labour force is
still quite sex-segregated across different occupations; some occupations are mostly undertaken
by  female  workers,  while  occupations  such  as  trades  and  machinery  operators  are  mostly
undertaken by males (Graph 7).
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
I  don’t  have  time  today  to  do  justice  to  the  huge  literature  examining  how  occupational
segregation comes about or what might cause it to change.  But one broad way to summarise
the evidence is that the pattern of occupations that are male-dominated or female-dominated is
largely determined by social conventions past and present. The echo of past social conventions
remains in older workers’ occupational choices. There are examples of social conventions and
employment patterns changing. Those of you who have seen the film Hidden Figures would now
be aware that performing mathematical calculations was once considered ‘women’s work'. At
that time, a ‘computer’ was a human, often a female human. That might be surprising to some
people,  given  the  overwhelmingly  male-dominated  mathematical  professions  today.  A  more
recent example of what was once traditionally a ‘male’ occupation now employing many more
women is the role of traffic management on roadwork crews.
At  a  broader  level,  though,  industry-level  and  occupation-level  sex-segregation  is  remarkably
stable from decade to decade. Across both the broad industry groupings shown in this graph and
more narrowly defined specific industries, the share of females in total employment has been
remarkably  stable  over  the  past  decade  or  so  (Graph  8).  Where  it  has  changed,  the  sex-
segregation has if anything become more stark.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
And it’s hard to see how this will change much in the next decade or so, when we consider that
the patterns of subject choices in higher education are not only quite sex-segregated, but have if
anything  become  more  so  in  recent  years  (Graph  9).  Traditionally  ‘female’  fields  such  as
education, health and hospitality and personal services – all "caring professions" – have become
slightly  more  female-dominated  over  the  past  decade.  Similarly,  IT  has  long  been  a  male-
dominated field in this country, and current student enrolments are accentuating that trend.
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
A dismally male profession?
To understand and interpret these trends, it helps to have a few people around who have trained
in economics. Unfortunately, both in general and for female students, economics is not exactly
popular in Australia. The previous graph showed that the decline in the female share of tertiary
students in management and commerce over the past decade has only been marginal, and the
student population is reasonably balanced between males and females. But for economics, the
share  of  female  university  students  has  always  been  much  lower  and  appears  to  have  fallen
further more recently. Even more concerning is that total student numbers in economics appear
to  have  fallen  at  our  universities  over  the  past  couple  of  decades,  though  some  data  show  a
small pick-up more recently.
The picture is even worse at school level. Taking New South Wales just as an example, fewer
students are doing economics in Year 12, and a declining proportion of that declining number are
female (Graph 10). From what we understand, when business studies subjects were introduced,
they expanded at the expense of economics. Most of that shift happened in the 1990s. I can’t
help wondering if the experience of the early 1990s recession, or the popular discussion at the
time  about  ‘economic  rationalism’  made  economics  somehow  uncool.  Or  maybe  business
studies was seen as easier for students, or for teachers; or maybe general subjects are seen as
better for employability. We just don’t know.
At least we can say that it seems that the global financial crisis, which is considered in some
quarters to represent a failure of economics as a discipline, did not have the same effect. In fact
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
we  hear  from  some  students,  young  and  old,  who  were  inspired  to  study  economics  by  the
crisis. Maybe that has something to do with the small pick-up in total university student numbers
recently.
Of  course,  it  is  not  essential  to  have  studied  economics  at  school  to  select  it  as  a  major  at
university.  Studying  mathematics  can  be  another  path.  To  succeed  in  university  economics
studies, studying mathematics and statistics is actually very helpful. But this decline in school
economics is a disquieting picture.
There  is  already  a  voluminous  literature  on  the  sex  imbalance  in  the  economics  profession.
Equality of the sexes is one of the areas where new data, and big data, have been instrumental in
replacing pontification with evidence-based insight. We can no longer dismiss suggestions that
treatment or representation of females are subject to negative biases and other disadvantages.
From  analysis  of  movie  dialogue  to  matched-resume  studies,  evidence  of  bias  now  has
statistical weight.
One piece of positive news from these new data sets is that in US academia, at least, evidence
of raw bias is no longer present in most Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM)
fields. Male and female academics who publish the same number of papers will on average have
the  same  experiences  in  hiring  and  promotion  (Ceci et  al  2014).  However,  economics  is  an
outlier;  there  is  still  apparent  bias  in  those  hiring  and  promotion  decisions  (Ginther  and  Kahn
2015). In an earlier paper, the authors summarised their results by saying, ‘It seems that once
men  have  assistant  professor  status  in  economics,  they  get  tenure  irrespective  of  their
publications,  citations  or  background,  while  women  …  only  receive  tenure  based  more  on
observable traits’ (Ginther and Kahn 2004).  Some other recent research suggests that part of
3
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
the problem arises because selection committees don’t give female economists sufficient credit
for their work when that work is co-authored with men (Sarsons 2016).
It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  economics,  unlike  most  other  technical  disciplines  such  as
statistics, has not seen much increase in the share of PhDs granted to women or other metrics
of the ‘pipeline’ to senior positions. Seeing few women in senior faculty positions, it is also no
surprise  that  economics  does  not  attract  many  women  even  at  undergraduate  level.  This  is
especially  disappointing,  given  that  economics  is  so  important  to  understanding  aspects  of
everyday life, media commentary and public policy discourse.
One conclusion we can draw from this is that if there is some form of objective criteria for career
progression,  such  as  publications  or  profits,  it  is  harder  for  unconscious  biases  to  influence
outcomes.  But  we  also  know  from  the  same  research  that  married  men  in  STEM  fields  had
better publication records on average than either single men or married and single women. This
might suggest that women do not receive the same kind of spousal support of their careers, and
therefore  that  publication  records  might  overstate  the  underlying  abilities  of  married  men  in
academia. I do fear that organisations could do everything in their power to eliminate biases and
obstacles  to  female  participation,  but  that  it  won’t  be  enough,  because  of  the  presumptions
operating within at least some couples.
It isn’t all bad news for equality of the sexes in economics, though, at least not at the Reserve
Bank.  Some  concerted  effort  and  rethinking  of  our  recruitment  strategies  have  resulted  in  a
4
marked turnaround in the share of female graduates in our intake this year (Graph 11).
Contrary to what some people might fear, we didn’t have to lower our standards. Nor did we have
to  recruit  candidates  from  outside  the  family  of  disciplines  we  usually  recruit  from,  such  as
economics, finance, law, mathematics and statistics. Instead:
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  engaged  more  intensively  with  universities  so  that  students  knew  about  the  Reserve
Bank as a place where one can have a rewarding career in an inclusive environment.
We used separate teams for shortlisting and interviewing, to reduce unconscious biases at
later stages of the selection process.
We  moved  our  recruitment  campaign  earlier  and  started  fast-tracking  the  obviously  good
candidates to interview and decision before deciding on the full slate of interviewees.
I believe this last change was particularly important because we are competing with many other
organisations  for  the  best  candidates,  whether  male  or  female.  If  we  are  later  than  our
competitors,  we  never  even  see  some  candidates.  By  the  time  applications  for  jobs  at  the
Reserve  Bank  opened,  someone  had  already  snapped  them  up.  I  believe  that’s  especially
relevant for the female candidates, though. In a male-dominated field where many employers are
trying  to  rectify  their  gender  balance,  everyone  is  competing  for  the  same  strong  female
candidates.
Final thoughts
I’ve touched on a lot of issues today, none in much detail. But I hope I have given a flavour of the
complexity  and  the  depth  of  the  issues  we  face,  both  in  economics  and  the  economy  more
broadly. Equality of the sexes is essential if we are to achieve our economic potential as a nation.
When  someone  faces  bias  or  artificial  obstacles,  it  holds  all  of  us  back.  Overcoming  those
biases  and  unmaking  those  obstacles  won’t  be  easy,  either  in  the  profession  or  in  other
workplaces. But it is certainly worth doing, for both males and females, now and in future.
Thank you so much for your time. I wish the network every success.
Bibliography
Ceci  SJ,  DK  Ginther,  S  Kahn  and  WM  Williams  (2014),  ‘Women  in  Academic  Science:  A
Changing Landscape’, Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 15(3), pp 75–131.
Daly MC (2016), ‘You Tell Me—Stop Leaving Talent on the Table: Achieving Diversity with No
Excuses’,  Medium.com  site,  15  December.  Available  at medium.com/diversity-without-
excuses/stop-leaving-talent-on-the-table-achieving-diversity-with-no-excuses-
c0719c60564b#.ehll2i76w.
Dennison  T  and  S  Ogilvie  (2014),  ‘Does  the  European  Marriage  Pattern  Explain  Economic
Growth?’, The Journal of Economic History, 74(3), pp 651–692.
Foreman-Peck  J 
development’, Explorations in Economic History, 48(2), pp 292–309.
‘The  Western  European  marriage  pattern  and  economic
(2011), 
Ginther DK and S Kahn (2004), ‘Women in Economics: Moving Up or Falling Off the Academic
Career Ladder?’, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(3), pp 193–214.
Ginther  DK  and  S  Kahn  (2015),  ‘Women’s  Careers  in  Academic  Social  Science:  Progress,
Pitfalls,  and  Plateaus',  Boston  University,  January,  unpublished  manuscript.  Available  at
sites.bu.edu/shulamitkahn/files/2015/01/GintherKahn-SocSci-chapter.pdf.
Goldin  C  (2016),  ‘  A  Pollution  Theory  of  Discrimination:  Male  and  Female  Differences  in
Occupations  and  Earnings’, Human  Capital  in  History:  The  American  Record,  University  of
Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 313–348.
Hajnal  J  (1965),  ‘European  marriage  pattern  in  historical  perspective  ’,  in  D  Glass  and  DEC
Eversley (eds), Population in History, Arnold, London.
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sarsons  H  (2016),  ‘Gender  Differences  in  Recognition  for  Group  Work’,  Working  Paper,
unpublished manuscript. Available at scholar.harvard.edu/files/sarsons/files/groupwork.pdf.
1
2
3
4
The pattern of marriage and child-bearing occurring mainly when people are in their late 20s is known as the
‘Western European marriage pattern’ and has been established for several centuries in European data (Hajnal
1965).  There  is  some  suggestion  that  the  establishment  of  this  pattern  was  instrumental  in  subsequent
economic development (Foreman-Peck 2011), although this claim is contested (Dennison and Ogilvie 2014). If
the claim is true, though, one is tempted to speculate whether the post-war decline in average ages of marriage
and child-bearing had something to do with the decline in productivity growth observed in the 1970s.
A useful recent contribution to this literature is Goldin (2016).
The  working  paper  version  of  the  article  described  this  more  succinctly:  ‘It  seems  that  men  get  tenure
irrespective of their merit (including publications). Women get tenure only if they merit it’.
These figures group graduates by campaign year, not entry year: the last data point only includes staff starting in
the 2017 cohort who were recruited in directly as graduates in 2016, rather than initially as summer interns in
the summer of 2015/16. This is because our recruitment approach was changed for 2016, after those interns
were interviewed and selected. Other central banks have had similar experiences: see, for example, Daly (2016)
on the experience of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
