François Villeroy de Galhau: Basel III - an assessment, an outlook
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at AGEFI's financial
regulation meetings, Paris, 6 December 2016.
Accompanying slides.
 Our meeting tonight could not be more timely: we are now in a pivotal period for the Basel III
reforms, eight days after the meeting of the Basel Committee in Chile, one month before the
decisive meeting of the GHOS (Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision). We started to
write this new page of banking regulation very soon after the financial crisis. Eight years have
passed since the Lehman crisis. It is high time to put an end to this regulatory chapter, to focus
on implementation and supervision, and to give stability and predictability to the financial industry
and thereby to the economy. But before laying out the prospects for the coming weeks – which is
what you probably expect from me tonight – it is necessary to take stock of the measures of the
Basel III package that have already been adopted: the results are considerable, and positive.
1 Basel III reforms were absolutely essential after the crisis
No one, I hope, can seriously dispute – even among the banking industry, including on the other
side of the Atlantic – that after the financial crisis it was necessary to significantly strengthen
regulation to reduce risks. The financial crisis has had heavy economic and fiscal costs, as well
as  social  costs  through  the  drama  of  unemployment.  Its  political  consequences  for  our
democracies are still visible today. We must all wish and act for a better prevention of future
risks: it is a collective imperative. Remarkable achievements have been carried out since 2009
under the impetus of the G20 and the Financial Stability Board. Basel III is a very comprehensive
reform that has significantly strengthened the prudential system for banks and financial stability
[slide 2]. Beyond the very last measures of the Basel III package still under discussion, great
progress has already been made:
First, by raising capital requirements, Basel III has made the financial system much stronger
than before the crisis. Banks now have more capital and of higher quality. [slide 3] To take
the  example  of  France,  major  banking  groups  more  than  doubled  their  core  tier  1  capital
between 2008 and 2015, from a total of EUR 132 billion to EUR 275 billion. The improvement
in  solvency  was  mainly  achieved  through  the  increase  in  capital,  rather  than  through  the
reduction in average weighted assets – i.e. financing to the economy.
Also, Basel III broadened banking regulation beyond the solvency ratios to take into account
the  diversity  of  risks  to  which  banks  are  exposed.  A  leverage  ratio  –  relative  to  the
unweighted balance sheet total – was introduced. Two new liquidity ratios also complement
the regulatory framework: the LCR (Liquidity Coverage Ratio) covers short-term liquidity, the
NSFR  (Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio)  controls  the  refinancing  structure.  French  banks  have
already adjusted [slide 4]: they have almost doubled their liquidity reserves since 2011 and
now largely meet the LCR requirement, which will only be fully binding in 2018.
Lastly, Basel III makes it possible to respond more effectively to financial stability issues by
providing  dedicated  tools,  such  as  countercyclical  capital  buffers,  or  for  systemically
important banks. In 2013, France set up the Haut Conseil de stabilité financière (HCSF –
High Council for Financial Stability), which is qualified to take macroprudential measures; the
HCSF has its European equivalent with the ESRB (European Systemic Risk Board). And the
new European Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) is now fully in force.
A question is nevertheless often raised: what is the economic impact of these new rules? Are
they  likely  to  overly  constrain  the  financing  of  the  economy  and  hence  to  weigh  on  growth?  I
believe it would be desirable that, over time, we set up instruments for conducting an ex post
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessment of these economic effects: the Financial Stability Board is working on this issue, on
the basis of a plurality of methods and including the benefits derived from a lower probability of
crises occurring. We discussed this at our meeting in London on 17 November. However, today
no one can seriously claim that the supply of credit in France or in Europe is constrained by
prudential ratios. There has been no rise in the cost of credit, quite the contrary, and growth of
credit to the economy is particularly robust in France, at + 4.6% for loans to businesses and +
4.1%  for  households  in  October  2016  [slide  5].  The  Eurosystem’s  accommodative  monetary
policy has certainly contributed to this by fostering excess liquidity for European banks. For the
future, however, the question may arise. We must absolutely avoid this pitfall in the finalisation
phase of the Basel III reforms.
2 As the final pieces of the Basel III framework are put in place, we must keep in mind the
need to safeguard financial security and the ability of Europe’s banks to finance the real
economy 
Basel III is nearing completion. The last remaining work areas chiefly concern the measurement
of risk on bank balance sheets. Beyond the technical questions raised, two key challenges have
to be met.
First  comes  the  question  of  how  internal  models  fit  into  the  prudential  risk  assessment
framework. On this issue, we should not aim at the wrong target. It is certainly important to limit
the  variability  of  results  between  banks  and  across  countries,  but  only  if  this  variability  is
unjustified. Several papers have stressed the differences between European and US banks. In
particular, the latter have on average higher risk-weighted assets (RWAs) as a percentage of
total unweighted assets – what we call density. Yet we must steer clear of drawing simplistic
conclusions [slide 6]. The variations observed between Europe and the United States are not due
to  the  sole  use  of  internal  models  rather  than  the  standardised  approach.  We  also  have  to
consider the very different nature of bank balance sheets in the two zones, notably owing to more
widespread use of securitisation – of real estate loans especially – and market financing in the
US, not to mention differences in accounting rules. Naturally, we must reinforce confidence in
internal models by supervising them closely – a task long performed by the Autorité de contrôle
prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR) and more recently taken on as well by the Single Supervisory
Mechanism  in  Frankfurt  –  but  this  need  not  be  at  the  cost  of  full-blown  standardisation.  Risk
sensitivity must be maintained because it represents a huge step forward with Basel III, ensuring
that  requirements  are  proportionate  to  risk  taking.  You  can  see  [slide  6-3]  that  the  correlation
between  RWAs  and  the  cost  of  risk  is  high  in  Europe  as  well,  confirming  that  different  risk
profiles are largely responsible for the difference in RWAs between geographical zones. In other
words, the task at hand is to finalise Basel III, not to build a new Basel IV, a notion that has been
widely decried in some quarters. 
The  second  challenge  involves  the  impact  of  the  new  prudential  rules  and,  ultimately,  their
effectiveness in achieving the stated goals. Systematically strengthening capital is no longer the
aim,  since  the  requisite  adjustments  in  this  area  have,  as  I  said,  mostly  been  carried  out. A
further across-the-board increase is unwarranted from a financial stability perspective and might
interfere with orderly financing of the economy, especially in Europe, where bank intermediation
plays such a crucial role in the economy. Admittedly, capital requirements could go up at some
banks as a result of adjustments to the parameters of their internal models, when justified. We
must also bear in mind that some measures aimed at bolstering the prudential framework were
adopted recently and have yet to be implemented – I am thinking particularly of the fundamental
review of the trading book, that is, of the treatment of market risk. 
G20 leaders have repeatedly underlined the general objective of refining the Basel III framework
“without further significantly increasing overall capital requirements”. They reaffirmed this stance
in Shanghai in February, in Washington in April, and again in Hangzhou in September. The Basel
Committee must, of course, comply with the mandate entrusted to it.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The initial proposals published by the Basel Committee in the first half of 2016 fell short in terms
of meeting these two challenges, as I underlined at that time. Their impact was excessive and
they raised technical issues on several fronts. But considerable progress has been made, both
since the summer and at the Santiago meeting. To achieve this took unwavering determination
on the part of the French negotiating team, a strong cohesion within the euro area, particularly
between France and Germany, and substantial expert work by ACPR and Banque de France
staff, to whom I extend my congratulations.
We have not yet reached an agreement. But the possible outlines of the final Basel III reform are
becoming clearer. Among other things, they include: 
Risk  sensitivity  is  to  be  maintained,  with  certain  portfolios  remaining  eligible  for  internal
models. Additionally, a number of excessive technical parameters were removed at the last
Basel Committee meeting, both for credit risk and operational risk.
Guaranteed loans will be considered equivalent to mortgage loans. This is a major advance
for French banks and should lower the requirements on these portfolios. This will reinforce,
not threaten, real estate lending in France.
Even so, we are not yet at the end of the process: 
Numerous details still have to be clarified, and appropriate treatment of specialised financing
(for equipment and large-scale projects) needs to be secured for the long term. 
The debate is still lively over the principle and calibration of an output floor – i.e. the potential
introduction  of  a  capital  floor  for  internal  models,  calculated  as  a  percentage  of  the
standardised approach.
The  Banque  de  France  and  the ACPR  will  remain  vigilant  until  the  work  with  our  European
partners is completed. And should an agreement be reached, its future transposition in Europe
would obviously be dependent on compliance by other major geographical zones, including the
United States and its incoming administration.
 I would like to end by sharing my belief with you. Provided that it is balanced, a final agreement on
Basel  III  is  in  everyone’s  interest.  Banks,  first  of  all,  need  to  see  an  end  to  the  regulatory
uncertainty that is weighing on their strategy and depressing their market valuations. Companies
and households will also benefit by being able to count on stable financing. And it is in the interest
of France and Europe to maintain shared rules at a global level that will help to ensure an orderly
international financial system and fair treatment of all participants. While it is still too early to say
with  certainty,  for  some  important  points  still  remain  outstanding,  I  am  nevertheless  more
confident that we will be able to reach this decisive agreement by the beginning of next year.
Thank you for your attention. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
