 State Bank of Pakistan 
                 Governor’s Speech 
Share Purchase Agreement with the Consortium of Chinese Exchanges 
January 20th, 2017 
Bismillah  
Hon’ble Senator Muhammad Ishaq Dar, Finance Minister of Pakistan 
Mr. Zafar Hijazi, Chairman SECP 
Mr. Munir Kamal, Chairman, Pakistan Stock Exchange 
Ambassador Peoples Republic of China 
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
  
Assalam-o-Alaikum and Good Morning! 
I  am  very  thankful  to  Pakistan  Stock  Exchange  to  invite  me  today  at  this 
historic  occasion  in  our  economic  history.  Can  a  single  word  be  used  to  describe 
the prosperity of developed countries in the past few decades? If I were to answer 
this question, I would say collaboration. In this global world, it is not possible for 
economies to grow in isolation. Hence, it should not come as a surprise to anyone 
that  the  most  successful  countries  are  the  one  that  work  in  tandem  with  their 
neighbors  and/or  trading  partners.  Pakistan  and  China  are  taking  that  exact  path 
beyond which a great future awaits!  
Before  I  move  any  forward,  please  allow  me  to  take  you  to  a  short  visit 
down  the  memory  lane  when  Pakistan  economy  was  challenged  with  multiple 
headwinds. Be it  war  on terror  that led to  lower  than desired security  situation in 
the  country,  energy  shortfalls,  insufficient  foreign  exchange  reserves,  or  lack  of 
foreign investment; we  have  rebounded strongly  than  what  was  anticipated of us. 
With  adequate  economic  policies  and  the  assistance of  international  agencies, we 
have  firmed  up  our  feet  on  the  ground.  However,  we  did  not  stop  there;  we 
continued with our efforts to take our economic growth and public well-being to a 
higher level. To achieve those goals, Pakistan required the necessary impetus in the 
form of capital investment and opportunities. This is where the role of our closest 
friend and ally China has been instrumental! 
 Page 1 
State Bank of Pakistan 
  It  is  an  applaudable  step  of  a  country  like  China  to  get  integrated  with  the 
rest of the world. For this purpose, the country has rightly focused on the strategic 
location  of  Pakistan.  The  investment  of  China  in  Pakistan  as  just  one  route  of  its 
corridor  has  now  begun  a  string  of  partnerships  that  would  further  strengthen  the 
bond  between  the  two  countries.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  one  of  the  outcomes  of 
those efforts is the reason that we have gathered here. 
The  signing  ceremony  of  share  purchase  agreement  by  the  consortium  of 
Chinese exchanges and local financial institutions is a surely a landmark event for 
the Asian capital market. The investment of the consortium will not only enhance 
the credibility of Pakistan Stock Exchange – which let me remind you has been the 
best performer of Asia in 2017, but will also make it accessible and desirable to a 
host of investors across the world. To further add, the technological improvement 
would be a further boost for trading within and outside the country.  I am sure that 
the  partnership  of  Pakistan  Stock  exchange  with  China  will  bear  fruits  by 
developing competitive and profitable securities and derivative products.  
The local financial institutions in this consortium have an important role to 
play  as  well. With the  thorough  understanding of the domestic  markets and  well-
poised to assist their foreign counterparts, the consortium would be instrumental in 
raising  productive  capital  from  both  within  and  outside  Pakistan.  This  capital 
would  play  a  critical  role  for  the  corporate  sector  at  a  time  when  the  China-
Pakistan Economic Corridor is in full swing. 
This  is  just  the  tip  of  the  iceberg,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  With  proper 
planning  and  execution,  such  future  collaborations  could  be  game  turners  for  all 
the  stakeholders.  Not  only  would  this  help  raising  the  economic  growth  of  the 
country,  but  will  also  unlock  the  business-to-business  and  person-to-person 
barriers, and may be a good avenue to learn from each other in various fields such 
as  banking,  engineering,  transportation,  telecommunication,  energy,  and  many 
more. To sum up, the possibilities are limitless. 
The  key,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  would  be  to  have  an  open  mind  and  learn 
from  the  experiences  of  such  co-ordinations  in  other  parts  of  the  world  like  the 
Trans-African Highway network, Pan-American and Pan-European corridors.  
Our year on year LSM growth in Nov 2016 is 8.1% compared with 4.5% in 
Nov 2015. Private sector credit expanded by Rs. 376 billion and is broad based in 
 Page 2 
State Bank of Pakistan 
  
July-Dec FY 17 compared with Rs 283 billion in corresponding period 2016. Such 
good news will contribute to PSX and the investors sentiments. 
In the end, I would like to thank you all for your time, and congratulate you 
for making this step a success.  God Bless! 
 Page 3 
