Sharon Donnery: Brexit and global capital markets
Remarks  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  (Central  Banking)  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland, at Chatham House, London, 23 March 2017.
Introduction
 1
It is a pleasure to be invited to Chatham House to discuss Brexit and global capital markets.
In my remarks today, I would like to first turn to history to better understand the emergence of
centres for capital. I will then touch on what Brexit may mean for the ‘City of London’ as a global
market for capital. Finally, I will address some of the potential macroeconomic implications of the
UK’s decision to leave the EU and exit the Single Market, for both the UK and Irish economies,
and for Ireland as a location for financial services.
History of centres for capital
The fortunes of centres for capital change. Take the example of a world-leading commercial and
financial centre of the past: Venice. Venice rose in status because it was able to make full use of
its location, servicing important trading routes between Europe and the East. By the fourteenth
century  markets  for  debt,  and  secondary  markets  for  debt,  equity,  and  mortgage  instruments
existed.  Their development was accompanied by financial innovations such as bankruptcy laws
distinguishing illiquidity from insolvency; double-entry accounting; deposit banking; and a reliable
medium of exchange – the Venetian Ducat.  However, the emergence of alternative trade routes
with  the  discovery  of  the  New  World  and  Vasco  de  Gama’s  voyage  to  India  endangered  the
economic supremacy of the Italian city.
2
3
The Venetians were not blind to the changing geopolitical landscape. To retain its importance as
a  leading  trading  and  financial  centre,  Venice  encouraged  the  excavation  of  Suez  Canal,  but
without success.  Moreover, Venice failed to modernise its naval force, which was not equipped
to navigate in oceanic waters. The Mediterranean soon lost its importance as European trade re-
routed to the oceans, signalling the decline of the fortune of the Italian city and the advent of new
opportunities for the Atlantic powers.
4
Subsequently, the Netherland’s economic prominence led to Amsterdam becoming the world’s
leading  trading  and  financial  centre,  from  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.  However,  the
Napoleonic  Wars,  French  Occupation  and  relegation  in  terms  of  the  financing  of  international
trade and issuing foreign loans, led to a decline in its status as a ‘capital of capital’. It could not
5
compete or adapt to competition from new centres such as London or Paris.
Turning to London, the need to finance successive wars – the Spanish War of Succession, the
Austrian War of Succession, and the Seven Years War – gave rise to a financial revolution in the
eighteenth century. The establishment of the Bank of England – although private at the time –
enhanced  the  state’s  opportunity  to  borrow,  and  led  to  the  establishment  of  a  genuine  capital
market  which  attracted  savings,  and  where  joint-stock  companies  and  government  securities
were traded.
London  consolidated  its  position  as  a  leading  international  financial  centre  in  the  nineteenth
century  following  Britain’s  expansion  as  the  dominant  player  in  the  world  economy  after  the
Napoleonic Wars. Productivity gains from technological innovations (such as mechanisation of
textiles, use of coal in the metallurgical industry and use of steam) during the industrial revolution
6
further enhanced its position as an already great trading and colonial power.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Brexit and global capital markets
The City’s international pre-eminence developed over 250 years. Agglomeration benefits in terms
of  labour  and  scale  reinforced  the  City’s  attractiveness.   The  UK  now  receives  the  second
largest FDI inflows in the world and the largest in the EU. Over half of the stock of UK FDI is in
financial services. Most financial transactions in the EU – three quarters of the hedging activity,
more  than  three  quarters  of  the  FX  activity,  half  of  the  lending  and  half  of  the  securities
transactions – take place in the UK, irrespective of where the counterparties are based.  In this
context, it is fair to say that both central banks and firms must grapple with sizeable and specific
issues associated with Brexit.
7
8
Broadly speaking, it is not unreasonable to assume that much of this FDI is predicated on UK
access to the Single Market, and a portion will be diverted to other Member States when Britain
leaves.  However,  estimating  the  impact  of  Brexit  on  the  geography  of  international  financial
centres is complex. In this regard, research undertaken by staff at the Central Bank of Ireland
shows location decisions of non-bank financial FDI are driven by the very same factors that are
traditionally regarded as determinants of investment decisions in more traditional sectors of the
economy.   Specifically,  the  research  finds  that  barriers  between  the  home  and  host,  market
size,  regulation  and  taxes,  as  well  as  other  traditional  gravity  variables  such  as  sharing  a
common  border,  currency,  language  and  legal  system  have  an  impact  on  firms’  location
decision. These results are interesting given the perception that this sector is very footloose and
not tied to a specific geographic location.
10
9
In  addition,  the  importance  of  factors  other  than  taxation  in  driving  non-bank  FDI  location
decisions mitigates concerns that FDI in the non-banking financial sector simply flows to low tax
locations  or  to  those  with  less  stringent  regulation.  The  same  results  hold  when  looking  at
research on bank FDI.
11
Some more specific challenges for firms to grapple with include, what will happen to the existing
passport  regimes  and  whether  third  country  equivalence  can  be  relied  upon  in  a  post-Brexit
scenario.  In these cases, the potential solutions which might be arrived upon vary depending on
the applicable legislative requirements.  In other words, what this means for European financial
services will depend on the sector and firm type.
What is important is that regardless of where an entity seeks to relocate, firms should expect a
rigorous assessment of the applicable regulatory standards and intrusive ongoing supervision of
their  activities.    Regulatory  authorities  in  the  EU  operate  as  part  of  the  European  System  of
Financial Supervision (ESFS) and, as such, should apply European legislative requirements in a
uniform manner.  A commonality of approach will be very important to ensure that the risk of
regulatory arbitrage is mitigated and any financial stability risks which could arise as a result of a
diminution of regulatory standards are avoided. ECB Banking Supervision, the EBA, ESMA and
EIOPA  have  critical  roles  in  supporting  consistent  and  coherent  financial  supervision  and  the
effective implementation of the rules in the financial sector across the EU and across sectors.
We are confident that location decisions will be driven by factors such as infrastructure, skills,
legal framework, and cultural factors, rather than any regulatory ‘race to the bottom’.
The potential macroeconomic impact of Brexit
We now know Article 50 will be triggered next week. Although the short-term risks of Brexit were
overestimated by some, it is important that we do not underestimate the risks over the medium
and longer term.
Estimates of the potential long term economic cost of a UK departure from the EU range from a
relatively  limited  impact  (with  an  orderly  departure  and  a  reasonable  transition  period)  to  the
potentially very damaging prospects of a so called ‘hard Brexit’. Under such a scenario goods
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
trade between the UK and the EU would be subject to tariff and non-tariff barriers leading to a
significant decline in trade volumes.  With the UK outside the Single Market and without passport
rights,  trade  in  financial  services  would  be  adversely  affected.    Moreover,  incentives  for
businesses both domestic and foreign to invest in the UK would also be undermined.
The UK’s revealed preferences, set out in broad strokes in the government’s recent White Paper,
seems to plot a middle course between a soft and hard Brexit extremes. However, the devil will
be  in  the  detail  which  will  only  become  clear  in  the  negotiations  that  will  follow.  More  recent
history – in Hong Kong or Singapore, for example – suggests that the dominance of international
centres of finance is driven by global factors, rather than national economic developments. The
international nature of the City suggests London’s resilience as a global capital market will be
less reliant on the state of the British economy post-Brexit.
Brexit is likely to see some relocation of financial services to Dublin.  Authorisation-related activity
in  Ireland  has  continued  to  increase  including  queries  from  banks,  markets  firms,  queries
regarding payments and electronic money, and insurance authorisations. To date, these have
largely been exploratory. For example, in the case of Ireland, the semi-annual growth rate of the
number of Irish resident investment funds since the UK referendum in June-2016 to Decemeber-
2016 stood at 3.13 percent. This is close to the longer-term trend seen since December-2012.
This  may  serve  as  evidence  that,  to  date,  there  have  not  been  significant  location  spillover
effects. In the main, firms are waiting until Article 50 is triggered before taking concrete decisions
on activity and location.
Taking a long term perspective, while the UK remains a very important market for Ireland, the UK
share of Irish exports has been on downward trend for decades, matched by an upward trend in
the share off exports going to rest of the EU. Prior to Irish accession to the EU, the UK accounted
for over 50 per cent of Irish exports. This has fallen to under 20 per cent for services and under
14 per cent for goods exports.  By contrast, the EU, excluding the UK now accounts for close to
three  times  the  volume  of  goods  exports  to  the  UK  and  around  twice  the  volume  of  services
exports  to  the  UK.    This  trend  is  unlikely  to  be  reversed  and  is  more  likely  to  become  more
pronounced following the UK’s departure from the EU. 
Conclusion
The decision to leave the EU will impact significantly on the trading arrangements between the
UK  and  EU,  with  effects  also  for  investment  and  capital  flows  and  potentially  the  structure  of
European financial markets. 
Although,  some  European  jurisdictions  will  potentially  see  considerable  change  in  light  of  the
UK’s  exit,  what  is  not  anticipated  is  for  a  ‘new  London’  to  emerge.    Given  more  recent
technological developments, it is unclear whether agglomeration effects are as important as they
once were. The answer to that question will contribute to determining the extent to which financial
services will fragment across a number of European cities. 
The rise and fall of Venice and Amsterdam shows that what determines the fortunes of ‘capitals
of  capital’  depends  on  their  ability  to  cope  with  external  shocks  and  global  developments  and
ultimately their ability to adapt to the changing landscape of history. The future importance of the
‘City of London’ will therefore depend not only on the agreement between the EU and the UK, but
also on how London will position itself in the post Brexit world.
1
2
3
 I would like to thank Mark Cassidy, Donata Faccia, Mícheál O’Keeffe, James O’Sullivan, and Terry Quinn for their
contribution to my remarks.
See for example Puga, D., & Trefler, D. (2014). International trade and institutional change: Medieval Venice’s
response to globalization. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, p. 768.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Ibid.
See Grygiel, J. J. (2006). Great powers and geopolitical change. JHU Press, pp. 51-87.
See  Cassis, Y., & Collier, J. (2010). Capitals of Capital: The Rise and Fall of International Financial Centres
1780-2009. Cambridge University Press, pp. 09-15.
Ibid.
See Ball, M., & Sunderland, D. T. (2002). An economic history of London 1800-1914. Routledge, p.335.
See for example Wright, W. (2016). The Potential Impact of Brexit on European Capital Markets: A Qualitative
Survey of Market Participants. New Financial.
See  Davies,  Ronald  B.  and  Killeen,  Neill  (2015).  Location  Decisions  of  Non-Bank  Financial  Foreign  Direct
Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Europe, Central Bank of Ireland Research Technical Paper No.4.
Ibid., p.5.
Claessens, Stijn, and van Horen, Neeltje (2014). Foreign banks: Trends and impact. Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, 46(s1), pp.295-326.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
