  23.01.2017 
 Presentation of the book “La Historia de Foment del Treball 1771-2011” 
Foment del Treball Nacional, Barcelona 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Mr.  President  of  Fomento  del  Trabajo  Nacional,  distinguished  authorities,  ladies  and 
gentlemen: 
Let me begin by thanking Fomento del Trabajo Nacional and its president, Joaquín Gay de 
Montellá, for their invitation to take part in this event which has seen the presentation of the 
two books that compile the history, over more than two centuries, of this great institution. 
Thank you to Jordi Gual for his opening address. And my congratulations to the authors, 
Manuel Millán and Francesc Cabana, and to all the managers and associates of Fomento 
del Trabajo.  
Foment  del  Treball  Nacional,  the  oldest  employers’  association  in  Europe,  remains  fully 
active today, with a significant presence in our economic and business life. As the epilogue 
to the study presented today states, it is a story without an ending, and we are all happy 
that this should be so.  
The role of this private, independent and not-for-profit institution has always been to defend 
the  interests  of  its  associates  and  of  all  Catalonian  entrepreneurs.  Fomento  has  been  a 
liaison with the authorities, but also with the representatives of civil society. Its objective, 
the  compass  steering  its  initiatives  and  taking  of  positions,  has  been  to  maintain  an 
environment conducive to the pursuit of productive activities and the sound functioning of 
companies.  And  this  has  been  its  major  contribution  to  the  economic  development  of 
Catalonia and of Spain.  
Our Constitution acknowledges the pivotal role of employers’ associations. Article 7 of the 
Preliminary Title recognises their role (along with the trade unions) as organisations key to 
the defence and promotion of economic and social interests, a point further bolstered in 
Article 22 and in the freedom of association it advocates.  
Our  Constitution  also  details  specific  requirements  in  respect  of  the  internal  structure  of 
employers’ associations, their ends and their functioning. It is emphatically important that 
employers’  associations  should  be  exemplary  institutions,  both  for  society  and  for  their 
associates.  Among  their  obligations  is,  of  course,  to  ensure  this  exemplary  role,  which 
includes defending the common good, good corporate governance  and, in all instances, 
strict compliance with the law.  
Fomento  has  always  been  open  to  collaboration  with  other  employers’  organisations. 
Notable proof of this, in the none-too-distant past, was its participation and drive, at the 
onset  of  the  democratic  transition  some  40  years  ago,  to  reconstruct  the  Spanish 
employers’  association  framework  with  the  creation  of  the  Confederación  Española  de 
Organizaciones  Empresariales  (CEOE  –  the  Spanish  Confederation  of  Employers’ 
Organisations)  and  its  participation  in  and  contributions  to  the  pursuit  of  the  attendant 
activities. The first president of the CEOE, Carlos Ferrer Salat, was from Fomento, as was 
indeed the current president, Joan Rossel. 
The international economic and financial crisis  
The year 2017, which has recently begun, will mark 10 years since the first episodes of the 
crisis from which the global economy is still recovering.  
 3/7 
 In 2008, scarcely a year after the onset of the first tensions in August 2007, the initial turmoil 
resulted in a deep-seated global crisis, interrupting the global economy’s longest growth 
phase since the 1960s and making way for the most serious economic recession since the 
Great Depression.  
In the euro area, vulnerabilities that had not been perceptible against the background of the 
relative good times that followed the launch of Monetary Union began to emerge.  
On  one  hand,  the  crisis  uncovered  a  series  of  imbalances  in  the  economies  of  certain 
member countries: losses in competitiveness, high debt levels and weak banking systems. 
These  imbalances  showed  that  the  national  economic  authorities  have  not  sufficiently 
assumed that, in a monetary union, domestic economic policies must be equipped with the 
necessary flexibility to compensate for the lack of some of the traditional instruments used 
in national economic policies, such as the interest rate, the exchange rate and, indeed, fiscal 
discretionality.  
On the other, it became evident that the euro area’s institutional design and governance 
arrangements lacked the appropriate mechanisms for the early identification and correction 
of macroeconomic imbalances, and ultimately for crisis management and resolution.  
The sovereign debt, banking and balance of payments crisis episodes in 2011 and 2012, 
and the emergence of the risk of the common currency falling apart further highlighted the 
inadequacies of the financial integration model.  
The cost of the crisis across the euro area as a whole was greater than that incurred by the 
United States; and exit proved slower. From end-2007 to mid-2009, US GDP fell off by more 
than 4 pp; in the case of the euro area, the loss between the first quarter of 2008 and the 
second quarter of 2009 was close to 6 pp. After the double-dip recession, which ran until 
the  first  quarter  of  2013,  a  slow  recovery  ensued,  with  modest  but  sustained  rates  of 
increase in output.  
Only in the second half of 2015, seven years after the first recession began, did the euro 
area regain overall the pre-crisis levels of income and consumption, levels which even today 
have  still  to  be  restored  in  the  case  of  gross  capital  formation.  As  to  the  euro  area 
unemployment  rate,  while  it  has  moved  on  a  declining  trend  since  the  current  recovery 
phase began, it remains at close to 10%, almost 2.5 pp above the level prevailing in early 
2008, and double the rate in the US economy.  
In Spain, which had built up most significant imbalances, the depth and seriousness of the 
crisis was unprecedented. From 2007 to 2013, GDP fell by close to 8 pp and, foreseeably, 
it will only be this year, in 2017, that income will reach its pre-crisis levels.  
As in other episodes of our economic history, the most severe costs were felt in the labour 
market.  In  the  2007-2013  period,  employment  declined  by  over  18%,  taking  the 
unemployment rate, four years back, to 26% of the labour force. Although the economic 
recovery has provided for an appreciable reduction in this rate, it still stands at around 19%. 
Foreseeably,  several  years  must  go  by  before  unemployment  in  Spain  falls  to  levels 
comparable  with  those  of  other  developed  economies.  Of  note  in  Spain’s  case  is  the 
heterogeneity of the unemployment rates in different regions, from levels slightly over 12% 
4/7 
 in  Navarre  to  close  to  29%  in  Andalusia,  with  Catalonia  in  the  lower  part  of  the  table  at 
around 15%.  
 Monetary and financial policy in the face of the crisis  
The recovery in the developed economies, and in particular in the euro area and of course 
in Spain, has necessitated far-reaching actions in all economic policy areas.  
Early efforts by the central banks focused on alleviating the liquidity problems affecting the 
financial  system.  But  the  serious  worsening  of  the  situation  opened  the  way  for  more 
powerful plans, both in the financial and monetary realms and in terms of fiscal initiatives to 
boost aggregate demand.  
Regarding monetary policy, the depth and persistence of the crisis has required an ongoing 
effort by central banks. Over these years, the monetary authorities have broadened their 
range  of  instruments,  resorting  to  non-conventional  tools  that  have  enabled  monetary 
stimuli  to  be  deepened  and  that  have  been  conducive  to  their  pass-through  to  lower 
borrowing  costs,  thereby  encouraging  household  and  business  consumption  and 
investment decisions.  
With interest rates at historically low levels, and some even in negative territory, and after 
deploying  extraordinary  credit-support  programmes,  central  banks  have  set  about 
managing the size and composition of their balance sheet as a monetary policy instrument, 
through  the  so-called  quantitative  easing  programmes.  Under  QE,  the  Eurosystem 
purchases outright on the secondary market private and public debt instruments, the former 
encompassing covered bonds, securitisations and corporate debt, and the latter securities 
issued by governments, European agencies and, since December 2015, regional and local 
governments.  
Cumulative  asset  purchases  over  the  period  of  almost  two  years  in  which  the  purchase 
programme has been in place now stand at around €1.5 trillion, with public debt securities 
accounting for over 80%. The extension of the asset purchase programme until the end of 
2017, at least, will mean that the volume of assets acquired by the Eurosystem may exceed 
€2 trillion, tantamount to around 20% of euro area GDP.  
European structural and governance reforms  
Euro  area  governments  have  focused  their  reform  efforts  since  2010  on  two  fronts:  i) 
European  Union  institutions  and  euro  area  governance  arrangements;  and  ii)  domestic 
structural reforms.  
In  the  area  of  governance,  the  reforms  were  initially  geared  to  strengthening  national 
budgetary policy surveillance mechanisms, extending the multilateral surveillance perimeter 
to macroeconomic imbalances and agreeing on the creation of the European Systemic Risk 
Board, the new European body entrusted with macroprudential supervision.  
That said, it was the risk in 2011-12 of the single currency breaking up which prompted the 
decision  to  undertake  the  reform  of  EU  governance,  moving  towards  a  new  model  that 
 5/7 
 would transfer to the area as a whole many of the responsibilities for supervising banks and 
managing bank crises, which we know as the Banking Union.   
Following this initial momentum, which culminated in the launch of the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism in late 2014 and the approval of new Directives on capital requirements and 
resolution, political considerations are hampering further steps in financial union projects; 
and progress on the reform agenda considered by national governments has been uneven. 
The reform agenda in Spain  
In Spain, from 2010 onwards, the reforms carried out have provided for a better adjustment 
of  labour  costs  to  firms’  cyclical  position,  preventing  employment  from  being  the  only 
adjustment factor. The reforms have also been conducive to a greater degree of flexibility in 
the  organisation  of  work  within  firms.  These  factors  have  played  a  significant  role  in 
improving our economy’s competitiveness, which is at the very root of the recovery.   
The gains in competitiveness have been clearly reflected in the pick-up in exports. From 
2011 to 2016, the share of goods exports in GDP has increased by 2.6 pp, amounting to 
almost 23%; goods and services exports, including tourism, have climbed by almost 4 pp 
of GDP, rising last year to 33%.  
In  2015,  the last year  for  which  full information is available,  the  external  sector  posted a 
positive balance of 2.4% of GDP, a figure that might improve in 2016, despite the lower 
growth recorded in 2016 in world trade.  
The competitive gains have spurred firms’ investment and hiring decisions, which have also 
been boosted by the decline in borrowing costs since mid-2012, to which both the efforts 
to  clean  up  and  restructure  our  banking  system  and  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  have 
contributed.  
Job creation, observable since the onset of this expansionary phase, has been conducive 
to  a  pick-up  in  household  confidence  and  income  levels  which,  in  turn,  has  driven  the 
recovery in consumption spending. As a result, private domestic demand has become the 
main engine of the recovery, underpinned also by certain transitory factors, such as lower 
oil prices and the marginally expansionary stance of budgetary policy in the two-year period 
spanning 2015 and 2016.  
The fallout from the crisis and the challenges outstanding  
Yet it should be stressed that, after more than three years of growth, some of the main scars 
of the crisis remain present. The high unemployment and public debt levels and the heavy 
dependence on external financing are areas of vulnerability for our economy that should not 
be underestimated. For the euro area as a whole, the current environment remains one of 
moderate and fragile growth.  
In the current circumstances, the sustained recovery in activity, investment and employment 
in the euro area requires that other economic policies should complement monetary policy 
measures.  The  continuity  of  reform  momentum  –  especially  that  geared  to  product  and 
6/7 
  factor markets and to improving the business environment – is a key element for promoting 
growth.  
In  Spain,  the  recovery  is  providing  for  significant  headway  in  restoring  the  main 
macroeconomic equilibria. But we cannot maintain our growth if we abandon, or step back 
from, the agenda of reforms aimed at improving our productivity, our competitiveness and 
the flexibility of our productive system; these are the pillars of economic growth, of lower 
unemployment and of the re-balancing of public finances that ensures their sustainability 
and provides for fiscal policy headroom to boost investment and growth.  
Last but by no means least, the demographic developments our country will foreseeably 
face  in  the  coming  decades,  like  other  EU  members,  place  greater  and  more  pressing 
demands on the economic policy responses to the foregoing challenges. This is because a 
progressively older population makes it more difficult to entrench budgetary sustainability 
and to ensure long-term economic growth.  
Conclusion 
As we all know, the economic and political context in which we must face these challenges 
is not exactly going to be an easy one.  
The plans for European unity, in their various configurations prior to those we have today, 
have  over  the  almost  60  years  since  the  project  was  launched  overcome  highly  diverse 
difficulties.  But  I  believe  that  today  the  risks  are  high  because  political  repudiation  – 
attributable in part to the crisis, but not only to the crisis – is on the agenda, and this was 
non-existent or insubstantial only a decade ago.  
For the first time since the signing of the European Union Treaty in 1992, political currents 
and  popular  movements  have  arisen  in  the  EU  openly  contrary  to  the  integration  so  far 
achieved and, of course, to potential further steps towards greater integration; contrary to 
European institutions and their current remits; and contrary to the continuity of the single 
currency. The announced departure by the United Kingdom, whatever its final form, is going 
to encourage these movements. 
In this situation, national governments, European Union authorities and legislators all have 
a responsibility to come up with the appropriate response and to pursue the reforms that 
may first contain misgivings and then restore support, relatively seamlessly, for the grand 
European Union project.  
To conclude, allow me to return to monetary policy and central bank action. As we approach 
the twentieth anniversary of the launching of the euro, we can have no doubts about the 
crucial  importance  of  preserving  and  strengthening  the  Monetary  Union  and  the  single 
currency in order to sustain and give continuity to the European Union project.  
Many thanks, once more, to Fomento de Trabajo Nacional for this celebratory event and to 
all of you for your attention. .  
  7/7 
