Mario Draghi: The interdependence of research and policymaking
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Lindau  Nobel
Laureate Meeting, Lindau, 23 August 2017.
 I am especially thankful to Professor Hellwig for inviting me to address this conference. All of you
Nobel laureates share the extraordinary ability to explain parts of our everyday reality that have
not  been  understood  before,  or  were  previously  seen  from  a  different,  and  less  informative,
perspective.  You  are  the  builders  of  a  science  that  is  also  a  guide  to  policymaking.  Your
discoveries have contributed to the way we think, the way we do policy, the way we affect the
welfare of millions of individuals.
This year marks the 200th anniversary of David Ricardo’s Theory of Comparative Advantage  –
in  the  words  of  Paul  Samuelson,  one  of  the  few  counter-intuitive  fundamental  ideas  in
economics, which moved the world away from mercantilism. And when we look at other giants in
the  history  of  economic  thought,  Adam  Smith,  who  laid  down  the  foundations  of  capitalism;
Keynes,  who  drove  us  into  policy  activism  and  away  from laissez-faire;  until  the  founders  of
econometric  model  building  in  post-war  time,  we  cannot  but  conclude  that  there  is  little  in
economics that does not have policy implications and that the interaction between research and
its policy application is continuously evolving in an ever expanding universe.
1
Let me review the most recent development of those interactions and in so doing, I will focus on
monetary policy and financial regulation.
The pre-crisis macroeconomic framework
The  breakdown  in  the  ability  of  post-war  macroeconomic  models  to  accurately  forecast  the
economic developments of the 1970s and the early 1980s opened up space for further advances
in research. Advances that, by and large, provided the foundation of the pre-crisis consensus
that inspired central banks in their monetary policy and governments in their stance on financial
regulation and supervision.
In a very stylised fashion, the range of views that formed this consensus shared three general
features. Dominant was the emphasis placed on the interactions between policies and economic
agents’ behaviour under rational expectations. Price and wage rigidities were often the only types
of  rigidity  considered  in  the  economy.  Finally,  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  –  their
regulation,  their  imperfections,  and  their  supervision  –  played  only  a  minor  role,  or  were  even
entirely neglected in macroeconomic models.
It would be a mistake to look back at this considerable body of theory and evidence only with
today’s  disenchanted,  post-crisis  eyes  and  to  underestimate  the  profound  changes  that  it
produced in policymaking and institutions.
In  the  1970s  governments  attempted  to  maximise  social  welfare,  in  the  form  of  low
unemployment  and  inflation,  by  trying  to  exploit  the  short-run  trade-off  between  the  two.  They
engineered surprise booms “just once” before promising to revert to a policy of low inflation in
future,  especially  when  motivated  by  the  electoral  cycle.  The  insights  of  a  number  of  Nobel
laureates  showed  how 
time
inconsistent.  The same incentive to renege remains in the future, and promises to do otherwise
lack credibility. Rational wage and price setters will not believe in a policy that policymakers will
find it optimal to renege on, making it difficult for policymakers to achieve price stability without a
recession.
these  policies  were  bound 
fail  and  why 
they  were 
to 
2
It is hard to overestimate the enormous impact that the Lucas critique and the problem of time
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
inconsistency have had on the conduct of monetary policy over the past 40 years. In the 1970s,
most  central  banks  were  under  political  control  and  obliged  to  follow  more  or  less  short-term
oriented  policies.  During  the  1990s  and  2000s,  the  importance  of  credibility  was  increasingly
appreciated  and  evidence  mounted  that  operationally  independent  central  banks  with  a  clear
mandate to maintain price stability delivered much better economic outcomes than those under
direct government control.
The  result  was  a  revolution  in  central  banking.  Today,  most  countries’  central  banks  are
independent, but subject to a mandate drawn up by the legislators, who in turn hold the central
bank to account. As a result of independence and of greater accountability, communication of
monetary policy has become much more transparent.
The  second  dominant  feature  of  the  paradigm  prevailing  before  the  crisis  was  its  focus  on
nominal wage and price rigidities. Models including these rigidities had greater explanatory power
than previous models and were more in line with monetary policy practices at that time. Price
stability emerged in both central bank mandates and macroeconomic models as the overriding
objective that central banks should pursue in order to maximise social welfare. In the words of an
influential article, one could see a “science of monetary policy” developing next to the traditional
3
“art” of monetary policy.
But there was a notable absence of a role for banking and finance in these models. Wage and
price rigidities, together with a few other frictions, appeared to be sufficient to provide a realistic
characterisation of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy in the main macroeconomic
models.  Financial  sector  developments  did  not  seem  to  affect  this  mechanism,  because
financial intermediation was assumed to be fully efficient. And generally, the interest rates faced
by  households  and  businesses  typically  moved  in  line  with  movements  in  central  bank  policy
rates.
4
that 
there  were 
some  models 
into
True, 
macroeconomics.   Central  banks  themselves  were  also  aware  of  the  role  of  monetary  and
financial  markets  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism.  The  first  Eurosystem
Research Network at the ECB studied the so-called bank lending channel, which maintains that
banks  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  But  the  impact  of  financial
frictions  was  generally  estimated  to  be  small  in  developed  countries  and  these  frictions  were
therefore absent from the canonical models used for monetary policy analysis.
incorporated 
financial 
frictions 
Financial economists of course studied banks and financial markets much more closely, but they
used predominantly partial equilibrium models and showed less interest in the way the financial
system interacted with the wider economy.
In fact, the pre-crisis paradigm in macroeconomics predicted neither the onset nor the severity of
the  crisis  in  any  meaningful  fashion  for  the  conduct  of  policy.  Unconditional  trust  in  the  self-
repairing  capacities  of  financial  markets,  or  simple  neglect,  had  led  to  deregulation  and  lax
supervision  in  the  years  preceding  the  crisis.  Low  quality  capital  with  little  loss-absorbing
capacity,  underestimation  of  asset  risk,  excessive  and  overlooked  leverage,  ignorance  of  the
interconnections,  disregard  for  the  liquidity  buffers,  low  resilience  of  the  funding  markets,  and
pervasive fraud, especially in the sub-prime sector were just a few of the factors that produced
the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression.
The evolution of the financial and sovereign debt crises
As  the  crisis  unfolded,  the  interbank  funding  market  dried  up  and  credit  availability  contracted
sharply. Annual credit growth to the private sector fell from 9.3% in 2007 Q4 to –2.1% in 2009 Q3
in the United States and from 8.5% to 0.7% in the euro area over the same period. The effect on
economic activity was sudden and significant. Between 2008 Q3 and 2009 Q2, GDP declined by
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
3.6% in the United States and by 4.9% in the euro area.
Though the initial effect of credit contraction was similar in the United States and the European
Union  (EU),  its  propagation  was  considerably  different  owing  to  the  EU’s  predominantly  bank-
based system of financing. The first banks to be hit in 2007 were obviously the ones that invested
the most in related financial products that had by then lost much of their value. These banks
were  mostly  located  in  Germany,  France  and  Netherlands,  countries  with  comparably  strong
fiscal positions. Then, starting in 2008, it was the turn of several Spanish and Irish banks, which
were overexposed to the collapsing domestic real estate market.
Governments  across  the  globe  stepped  in  to  shore  up  their  banking  systems.  The  European
Commission estimates that in the EU, public sector aid provided in 2008 was around 5% and in
5
 The direct net fiscal costs of financial sector support in the United
2009 around 9% of EU GDP.
6
States between 2007 and 2009 are estimated to be at around 5% of GDP.
Up until that point, sovereign debt had been considered as effectively risk free, regardless of the
rating of the sovereign. The Greek crisis destroyed that illusion, and induced a general repricing
of  risk  in  the  EU.  This  repricing  of  sovereign  and  other  risks,  combined  with  the  drying  up  of
funding  markets,  in  turn  affected  other  countries’  banks  which,  having  little  exposure  to  either
toxic  financial  products  or  to  real  estate,  had  been  immune  up  until  that  point.  Banks  in,  for
example, Italy and Portugal were overly exposed to their fragile sovereigns. The banking crisis
morphed  into  a  sovereign  debt  crisis.  In  these  countries  credit  contracted  even  further,
aggravating the ongoing recession and further weakening the banking system in a vicious circle.
Fears of potential sovereign default, with likely catastrophic impact on domestic banking sectors,
caused  interbank  lending  between  countries  to  dry  up  and  funding  markets  in  the  euro  area
became  fragmented  along  national  lines.  This  threatened  the  even  transmission  of  monetary
policy  across  the  euro  area.  The  interest  rates  faced  by  businesses  and  households  –  and
indeed sovereigns – became increasingly divorced from movements in short-term central bank
rates. The crisis that had started as a global crisis was now becoming the crisis of the euro.
The financial sector played a significant role in not only propagating but also originating negative
shocks to the economy. Financial frictions – largely absent from both the pre-crisis experience of
developed economies and the canonical macroeconomic models – had become major drivers of
the  recession.  The  resulting  crisis  prompted  academics  to  reassess  existing  economic
paradigms and policymakers to adjust their frameworks. The rediscovery of the notion that policy
may  have  a  role  in  coordinating  private  expectations  at  times  of  severe  uncertainty  played  a
major part in the transition to today’s post-crisis world.
The evolution of economic theory in response to the crisis
A number of significant academic contributions during the 1980s had focused on the way optimal
individual behaviour could change depending on what individuals expect other private agents to
7
do.
The  presence  of  this  interdependence  between  agents,  or  as  it  is  called,  strategic
complementarity, leads to multiple outcomes. Each of these outcomes is a rational equilibrium,
but  ones  that  differ  in  their  implications  for  social  welfare.  Panic-based  bank  runs  and  panic-
based  sovereign  debt  crises  are  examples  of  policy  intervention  being  needed  to  avert  “bad”
outcomes during a financial crisis.
To an extent this is not a new idea for policymakers – central banks have been acting to stave off
panic-based runs on banks for centuries. But the financial crisis has shown that severe financial
frictions can exacerbate strategic complementarities. Moreover, the financial sector nowadays is
much more sizeable relative to the economy, and runs are correspondingly more costly.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Advances in the literature have made strides in incorporating these ideas into macroeconomic
8
models, thus to providing a clearer theoretical framework for these types of interventions.
Economic research has also evolved in its thinking of how central banks should respond to an
emerging crisis, particularly when their standard monetary policy instrument, typically a short-
term  interest  rate,  reaches  its  effective  lower  bound.  At  the  lower  bound,  monetary
accommodation cannot be provided through further reductions in short-term interest rates and
policy must become non-standard.
One option is to rely on forward guidance, i.e. to promise to keep interest rates low for longer in
the future. Such commitments, if credible, lower longer-term interest rates and provide economic
stimulus even if the current interest rate remains unchanged. While forward guidance is a useful
instrument, recent research has highlighted that its effectiveness can be improved if combined
with other non-standard monetary policies.
 Research in both academia and in central banks
has  therefore  re-examined  alternative  monetary  policy  tools,  including  so-called  quantitative
easing (QE) policies. And here the newly developed models with financial frictions have been
useful.
10
11
9
Earlier studies based on the assumption of frictionless financial markets had concluded that QE
is completely ineffective. The renewed focus on financial frictions clarified that this conclusion is
unwarranted,  once  it  is  recognised  that  financial  intermediaries  are  subject  to  leverage
constraints.
 Large-scale asset purchases can ease these constraints and increase investors’
risk-bearing capacity, leading to a portfolio rebalancing towards risky assets and to strengthened
lending activity for banks.
12
All  in  all,  research  has  confirmed  that  central  banks  are  not  powerless  at  the  effective  lower
bound.  Provided  they  are  willing  to  explore  non-standard  policy  avenues,  they  can  continue
pursuing their price stability mandates even in the most adverse circumstances.
The evolution of policymaking
The policy response by central banks and governments has evolved along the two main lines
suggested  by  research.  As  short-term  interest  rates  approached  the  effective  lower  bound,
central  banks  on  both  sides  of  the Atlantic  undertook  a  number  of  unconventional  measures
aimed at influencing the whole constellation of rates that are important for the financial decisions
taken by households and businesses.
Forward  guidance  helped  guide  market  expectations  of  future  short-term  rates.  QE  involved
direct intervention by central banks in markets through large scale asset purchases to influence
the yield curve beyond the very short term. A large body of empirical research has substantiated
the success of these policies in supporting the economy and inflation, both in the euro area and
in the United States.
13
But central bank policy moves extended beyond just measures to counteract the impairment of
the transmission mechanism caused by financial frictions. The ECB also acted in various ways
to  prevent  self-fulfilling  expectations  from  delivering  socially  undesirable  outcomes  by  co-
ordinating expectations onto “good” outcomes.
14
One  such  policy  initiative  was  our  lender-of-last-resort  intervention  during  the  financial  crisis.
Revisiting  the  Bagehot  principles  set  out  a  century  and  a  half  ago  in  the  light  of  the  ongoing
crisis,
 the ECB lent freely to solvent financial institutions against sound collateral, penalised by
a haircut. We did so in multiple ways: our liquidity operations moved to a fixed rate full allotment
basis with unprecedented maturity of four years, and we widened the eligible collateral accepted
in our operations.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second occasion came later in 2012 when we had to prevent a self-fulfilling bad outcome
that  threatened  to  occur  as  a  result  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Investors  had  begun  pricing
redenomination  risk  into  sovereign  debt  and  interbank  markets,  as  they  worried  about  the
possible break-up of the euro area.
However,  as  I  said  earlier,  the  pricing  of  such  risk  led  to  a  breakdown  of  money  markets,  a
fragmentation  of  banking  systems  along  national  lines  and  threatened  the  unity  of  monetary
policy  transmission  across  the  euro  area.  Moreover,  expectations  fuelled  a  vicious  cycle.
Tightening monetary conditions in countries affected by perceptions of redenomination risk put
downward pressure on economic activity, exacerbating the perceived risk. Such moves are a
classic  example  of  expectations  leading  towards  an  outcome  that  is  non-optimal  for  social
welfare.
This is why we announced Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) as an instrument that can
support  our  monetary  policy.  The  idea  was  for  the  ECB  to  purchase  the  sovereign  bonds  of
countries affected by panic-based redenomination risk. By breaking the link between perceptions
and  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity,  OMTs  would  aid  in  restoring  the  proper
transmission of monetary policy across the whole euro area and support the recovery.
OMTs  were  not  used.  That  the  ECB  had  the  tool  at  its  disposal  was  sufficient  to  anchor
expectations at the “good” outcome. Once unwarranted fears of redenomination were removed,
sovereign spreads fell and banks were once again able to raise debt and equity funding. This
played a vital role in fostering the euro area recovery that is currently under way.
Financial sector policies
The  greater  awareness  of  the  costs  of  financial  instability  and  of  financial  frictions  has  also
resulted in a revamp of financial sector policies.
First,  financial  sector  regulation  and  supervision  are  much  stricter.  The  quality  of  regulatory
capital  has  improved  and  its  quantity  has  increased.  In  the  euro  area,  banks  have  materially
bolstered  their  capital  positions,  with  the  average  common  equity  Tier  1  ratio  of  significant
institutions rising to 13.5% by end-2016 from 7% in 2008.
The establishment of a new stress testing framework lends a further quantitative dimension to
the  process  of  ensuring  that,  even  in  a  pre-defined  “stressed  scenario”,  financial  institutions
should remain well capitalised and able to continue lending to creditworthy borrowers.
Second, policymakers have acquired new macroprudential tools to mitigate the effect of financial
cycles on the economy. Across the globe, authorities have imposed measures such as loan-to-
value and loan-to-income ratios, to reduce the endogenous link between credit and house prices.
This  new macroprudential  approach  to  regulation  aims  to  safeguard  not  just  the  solvency  of
individual banks but also the systemic integrity of the banking system and its ability to continue
providing finance to the non-bank private sector.
In  addition  to  the  overall  global  move  to  stricter  regulation,  there  have  been  also  a  number  of
institutional improvements. In the euro area, banking supervision is now carried out by the Single
Supervisory Mechanism, composed of the ECB and the national competent authorities. This has
unified the basis on which supervision is carried out. The largest and most significant banks are
now  supervised  directly  from  Frankfurt,  in  close  partnership  with  the  national  authorities.  The
euro area has also set up the Single Resolution Mechanism to ensure the orderly resolution of
failing banks, while at the same time reducing the impact on the taxpayer.
Conclusion
This account of how policymakers and researchers have interacted in the past ten years shows
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
how indebted the former are to the latter. From my point of view, one can draw five lessons for
policymakers.
First, sudden shocks often make visible the flaws in our policy frameworks and challenge the
explanatory power of existing theories in ways that have been previously overlooked. But analysis
conducted  by  researchers  and  embraced  by  policymakers  remains  essential  in  designing  the
policy response.
Second, a policy response that has its foundation in rigorous research is less prone to being
impaired by political compromise and easier to explain to the general public.
Third, Keynes is often quoted as saying, “When the facts change, I change my mind. What do
you  do,  sir?”  Well,  for  policymakers,  it  is  not  that  simple,  and  research  helps  us  to  decide
whether a change in the facts deserves a policy response or, as we say, we should look through
it.
Fourth,  when  the  world  changes  as  it  did  ten  years  ago,  policies,  especially  monetary  policy,
need  to  be  adjusted.  Such  an  adjustment,  never  easy,  requires  unprejudiced,  honest
assessment of the new  realities  with  clear  eyes,  unencumbered  by  the  defence  of  previously
held paradigms that have lost any explanatory power.
Fifth,  we  must  be  aware  of  the  gaps  that  still  remain  in  our  knowledge.  Our  mainstream
macroeconomic models still have little to say, for instance, about the non-linear propagation of
shocks, the distributional impacts of policies, or how endogenous firm entry and exit can affect
economic performance.
 Policy actions undertaken in the last ten years in monetary policy and
in  regulation  and  supervision  have  made  the  world  more  resilient.  But  we  should  continue
preparing for new challenges.
15
The  changes  that  we  have  discussed,  profound  as  they  are,  often  hinge  on  one  fundamental
idea. A natural question to ask is whether such an idea sprang out as a response to a specific
policy problem or was rather conceived previously in an entirely different, unrelated intellectual
environment, perhaps addressing a different set of problems. It is a question that is especially
relevant in economics, when previously held consensus views change. But it is a question that is
unlikely to have a precise answer.
Let me rather use the 1939 words of Abraham Flexner, the first director of the Princeton Institute
for Advanced Study: “Almost every discovery has a long precarious history. Someone finds a bit
here, another a bit there. A third step succeeds later, and thus onward till a genius pieces the bits
together and makes the decisive contribution.”
16
Today, I have had the privilege of addressing such people – geniuses who have pieced the bits
together and made decisive contributions. 
1
2
3
4
Ricardo, D. (1817), On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, London: John Murray.
Sargent, T. & Wallace, N. (1976), “Rational Expectations and the Theory of Economic Policy", Journal of Monetary
Economics, 2(2): 169–83; Lucas, R., (1976), “Econometric policy evaluation: A critique”, Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1: 19–46; Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1977), “Rules rather than discretion:
the time inconsistency of optimal plans”, Journal  of  Political  Economy, 85(3): 473–491. These models also
provided  the  ground  for  structural  econometrics,  which  allowed  for  policy  analysis  and  the  study  of
counterfactuals. See Hansen, L. P. (2013), “Uncertainty outside and inside models”, Lecture on receipt of the
Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, 8 December; and Sims, C. (1980),
“Macroeconomics and Reality“, Econometrica, 48(1): 1–48.
Clarida, R., Gali, J. and Gertler, M. (1999), “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective”,
Journal of Economic Literature, 37(4): 1661–1707.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Notably Kiyotaki, N. and Moore, J. (1997), “Credit Cycles”, Journal of Political Economy, 105(2):211–248 and
Bernanke, B., Gertler, M. and Gilchrist, S. (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative Business Cycle
Framework”, Chapter 21, Handbook of Macroeconomics.
This  includes  recapitalisation  measures,  asset  relief  interventions,  liquidity  measures  and  guarantees.  For
2009, the numbers as a percentage of GDP are around 12 % for Netherlands, 8 % for Germany, 5.4 % for Spain
and 5 % for France. See Financial Crisis Aid amounts for a more detailed breakdown.
Laeven, L. and F. Valencia (2013), “Systematic banking crisis database”, IMF  Economic  Review, 61(2): 225–
270.
E.g.  Diamond,  D.  and  P.  Dybvig  (1983),  Bank  runs,  deposit  insurance  and  liquidity”, Journal  of  Political
Economy, 91(3): 401–419; Cooper, R. and A. John (1988), “Coordinating coordination failures in Keynesian
models”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(3): 441–463; Calvo, G. (1988), “Servicing the public debt: the role
of expectations”, American Economic Review, 78(4):647–661. The search and matching literature also exhibits
multiple equilibria, e.g. Diamond, P. (1982), “Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium”, Journal of
Political Economy, 90(5): 881–894.
Gertler, M. and N. Kiyotaki (2015), “Banking, liquidity and bank runs in an infinite horizon economy,” American
Economic Review, 105(7): 2011–2043.
Eggertsson,  G.  and  M.  Woodford  (2003),  “The  zero  bound  on  interest  rates  and  optimal  monetary  policy”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 34(1): 139–235; Woodford (2012) “Methods of Policy Accommodation at
the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” presented at the Jackson Hole symposium, August.; Nakov, A. (2008), “Optimal
and simple monetary policy rules with zero floor on the nominal interest rate”, International Journal of Central
Banking, 4(2): 73–127.
Campbell, J. R., C. L. Evans, J. D. M. Fisher, and A. Justiniano (2012), “Macroeconomic effects of Federal
Reserve forward guidance,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 43(1): 1‒54 and Del Negro, M., Giannoni,
M. and C. Patterson (2015) “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports,
no. 574.
Notable  contributions  include  Del  Negro,  M.,  Eggertson,  G.,  Ferrero, A.  and  Kiyotaki,  N.  (2017),  “The  Great
Escape: a quantitative evaluation of the Fed’s liquidity facilities”, American Economic Review, 107(3): 824–857;
Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. (2011), “A model of unconventional monetary policy”,  Journal of Monetary Economics,
58  (1):  17–34;  Gertler,  M.  and  Kiyotaki,  N.  (2015), op. cit.; Suarez, J. and Martinez-Miera, D. (2014), “Banks’
endogenous systemic risk-taking”, mimeo; Brunnermeier, M. and Sannikov, Y. (2014), “A macroeconomic model
with a financial sector”, American Economic Review, 104(2): 379–421.
Curdia, V. and M. Woodford (2011), “The Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Monetary Economics.; Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. (2011), ibid.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensson (2013), “The ins and outs of LSAPs,” Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium; Gertler, M. and Karadi, P. (2013), “QE1 vs. 2 vs. 3: A Framework to
Analyze Large Scale Asset Purchases as a Monetary Policy Tool”, International Journal of Central Banking,
9(S1): 5-53; Altavilla, C., Carboni, G. and R. Motto (2015) “Asset Purchase Programmes and Financial Markets:
Evidence  from  the  Euro Area,” ECB  Working  Paper, no.1864;  Andrade,  P.  et  al.  (2016),  “The  ECB’s  asset
purchase programme: an early assessment” ECB Working Paper, no. 1956.
Bagehot, W. (1873), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, London: H.S. King.
Some move in this direction is presented in e.g. Bilbiie, F., Fujiwara, I. and F. Ghironi (2014), “Optimal Monetary
Policy with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 64: 1-20.
Abraham Flexner (1939), The Usefulness of Useless Knowledge, Princeton University Press. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
