François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Secular  stagnation  and  growth
measurement
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Secular
stagnation  and  growth  measurement  conference,  organized  by  the  Bank  of  France,  Paris,  16
January 2017.
Accompanying slides
Ladies and Gentlemen [slide 1],
 I am very pleased to welcome you all to Paris, for this conference on “secular stagnation and
growth measurement”. We should always be cautious when using expressions as categorical as
“secular stagnation”, and which describe the long term: Alvin Hansen, who coined it in 1938 with
his famous “full recovery or stagnation”, lived long enough – until 1975 – to see thirty years of
almost full recovery, instead of stagnation. Nevertheless, this risk, popularized again recently by
Larry  Summers,  is  a  matter  of  concern  for  central  bankers.  Why?  Because  a  persistent
slowdown in trend output growth could make the economy more vulnerable to shocks that push
the natural interest rate below the effective lower bound. Whether secular or lasting for many
years, very slow growth and inflation also challenge the efficacy of conventional monetary policy
tools. They can affect the sustainability of public and private debt. And beyond central banking
concerns, they can also alter the functioning of our social models. Let me just clarify that I will not
speak about monetary policy today, as we are in our “silent period” before the Governing Council
meeting. Allow me to say simply that some of the more recent comments about a “come back of
inflation",  which  would  allegedly  put  the  Governing  Council  under  strain,  seem  greatly
exaggerated.
So, where do we stand? The slowdown in per capita growth in advanced economies can actually
be traced back to the 1970s [slide 2]. It worsened in several stages, the latest starting in the mid-
2000s, after the ICT revolution and before the Great Recession. The issue is that this prolonged
slowdown  raises  questions  about  future  potential  growth,  largely  due  to  uncertainty  about
productivity trends. To assess the risks, I would like to elaborate on the three hypotheses that
form  the  basis  for  today’s  conference  [slide  3]:  first,  are  we  simply  underestimating  growth?
Second, is the slowdown a demand phenomenon? Third, is it a persistent phenomenon due to a
slowdown in the pace of innovation?
1. Are we underestimating growth?
New technologies usually lead to a mismeasurement of output. National accounts indeed have a
hard time taking into account improvements in product quality and product entry or exit. As a
result,  they  tend  to  overestimate  inflation  and  underestimate  output.  For  instance,  there  is
currently an issue with IT hardware, as output of these products is inadequately recognised, even
in the US.
But the growing share of digital computing technologies in economic activity raises new specific
challenges, both on a conceptual and practical level [slide 4]. Let me take the example of travel
services.  On  a  conceptual  level,  digitalization  is  blurring  the  frontier  between  the  market  and
informal economy, and leading to the development of “C to C” services; for example, many of us
now directly buy our holidays on-line. This disintermediation of services has been accompanied
by a significant improvement in their quantity and quality. Yet, travel services are now in large part
‘home production’, and the measured market value added of travel agency services is declining.
On a practical level, with the rise of digitalization, new kinds of services can be imported, notably
through e-trade, and the location of activities is less easy to determine. Moreover, the fact that
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
these services are not standardized and evolve quickly makes it more difficult to estimate the
deflator for service output in national accounting.
The  concern  over  output  mismeasurement  is  therefore  serious.  Yet  mismeasurement  alone
cannot explain all of the slowdown, as it did not suddenly appear in the mid-2000s.
2. Is it also a demand phenomenon? I am very much inclined to say it is.
Negative demand shocks are particularly pernicious when interest rates are already low, as there
is limited room to spur demand by cutting interest rates. In central banking jargon, we say that
short-term  interest  rates  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  “natural  rate”,  which  is  the  level  where
demand  equates  to  potential  output  and  inflation  is  stabilized.  Faced  with  these  constraints,
major central banks have implemented an array of non-conventional measures, including forward
guidance and QE, in order to help stimulate demand by lowering long-term interest rates further.
So why is demand proving so slow to pick up in spite of these highly stimulatory measures?
[slide 5] Wage-setting mechanisms are likely to play a role. Insufficient attention has been given
to this, due to differences between countries and the fact that it is a micro-level issue. The muted
reaction of wages to stimulatory measures and to a tense labour market is particularly puzzling
in  Germany.  On  the  contrary,  real  wages  in  France  have  been  relatively  dynamic,  despite  a
deteriorated  labour  market,  leading  to  further  competitiveness  losses.  This  reflects  in  part  the
minimum  wage  and  the  associated  automatic  revaluation  rules.  And  yet  wage  setting  is  an
important  issue  not  just  for  employment,  competitiveness  and  growth,  but  also  for  monetary
policy. Wages are a determinant of cost inflation, whereas wage negotiation is likely to take into
account the central bank inflation target – over the medium run, wages should in theory increase
at the rate of productivity growth plus the inflation objective. What is more, wage setting policies
could improve coordination in the euro area, as relative wages could contribute to the correction
of imbalances. Although this issue attracts less attention than fiscal policy in the public debate,
there would be merit in exploring it further in each country, including in France, and in the euro
area as a whole. In that respect, Jens Weidmann’s call for significant pay rises in Germany in
2014 was a courageous and welcome move.
Deleveraging is another factor that  can  act  as  a  drag  on  demand. A  significant  deleveraging
process  took  place  after  the  recent  financial  crisis  –  among  households,  firms  and  also
governments. Household debt declined the most in those countries where it had grown the most,
such as the United States or Spain. Corporates reduced their net debt positions to insulate their
balance sheets from the crisis. And, to make sure that debt remained sustainable, governments
had  to  reduce  their  deficits  from  the  very  high  levels  reached  during  the  Great  Recession  of
2009.  Unfortunately,  fiscal  consolidation  polices  were  not  sufficiently  coordinated  in  the  euro
area.  While  deleveraging  might  be  individually  desirable  for  over-indebted  groups,  if  all  agents
scale down their debts simultaneously, aggregate demand inevitably slows.
Turning  to  more  structural  factors, demographic trends  and productivity can also weigh on
demand through their impact on savings. What are the determinants of savings in the long run?
According to economic theory, people save more when the rate of the economic growth slows,
either because fewer people are in work or because the productivity of each worker decelerates.
Several factors are likely to reduce the growth rate of the working age population and increase
the average age of workers: the gradual exit of baby boomers from the workforce, the one child
policy in China and the decline of fertility rates in the OECD. This can also weigh on productivity
as  older  workers  may  have  a  harder  time  adapting  to  new  technologies.  Another  important
demographic factor is increasing longevity which would also, for a given retirement age, increase
savings.
Lastly, inequalities – both on a global level and within countries – can also affect demand [slide
6].  Growing  income  inequality  within  countries  –  even  if  it  remains  significantly  lower  in
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
continental Europe – implies reduced relative spending power for low-income households, which
have a high propensity to consume. More inclusive societies with fewer unemployed and more
even income distribution would most likely result in more dynamic demand.
3. Are we witnessing a permanent slowdown in the pace of technological progress?
The debate between techno-pessimists and techno-optimists over the future pace of innovation
is  well-known.  It  resulted  from  the  slowdown  in  productivity  and  in  the  contribution  of  ICT  to
growth in the mid-2000s, even before the Great Recession. For the United States, there was a
downward break in the productivity trend as early as 2006.
In fact, the diffusion of technology can suffer from two types of lag: a time-lag, but also a space-
lag.  Time-lags  refer  to  the  delay  in  incorporating  innovations  efficiently  into  the  production
process, as the required structural adaptation of the economy and learning processes can take
decades. What stage of diffusion are we at for ICTs? Have structures in individual firms evolved
sufficiently to allow them to reap the full benefits of ICTs? I very much doubt it given the usual
time lags observed in the diffusion of past technologies and the differences in productivity levels
between firms. The second type of lag, space-lags, refers to the uneven diffusion of technology
across firms. Frontier firms usually enjoy stronger rates of productivity growth than imitators in
the same sector. In France, the productivity growth of frontier firms has remained steady – or
even  increased  –  throughout  the  slowdown  [slide  7].  This  may  reflect  winner-takes-all
phenomena. For example, in the digital economy, due to network externalities, one firm with a
marginal comparative advantage can seize the whole market and benefit from the low marginal
cost of production of additional units of its product. However, these phenomena may be specific
to ICT-producing sectors. Productivity growth in frontier firms mostly reflects the actual pace of
technological advance and supports techno-optimists views. 
I’ve shared with you a few thoughts on these three promising hypotheses. To conclude, let me
share with you what I see as priorities in order to exit the low growth trap and prevent the risk of
secular stagnation. We must obviously accelerate domestic reforms in order to foster innovation
and  an  entrepreneurial  spirit.  But  at  the  European  level,  we  need  to  tackle  the  persistent
“investment  crunch”  which  followed  the  financial  crisis.  Thus,  we  first  need  a  “Financing  and
Investment  Union”  in  Europe  to  steer  abundant  savings  into  investment  and  provide  adequate
financing for innovation. We also need, as a second step, a collective economic strategy in the
euro  area,  which  could  be  backed  up  with  a  euro  area  “Finance  Minister”:  growth  and
employment will be stronger in Europe if we combine more structural reforms where they are
needed – such as in France and Italy – and more fiscal and/or wage support in those countries
with room for manoeuvre – such as Germany. On that note, I wish you very fruitful discussions
throughout this conference and I shall now leave the floor to the first session on measurement
issues. Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
