RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  ADDRESS BY 
GOVERNOR OF THE RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
BARRY WHITESIDE 
AT THE 3rd ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS OF HFC BANK  
 Mr Tom Ricketts. Chairman of the HFC Bank Board 
4 March 2017 
Members of the Board 
Mr Raj Sharma, Acting Chief Executive Officer 
Management and Staff  
Members of the media 
Invited Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 Bula Vinaka and a very good morning to you all! 
 Introductory Comments 
I  am  pleased  to  join  you  in  celebrating  this  special  day,  marking  the  3rd 
anniversary of HFC Bank’s operations as a commercial bank.  I always welcome 
such  opportunities  to  celebrate  the  achievements  of  our  licensed  financial 
institutions  as  they  confirm  to  us  the  commitment  and  resilience  they  have  to 
continue to serve our people. 
 The  Fijian  financial  system  has  evolved  significantly  into  a  modern,  reputable 
and  stable  one,  which  has  safely  steered  our  economy  through  the  past  two 
decades,  and  is  considered  the  most  advanced  amongst  our  Pacific  island 
countries.  
  1 
Three years ago when the Reserve Bank of Fiji first received an application for a 
commercial banking licence by Home Finance Company Limited there was a bit 
of  hesitancy  on  our  part  to  accept  the  proposal.    However,  with  the 
acknowledgement of the performance of HFC as a licensed credit institution for 
18  years,  the commitment of strong  shareholders, and  also the  strengthening  of 
the  Reserve  Bank’s  own  regulatory  capacity,  it  was  agreed  that  it  was  an 
opportune time to allow a locally owned bank to operate.   
 It  was,  however,  not  a  light  decision  as  HFC  Bank  will  acknowledge,  with  the 
Reserve  Bank  setting  high  expectations  for  the  institution  and  continuing  to 
closely  liaise  on  necessary  regulatory  matters,  in  line  with  our  mandate  of 
protecting Fijian depositors.   
 I  therefore  wish  to  congratulate  the  shareholders  of  HFC  Bank,  its  Board, 
management  and  staff  for  this  milestone  we  are  celebrating  today,  achieved 
through great dedication and teamwork. 
 HFC Bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen, from the humble beginnings of a home loan provider in 
1962 and later as a licensed credit institution with services limited to providing 
term deposits and loans limited to mortgage financing, HFC today boasts a vast 
offering of financial services akin to other banks in Fiji.   
 Substantial  and  necessary  investment  into  its  technological  platform  has  also 
made  it  possible  for  the  institution  to  provide  secured  online  banking  services 
which  will  also  soon  include  bill  payment  capabilities.    HFC  Bank  has  further 
invested heavily in refurbishing its branches to be on par with other commercial 
banks and has increased its presence with the installation of its first ATMs. 
  2 
I  acknowledge  the  Bank  for being  an  active  user of the  Reserve  Bank’s  import 
substitution  and  export  finance  facilities.    We  continue  to  encourage  banks  to 
utilise these services for the benefit of their customers. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, HFC’s achievement in this three year period is testament 
to  public  confidence  in  the  Fijian  banking  industry  and  in  a  growing  Fijian 
economy.  I would like to take this opportunity to make some comments on the 
significant contributions made by our financial institutions to the growth of our 
economy,  and  towards  ensuring  the  maintenance  of  a  sound  and  safe  financial 
system. 
 The Fijian Financial System and the Commercial Banking Industry 
The gross assets of the Fijian financial system stood at $17.5 billion at the end of 
2016,  nearly  twice  the  size  of  our  GDP.    51  percent  of  that  was  held  by  the 
commercial banks alone, making the banking industry the most dominant sector 
in our financial system.   
 Commercial banks in Fiji have grown in terms of the size of their balance sheets, 
and the scope of their services and product offerings.  They have also extended 
their  reach  to  areas  once  unbanked,  through  their  increased  footprints  and 
financial inclusion initiatives, including financial literacy. 
 The  range  of  banking  customers  in  Fiji  has  also  expanded  significantly,  with 
banking  services  provided  at  the  early  ages  of  primary  school  to  tertiary 
education,  and  then  to  the  other  end  of  the  spectrum  acknowledging  the 
importance  of  our  retiree  population  and  senior  citizens,  who  are  being  offered 
products designed specifically to meet their financial status. 
 Commercial  banks  have  also  established  their  presence  in  Fiji  by  driving 
investments  through  their  basic  function  of  intermediation,  paying  taxes  and 
3 
 providing employment.  Ladies and Gentlemen, like any other business, all these 
cannot  be  achieved  without  extensive  investments  by  the  commercial  banking 
industry.   
 One  just  has  to  look  at  the  significant  development  in  Fiji’s  banking 
infrastructure  to  understand  the  extent  of  commitment  made  by  commercial 
banks  in  Fiji  to  ensure  that  most  Fijians  are  financially  included.    The  Reserve 
Bank continues to work with them in this area. 
 The  number  of  EFTPOS  terminals  available  to  our  people  has  increased  from 
2937 in 2011 to 6081 at the end of 2016, while the number of ATMs increased 
from 212 to 326 in the same 5-year period.  All commercial  banks in Fiji have 
continuously upgraded their core systems, costing millions of dollars, to enhance 
how they do business and improve services to their customers.  Competition has 
been strong. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, because of the important service that commercial banks 
provide,  it  is  vital  that  we  ensure  that  they  continue  to  operate  soundly  and 
safely.    The  soundness  and  safety  responsibility  is  at  the  core  of  the  Reserve 
Bank’s financial stability mandate.  Banks are to ensure at all times that they are 
well capitalised and earning adequate profits to sustain their operations.  Banking 
business  is  a  business  of  managing  risks,  and  it  is  important  that  commercial 
banks have robust frameworks to identify and mitigate the risks inherent in their 
operations. 
 Market conduct and consumer protection have also come to the fore of banking 
in  recent  years.    Commercial  banks  in  Fiji  are  continuously  reviewing  their 
processes to ensure that these issues are managed effectively.  The Reserve Bank 
of  Fiji  expects  all  banks  to  prioritise  customer  complaints  and  ensure  the 
efficient and effective resolution of these at all times. 
4 
  The banking sector, in the coming months, will embark on further improving its 
payments  infrastructure  by  participating  in  the  Fiji  Interchange  Network 
Payment system, or what has often been referred to as a national switch.  Having 
a  central  national  switch  will  further  allow  the  efficient  provision  of  payment 
services and in due time provide cost savings for banking customers. 
 Closing 
In closing, I would like to again congratulate HFC Bank on achieving 3 years of 
commercial  banking,  but  also  HFC  as  a  financial  institution  for  having  served 
the people of Fiji for the last 55 years. 
 As  the  institution’s  regulator,  it  would  be  remiss  of  me  if  I  do  not  remind  the 
HFC  board  and  management  of  the  importance  of  the  task  they  have  ahead  of 
them,  which  includes  their  duty  to  serve  the  public  interest by  ensuring  a good 
governance environment and a strong risk management culture. 
 We wish HFC Bank the very best for the future, and look forward to the many 
years of great service that they will provide for all Fijians.   
 Vinaka vakalevu! 
 END. 
  5 
