Mario  Draghi:  Moving  to  the  frontier  –  promoting  the  diffusion  of
innovation
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  joint
conference by the ECB and the MIT Lab for Innovation Science and Policy “Fostering Innovation
and Entrepreneurship in the Euro area”, Frankfurt am Main, 13 March 2017.
 It is my pleasure to welcome you to this joint ECB-MIT conference on fostering innovation and
entrepreneurship in the euro area.
This might at first glance seem an unusual topic for a central bank conference, since monetary
policy principally operates through the demand side of the economy. But the long-term supply
picture evidently also affects our ability to deliver on our mandate.
Much of the debate today about the true level of the real equilibrium interest rate, for example, is a
debate  about  the  outlook  for  productivity  growth,  which  of  course  depends  in  large  part  on
innovation and entrepreneurship. Higher productivity growth is also vital to safeguard Europe’s
economic  model  of  high  wages  and  social  protection,  and  hence  to  counter  the  sense  of
economic insecurity that is currently prevalent in several advanced economies.
But aggregate productivity growth is more than just the development and application of innovation
and  new  technologies  which  enhance  or  even  revolutionise  production  processes.  New
technologies  invented  elsewhere  need  to  be  adapted  by  firms  into  their  own  production
processes  to  make  them  more  efficient.  In  short,  productivity  growth  depends  not  only  on
the creation of new ideas, but also on their diffusion.
To raise productivity growth, which has slowed in the euro area and in many other economies in
recent years, we need to focus on both areas.
Innovation
1
There is a lively debate underway as to whether the rate of innovation has slowed or not. Some
argue that the great innovations of the past – electricity, railways, etc. – will not be matched in the
future,  or that we have exhausted the gains from the information and communication technology
(ICT)  revolution.   Others  remain  more  optimistic  that  the  current  slowdown  in  productivity
reflects a transition to a knowledge-based economy, and that general purpose technologies such
3
as ICT improve over time and generate complementary innovations.
2
My  view  on  the  topic  is  that  we  should  not  be  overly  gloomy  about  the  global  prospects  for
innovation, for two reasons.
The first is that we clearly have potential to boost innovative capacity in the euro area. Consider,
for example, the persistent  gap  between  R&D  spending  in  Europe  and  other  major  advanced
economies. According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Indicator, only
three euro area countries are in the world’s top ten for innovation.
So if, as the world’s second-largest economic area, we were to dismantle barriers to innovative
activity in the euro area, it would clearly give a boost to global innovation. I will not go into detail
here about what policies this might entail, but clearly government support for innovation matters:
in  Europe  differences  in  innovative  capacity  between  countries  are  closely  related  to  public
4
spending on R&D, particularly in basic research.
The second reason why I am reasonably optimistic is that there is no clear evidence yet of a
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
slowdown in innovation. The available data in terms of global R&D spending, and the ongoing
historically high rate of high-tech patent registrations seem to challenge this perception.
Moreover, despite the global slowdown in aggregate productivity, firms at the global productivity
frontier have continued to post strong productivity gains over the past decade. The performance
of euro area businesses at the global frontier is on a par with businesses in other developed
economies, particularly in manufacturing. It is the performance  of  firms away from the frontier
that  has  been  lagging  (Charts  1  and  2).  Although  this  is  a  common  feature  for  all  OECD
countries,  it  is  particularly  the  case  for  euro  area  services,  where  productivity  growth  for  the
laggard firms has stagnated.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Diffusion
It seems, therefore, that a large contributing factor to the slowdown in aggregate productivity is
the second link in the chain: the lack of diffusion of innovation.
This  is  a  long-standing  issue  for  the  euro  area:  better  adoption  of  ICT  in  the  United  States
appears to explain most of the productivity gap between the US and the EU15 from 1995 to 2007.
The contribution to aggregate productivity growth from non-ICT sources of capital deepening and
total factor productivity (TFP) growth over that period was broadly equivalent in the two regions.5
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
But what is now becoming clearer is where the diffusion gaps lie. Recent work carried out by the
ECB using micro data shows that the difference in productivity between the most productive and
the least productive firms in each narrow, two-digit sector is considerable. The top 10% of firms,
in terms of productivity, are on average three times more productive than the firms in the bottom
10%  (Chart  3).  Similar  differentials  occur  in  the  United  States.   This  massive intra-industry
productivity  differential  dwarfs inter-industry  differentials.  For  comparison,  firms  active  in  the
tradable sector are on average around 50% more productive than those producing mainly non-
tradables.
6
How,  then,  can  we  improve  the  diffusion  of  innovation  from  the  frontier  to  the  laggard  firms,
especially within sectors? Research suggests three main areas that will improve the capacity of,
and incentives for, firms to adopt new technology: (i) investing in human capital and managerial
ability, (ii) investment in intangibles, and (iii) improving economic dynamism.
Investment in human capital and management
 
5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  there  is  now  an  extensive  literature  on  the  complementarities  between  technology  and
workforce  skills,  and  on  how  better  human  capital  increases  the  capacity  to  absorb
technologies.  Human capital includes not just formal education, but also on-the-job training and
job security – firms with a large proportion of workers on temporary contracts underperform in
8
terms of innovation.
7
Managerial ability is also key for the adoption of technology. New technologies often require new
structures  and  a  reorganisation  of  production  to  maximise  efficiency  gains.  While  managerial
quality  is  hard  to  quantify,  the  existing  studies  find  a  statistically  strong  correlation  between  a
firm’s  managerial  quality  and  its  total  factor  productivity.   One  of  the  channels  through  which
managerial practices enhance firm performance has been found to be the increased capability of
firms to absorb new technologies.
10
9
Certainly there is potential to improve education systems in the euro area and thereby to give
greater numbers of graduates the necessary technical and scientific skills. Our co-hosts today,
MIT, came top of the latest QS world university rankings. There are nine UK universities and two
Swiss universities in the top 50 of those rankings, but only one euro area university.
11
And education is not just for the young. Improving the provision of life-long learning and retraining
programmes will aid the flow of skilled labour towards more productive businesses.
Investment in intangibles
Second, numerous studies have shown that firms which invest more in intangibles are in a better
position  to  understand  and  benefit  from  new  technologies.
  Such  investment  includes
conducting their own R&D and developing their own intellectual property, as well as investment in
branding, software and databases.
12
Investment in intangibles also appears low in the euro area compared with a number of other
advanced  economies,  although  it  has  been  on  an  upward  trend.  The  aggregate  number  also
masks a wide country-level disparity, with the lack of intangibles investment particularly acute in
some countries. Increasing the resources devoted to R&D would improve the ability of euro area
firms to absorb more innovation.
Economic dynamism
The  third  main  factor  increasing  absorptive  capacity  is  the  framework  in  which  the  business
operates. Greater economic dynamism, from competition to higher rates of business entry, plays
an important role in incentivising firms to adopt new technology.
 Ensuring that failed firms are
able  to  smoothly  exit  the  market  is  also  key  to  enabling  capital  and  labour  to  be  allocated  to
where it can be more productively used.
13
Business churn – the combined rate of business formation and closure – has been declining in
Europe and the United States since just before the crisis (Chart 4). In lock step with the decline in
churn, evidence suggests that capital misallocation has been rising in both regions.
14
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
As an example of barriers to business creation, it takes on average about 10 days to start a new
business in the euro area. Depending on the country it can take between four days and almost a
month. Yet in the global best performer – New Zealand – it is possible to set up a business in
less than a day. There are barriers as well to the orderly exit of firms. Resolving insolvency takes
an  average  of  almost  two  years  in  the  euro  area,  three  times  longer  than  in  the  best  three
performing countries.
This  is  why  we  talk  frequently  about  the  need  for  structural  reforms  of  regulatory  and  judicial
processes to bolster business dynamism, as well as the need to complete the Single Market.
This is especially true in services, where the laggard firms are noticeably behind the frontier.
Of course, creating the right regulatory framework and market conditions to nurture innovation
and promote its transformation into new products and processes is complex, and there is no
particular established winning formula. But there are a number of countries in the euro area that
have proven relatively more successful at putting in place an effective “innovation ecosystem”.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
One of the aims of this conference is to investigate international and euro area best practice and
facilitate the sharing of that knowledge with countries where an effective ecosystem has yet to be
established.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
There are many reasons why it is a priority today in the euro area to address weak productivity
growth. But while some progress can be made in innovation, it is not in my view the sole issue. It
is equally important for the euro area to facilitate and encourage the spread of new technology
from the frontier to the laggard firms.
Simply  by  diffusing  better  the  technology  we already  have  in  the  euro  area,  we  could  make
sizeable  gains  in  productivity.  In  other  words,  there  is  much  we  can  still  do  to  reverse  the
aggregate productivity slowdown and dispel pessimism about our future.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Gordon,  R.  (2016), The  Rise  and  Fall  of  American  Growth:  The  US  Standard  of  Living  since  the  Civil
War, Princeton University Press.
See Fernald, J. (2014), `Productivity and Potential Output Before, During, and After the Great Recession', Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series (2014–15) and Cette, G., Fernald, J. G., and B. Mojon,
2016. “The Pre-Great Recession Slowdown in Productivity.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working
Paper 2016–08.
See, e.g. Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a
Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company.
See Veugelers, R.  (2016),  “The  European  Union’s  Growing  Innovation  Divide”,  Bruegel  Policy  Contribution,
Issue 2016/08, April 2016 and Mazzucato, M. (2013), The entrepreneurial state: debunking public vs. private
sector myths, Anthem.
Bloom, N., Sadun, R. and van Reenen, J. (2012), “Americans Do IT Better: US Multinationals and the Productivity
Miracle”, American Economic Review, 102(1): 167–201 and van Welsum, D., Overmeer, W. and van Ark, B.
(2013), “Unlocking the ICT growth potential in Europe: Enabling people and businesses”, report prepared for the
European Commission.
For example, Syverson, C. (2004): “Product Substitutability and Productivity Dispersion.” Review of Economics
and Statistics, 86(2): 534–50 shows that within four-digit industries in the US the top 10% of firms are, on
average, two times as productive as the bottom 10%.
See, for example, Acemoglu (2007), “Equilibrium Bias of Technology”, Econometrica, 75: 1371–1409
See Albert,  García-Serrano  and  Hernanz  (2005)  and  Lopez-Garcia  and  Montero  (2011),  and  Bentolila,  S.  &
Dolado,  J.  and  Juan  Jimeno,  J.,  (2012),  “Reforming  an  insider-outsider  labor  market:  the  Spanish
experience," IZA Journal of European Labor Studies, 1(1): 1-29.
Bloom, N. and J. Van Reenen (2007), “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
Countries”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351–1408 surveyed managers from over 700 medium-
sized firms in the United States, United Kingdom, France, and Germany and find that spanning the interquartile
range of the management score distribution, for example, corresponds to a productivity change of between 3.2
and 7.5 percent. This is between 10% and 23% of TFP’s 32 percent interquartile range in their sample.
See, for example, Garicano, L. and P. Heaton, (2010). “Do Computers Help Police Fight Crime?,” CentrePiece –
the  magazine  of  economic  performance  247,  Centre  for  Economic  Performance,  LSE;  and  Bloom  et  al.
(2012), op. cit.
QS world university rankings, www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings/world-university-rankings/2016
Numerous studies have demonstrated that a country’s ability to absorb international technological advances
relies on its exposure to them, and its absorptive capacity as proxied by investment in R&D and labour force
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
qualifications. See Coe, D.T., Helpman, E. and A.W. Hoffmaister (1997), Engebrecht (1997), Frantzen (2000) and
Griffith, Redding and van Reenen (2004).
13
14
See, e.g., Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J. and S. Scarpetta (2013), “Cross-Country Differences in Productivity:
The Role of Allocation and Selection”, American Economic Review, 103(1): 305–334 and Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin
R., Kulick, R. and J. Miranda (2016), “High Growth Young Firms: Contribution to Job, Output and Productivity
Growth”, mimeo.
Gamberoni, E., Giordano, C. and P. Lopez-Garcia (2016), “Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro area:
some stylized facts and determinants”, ECB Working Paper No 1981 and Hsieh, C. and Klenow, P. (2009):
“Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4) 1403–1448.
Note that data for the US refer to different waves of the US Census up to 1997.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
