 Remarks by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the press conference to 
announce the sale of SARB shares to the general public 
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
2 March 2017 
  Members of the media, ladies and gentlemen. 
 We  have  called  today’s  media  briefing  to  make  South  Africans  aware  of  the 
opportunity to buy shares of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB).  
 How did these shares become available?  
 
Some of you will recall that the SARB Act1 was amended in September 2010 to, 
among other things, limit the shareholding in the SARB to 10 000 shares each for 
a  SARB  shareholder  and  their  associates.  This  means  that  no  shareholder  and 
their  immediate  family,  and/or  associates,  can  collectively  own  more  than 
10 000 SARB shares.  
 After  some  shareholders  had  failed  to  comply  with  the  legislative  measures 
pertaining  to  this  limitation  of  shareholding,  the  SARB  applied  for,  and  was 
granted,  an  order  by  the  High  Court  of  South  Africa  authorising  the  sale  of  the 
shares held by these shareholders and their associates in excess of the statutory 
limit of 10 000.   
    
                                                           
1 South African Reserve Bank Act 90 of 1989 
 Page 1 of 4 
The High court order was issued on 4 November 2016: 
a)  Directing affected shareholders,  with their associates, to  dispose  of those 
SARB shares which they held in excess of 10 000; 
b)  Appointing 
Investec  Securities  Proprietary  Limited 
to  act  as  an 
independent broker to facilitate the disposal of those shares over a period 
of  two  years  from  the  date  of  the  order,  at  a  sale  price  of  not  less  than  a 
pre-determined market price; and 
c)  Directed  the  General  Counsel  of  the  SARB  to  do  all  things  necessary  to 
enable 
the  sale  of 
the  shares, 
including  signing  all  necessary 
documentation and providing whatever assistance is necessary to Investec 
Securities Proprietary Limited. 
 As  a  result  of  this  process,  some  149  200  shares  in  the  SARB  have  become 
available  for  sale.  We  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  diversify  our 
shareholder  base,  and  we  would  like  to  encourage  all  eligible  South  Africans  to 
take up this opportunity to own shares in the SARB. 
 Any  person  is  eligible  to  buy  shares  in  the  SARB,  except  if  they  already  hold, 
together with their associates, 10 000 of these shares. 
 I must emphasise that the SARB does not have a profit-maximising objective; our 
operations are conducted in the broader interests of the country, in pursuit of the 
SARB’s mandate and responsibilities. 
 The  mandate  and  independence  of  the  SARB  are  entrenched  in  sections  224 
and  225  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  South  Africa.  In  carrying  out  its 
mandate,  the  SARB  does  not  bow  to  any  pressure,  be  it  political  or  from  the 
private  sector.  The  SARB  accounts  to  the  people  of  South  Africa  through 
Parliament. 
    Page 2 of 4 
Shareholding  in  the  SARB  is  based  exclusively  on  the  principles  of  shared 
community  representation  and  participation  in  the  governance  of  the  SARB  in 
order  to  enhance  the  independence,  transparency  and  accountability  of  the 
SARB in the interest of all South Africans. 
 The SARB has a total of 2 million ordinary shares and its shareholders are paid a 
fixed annual dividend of 10 cents per share, as stipulated by the law.   
 SARB  shareholders  have  no  say  on  any  policy  decisions  that  the  executive 
management  of  the  SARB  takes  in  implementing  the  SARB’s  constitutional 
mandate. 
 However,  SARB  shareholders  can  elect  a  maximum  of  seven  non-executive 
directors of the Board of the SARB from a list of candidates approved by a panel 
chaired by the Governor of the SARB. These votes are normally exercised at the 
annual  ordinary  general  meeting  (AGM)  of  the  SARB  and  each  shareholder  is 
limited to 1 vote for every 200 shares held. 
 It  just  so  happens  that,  earlier  this  week,  the  SARB  put  out  a  call  for  the 
nomination of candidates for election as non-executive directors to the Board. 
 I  would  once  again  like  to  encourage  all  members  of  the  public  to  nominate 
candidates  who  have  skills  and  experience  in  the  mining  sector,  labour  sector 
and commerce or finance sectors.  Nominations close on Friday, 17 March 2017 
and forms are available on the SARB website.  
 SARB  shareholders  can  vote  from  an  approved  list  of  candidates  following  a 
rigorous  pre-qualification  process,  including  an  evaluation  of  the  nominees  by  a 
panel.   
    Page 3 of 4 
SARB shareholders are also required to discuss the Annual Report and the audit 
reports  of 
the  SARB,  appoint 
its  external  auditors  and  approve 
their 
remuneration, and consider any special business that may have been placed on 
the agenda of the AGM.  
 In  conclusion,  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  once  again  encourage  all  South 
Africans  to  get  a  share  of  the  SARB  today  –  and  in  so  doing  join  the  SARB  in 
serving the economic well-being of all South Africans. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 4 of 4 
