REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, AT THE PANEL OF CENTRAL BANK GOVERNORS ON “NEW 
CHALLENGES  FOR  CENTRAL  BANKS  IN  LATIN  AMERICA”.  SEMINAR  ON 
FINANCIAL  VOLATILITY  AND 
INTERVENTION 
ORGANIZED  BY  THE  CENTRAL  RESERVE  BANK  OF  PERU  AND  THE  INTER-
AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK. Cusco, Peru, July 25, 2017.1 
FOREIGN  EXCHANGE 
The  central  banks  from  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  faced  a 
challenging  external  environment  in  recent  years.  The  monetary  policies 
implemented  by  the  advanced  economies  after  the  global  financial  crisis, 
combined  with  episodes  of  turbulence  in  highly  integrated  international 
financial  markets  deriving  from  a  combination  of  factors,  have  resulted  in 
substantial  volatility  of  capital  flows.  In  addition,  EMEs  have  confronted  a 
world economic environment characterized by lower rates of global potential 
growth, a decline in commodity prices, a growing anti-globalization sentiment 
and events of a geopolitical nature. The combination of these factors has led 
to a situation of acute uncertainty. If this were not enough, the global financial 
crisis has eroded confidence on our understanding of the economics science 
and  of  the  proper  way  to  implement  monetary  policy  under  current 
circumstances.  
The  Mexican  experience  of  the  last  couple  of  years  provides  an  illustrative 
example of the nature and magnitude of the challenges that our central banks 
have  faced.  Since  mid-2014,  the  country  has  been  hit  by  a  combination  of 
external shocks. To a significant extent, the current evolution of the economy 
                                                           
1 The opinions and views expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
 1 
has been determined by the impact of these shocks and the economic policy 
that has been implemented in response to them. Let me refer briefly to the 
most important: 
1.  The price of the Mexican crude oil basket fell from around 100 dollars 
per  barrel  in  June  2014  to  some  45  dollars  per  barrel  at  present. 
Although  the  share  of  oil  in  exports  and  GDP  is  relatively  modest,  it 
accounts for a  substantial share of public revenues. Therefore, these 
developments have had significant implications for public finances. In 
fact,  when  the  impact  of  the  concurrent  reduction  in  oil  prices  and 
output is taken into consideration, the result is a decline in annual public 
revenues  from  this  source  of  approximately  5  percent  of  GDP  since 
2012. 
2.  After a prolonged period with near-zero interest rates, the US Federal 
Reserve began to increase the target for the federal funds rate in late 
2015.  While  this  shock  affects  EMEs  in  general,  its  implications  for 
Mexico  are  particularly 
important,  given  the  close  economic 
relationship between both economies and the openness of Mexico to 
foreign capital flows.  
3.  From December 2014 until late 2016, a recession was observed in the 
industrial sector in the United States. In addition, in a context of weak 
world trade, exports and imports of this country stagnated during most 
of  that  period.  This  had  important  repercussions  on  the  Mexican 
economy, since the industrial sectors in the US and Mexico are closely 
integrated,  and  exports  of  the  US  to  the  rest  of  the  world  make  an 
intensive use of Mexican manufacturing goods as inputs. 
 2 
4.  The  results  of  the  electoral  process  in  the  United  States  in  2016 
substantially  increased  uncertainty  regarding  the  future  economic 
relationship  between  this  country  and  Mexico.  In  particular,  concern 
emerged about the evolution of NAFTA negotiations, fiscal policy in the 
US, and the potential for actions with adverse repercussions on Mexico 
in the areas of migration and remittances. Although the possibility of 
extreme  scenarios  has  decreased  substantially,  uncertainty  has  not 
dissipated. 
Challenges  for  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  resulting  from  the 
above shocks were accentuated by other features of the Mexican economy. In 
particular,  the  sizable  portion  of  domestic  public  securities  in  the  hands  of 
foreign investors (around 30 percent of the total stock) may have increased 
the  sensitivity  of  capital  flows  to  external  and  domestic  developments.  In 
addition, in view of the high international liquidity of the Mexican peso, the 
currency  has  been  used  to  hedge  risks  unrelated  to  developments  in  the 
domestic  economy,  giving  rise  to  the  potential  for  additional  volatility  and 
pressures on the peso.   
In this context, the Mexican peso has depreciated significantly in recent years. 
From September 2014 to late July of this year, the depreciation vis-à-vis the 
US  dollar  amounts  to  around  36  percent,  although  at  some  stage  the 
cumulative decline in the value of the peso reached more than 60 percent. 
Mainly as a result of increased credibility of the Central Bank, the pass-through 
from the exchange rate to inflation has dropped significantly over the years. In 
fact, at present it remains relatively low compared with other EMEs. However, 
the  depreciation  of  the  peso  has  inevitably  reflected  in  higher  prices  of 
 3 
internationally  tradable  goods,  thus  affecting  inflation,  an  effect  that  has 
become more evident in recent months. 
Inflationary pressures in Mexico have not resulted from depreciation of the 
peso only. In an effort to strengthen public finances and support the process 
of reform of the energy sector, prices of gasoline were substantially increased 
in early 2017 and domestic gas prices were liberalized. This combined with 
other supply shocks2 and the above mentioned peso depreciation. Thus, after 
remaining below the 3 percent Banco de México’s target during 17 consecutive 
months,  the  inflation  rate  rose  to  3.1  percent  in  October  2016  and  to  6.3 
percent in the first half of July 2017, i.e. well above the +/- 1 percent variability 
interval around the target. 
GDP growth in Mexico recorded a moderate yet sustained expansion in recent 
years, which implied a gradual narrowing of a negative output gap. As of the 
first  quarter  of  2017,  a  combination  of  indicators  suggests  an  output  gap 
around zero. However, to a significant extent as a result of the shocks that the 
economy has faced, and especially the uncertainty resulting from the future 
economic relationship with the United States, the economy is showing signs of 
deceleration,  although  to  a 
foreseen. 
Consequently, it is anticipated that the output gap will fall again into negative 
territory in coming months.  
lesser  extent  than  originally 
Therefore, monetary policy in Mexico has faced an environment with mixed 
features. On the one hand, a significant increase in inflationary pressures, in a 
                                                           
2 Namely higher agricultural prices, an increase in the minimum wage and an upward adjustment to public 
transport fares. 
 4 
context of an upward trend of the federal funds rate and a situation of high 
uncertainty  to  a  large  degree  originating  from  potential  policy  actions  in 
several fronts in the United States. On the other hand, absence of significant 
demand pressures on prices and the perspective of a weakening of economic 
activity. 
What has been the monetary policy response? 
Since late 2015, within the framework of an inflation targeting  regime, the 
target for the overnight interbank rate has been raised by 400 basis points, to 
a level of 7.0 percent. This response is explained by a combination of factors:  
1.  The increase in interest rates in the United States. Under conditions of 
close economic links with that country, substantial openness to external 
capital  flows,  bulky  investments  by  foreigners  in  the  domestic  bond 
market,  and  an  environment  of  high  uncertainty,  decoupling  from 
actions taken by the Federal Reserve would have implied high risks for 
the exchange rate and inflation in Mexico.  
2.  The potential impact of depreciation of the peso on prices. In view of 
the lags with which monetary policy operates and the openness of the 
Mexican economy to foreign trade, most of the monetary policy actions 
undertaken  during  2016  were  of  a  preventive  nature  and  aimed  at 
containing the pass-through of the exchange rate to prices.  
3.  The  inflationary  implications  of  a  number  of  simultaneous  supply 
shocks. The latter would, under normal conditions, imply a change in 
relative prices without a permanent effect on inflation. The risk in this 
case  derives  from  the  potential  for  second-round  effects,  given  the 
 5 
magnitude and simultaneous impact of the shocks, in the context of a 
large depreciation of the exchange rate. 
The overall objective of this prudent monetary policy approach was to achieve 
a gradual convergence of inflation to the target, at the lowest possible cost for 
economic activity.  
It is important to stress that monetary policy has been supported by actions in 
other fronts. To ensure an orderly functioning of the foreign exchange market, 
pre-announced or sporadic interventions in this market have been carried out 
and, most recently, a mechanism for the hedging of foreign exchange risk of 
up  to  US$20  billion  was  introduced,  which  does  not  imply  the  use  of 
international reserves. This strategy is consistent with a flexible exchange rate 
regime that plays a key role as a shock absorber, and allows market forces to 
determine  the  equilibrium  real  exchange  rate.  It  is  also  worth  noting  that 
against the background of an increase in public debt as a share of GDP, a major 
fiscal adjustment has been announced for 2017 and subsequent years. The 
implementation of these measures should widen the margins of maneuver for 
monetary  policy.  Moreover,  the  banking  system  is  well  capitalized  and 
profitable, and in general the financial sector does not appear to face risks of 
a systemic nature.  
Thus  far,  the  strategy  adopted  has  yielded  satisfactory  results.  Inflation 
expectations for the end of 2017 have increased sharply, to figures above the 
upper  end  of  the  variability  interval  around  the  target.  However,  a  sharp 
decline is expected for 2018, and by the end of that year inflation is anticipated 
to show figures falling within the interval. Furthermore, there is no evidence 
 6 
of second-round effects from the shocks that have affected the evolution of 
prices. It is also worth noting that even though a deceleration of economic 
activity  is  projected  for  2017,  this  is  expected  to  be  gradual  and,  as  noted 
before, heavily influenced by external developments. In addition, higher short-
term interest rates in Mexico have discouraged use of the peso for the hedging 
of risks in other EMEs. 
I  wish  to  note  that  notwithstanding  the  results  observed  up  to  date, 
inflationary risks remain. Long-term inflation expectations based on surveys 
are relatively stable, but above the target. Similarly, the differential between 
nominal and real yields on government bonds remains at levels above those 
observed  in  2016,  pointing  to  concern  about  the  medium-  and  long-term 
evolution of inflation in Mexico. 
Furthermore, an environment of high uncertainty is likely to persist, especially 
in view of ongoing NAFTA negotiations and other potential actions by the US 
government, the normalization of monetary policy in that country, and the 
electoral process in Mexico in 2018. Therefore, the possibility of additional 
pressures on the peso stemming from these or other factors remains. Also, the 
risk of second-round effects from the recent supply shocks, though contained 
thus  far,  has  not  disappeared.  Under  these  circumstances,  a  cautious 
implementation of monetary policy is warranted. 
What lessons can be learned from the recent Mexican experience? 
First of all let me say that any comments in this regard should be considered 
as preliminary, since the process of adjustment to the challenges faced has not 
concluded. It should also be kept in mind that the experience of one country 
 7 
cannot  automatically  be  considered  as  suitable  for  other  economies.  With 
these caveats in mind, I would underline the following: 
1.  Inflation  targeting  has  been  an  efficient 
for  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  Mexico  under  the  present 
conditions of the world economy.  
framework 
2.  A timely and well measured response of monetary policy to inflationary 
pressures is essential to minimize the policy effort. In other words, the 
cumulative  increase  in  interest  rates  required  to  contain  upward 
pressures  on  inflation  will  be  larger  if  the  initial  response  is tardy  or 
insufficient.  
3.  Central banks will frequently need to deal with inflationary pressures in 
the  face  of  a  weak  GDP  growth.  The  costs  for  economic  activity  of 
monetary  policy  actions  have  to  be  seen  against  the  counterfactual. 
Indeed,  such  costs  will  be  higher  in  a  scenario  where  second-round 
effects on prices arise. On the other hand, the definition of the time span 
over which convergence to the inflation target will be sought is a crucial 
element.  
4.  The exchange rate may have a significant effect on domestic prices in 
economies with large foreign trade sectors. It is not possible to say a 
priori if this justifies a monetary policy action. However, it will always be 
important to keep in mind that the size of the pass-through coefficient 
can be closely linked to the monetary policy reaction, and that after a 
certain stage depreciation of the currency may have non-linear effects. 
5.  A change in relative prices does not normally justify a monetary policy 
response. However, depending on their magnitude, the simultaneous 
 8 
impact of several shocks of this nature can increase the risk of second-
round effects.  
6.  Monetary policy must not bear an excessive burden in the adjustment 
to external shocks. The adequate support of other policy instruments is 
fundamental to minimize costs for the economy. 
7.  A flexible exchange rate mechanism can play a crucial role to achieve a 
smoother adjustment to external shocks. However, a floating exchange 
rate may also be accompanied by substantial volatility and other costs, 
and therefore it will frequently be necessary to find appropriate means 
to foster an orderly functioning of the foreign exchange market. 
8.  Fiscal policy will often need to respond to shocks of an external nature 
and  in  many  occasions  will  in  fact  be  the  key  policy  tool.  With  an 
adequate implementation of fiscal policy, the degrees of freedom for 
monetary  policy  management  are 
increased.  Naturally,  financial 
stability is another crucial piece in this regard. 
9.  Communication, a key instrument for the implementation of monetary 
policy, must be handled carefully, to avoid potential misunderstandings 
and the possibility of market overreaction.  
10. Under a situation of higher-than-usual uncertainty, it will generally be 
better to err on the side of caution. 
 9 
