Gent Sejko: "Learn. Save. Earn."
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the launching ceremony of the
Global Money Week, Tirana, 27 March 2017.
 Honourable Minister Nikolla,
Dear AAB Chairman Drougkas,
Dear guests,
I  have  the  pleasure  to  welcome  you  at  the  Bank  of Albania  premises.  In  addition  to  being  a
second home for its employees, since the opening of the Museum, it has become an attractive
learning place about finance for students.
The Global Money Week an event that involves local stakeholders in more than 140 countries is
the highlight of all the educational activities conducted throughout the year.
I am proud to say that, thanks to the persistent commitment of the Bank of Albania regarding
financial education, Albania has been featuring in the map of countries that organize this Week.
This persistence ensures the effectiveness of our educational programmes, and keeps active
the connection between institutions engaged in the financial education of the public in general
and the youth in particular. I take this opportunity to extend my most sincere gratitude for their
commitment and support to the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Albanian Association of
Banks, and other institutions present here today.
Under  the  motto  “Learn.  Save.  Earn.”,  this  year’s  Global  Money  Week  is  dedicated  to  raising
awareness  of  young  Albanians  on  the  importance  of  money  and  their  involvement  in  the
economic and financial system in Albania and, why not, in the region and the world.
The  activities  that  will  be  organised  during  this  week  will  especially  aim  at  inspiring Albanian
children  and  youth  to  learn  more  about  money,  saving,  creating  prosperity,  increasing
employment and entrepreneurship.
To illustrate this better, more than 45 activities will be organised and more than 3500 pupils and
students  will  participate  in  these  activities  during  this  very  busy  week,  with  educational
institutions:  universities,  high  schools  and  nine-year  schools.  These  numbers  make  us  very
proud, since they serve to raise the awareness on highly important issues, such as consumer
information and financial inclusion. These two key issues contribute directly the economic well-
being  of  households  and  businesses.  Financial  education,  especially  of  youth,  is  the  best
channel  to  put  that  effect  in  practice,  as  affirmed  by  the  OECD,  a  reputable  international
institution.
The Bank of Albania is and will remain dedicated to this mission, with the support of the Ministry
of Education and other partners. Their support and cooperation have had a decisive contribution
in the success of such activities. Also, the elective course “Personal financial in your hands” for
high school students has been, for seven years, another example of successful cooperation.
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Albanian  Association  of  Banks  for  its  valuable  support  through
commercial banks to enhance financial education and add channels and related activities in this
regard.
In  conclusion,  let  me  once  again  take  this  opportunity  to  invite  the  participating  institutions  to
further expand our collaboration on this pleasant and challenging issue, and an important one for
the next generations.
1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
