UNNATI-Access to Finance (A2F) Partnerships Launch Ceremony with BFIs 
Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor, Nepal Rastra Bank 
Closing Remarks by  
8 May 2017 
Hotel Yak and Yeti, Kathmandu 
 
Ms. Valerie Julliand, UN Resident Coordinator, 
Ms. Ingrid Dahl-Madsen, Charge d'Affaires, Embassy of Denmark, 
Mr. Vincent Weirda, Regional Technical Advisor, UNCDF, 
Mr. Shiba Raj Shrestha, Deputy Governor of Nepal Rastra Bank, 
Officials from Government of Nepal and Other Agencies, 
Officials from Nepal Rastra Bank 
CEOs and Representatives from banks and financial institutions,  
Friends from the Media, 
Distinguished Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
 
It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  be  here  at  this  Challenge  Fund  Partnership  Launch 
Ceremony  of  UNNATI-Access  to  Finance  program  with  different  BFIs.  Allow  me,  at  the 
outset,  to  extend  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the  Embassy  of  Denmark  and  UNCDF  for 
supporting  the  Government  of  Nepal  by  launching  this  Project  that  aims  at  expanding 
financial  access  to  the  rural  people  and  help  raise  their  living  standards  and  ultimately 
reduce the poverty level in the country.  
 
Distinguished Guest, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Financial access broadly refers to the reach of financial institutions and their products to the 
doorsteps  of  the  people  throughout  the  country.  This  would  create  opportunities  for  the 
people to involve themselves in in-come generating activities and hence improve their well-
being. 
 
As some 80 percent of Nepalese population live in rural areas and about two-thirds of them 
rely on agriculture, extending financial services to the rural people is especially meaningful 
for inclusive growth of Nepal. 
 
Acknowledging this need, the Government of Nepal and Nepal Rastra Bank have long been 
undertaking a host of policy measures to increase access of financial services to the rural 
areas  through  different  modalities.  One  such  modality  is  project  financing  under  which 
Government of Nepal and NRB have been working with different bilateral and multilateral 
donor  agencies  to  implement  different  projects.  UNNATI-Access  to  Finance  is  one  such 
project  that  is  supported  by  Government  of  Denmark  along-with  United  Nations  Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF).  
 
The 5-year project (2014-18) is being implemented by NRB in the 7 hilly districts of Eastern 
Development  Region  (EDR)  by  supporting  BFIs  to  more  effectively  serve  the  agricultural 
value  chain  actors  with  appropriate  financial  products  and  services.  Consequently,  it  also 
 1 
aims to enable smallholder farmers and micro  small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) to 
invest into their agriculture value chain activities leading to the sustained improvement in 
competitiveness of  selected  value  chains,  especially 4 agro products including dairy, tea, 
large cardamom and ginger.  
 
This Project has launched a Challenge Fund for BFIs of around 1.7 million US Dollar through 
a  competitive  process.  In  this  respect,  I  would  like  to  offer  my  congratulations  to  the 
selected  10  BFIs  with  whom  the  Challenge  Fund  Partnership  Agreements  have  just  been 
signed today.  
 
Distinguished Guest, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Let me reiterate that the Challenge Fund is a competitive grant to be provided to BFIs to 
absorb some of their risks associated with innovative business ideas that better meet the 
financial  needs  of  the  smallholder  farmers  and  micro,  small  and  medium  enterprises 
(MSMEs).  It  accords  special  attention  to  reducing  discrimination  towards  women  and 
traditionally  marginalized  groups.  The  10  partner  BFIs  will  be  focusing  on  a)  expanding 
financial services in rural areas, b) promoting agent banking, mobile banking and branchless 
banking, and c) developing the process of digitizing banking products and agriculture micro 
financing. I sincerely request and encourage the partner BFIs to put their utmost efforts to 
meet the business targets proposed by them in their Challenge Fund Agreements and fully 
utilize this opportunity to achieve the intended results and hence contribute towards the 
well-being of the poor people. 
 
With this note, let me close my remarks by congratulating the grantees and thanking you all 
for your gracious presence in this UNNATI-Access to Finance Partnerships Launch Ceremony.  
 
 2 
