Carolyn Wilkins: Blame it on the machines?
Remarks by Ms Carolyn Wilkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Toronto
Region Board of Trade, Toronto, Ontario, 18 April 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Rhys  Mendes,  Ben  Tomlin  and  Stephen  Murchison  for  their  help  in
preparing this speech.
Introduction
In the 150 years since Confederation, the average income per person in Canada has increased
about  20-fold  after  adjusting  for  inflation—all  because  we  have  adopted  better  ways  of  doing
business. This illustrates the basic economic reality that productivity growth is the only game in
town when it comes to raising the economic and financial well-being of people over a long period.
The  arithmetic  is  simple.  Productivity  growth,  combined  with  growth  in  the  labour  force,
determines how fast activity can expand without stoking inflation pressures—something we call
1
potential output growth.
The Bank of Canada updated its estimates of potential output growth in last week’s Monetary
Policy Report. Our best estimate is that potential output will rise by an average of 1 1/2 per cent
per year over the next few years—that is not very impressive relative to history.  We are counting
on gains in productivity to deliver fully two-thirds of that growth. And we are not alone; productivity
performance in other industrialized countries is also underwhelming.
2
The good news is that Canada has the opportunity to make up for lost time. The world is on the
brink of a new industrial revolution. Innovations in artificial intelligence, robotics and other fields
could give productivity a big boost by automating an expanding range of tasks. Some analysts
predict that close to half of all jobs in some advanced economies will be profoundly affected by
automation in the next 20 years. That leaves many of us wondering about the future of work. And
it’s personal. We wonder what will happen to our own jobs or those of our friends, or what our
kids should study to succeed in tomorrow’s workplace.
Business  people  like  you  share  a  stake  with  the  Bank  of  Canada  in  these  matters.  So  I  am
pleased to have the occasion to speak on this subject today, and I thank the Toronto Region
Board of Trade for the invitation.
In my remarks, I will speak to three main points:
1.  We can expect a future with work for people, not just for machines. Innovation is always a
process  of  creative  destruction,  with  some  jobs  destroyed  and,  over  time,  even  more
created. We have seen this process in action throughout modern history.
2.  What will change is the types of workers that will be in demand. We will need people with
highly  technical  skills  to  program  and  repair  the  technology.  We  will  also  need  people  to
perform tasks that may never be replicated by a machine because they require creativity,
intuitive judgment, inspiration or simply a human touch.
3.  Canada  should  embrace  new  technologies  and  their  benefits,  while  proactively  managing
their more harmful side effects.  Policies  that  help  businesses  and  workers  manage  what
could  be  a  difficult  transition  are  essential.  So  are  policies  that  address  the  potential  for
amplified income inequality and, in some cases, increased market power.
The Bank’s job in all of this will be to foster the macroeconomic conditions that will help Canada
adapt and grow.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Were the Luddites right?
Let me dive right into my first point.
In  the  past  couple  of  centuries,  the  world  has  seen  revolutionary  innovations  like  the  steam
engine,  the  combine,  the  jet  engine  and  the  assembly-line  robot.  The  resulting  increases  in
productivity gave us a 20-fold increase in real income per capita in Canada over the past 150
years. 
Our  underwhelming  productivity  performance  since  the  early  2000s  has  cost  us  dearly.  If
productivity  had  continued  to  grow  at  the  pace  it  did  in  the  late  1990s,  our  gross  domestic
product (GDP) would have been 23 per cent higher in 2016, meaning an extra $13,000 for every
Canadian.
Even as we see the benefits of technology, many of us feel uneasy about what automation could
mean for workers. Fears of technological progress are as old as technological progress itself.
Now,  there  is  no  doubt  that  technological  improvements  have  eliminated  jobs  at  the  sectoral
level. Take manufacturing, for instance. Innovations such as industrial robots have reduced the
need  for  workers  in  that  sector.  If  we  were  to  roll  back  the  clock  on  Canadian  manufacturing
productivity to what it was 20 years ago, three-quarters of a million more people would have been
needed to produce today’s level of output in that sector. But the manufacturing jobs lost were
offset with gains elsewhere. Roughly 82 per cent of the prime-age population is now employed,
about 13 percentage points higher than 40 years ago.
Other  past  technological  advances  did  not  lead  to  a  sustained  rise  in  overall  unemployment
either. Let me use agriculture to illustrate the economic mechanisms that have helped us adapt
and  thrive  in  the  past,  which  are  often  underemphasized.  Factory  farming  and  the  combine
harvester  increased  labour  productivity  in  the  farming  sector  and  reduced  the  need  for
agricultural workers. Higher farm productivity also made food cheaper for all consumers, leaving
them with more money to spend on other goods and services. These positive effects on income
led  to  higher  consumer  demand,  which  helped  spur  the  creation  of  new  jobs  outside  of
agriculture. Rising productivity in manufacturing also led to widespread industrialization, which
attracted labour from farms to higher-paying factory jobs.
This  is  how  agriculture  went  from  representing  more  than  one-third  of  all  jobs  in  Canada  a
century ago to less than 2 per cent today, without creating a permanent jump in unemployment.
Governments helped ease the transition away from agriculture by making some bold decisions.
One example is promoting education in the late 1800s and early 1900s through publicly funded
schools. This helped prepare the next generation for jobs outside the agricultural sector, although
the period of adjustment could not have been easy. 
OK computer
This leads me to my second point. Technological advances have always been a key driver of
growth and rising income per capita, yet some fear that this time will be different. In the past,
automation  was  largely  restricted  to  simple  manual  or  procedural  tasks.  Today’s  technology
makes it possible to automate an increasing number of cognitive and non-routine tasks across a
wide range of industries.
Machine learning is one way to do that. Feeding computers large sets of data teaches them to
mimic the human brain’s ability to infer rules from previous experiences and adapt to changing
circumstances.  Artificial  intelligence  (AI)  allows  computers  to  read  scans  and  x-rays  with
precision and self-driving cars to react to any number of unique situations on the road. AI also
allows businesses to automate many of the routine cognitive tasks performed by accountants,
investment advisors and lawyers.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
This has raised the spectre of technological unemployment—the dystopian vision of an economy
in  which  machines  make  many  workers  obsolete.  You  have  probably  heard  estimates  that
suggest that around 40 per cent of tasks performed by humans in Canada and the United States
3
could be automated using current technology.
Even so, it is difficult to imagine that the adjustment mechanisms I described earlier are now
obsolete. An intuitive way to think about it is to observe that people’s spending appetite tends to
grow along with productivity. With 20 times more income, people would only have to work 20
times less than they did before to earn the same amount. The reality is that people generally
work a little more than half the time that they used to, with the rest of the gains going toward
increased consumption.   This  phenomenon  is  observed  not  only  in  Canada  but  also  in  other
advanced economies.
4
As technologies raise productivity, labour market dislocations occur over the transition period, but
eventually new jobs are created to supply the goods and services that people buy with the extra
income.
The fact is that we do not know exactly which new sectors will be important employers 50 years
from now. Who in the early 1900s could have imagined the boom in health care, tourism and
software  development  jobs?  There  are  also  many  tasks  that  machines  will  not  be  capable  of
doing any time soon. An academic expert in this area of economics, David Autor, maintains that
humans  will  likely  retain  an  advantage  in  jobs  that  require  interpersonal  interaction,  flexibility,
problem  solving  and  common  sense.  These  include  personal  care  workers,  plumbers,
consultants and, I am hoping, central bankers.
5
What  is  particularly  important  to  consider  this  time  is  the  impact  that  technological  progress
could  have  on  income  inequality.   Technological  advances  may  lead  to  higher  incomes  for
workers whose skills are complemented by the technology, but not for those whose skills are
substituted by it. The first wave of information technology in the 1980s and 1990s is a case in
point.  Educated  professionals  like  scientists  and  architects  could  use  their  skills  more
productively,  while  many  less-educated  workers,  like  bank  tellers  and  travel  agents,  saw  their
jobs being displaced by technology.  This led to bigger employment shares for high- and low-
skilled  jobs  at  the  expense  of  middle-skilled  jobs  in  Canada,  along  with  a  modest  increase  in
7
income inequality.
6
The  hollowing  out  of  the  middle  could  be  further  accentuated  by  automation.   Moreover,  the
polarizing effect of technology on income distribution could be heightened by a winner-takes-all
effect—this  comes  from  the  market  power  that  new  technologies  can  often  bestow  on  their
inventors. In parts of the information and communication technology (ICT) sector, economies of
scale such as network effects are already prominent.
8
That said, for all the hype around the current wave of automation, we have yet to see the kind of
productivity growth that is consistent with a technological revolution. While we sometimes see
fast  technological  change  in  specific  industries—fracking  in  the  oil  sector  is  one  example—
economy-wide  technological  transitions  often  play  out  over  long  periods. After  the  first  central
power  station  opened  in  the  1880s,  electrification  took  four  decades  to  have  an  impact  on
productivity in the United States. Power grids had to be built, machines had to be replaced and
new applications took years to develop.  For similar reasons, it could take many years for self-
driving vehicles to completely displace human-driven taxis, trucks and buses. The length of the
transition  will  depend  on  how  fast  existing  vehicles  depreciate,  prices  for  the  new  technology
decline, and required infrastructure is updated.  
9
What  does  all  of  this  mean  for  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  economic  projections?  It  is  simply
impossible to quantify the impact of these innovations before they happen. That is why the Bank
assumes no additional boost from automation. While the Bank is projecting a rebound in trend
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
labour productivity growth from 0.6 per cent in 2016 to 1.1 per cent in 2020, this mainly reflects a
cyclical pickup in investment spending from the lows witnessed following the oil price shock. Our
work  to  date  suggests  the  greatest  productivity  benefits  will  occur  in  firms  with  high-quality
people-management and decision-making processes and high levels of human capital. With big
10
data, smart contracts and robo advisors, financial companies could be at the head of the pack.
The  Bank  of  Canada  has  a  research  program  to  better  understand  these  issues.  We  have
created a new digital economy team that focuses on how automation is unfolding and affecting
the  economy,  including  inflation  dynamics  and  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  We  are
reviewing  the  measurement  issues  that  are  exacerbated  by  the  proliferation  of  digital  and
services-oriented technologies.
 We are also developing our macroeconomic models to better
account for changes in the distribution of income and wealth.
Proactive beats reactive
11
Let me now turn to my final point. Canada is well positioned to succeed in a digital world, and we
should embrace it. Canada has a flourishing information technology sector and is becoming an
important player in the AI field.
 Major Canadian firms have teamed up to provide funding for the
development of AI start-ups through a program called NextAI. And some international companies
are moving their AI divisions to Canada.
13
12
To get the most out of the new technologies, we will need to work together to proactively mitigate
the more harmful side effects that I have mentioned: the transition period and the potential effects
on the distribution of income. 
There are many promising approaches to managing the first side effect—the transition period.
Let me highlight just one. As with previous technological transitions, education, skills training and
continuous  learning  will  be  key.  Universities  across  Canada  are  working  with  students  and
businesses to bring the best ideas in science, machine learning and AI to market. A great local
example is the Rotman School of Management’s Creative Destruction Lab.
 A positive aspect is
that students will gain practical experience early on.
14
15
Canada  and  its  fellow  G20  countries  have  committed  to  supporting  strong,  sustainable  and
inclusive  growth.  Today  more  than  ever,  it  is  important  to  preserve  the  gains  that  have  been
made. Trade is a great driver of productivity, and so the risk of growing protectionism concerns
  More  open  trade  with  the  United  States  and  Mexico  in  the  1990s  gave  Canadian  firms
me.
access 
invest—in  both
physical and human capital.
 Disrupting supply chains and reducing incentives to compete will
not create more jobs and income in the long run. Canada remains committed to free trade and
the  most  recent  example  of  that  is  the  interprovincial  agreement  that  was  signed  earlier  this
month. While we will not know its full impact for some time, we flagged it as an upside risk to
productivity in our April Monetary Policy Report.
to  much  bigger  markets  and 
therefore  greater 
incentives 
to 
16
The second side effect, distribution of income, is equally important. While gains in productivity
will increase the size of the pie, there is no guarantee that these gains will be evenly distributed.
This is the purview of governments, who can use tools such as taxation and transfers to address
these issues. And they  involve  difficult  trade-offs  related  to  preserving  the  incentives  to  invest
while  also  avoiding  increased  polarization  of  income.  Cross-border  taxation  will  also  be
challenging, given how easy it can be to move intellectual property to low-tax jurisdictions.  
Aside  from  taxation,  increased  market  power  for  some  players  may  raise  important  systemic
issues, many of which are cross-border in nature. These issues are likely to arise in sectors
where barriers to entry or economies of scale are prominent. An example that is top of mind from
my work on fintech issues is related to cloud computing and storage. As we move away from
decentralized  on-site  storage  and  computing  systems,  we  may  see  a  trend  toward  greater
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
concentration  in  market  structure.  These  service  providers  are  largely  outside  the  regulatory
framework,  and  this  raises  issues  related  to  adequate  legal  foundations,  governance,
transparency  and  risk  controls.  All  of  these  are  critical  to  a  stable  economic  foundation  for
workers and businesses.
As a central banker, I care about income inequality, even if we do not control the tools to address
it.  Worsening  income  inequality  can  lead  to  weaker  macroeconomic  outcomes  and  financial
instability.
 It is more difficult for people with low incomes to weather economic shocks. If we
see an increasing proportion of people at the lower end of the income distribution, recessions
and other negative events could result in more financial stress.
17
Shifts in income distribution can also affect the transmission of monetary policy since interest
rates do not affect everyone in the same way. For example, people with lower incomes are likely
to  be  sensitive  to  interest  rate  changes  because  of  the  potential  effects  on  their  employment
income and their debt-service costs. These effects may be less prominent at the other end of the
income scale. That said, people with higher incomes and higher net worth tend to be sensitive to
the impact of interest rates changes on asset prices. An increase in income dispersion, then,
could alter the channels through which monetary policy actions affect the economy.
The Bank of Canada’s monetary policy accomplishes a simple, yet vital, task: it manages the
level  of  demand  over  the  business  cycle  in  order  to  meet  our  inflation  target.  In  turn,  an
environment of low, stable and predictable inflation allows productivity-enhancing investments in
physical  and  human  capital.  This  is  the  perfect  complement  to  the  structural  policies  that
governments at all levels in Canada are working to strengthen.
Conclusion
Time to wrap up.
If we want to continue to prosper, we have to improve our productivity.
Clearly,  blaming  the  machines  is  not  the  way  forward.  If  we  seek  out  and  embrace  new
technologies  while  successfully  managing  their  harmful  side  effects,  we  will  create  inclusive
prosperity.  That  means  proactively  managing  the  transition  period  and  the  longer-term
implications for the distribution of incomes. In many respects, we have a head start in Canada.
Our policy-makers are working to implement measures that will achieve strong, sustainable and
inclusive growth.
What  you  can  do  on  your  side  is  equally  ambitious:  keep  building  competitive  and  dynamic
businesses; keep the collaboration going between educational institutions and companies; and
keep sharing your good ideas with policy-makers.
The Bank of Canada will continue to focus on what it does best: supporting the economic and
financial well-being of Canada by achieving low, stable and predictable inflation; by keeping core
financial market infrastructure safe; and by giving sound advice on financial sector policies so
that vulnerabilities do not get in the way of sustainable, productive growth for all Canadians.
1
2
3
Productivity in this speech refers to labour productivity. For a more detailed description, see the Productivity
backgrounder on the Bank of Canada website.
The average annual growth rate for potential between 1982 and 2016 was 2 1/2 per cent.
One way of assessing the potential impact of automation is to break every job into a number of distinct tasks
and ask whether a given task can be automated using current technology. McKinsey & Company estimates that
47 per cent of tasks could be automated in the United States using current technology. The Brookfield Institute
finds a similar number for Canada (42 per cent). This refers only to the parts of jobs that could be automated.
Brookfield finds that, while 18 per cent could have 70 per cent or more of their tasks automated, only 1 per cent
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of jobs are currently fully automatable. C. Lamb, The Talented Mr. Robot, Brookfield Institute, June 2016. 
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See T. Boppart and P. Krusell, “Labor Supply in the Past, Present, and Future: A Balanced-Growth Perspective,”
NBER Working Paper number 22215 (May 2016).
See P. Krusell, L. E. Ohanian, J.-V. Ríos-Rull and G. L. Violante, “Capital-Skill Complementarity and Inequality: A
Macroeconomic Analysis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department Staff Report No. 239 (1
September 1997).
D.  Acemoglu  and  D.  Autor,  “Skills,  Tasks  and  Technologies: 
for  Employment  and
Earnings,” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4B, edited by D. Card and O. Ashenfelter, 1043–1171 (Elsevier,
2011).
Implications 
This is a phenomenon across many advanced economies. For more on Canada, see D. A. Green and B. M.
Sand, “Has the Canadian Labour Market Polarized?” in Income Inequality: The Canadian Story, edited by D. A.
Green,  W.  C.  Riddell  and  F.  St-Hilaire,  217–227  (Institute  for  Research  on  Public  Policy,  2015).  For  an
international comparison, see OECD, “Income Inequality Update,” (November 2016).
A  related  issue  is  the  impact  of  technology  on  labour’s  share  of  income. An  analysis  by  the  International
Monetary Fund (IMF) found that automation has contributed to the decline of the labour share of national income
in advanced economies. This was accompanied by a rise in income inequality, partly because of the effects of
automation  on  middle-income  workers.  See  IMF, World  Economic  Outlook,  “Chapter  3,  Understanding  the
Downward Trend in Labor Income Shares,” (Washington, April 2017).
P.  David,  “The  Dynamo  and  the  Computer:  An  Historical  Perspective  on  the  Modern  Productivity
Paradox,” American Economic Review, 80, no. 2 (January 1990): 355–361.
C. D’Souza and D. Williams, “The Digital Economy,” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 2017—forthcoming).
Recent work at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) suggests that gross
domestic product (GDP) remains a good measure of the sum of all market transactions. Nevertheless, GDP is
an  imperfect  measure,  and  many  of  the  challenges  are  more  prevalent  in  a  digital  and  services-oriented
economy, such as the distinction between quality and price change, consumers acting as producers, and price
measurement. Investment and productivity estimates are also becoming more problematic. While digitalization
intensifies  these  challenges,  it  could  also  provide  useful  data  that  will  help  solve  them.  In  addition,  GDP
statistics are often criticized in the context of digitalization because they do not account for the related welfare
gain, but it is important to bear in mind that GDP is not a measure of welfare. That said, digitalization has
probably widened the gap between GDP and welfare, which reinforces the importance of complementing GDP
with indicators of well-being, like the United Nations Development Program’s Human Development Index and
the Canadian Index of Wellbeing produced by the University of Waterloo.
W. Dong, J. Fudurich and L. Suchanek, “The Digital Economy—Insight from a Special Survey with IT Service
Exporters,” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper No. 2016–21 (November 2016).
See J. Jacobs, T. Poutanen, R. Zemel, G. Hinton and E. Clark, “Artificial Intelligence is the Future, and Canada
Can Seize It,” The Globe and Mail, 7 January 2017.
The Creative Destruction Lab program targets early-stage, science-based technology companies. It also offers
a specialized machine-learning stream for companies that focus on machine learning or artificial intelligence.
The program expanded to Vancouver in collaboration with the University of British Columbia’s Sauder School of
Business.
For a history of how Canada has benefited from trade openness, see S. S. Poloz, “Canada at 150: It Takes a
World to Raise a Nation,” (speech to Durham College for its 50th anniversary, Oshawa, Ontario, 28 March 2017).
There is evidence that following trade liberalization agreements, many lower-productivity firms shed workers or
do not survive. Others can flourish and raise productivity. See, for example, D. Trefler, “The Long and Short of the
Canada–US Free Trade Agreement,” American Economic Review 94, no. 4 (2004): 870–895.
See M. Kumhof, R. Rancière, P. Winant, “Inequality, Leverage, and Crises,” American Economic Review 105, no.
3 (March 2015):1217–45.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
