  Bringing Together Regulatory and Statistical Reporting: 
A Win-Win Strategy 
 
Keynote speech by Mr Pedro Duarte Neves, Vice-Governor of the Banco de Portugal, at 
the Workshop on “Setting Global Standards for Granular Data: Sharing the Challenge”, 
jointly organised by the ECB DG-S, the Bank of England and the US Office of Financial 
Research. Frankfurt am Main, 28 March 2017 
 Dear colleagues, fellow central bankers, ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
 It is a pleasure for me, and an honour, to have the opportunity to address you on the 
occasion of this 3rd edition of the workshop on “Setting Global Standards for Granular 
Data”. 
I would like to begin by thanking the organisers for giving me the opportunity to take 
part in this event. On the basis of what I have seen so far, and in anticipation of what is 
yet to come, it is safe to say that this workshop will indeed provide fruitful discussions 
between  policymakers  and  market  participants  and  yield  valuable  inputs  for  the 
fulfilment of our different mandates. 
I  will  centre  my  contribution  on the  positive  synergies  arising from  bringing  together 
regulatory and statistical reporting. 
Financial supervisory activities generally demand the regular exchange of great volumes 
of  information  between  supervisors  and  supervised  entities.  In  many  cases,  these 
entities are often requested to share additional information on an ad hoc basis to cope 
with the need to clarify specific aspects of their activities. Furthermore, these entities 
are  also  requested  to  report,  on  a  regular  basis,  information  for  statistical  purposes, 
which is typically more frequent and with a shorter timeliness. 
In  setting  up  a  data  system  supporting  the  recently  created  Eurosystem’s  financial 
supervision  activities,  important  synergies  with  the  statistical  reporting  have  been 
recognized.  In  fact,  integrating  both  functions  allows  reaping  large  benefits,  which 
positively affect both the data compilers and the reporting entities: while the former 
can take advantage of the existing infrastructure and the expertise accumulated over 
time, the latter can benefit from a reduced reporting burden through the mitigation of 
data redundancies and overlapping. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     1   
 The synergies go beyond the lower burden for data providers and the gains in terms of 
the economies of scale for the data compilers. The possibility of combining micro level 
datasets  will  continue  to  be  crucial  to  the  development  of  analytical  tools  to  assess 
supervisory and financial stability issues. It will also foster scientific research in relevant 
areas. 
Still, it should be highlighted that, even though there are important synergies to explore 
in bringing together such reports, these interactions are far from straightforward and 
demand a great amount of cooperation between the entities involved. For instance, the 
reporting standards specified by IASB, EBA or the ECB, are sometimes different in their 
respective scopes, which emphasizes the need for a progressive harmonization of the 
underlying concepts. 
In my address I will briefly and selectively overview the work that has been done so far 
at  the  European  level  to  enhance  the  interactions  between  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism  (SSM)  data  needs  and  statistical  reporting  –  with  a  reference  to  the 
extremely important work developed by the EBA - and will proceed with an outline of 
the  experience  of  Banco  de  Portugal  in  managing  large  micro-datasets  as  well  as  in 
enhancing  the  synergies  between  financial  stability  assessment  and  microdata 
availability.  
 An important step towards the setting up of the SSM data supporting system is related 
to the update of the legal provisions ruling the use and exchange of confidential data, 
which  was  initially  designed  having  in  mind  the  statistical  function  of  the  European 
System of Central Banks (ESCB).  
To  address  these  concerns,  the  Governing  Council  approved,  in  April  2014,  a 
recommendation  for  a  Council  Regulation  amending  Regulation  (EC)  No.  2533/98 
concerning the collection of statistical information by the European Central Bank (ECB). 
In a nutshell, this initiative aimed at creating a legal framework for the transmission and 
use of confidential statistical information supporting the role of (i) the European Central 
Bank,  in  its  capacity  as  the  competent  authority  in  prudential  supervision,  (ii)  the 
National  Competent  Authorities  (NCAs),  responsible  for  prudential  supervision  in  the 
Member  States,  and  (iii)  the  Member-States  and  European  Union  authorities 
responsible for the financial system stability.  
Actually, the need for information sharing across supervisory entities became even more 
evident  in  the  aftermath  of  the  recent  economic  and  financial  crisis.  The  ensuing 
development  of  macroprudential  supervision  highlighted  the  crucial  role  of  the 
transmission  of  key  information  across  banking,  insurance  and  financial  markets 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     2   
 supervisors. This is a point that definitely needs more debate and refinements at both 
euro area and Member-States’ levels.  
The  European  Banking  Authority’s  Implementing  Technical  Standards  (ITS)  provide  a 
harmonized approach to supervisory data collection across Europe, allowing not only 
sounder  comparisons  among  the  different  countries,  but  also  a  common  set  of 
regulations and definitions that pave the way to the single supervisory initiative. In this 
area, it is important to highlight the impact that the existence of harmonized supervisory 
reports at the European level – such as FINREP and COREP – had on enabling the setting 
up of the SSM in such a swift and efficient way. 
As for the infrastructure, new bodies were created to cater for the data needs associated 
with the SSM. In particular, one of the main tasks of the Working Group on Supervisory 
Statistics,  which  was  created  in  the  wake  of  the  construction  of  the  SSM,  is  the 
collection, production and dissemination of supervisory data harmonised under the ITS 
and any other additional supervisory data deemed necessary for the SSM. 
Moreover,  following  a  recommendation  by  the  so-called  Groupe  de  Réflexion  on  the 
integration of statistical and supervisory data, and in recognition of the importance of 
data requirements harmonization, the Statistics Committee (STC) endorsed the creation 
of the Task Force on European Reporting Framework, which – as Mr Turner has already 
outlined  earlier  this  afternoon  –  is  responsible  for  the  design  of  integrated  reporting 
schemes,  covering  a  wide  range  of  different  statistics,  namely  credit  institutions 
balance-sheet  statistics,  money  and  interest  rates,  securities  holdings  and  credit 
statistics.  Pursuant  of  its  mandate,  this  task  force  has  also  liaised  with  other  SSM 
structures in trying to identify potential SSM requirements and propose additional steps, 
as well as with other groups, such as the Expert Group on Statistical and Banking Data 
Dictionary  (whose  transformational  work  Mr  Ganoulis  has  just  shared  with  us  in  the 
previous panel session). 
Efforts of conceptual harmonisation and convergence have also been taken regarding 
another key source of microdata: the Central Credit Registers (CCRs). These information 
systems provide central banks, banking supervisory authorities and commercial banks 
with  information  regarding  the  indebtedness  of  credit  institutions,  companies, 
individuals and the public sector  and are a fundamental tool to monitor and manage 
credit  risk,  as  well  as  to  provide  an  overview  of  credit  exposures  and  the  level  of 
indebtedness of both resident and non-resident borrowers vis-à-vis national financial 
intermediaries.  In  order  to  get  a  better  overview  of  the  level  of  indebtedness  of  the 
borrowers the ESCB has explored, since 2007, the potential statistical use of CCRs. In 
particular, it sought to understand to which extent their content could be enhanced and 
adapted to euro area and European Union statistical needs, to alleviate the statistical 
reporting burden and to increase transparency.  
 www.bportugal.pt  
     3   
 Against this background, and following up on the work of the ESCB Task Force on Credit 
Registers and of the joint STC / Financial Stability Committee Task Force on Analytical 
Credit  Datasets,  the  ESCB  has  been  developing  the  AnaCredit  project,  which  will 
establish a Eurosystem database comprising loan-by-loan data on credit granted by euro 
area  financial  institutions  to  legal  entities. This will  create the  opportunity to  answer 
some of the data gaps identified in the wake of the financial crisis, by generating clear 
and detailed information that will greatly assist monetary policy decision-making and 
help  keep  the  financial  system  sound  and  transparent.  Moreover,  AnaCredit  will  be 
based on harmonized concepts and definitions and on a complete coverage of (at least) 
all  euro  area  Member-States,  thus  ensuring  more  comparability  and  improving,  in  a 
significant way, the statistical information available at the Eurosystem level. 
To this end, the ESCB has already taken several concrete steps to make this project a 
reality by September of 2018, of which the most important was arguably the publication, 
in May of 2016, of the regulation on the collection of granular credit and credit risk data 
(or,  put  simply,  the  AnaCredit  Regulation),  which  has  set  forth,  inter  alia,  the  scope, 
purpose, content and calendar of the future data collection.  
Notwithstanding, the development of such a wide project has set several practical and 
strategic challenges to the ESCB. One of the most notable obstacles that this project has 
imposed  is  the  development  and  management  of  adequate,  timely  and  trustworthy 
reference data, that is, the information on the “actors” participating in the operations 
reported,  given  the  high  degree  of  heterogeneity  across  countries  in  the  way  legal 
entities  are  identified.  To  cope  with  such  a  daunting  challenge,  the  ESCB  decided  to 
extend  and  upgrade  an  existing  reference  database:  the  Register  of  Institutions  and 
Affiliates Database (the RIAD).  
That said, I am aware of the fact that this chain of events, albeit seemingly long, stays 
short of being an exhaustive list of the initiatives and actions that have been carried out 
in this context. It gives us, nevertheless, a general idea of the many efforts that have 
been devoted at EU level in exploring the synergies between statistics and supervisory 
data. A lot has certainly been done so far, but we are still taking the first steps in what 
appears to be a long but exciting journey. 
 In this sense, the dynamic interaction between  supervisory data needs and statistical 
reporting  will  be  a  challenging  process.  In  what  follows,  I  will  highlight  several 
dimensions  in  which  this  interaction  can  be  particularly  fruitful,  building  on  the 
experience of Banco de Portugal. 
Banco de Portugal has been gradually developing a data system based on  microdata. 
The approach has been twofold: first, to build and manage highly detailed and granular 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     4   
 databases; second, to evolve towards an integrated data infrastructure. In the context 
of financial stability and supervision, allow me to highlight the following three statistical 
micro-databases:  
    The  Central  Credit  Register,  a  database  containing  granular  information  on 
credit on a borrower-by-borrower basis and, in some cases, including details 
which provide loan-by-loan information, with a virtually complete coverage – 
features  that  have  enabled  the  Bank  to  compile  comprehensive  statistics  on 
credit, to assess credit concentration and distribution and to measure overdue 
loans  and  overdue  loans’  ratio,  with  a  view  to  better  understand  the  risks 
underlying banks’ balance sheets; 
The Central Balance Sheet Database, a data repository that holds accounting 
and  financial  information  covering  almost  exhaustively  the  existing  non-
financial  corporations,  giving  us  a  complete  view  on  this  sector’s  assets  and 
liabilities  and  allowing  the  Bank  to,  inter  alia,  monitor  and  conduct  detailed 
studies on businesses and entrepreneurial dynamics; 
The Securities Statistics Integrated System, a very comprehensive security-by-
security  and  investor-by-investor  database  on  both  securities  holdings  and 
issuances, which complements the Central Credit Register data on loans with 
data on securities and, from a portfolios’ perspective,  constitutes a powerful 
tool  to  measure  exposures  of  banks  and  non-banks  to  specific  issuers. 
Moreover, the combination of these two datasets provides a more complete 
overview of the indebtedness of the economy as a whole. 
 
The  joint  management  of  micro-databases  has  many  advantages  covering  the  whole 
statistical  compilation  chain,  spanning  from  the  data  collection  processes  to  the 
dissemination policy. From an input perspective, these relate mainly to the reduction of 
the  burden  imposed  on  reporting  institutions  and,  from  an  output  perspective,  to  a 
wider  range  of possibilities  as  regards the  level of  complexity and  detail  of  statistical 
products and the additional flexibility in defining and creating different outputs, allowing 
users to define their own data queries according to their specific needs in a tailor-made 
way. In this respect, the long-standing aim of Banco de Portugal in having a fully-fledged 
integrated  system,  encompassing,  to  the  extent  possible,  granular  data  of  all 
institutional sectors and financial instruments, which can then serve the purposes of the 
different internal and external stakeholders, should be highlighted. To properly manage 
such detailed, comprehensive and complex information, a robust state-of-the-art data 
system is of the essence, boosting appropriate IT tools and solutions able to respond to 
the challenges ahead. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     5   
 An outstanding example of the advantages of this joint management of micro-databases 
that I would like to share with you is the recently taken steps towards the creation of an 
in-house credit assessment system (ICAS) at Banco de Portugal. This system, which is 
being fine-tuned as we speak, further explores the informational potential of both the 
Central Credit Register and the Central Balance Sheet Database and will provide Banco 
de  Portugal  with  its  own  internal  credit  risk  assessment  system,  thus  reducing  its 
dependence on external sources. Against the background of the recent economic and 
financial  crisis,  these  systems  have  recently  been  gaining  importance  within  the 
Eurosystem,  as  can  be  seen  by  the  increasing  number  of  NCBs  that  have  introduced 
them. In fact, at the current juncture, a more pressing business case for ICAS stems from 
monetary policy purposes, for which ICAS will provide an evaluation of debtors’ credit 
notation.  
But the benefits of such a system are not exclusive to monetary policy. In fact, there is 
a  broad  range  of  advantages  to  different  business  areas,  in  particular  regarding 
supervision and financial stability. 
Starting with supervision, the credit notations derived from ICAS could be used not only 
as a benchmark to gauge those provided by institutions with their own internal notation 
systems,  but  also  as  a  way  to  assess  the  quality  of  individual  credit  portfolios,  while 
potentially contributing to an early identification of specific risks to which institutions 
may  be  exposed  to.  Furthermore,  the  analysis  of  risks  and  weaknesses  of  different 
economic sectors and the Portuguese financial sector’s response to them could also be 
envisaged, thus providing a useful input for stress-testing.  
As  to  financial  stability,  ICAS’s  data  could  also  be  used  as  a  monitoring  tool  of  the 
developments of the non-financial sector (and the potential building up of imbalances), 
not only as a provider of non-financial corporations’ credit risk indicators, but also with 
the expert judgement of the risk analysts. This tool could serve, at least, two purposes: 
on the one hand, to assess the fragility of specific sectors of the economy, in particular 
through the economic and financial analysis of the companies that constitute each of 
the sectors; on the other hand, to contribute to evaluate other risks stemming from the 
NFCs  sector,  hence  providing  additional  insights  on  the  main  risks  and  threats  to 
financial stability. 
Another good example of the advantages of an integrated management of microdata is 
the  combination  of  the  Portuguese  Central  Credit  Register  dataset  with  accounting 
information at the firm level (from the Central Balance Sheet Database) for the purpose 
of analysing the drivers of credit risk for firms.1 Also, even though the use of household 
data is more restricted by legal constraints (notably in what concerns the merging of 
                                                                        
1 For more information on this research, please see Antunes, A. et al. “Firm default probabilities revisited”. Banco de 
Portugal, April 2016. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     6   
 these  datasets),  there  have  been  several  efforts  to  identify  what  drives  household 
defaults.  These  lines  of  research  allow  the  identification  of  emerging  risks  in  banks’ 
portfolios, as well to create modelling tools for the forecasting of default probabilities. 
The latter are a key input in stress-testing exercises. 
The integration of these micro-datasets unleashed new possibilities for policy-oriented 
research. In what I find one particularly rich example, researchers made use of the three 
micro-datasets that I mentioned before to document the impact of the  Eurosystem’s 
Expanded  Asset  Purchases  Programme  on  lending  rates  in  the  non-financial  sector.2 
More generally, this expanded information created an ecosystem of intense  scientific 
activity which will no doubt continue to generate a steady flow of high quality research. 
 Having acknowledged the importance of microdata and their integrated management, I 
would like to address now a number of noteworthy initiatives taking place at Banco de 
Portugal that aim at fostering the use and share of this granular information. 
 Firstly, Banco de Portugal, as well as many other national central banks, assigns a high 
priority to the use of granular data for economic research. In our case, this task is mainly 
undertaken at the Research Laboratory on Microdata (BPLim), an investigative structure 
integrated in the Bank’s Economics and Research Department, whose chief objective is 
to support the production of research projects and studies on the Portuguese economy, 
both by the Bank’s economists and authorized external users. Specifically, BPLim aims 
at,  inter  alia:  (i)  providing  scientific  and  computational  support for  microdata-backed 
research; (ii) promoting training actions in micro-econometrics and panel econometrics; 
and (iii) disclosing econometric estimation techniques applied to microdata. 
Secondly, I want to emphasize the recent launch of the so-called International Network 
of Exchanging Experiences on Statistical Handling of Granular Data (INEXDA, for short), 
an international network in the field of microdata. Banco de Portugal is one of the first 
participants  in  this  structure,  along  with  Banca  d’Italia,  Banque  de  France,  Deutsche 
Bundesbank  and  Bank  of  England.  The  INEXDA  network  will  provide  a  basis  for 
exchanging experiences on the statistical handling of granular data which are accessible 
to external users, and will approach very relevant issues such as the accessibility of data 
and metadata, techniques for statistical analysis of granular data and data protection, 
and  procedures  for  output  control.  Furthermore,  INEXDA  offers  a  framework  to 
investigate  possibilities  to  harmonise  access  procedures  and  metadata  structures,  to 
                                                                        
2 Please see Blattner, L. et al. “The effect of quantitative easing on lending conditions”, Banco de Portugal Working 
Paper 8/2016. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     7   
 develop  comparable  structures  for  existing  data,  and  to  further  foster  efficiency  of 
statistical work with granular data. 
Let me also mention,  as  a third  illustration, the relevance  of the  Funding  and  Capital 
Plans  (FCPs)  exercises.  These  plans  -  which  focus  on  the  solvency,  liquidity  and 
profitability of the largest banking groups - include detailed historical and prospective 
accounting  and  prudential  information  (overall  strategies  pursued  in  a  3-4  year  time 
horizon)  and  are  built  over  harmonized  macro  scenarios,  guidelines  and  restrictions, 
thus allowing for full consistency among institutions. On top of its direct relevance for 
supervision,  the  analysis  of  FCPs  contribute  to  the  prospective  assessment  of  the 
intermediate objectives of the macroprudential policy; in addition they can also be used 
to assess the coherency and sustainability of the projected aggregate trends on credit, 
funding, financing to the economy, and profitability. As such, this instrument is much 
suited for the pre-emptive nature of macroprudential policy.  
Lastly, let me also draw your attention to ongoing  developments on the collection of 
loan-by-loan information from banks on the value of collateral and households’ income. 
This information allows the calculation of loan-to-value (LTV), loan-to-income (LTI) and 
debt-to-income  (DTI)  ratios  for  household  mortgages  on  a  regular  basis,  both  at  the 
origin of the contract and over its life span. This information allows the analysis of the 
distribution of LTVs and LTIs across loan contracts and relate this information to other 
relevant characteristics of the contracts (e.g., interest rate spreads, maturities and non-
performing loans), therefore improving the monitoring of risks from banks’ exposure to 
mortgages and banks’ practices with respect to mortgage credit. 
 To sum up, the data needs put forward by the supervisory functions can be regarded by 
NCAs and the ECB as an opportunity to explore important synergies between supervision 
and statistical activities, which can be threefold: 
   (i)  Concerning data collection and information systems, integrating the reports for 
both functions will generate large benefits, not only for the data compilers but 
also  for  the  reporting  entities.  In  this  context,  highly  granular  data  collection 
schemes are proving to be fundamental; 
(ii)  A wide range of analytical studies, which have been crucial for supervision and 
financial stability, benefit significantly from microdata. These analyses reveal the 
heterogeneity  hidden  behind  aggregate  numbers  and  allow  for  a  better 
understanding  and  monitoring  of  the  financial  system,  thus  providing  the 
supervisor a closer and more comprehensive perspective of the financial sector 
and of its relations with the other sectors in the economy. More generally, the 
 www.bportugal.pt  
   8   
 integrated management of microdata enabled an explosion of research activity 
aimed  at  better  understanding  the  workings  of  the  financial  system  and  the 
economy at large; 
(iii) The core supervisory data, granular credit data and ad hoc data sets, collected 
and treated by statistics, will generate value not only for the direct supervision 
but also for the horizontal functions of the SSM, including sector-wide reviews 
and for identifying trends and emerging risks. 
To  maximize  the  usefulness  of  all  the  new  information  that  will  be  available,  further 
work should focus on its analysis and integration, to ensure that  the higher reporting 
standards are reflected in a sounder framework for banking supervision, thus fostering 
financial stability at the EU level. 
 To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  wish  you  all  the  best  for  the  remaining  of  this  inspiring 
workshop and indeed for the future. I am confident that you will keep up the excellent 
work you have been doing so far in this challenging area with the same enthusiasm and 
indisputable expertise.  
Thank you very much. 
 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     9   
