Karnit Flug: Establishing a financial stability committee in Israel
Remarks by Dr Karnit Flug, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Knesset Finance Committee
meeting on the bill to establish a financial stability committee, Jerusalem, 16 May 2017.
 I am pleased to participate in the first discussion in the Knesset Finance Committee on the issue
of establishing a financial stability committee.
About 5 years ago, the International Monetary Fund recommended that Israel establish a financial
stability  committee.    It  took  us  some  time,  but  I  am  happy  that  the  government,  the  financial
regulators and the Bank of Israel have all reached agreements regarding the composition, aims
and authorities of the committee—those that are before you, the members of the Knesset, in the
text of this bill.
Both  in  Israel  and  around  the  world,  the  main  motivation  for  establishing  a  financial  stability
committee was the understanding that cooperation, the transfer of information and coordination
between  the  various  financial  regulators,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  central  bank,  are
required in order to identify and monitor systemic risks and deal with them in a timely manner so
that they don’t become risks to the financial stability of the economy.
We must remember that impaired financial stability has long-term implications for employment,
growth, and general well-being.  The world experienced this during the Global Financial Crisis of
2008, and one of the main lessons learned was the necessity of institutionalizing cooperation and
coordination between all the financial authorities in the country within a central body.  Accordingly,
many of the advanced economies have established financial stability committees.
Such cooperation and coordination is also important due to the changes expected in the financial
system in Israel, both the reforms to increase competition and the rapid technological changes
that are enabling the entry of new entities into the financial system.  These changes, alongside
the advantages they bring with them, are naturally expected to increase the existing risks and to
create new ones, both due to the increase in activity and the changes in its components, and due
to the close interfaces of the new entities with the financial system.
Maintaining a stable financial system is the responsibility of the government, the Bank of Israel,
and  the  other  regulators.    The  financial  stability  committee  will  make  it  possible  to  fulfill  this
responsibility.  However, we must remember that the financial stability committee’s responsibility
is  preventive,  and  that  the  operative  responsibility  essentially  remains  that  of  the  financial
regulators or, in the case of a financial crisis, the government.  The committee will enable the
regular  tracking  and  monitoring  of  the  financial  system  and  provide  recommendations  to  the
financial regulators and to the government that will support the stability and proper functioning of
the financial system.  The Bank of Israel will lead and manage the committee’s work, and for that
purpose, a division was established four years ago at the Bank of Israel to deal with the area of
financial stability.  That division will do most of the staff work of the committee and will support its
activity.
The  discussion  of  financial  stability  is  often  considered  something  that  serves  the  financial
entities, but this is not so.  Maintaining financial stability first and foremost serves the customers
of the financial entities, the economy, and the public as a whole.  Maintaining financial stability
means that when we deposit our salaries in the bank, we can sleep quietly and be certain that we
will be able to withdraw it whenever we want.  It means that when we save for retirement, those
savings will be available to us.  And it means that when a business or factory owner receives a
commitment, it will be honored.
In conclusion, this is the first significant amendment to the Bank of Israel Law in its new format
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
since  the  law  was  legislated  through  this  committee  seven  years  ago,  under  the  committee
chairman  of  the  time,  who  is  also  the  committee  chairman  now.    I  am  certain  that  the
discussions will be matter-of-fact and will lead to legislation that, in the end, will serve the public
in the optimal manner.  Permit me to offer you, as we always do, the Bank of Israel’s professional
assistance in this important legislative process.​
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
