  24.02.2017 
 The role of Central Banks in present times. Monetary and exchange rate 
policies in the Mediterranean countries 
IEMED Conference/Barcelona 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  In  this  first  session  of  the  Conference,  we  will  address  the  implications  of  the  present 
situation of the global economy for central banks and, more specifically, how should central 
banks in the Mediterranean region manage their monetary and exchange rate policies in the 
present context.  
Before giving the floor to our distinguished speakers let me say a few words about the global 
economic policy environment and the implications for monetary and exchange rate policies. 
The latest data tend to confirm that the global recovery is firming, including in core advanced 
economies, even if the rates of growth continue to be rather modest. Inflation is also coming 
back. 
In this context, and after the prolonged period of ultra-expansionary monetary policies that 
goes back to the global financial crisis, we are witnessing what seems to be the beginning 
of a shift in the policy mix in advanced economies, at least by now in the US, a shift towards 
a normalization of monetary policy and a somewhat more expansionary fiscal policy.  
But  this  change  in  the  policy  mix  points  to  the  end  of  the  so  far  very  relaxed  financial 
conditions at the global level; and this, in turn, may have adverse collateral consequences, 
mainly  in  the  domain  of  financial  stability,  in  both  advanced  and  emerging  market 
economies, especially if the change does not take place slowly enough. Indeed, the mere 
expectation  of  the  shift  in  the  policy  mix  has  been  one  important  driver  behind  recent 
increases in bond yields in mature economies and the appreciation of the US dollar. In the 
same  way,  as  highly  accommodative  monetary  policies  in  major  advanced  economies 
generated major challenges for policymakers in emerging market economies, the exit from 
such policies can have important repercussions, as previous episodes of market volatility 
confirm. 
In  this  context,  it  seems  relevant  to  address  the  issue  of  how  central  banks  in  the 
Mediterranean region should cope with the potential spillovers from these policy changes 
in  advanced  economies,  taking  into  account  the  different  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
strategies  that  they  follow.  Many  countries  in  the  South  Mediterranean  shore  have 
historically  relied  on  stable  exchange  rates  as  the  nominal  anchor  for  monetary  policy, 
although some of them have moved or are moving towards more flexible exchange rate 
regimes  and  inflation  targeting  frameworks,  under  the  advice  of  international  financial 
institutions.  
While  there  is  no  specific  recommendation  regarding  the  choice  of  the  exchange  rate 
strategy and each country will need to weigh the pros and cons of pegging versus exchange 
rate flexibility, we must be aware of the limitations that domestic policies have in dealing 
with the spillovers from external policies and events. These are clear in the case of countries 
with fixed exchange rates which, depending on the openness of their capital accounts, have 
to accept the monetary policy stance of the reference country.  
But countries with more flexible exchange rates are not shielded either. Although they can 
disentangle their monetary conditions by allowing the depreciation of the exchange rate, 
this would have side effects on inflation. And the likely swings in capital flows can have 
implications  for  financial  stability,  as  emerging  market  economies  have  repeatedly 
experienced. Indeed, some of them have been forced to tighten monetary conditions in a 
procyclical way to counter inflationary pressures, and have used their buffers of international 
 3/4 
 reserves  and  implemented  macro-prudential  and  capital  control  measures  in  order  to 
preserve financial stability. In any case, tighter dollar funding conditions, in particular, are 
challenging for emerging market economies with high levels of dollar denominated debt. 
This is why it has been argued that the traditional “trilemma” in international finance (i.e., in 
a financially integrated world it is impossible to have at the same time free capital mobility, 
fixed  exchange  rates  and  independent  monetary  policy)  has  been  transformed  into  a 
“dilemma” by the existence of a so called “global financial cycle”, whereby an independent 
monetary  policy  pursuing  domestic  policy  objectives  (controlling  inflation  and  promoting 
growth) is possible if and only if the capital account is managed. In these conditions, sound 
fundamentals and the use of traditional macroeconomic (fiscal and monetary) policies may 
not be enough; authorities may eventually need also to resort to macroprudential and capital 
flow management instruments to smooth financial cycles and capital flows.  
Finally,  another  reflection  from  the  recent  experience  goes  to  the  central  banks  in  core 
advanced  economies:  the  importance  of  better  internalizing  the  global  spillovers  of  their 
monetary policy decisions. While it is not possible to coordinate monetary policies, given 
the mandates of these central banks, they should consider the effects of their decisions on 
the rest of the world in their decision making, as the spillovers have the potential to raise 
financial instability problems in other countries, and the spillback effects will hit back on 
their own economies. 
Without  further  ado,  we  are  honoured  to  have  with  us  today  three  very  experienced 
representatives of the central bank community of the Mediterranean region to address these 
issues:  
Mr. Abdellatif Jouahri, Governor of the Bank Al Maghrib.  
Mr. Mario Vella, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta. 
Mr. Mustapha Kamel Nabli, Former Governor of the Central Bank of Tunisia. 
4/4 
 