Ksenia  Yudaeva:  The  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  for  ensuring
financial stability in an environment of economic recovery
Speech  by  Ms  Ksenia  Yudaeva,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Russia,  at  the  Forum  on
Financial  Stability  "The  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Russia  for  ensuring  financial  stability  in  an
environment of economic recovery", Moscow, 13 April 2017.
 Dear colleagues, it is my pleasure to welcome you all to the Forum on Financial Stability, which
has by now become a tradition. In the last few quarters we have witnessed the beginnings of
fundamental change in both the economy and financial markets. The economy has adapted to
balance  of  payments  shocks  and  started  on  a  path  of  recovery,  and  the  level  of  volatility  in
financial markets has gone down significantly. The relatively calm climate we now find ourselves
has led to a decrease in risks that had been building up, but such a climate could nevertheless
bring in new risks and lead to the creation of so-called bubbles in certain markets. The Bank of
Russia must continue to be on the alert, and ready to adopt the necessary measures as they are
called  for.  And  so,  through  our  analysis  of  the  potential  for  implementing  macroprudential
instruments and macroprudential stress testing, that is exactly what we are doing now. Myself
and a number of my colleagues will be delving deeper into these issues, and I would like to take
this opportunity to highlight a few myself. I will be talking about issues like the present state of the
Russian economy and the impact this has on financial stability; key challenges facing the world
today; the current situation in the banking sector; and finally I would like to go into more detail on
some policy measures undertaken by the Bank of Russia for the express purpose of mitigating
risks in the Russian financial system as a whole.
1) On key risks and the current state of the Russian economy
First  of  all  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  a  number  of  improvements  in  the  Russian
economy  that  began  to  take  place  in  2016.  GDP  moved  into  growth  from  the  third  quarter  of
2016, and we expect that the positive effects of this change will continue to be felt. According to
our assessment, the GDP will see growth of 1-1.5% in 2017, and 1-2% in 2018–19. It is worth
noting that in recent years indices of business activity have grown considerably and now sit at
the highest levels of the last 9 years: in industry the PMI rose from 49.8 points in January 2016 to
52.4 points in March 2017; in the service sector – from 47.1 to 56.6 points over the same period.
Economic recovery has contributed to the reduction of current credit risks in the banking and
financial sectors as a whole.
Inflation is falling even more quickly than expected. The annual rate of consumer price growth fell
to 4.3% in March 2017, down from 12.9% in December 2015. However, it should be noted that
the slowdown in inflation was aided significantly by one-off factors such as the strengthening of
the ruble thanks to higher oil prices and last year’s good harvests.
Through the concerted efforts of OPEC and other oil producers, the oil market has become more
stable in recent months and oil prices have increased. Oil prices have gained a firm foothold over
a  relatively  broad  range.  This  provides  more  stability  in  understanding  long-term  trends.
Nevertheless, the range of scenarios that could evolve in the near future remains quite wide. As
you will doubtless be aware, the baseline scenario adopted by the Bank of Russia assumes that
oil prices will adjust to a level of US$40–45 per barrel in the short or medium term. However, the
alternative scenario we have forecasted assumes a gradual increase in the price of oil, and this
too seems entirely possible.
Under highly volatile conditions in the terms of trade it is very important to have a budget that is
not susceptible to external fluctuations, including those arising from the commodity supercycle.
Last year we adopted a programme of fiscal consolidation to aid in the stabilisation of budget
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
expenditures. Beginning this year an interim fiscal rule has taken effect, under which oil and gas
revenues  resulting  from  the  higher  than  expected  cost  of  base-level  oil  are  directed  to  the
Reserve Fund. The full implementation of this fiscal rule will contribute to a reduction in the risks
to financial stability associated with fiscal volatility and commodity cycles.
On the subject of the Bank of Russia’s monetary policy, the existing balance of risks allows for a
gradual  lowering  of  interest  rates  to  take  place,  however  monetary  policy  should  still  remain
moderately tight. This is due to the need to maintain inflation at a level close to the target, and to
reduce  inflation  expectations  in  the  medium  term,  taking  into  account  the  internal  risks  and
potential  volatility  of  external  factors.  The  steadiness  of  changes  to  interest  rates,  and  the
attendant high level of predictability in monetary policy, leads to a reduction in the risks posed to
financial stability.
2) On capital flows and global risks
For the most part, the situation in Russia reflects overall improvement in sentiment on global
markets in the context of a revival in economic activity in the leading economies. We have begun
to see clear signs that economic dynamics are being restored not only in the U.S., but also in the
Eurozone,  where  the  economic  situation  has  been  unstable  for  a  long  time.  In  general,  the
indices of economic activity PMI for both the leading economies and the global economy as a
whole  currently  sit  at  6-year  highs.  The  upward  swing  of  the  economic  cycle  is  gaining
momentum.
These  conditions  have  led  to  increased  optimism  of  global  market  participants  and  growth  in
capital inflow on the markets of emerging economies. Many countries, including Russia, have
seen improvement in the index of attractiveness of carry trade (carry-to-risk). This index reflects
the  rate  differential  between  sovereign  obligations,  with  regard  to  risk  measured  against  the
volatility of the exchange rate. The recent growth of this index for Russia is associated not so
much  with  change  in  the  rate  differential,  but  with  the  lower  volatility  of  the  ruble,  which  has
already matched the level of a large number of emerging markets with successfully implemented
inflation targeting policies, and that of some developed countries.
In  response  to  these  changes,  questions  have  arisen  regarding  the  volume  and  potential
sustainability of capital inflows to Russia. It should be noted that statistics do not confirm the
hypothesis that carry traders have brought about a mass influx of funds on the Russian market.
According to the latest balance of payments assessment published by the Bank of Russia, the
main  foreign  exchange  earnings  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year  were  related  to  the  current
account, and amounted to US$22.8 billion. Net private capital outflow in the first quarter of 2017 –
amounting  to  US$15.4  billion  –  was  actually  a  reflection  of  this  influx,  as  the  Russian  banks,
having received export revenue in their accounts, incorporated this revenue as foreign assets,
primarily in the form of deposits in correspondent banks. Therefore, the strengthening of the ruble
that  we  saw  in  the  first  quarter  of  2017  can  in  large  part  be  attributed  to  inflows  of  foreign
currency through foreign trade channels, and in small part to other factors, such as carry trade
operations.
Statistics show that the total volume of capital inflow is not huge, however in some markets the
share  held  by  non-residents  has  recently  increased.  Such  markets  include  the  OFZ  market,
information about the share of non-residents in that market is regularly published on our website.
According  to  these  statistics,  the  share  of  non-residents  investing  in  the  OFZ  market  rose  2
percentage points from October 2016, reaching 29% by 6 April 2017. This is hardly a substantial
increase. The yield of OFZ has remained fairly constant since October 2016, despite the fact that
the volume of net borrowing by the Ministry of Finance in this period has been quite large. This is
indicative of the fact that the main players in this market are Russian banks, and that competition
with foreign investors allows the yield of OFZ to be kept from growing, despite increase in supply.
In our opinion, based on the experience of recent years, a significant portion of the inflows of
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
foreign capital to the OFZ market can be considered to be quite stable. This is connected to the
beginning of Russia’s economic recovery and an increase in the level of trust investors have in
the policies which are in place. However, from the point of view of financial stability we cannot
completely disregard the possibility of capital outflow from the OFZ market if external or internal
shocks  were  to  take  place.  The  Bank  of  Russia  conducted  a  survey  of  foreign  investors
regarding their investment strategy in Russian sovereign bonds. The results of the survey show
that a significant portion of investors buying OFZ admit that these may be sold prior to maturity.
Such risks need to be taken into account and their impact on the economy reduced through clear
and predictable policy.
This  is  important  because  the  situation  on  global  markets  remains  fragile  and  volatile  while
uncertainty persists in a number of factors. Such factors include what format a British exit from
the European Union will take, at this point still unclear; the possible negative consequences that
will result from changing economic and trade policies in the United States; and the aggravation of
political risks in Europe. The heightened risk of negative developments in the Chinese economy,
given  the  high  degree  of  debt  load  in  the  economy  and  increase  in  the  number  of  corporate
defaults over the last year, may also prove to be an important factor. However, seeing as total
capital inflow is considered to be small, risks to financial stability associated with the possible
outflow of this capital remain quite low.
The excessive optimism currently experienced in global financial markets may also be a cause
for concern. The value of many assets is being overestimated by investors and increased global
political risks are not being taken into account.
Political  risks  lead  to  greater  uncertainty  in  economic  policy.  If  we  look  at  the  indices  of
uncertainty in economic policy, we can see that they have reached their maximum values. This
means that along with improving the prospects for economic growth, it is necessary to take into
account possible changes in the functioning of financial markets and potential spikes in volatility.
3) On currency risk and measures for the deforexation of the economy
In a climate of lowered yet still high volatility in oil prices, currency risks continue to be potentially
significant. From the point of view of currency risk management, I would like to highlight the need,
on the one hand for further deforexation of the balance sheets in the banking sector, and on the
other for limiting foreign exchange risks in the non-financial sector of the economy.
The issue of deforexation of the banking sector was raised at the Forum on Financial Stability
last  year,  with  particular  emphasis  placed  on  foreign  currency  lending  to  those  sectors  and
companies that do not have sufficient foreign exchange reserves. This problem primarily arises
in relation to companies from the construction and real estate sectors. As you know, the Bank of
Russia made a number of changes to regulation in order to limit the risks associated with such
lending, and to ensure that banks have a capital buffer for these loans. Today we will summarise
our intermediate results and progress we have made so far.
From the beginning of 2016 to March of this year, outstanding foreign currency loans went down
by almost US$28 billion. This was partly offset by an increase in outstanding ruble loans, which
grew to 514 billion rubles. We can also see a decrease in foreign currency lending, mainly in
those  industries  where  companies  lack  so-called  natural  hedging.  Once  again  this  refers  to
businesses in the construction and real estate industries, as well as wholesale and retail trade.
For exporter companies the situation remains unchanged, and banks continue to make foreign
currency loans to them.
In 2014–2015, exporters’ external debt presented a significant potential risk to financial stability.
The high number of maturing loans was a cause for concern, and we were carefully monitoring
the  schedule  for  upcoming  repayments.  This  spike  in  external  debt  repayments  has  since
passed. In the first quarter of 2017, the 27 largest companies repaid a combined total of US$9.8
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
billion  in  external  debt.  They  will  repay  a  further  US$16.5  billion  by  the  end  of  2017  (April  –
December), which is 22% less than the payments made in the same period of the previous year
(US$21.1 billion).
Now, given the recovery in economic activity in the world and in Russia, as well as the increase
in  attractiveness  of  Russian  borrowers,  there  is  the  potential  risk  that  these  borrowers  will
accumulate excess foreign currency debt. This risk is emphasised by the fact that far from all of
the  exporter  companies  can  claim  to  have  a  comprehensive  natural  hedge  against  currency
risks. In some cases companies raise foreign currency debt which is not fully covered by inflows
from  export  activities.  In  2008–09  and  2014–15,  the  Bank  of  Russia’s  assets  were  used  to
refinance  external  loans  which  had  been  raised  by  commodity  companies.  It  is  therefore
essential  to  keep  monitoring  the  risks  of  excessive  external  debt  accumulation,  for  which
purpose the Bank of Russia has instated monitoring of companies’ foreign currency debt levels.
Among  the  many  tools  for  macroprudential  risk  management  are  the  measures  taken  by  the
Bank of Russia towards the deforexation of the economy. Given that in Russia, phases of the
financial cycle largely correlate with phases of the commodity cycle, we think these measures
need  to  be  countercyclical  –  allowing  banks  to  accumulate  capital  during  periods  of  credit
expansion and then use it as a cushion in periods of credit crunch. This approach will smooth out
the sharpness of fluctuations in the financial cycle and reduce financial stability risks.
4) On credit risk in the banking sector
First of all, it must be noted that for the most part credit risks in the corporate segment did in fact
come to pass. If we look at the statistics, over the past six months the share of overdue loans
has remained virtually unchanged, coming to 6.7% on 1 March 2017. The share of bad loans in
banking  portfolios  also  remains  unchanged  (sitting  at  8.7%,  excluding  rehabilitated  banks,  in
contrast to the previous level of 8.6%).
The  largest  share  of  bad  debt  is  to  be  found  in  the  construction  sector  (27.3%),  real  estate
transactions (13.5%) and wholesale and retail trade (15.1%). To a large extent, the realisation of
risks in these sectors was caused by the reckless actions of not only borrowers, but also banks
providing foreign currency loans to borrowers who do not have foreign currency earnings.
The second point I would like to address is how banks manage risks that arise. The main tool of
credit risk management for borrowers already experiencing financial difficulties is restructuring. In
2016,  the  Bank  of  Russia  began  collecting  operational  data  from  banks,  analysis  of  which
showed that banks actively use restructuring in their operations. The areas in which banks make
concessions to borrowers are, once again, foreign currency loans to construction and real estate
companies, as well as ruble loans to coal companies which faced difficulties in 2013–15 due to
the decrease in coal prices. It is worth noting that the process of restructuring loans does not
affect the stability of the banking sector, as the loans in question generate sufficient reserves.
To  summarize,  I  would  like  to  note  that  the  banking  sector  is  entering  a  new  phase,  wherein
priority  will  shift  from  active  work  on  the  debt  problem  to  the  task  of  finding  new  clients  and
projects  for  lending.  The  Bank  of  Russia’s  job  in  this  case  will  be  to  carry  out  macro-level
monitoring to ensure compliance with banking standards for taking on risk.
With regard to consumer lending, since the second half of last year we have seen an increase in
new  loans,  a  decrease  in  the  share  of  bad  loans,  and  a  gradual  recovery  in  the  market.
Yelizaveta  Danilova  will  go  into  this  in  more  detail  in  her  report.  In  view  of  declining  market
interest rates, we have decided to alter the scale of the differentiated risk ratios depending on the
total cost of credit. However, low interest rates on consumer loans could lead to a new boom in
the market for unsecured consumer lending. To deal with this, the Bank of Russia is studying
different  approaches  to  the  regulation  of  borrowers’  debt  burden,  in  particular  the  relation
between income and total monthly loan payments.
 
4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
A number of countries actively use this type of regulation. In order for debt load information to be
incorporated into regulation, banks must be able to obtain information in a timely manner about
borrowers’ total debt, their payments on existing loans and their income. In February we put out a
consultative  paper  on  the  calculation  of  debt  ratios,  which  banks  have  since  made  a  lot  of
important  comments  on.  We  are  now  studying  these  comments  and  working  on  developing
specific approaches.
Among  the  other  tools  and  risks  that  require  particular  attention,  I  would  like  to  turn  now  to
interest rate risk and macroprudential stress testing.
5) On interest rate risk in the banking sector
At present, interest rate risk in the Russian banking sector is low. This is largely thanks to the
fact that after market stabilisation which took place in 2015 and the period following, the economy
learned to adapt to external shocks, and confidence in implemented monetary policy grew. Amid
slowing inflation and decreasing interest rates on bank loans and deposits, banks have been able
to increase their margins of interest. This in turn has contributed to growth in net interest income,
which reached a three-year peak in the fourth quarter of 2016 to exceed 700 billion rubles.
Despite  low  interest  rate  risk  for  Russian  banks,  it  is  important  not  to  forget  the  need  for
improvement in systems of risk management. In terms of inflation targeting, interest rates are
quite  heavily  dependent  on  inflation  behaviour  and  can  significantly  impact  the  value  of  credit
institutions’ assets and liabilities, as well as their interest margins. When taking this into account,
the challenge of effectively managing banks’ interest rate risk becomes very important.
Recently, particular attention has been paid to this issue by the world’s leading central banks. A
year  ago,  in April  2016,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS)  released  their
benchmark standard, dedicated to the management of interest rate risk in banking books. This
standard describes advanced methods of evaluating interest rate risk in banking books in detail,
such as sensitivity testing of the net present value (NPV) and of the economic value of equity
(EVE) in terms of interest rate risk. Moreover, the BCBS standard devotes special attention to the
assessment  of  non-standard  instruments  vulnerable  to  interest  rate  risk,  that  is,  instruments
without  a  defined  maturity  date  (in  particular,  demand  deposits),  and  instruments  with  built-in
optionality (in particular, loans with an early repayment option).
In  order  to  evaluate  to  what  extent  the  methods  of  interest  rate  risk  assessment  and
management used in Russian banks are consistent with international best practice, the Bank of
Russia conducted a survey of 27 of the largest banks about how their systems of interest rate
risk  management  and  assessment  are  currently  organised.  In  general,  there  is  pronounced
variation in the methods used by surveyed banks to assess interest rate risk.
Among  the  respondents  we  can  find  both  banks  applying  advanced  methods  close  to  BCBS
standards, as well as banks using the Bank of Russia’s regulatory methodology. This is a natural
consequence of the differences in banks’ sizes, their business models and the structure of their
assets  and  liabilities,  and  does  not  represent  a  disadvantage.  At  the  same  time,  it  can  be
expected that the BCBS standards of interest rate risk assessment will be reflected in Russian
banks’ regulation practice in the near future. In this regard, we now recommend that banks study
and incorporate those methods of interest rate risk assessment proposed by the BCBS.
I recommend you to look at the results of this survey of banks published on the Bank of Russia’s
website in the form of a consulting report. We are awaiting comments and suggestions from the
banking community on the conclusions drawn.
6) On macroprudential stress testing
And  finally,  coming  to  the  end  of  my  talk  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  Bank  of
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Russia’s  plans  for  the  development  of  macroprudential  stress  testing.  The  European  Central
Bank recently published an extensive document on this subject, and similar work has also come
from the Bank of England and Bank of Japan. It is fast becoming standard analytic practice for
central banks in ensuring financial stability.
Why has macroprudential stress testing become so relevant? There are several reasons. As you
will be aware, the Bank of Russia has long been engaged in stress testing of the banking sector.
Traditionally this instrument has been used in the supervision of banks, in order to understand
the  risks  posed  to  individual  banks  and  the  banking  sector  as  a  whole.  However,  across  the
globe  we  can  see  a  new  trend  of  conducting  cross-sectoral  stress  testing,  i.e.  stress  testing
which is applied not only to the banking sector, but also to other related sectors, as they may
also be carriers of systemic risk, be exposed to systemic risk from banks or, conversely, pass
this  risk  on  to  banks.  Such  sectors  include  insurance  companies,  pension  funds  and
professional market participants. And, importantly, in this type of stress testing intermediaries’
involvement in financial groups and holding companies is taken into account.
Work on macroprudential stress testing has already begun at the Bank of Russia, and we have
already taken the first steps in this direction. In 2017, the Bank of Russia began to publish its
“Review of Financial Market Risks”, instead of the previously published “Money Market Review”,
and the results of comprehensive stress testing of the financial market can be found in this new
edition. Reflected in this work is the interaction of different categories of financial intermediaries
in different financial market segments by means of network analysis tools.
Further steps to be taken involve linking financial sector risks to shocks to the real economy, in
which the effects of stress may be further exacerbated due to the feedback effect. At the end of
this year, we will present the results of macroprudential stress testing in our “Financial Stability
Review”. In the future, we will be able to use this to further develop the measure and calibration of
macroprudential tools.
So, in this short presentation I have tried to present you with our understanding of the current
situation in the Russian market from the point of view of financial stability. My colleagues will take
some of these issues up in more detail. We are ready to answer any questions you may have.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
