  12.07.2017 
 Congressional Hearing of the Governor of the Banco de España before 
the Commission investigating the financial crisis in Spain and the financial 
assistance programme 
 
 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Thank you Madam Chair, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
I appear before this Commission following the summons received from the President of the 
Congress of Deputies in connection with the publication drafted and released by the Banco 
de España on 16 June entitled “Report on the Financial and Banking Crisis in Spain, 2008-
2014”.  
The plans to draft a report on the economic and financial crisis that first broke in Spain in 
2007-2008 were considered some time ago in the Banco de España, justifiably so given that 
this crisis has been the worst the Spanish economy and financial system has undergone in 
recent decades.  
The  Parliament’s  decision  last  February  to  set  up  this  Commission  confirmed  for  us  the 
advisability of drafting the Report, understanding that it could be a suitable contribution by 
the Banco de España to the Commission’s work.  
Although some of its effects have continued to the present day, the crisis may be deemed 
to have ended or been brought under control, in general terms, in 2015. By then, the financial 
conditions for households and firms had normalised to a significant extent, our economy 
had resumed a growth rate above 3%, significant increases in employment were posted, 
the recapitalisation and restructuring of our credit institutions ceased to exert any further 
significant impact on the increase in the deficit and public debt, and the Single Supervisory 
Mechanism – incorporated into the ECB – commenced operating.  
The Report, in which several directorates general of the Bank participated and which was 
coordinated by the council member Fernando Eguidazu, covers the span of the crisis in the 
macroeconomic,  financial,  regulatory  and  supervisory  areas,  including  national  and 
European reforms.  
I shall address, first, the aims behind the drafting of the Report; second, the macroeconomic 
environment in which the crisis unfolded, with the build-up of strong imbalances linked to 
private-sector debt; third, the restructuring and recapitalisation strategy for a series of credit 
institutions, essentially savings banks; and, finally, I shall take stock of this process, as far 
as we can currently consider it. 
 The aim of the Report  
Firstly, I would like to set out our aims in drafting the Report.  
On 21 February, the Executive Commission of the Banco de España adopted the resolution 
to prepare, and I quote, “a detailed report on the financial and banking crisis that broke in 
Spain  as  from  2008,  addressing  its  causes,  unfolding  and  resolution,  with  particular 
attention to the Bank’s conduct in the crisis”.  
The drafting of the Report took into account several constraints, two of which I would like 
to mention. 
  3/14 
 On one hand, the obligation to maintain the confidentiality of individual banks’ data. The 
Report contains ample information on credit institutions, including intervention processes 
and the public aid granted, but it cannot go into details linked to the supervision of individual 
institutions  whose  confidentiality  is  legally  protected,  or  assess  those  matters  that  are 
currently the subject of proceedings initiated in the courts.  
As to the period studied, although 2008 is the year the crisis started, the analysis is from 
2000, on the understanding that it is impossible to explain the crisis without reviewing its 
sources and causes, which go back to the previous decade. Moreover, the year 2014 has 
been chosen as the date to close off the period considered, bearing in mind that it was the 
end of this year that saw the start-up of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and that the 
measures envisaged in the Memorandum of Understanding entered into with the European 
Commission in July 2012 may be deemed to be concluded. In short, the seven years from 
2008 to 2014 match quite closely the period which saw the emergence and development of 
the crisis, its treatment and the start of the recovery.  
The  Report  explains  the  measures  applied,  which  should  be  considered  in  their 
macroeconomic and financial setting, one which progressively changed over the period in 
question. Indeed, from 2008 to 2014 the Banco de España prepared a considerable number 
of  releases,  articles  and  reports  on  the  crisis  and  the  measures  adopted,  which  were 
available in print or on our website no sooner were they drafted. That is to say, the Bank 
had already prepared and published extensive information on and various analyses of the 
crisis; but what was missing was an orderly overview, in terms of both the timeline and the 
different themes, addressing the key macroeconomic, financial, regulatory and supervisory 
aspects.  
 The imbalances built up in the Spanish economy in the expansion prior to 2008 
Allow me first to refer to the build-up of macroeconomic and financial imbalances in the 
expansion years prior to the crisis, linked most significantly to private-sector debt.  
In  its  opening  chapter,  the  Report  indicates  that  an  intense  process  of  indebtedness 
unfolded in Spain from 2001 up to 2007, as reflected in Table 1.1 (p. 66).  
The  figures  for  the  period  2001-2007  are  as  follows:  set  against  nominal GDP growth  of 
67%, credit to the private sector increased by  221%, concentrated especially in the real 
estate sector, where growth of 250% in house purchase loans and of 513% in the case of 
credit to construction and real estate services companies was recorded. Peak growth in 
credit was in 2005 and 2006. In those two years, credit to the private sector grew by 60%, 
that  earmarked  for  house  purchases  by  65%  and  that  to  construction  and  real  estate 
services firms by almost 100%, i.e. it practically doubled in two years.  
Over  the  same  period  2001-2007,  570,000  new  houses  per  year  on  average  were  built, 
house  prices increased  twofold  in  real  terms,  and  by  2.5  times  in  nominal terms.  As  the 
Report notes, this process adjusted to a dynamic consistent with what may be considered 
to be a speculative real estate bubble, meaning that the attendant prices stood far above 
what the fundamentals in the respective markets – and naturally the housing market – would 
have warranted.  
4/14 
   The increase in credit and its concentration in the real estate sector came about at a time 
at  which  the  Spanish  economy  was  undergoing  deep-seated  changes,  on  two  fronts  in 
particular: the adoption of the euro and rapid demographic growth, which made it difficult 
to assess the scale of the imbalances.  
The  adoption  of  the  euro  as  from  1999  entailed  the  disappearance  of  the  adjustment 
mechanism  for  the  exchange  rate  against  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  countries  and  the 
adoption of the common monetary policy, which maintained an expansionary stance during 
those years, with an appreciable reduction in the interest rates prevailing for the Spanish 
economy. The monetary policy stance was appropriate for the area as a whole, but was no 
doubt overly expansionary for Spain. 
The build-up of imbalances also occurred in other euro area countries, in a setting in which 
different  institutions,  analysts  and  economic  policymakers  confided  excessively  in  the 
stabilising effect of the euro. This meant that, for example, the differences in the risk premia 
applied to the various issuers of government debt disappeared. It was thought – and this 
was a widely held viewpoint – that membership of the Monetary Union would reduce the 
risk linked to current account deficits, because they could be financed within the Union in 
light of the free movement of capital. This approach, which would be proven to be mistaken 
with the crisis, led, among other things, to the risk associated with our economy’s growing 
external debt not being properly estimated.  
As regards demographic growth, the population rose by around 5,000,000 between 2000 
and 2007, an unprecedented increase in such a short period since population series have 
existed in Spain, i.e. since the mid-18th century. Almost 90% of this population increase 
was attributable to net immigrant inflows, most of whom adults, which fuelled the growth of 
the real estate sector by means of both a permanent increase in the demand for housing 
and, on the supply side, by providing the labour that helped the construction sector expand.  
During those years, in its analyses on the Spanish economy and in its supervisory tasks, the 
Banco de España identified the main problems that were building up and signalled aspects 
such as the growing vulnerability of households’ and non-financial corporations’ financial 
position, associated with their growing and sizeable debt; the big increase in house prices; 
the excessive concentration of credit in the real estate sector; the excessive dependency 
on  external  funding;  and  the  accumulation  of  losses  in  competitiveness  in  the  Spanish 
economy. That said, as the Report states, they were considered to be downside risks, in a 
scenario that foresaw a move towards lower growth rates and a gradual correction of the 
imbalances. The Bank did not anticipate such an acute recession as that which took hold 
from late 2008, which would reveal the scale and gravity of the imbalances that had built up 
in our economy.  
The  Bank  adopted  regulatory  and  supervisory  measures  which,  over  time,  have  been 
acknowledged  internationally  as  advanced  and  innovative,  even  though  they  were 
questioned at the time by various national and international institutions, and by the Spanish 
banking  sector,  the  latter  understanding  that  they  placed  our  banks  at  a  competitive 
disadvantage. The two instruments in question were the countercyclical provisions, which 
were established by equipping the general provisions already in place with a component 
linked  not to  non-performance  but  to  credit  growth;  and  the  requirement  that  structured 
 5/14 
 investment vehicles be included within the scope of prudential consolidation of the credit 
institutions creating them, thereby preventing the transformation and securitisation of poor-
quality loans from proliferating, which was one of the sources of the international banking 
crisis. 
In 2008 the countercyclical provisions accounted for a sizeable volume of funds, of over €26 
billion; the stricter treatment in Spain than in other countries of special-purpose investment 
vehicles  deterred  our  banks  from  using  this  artificial  risk-reduction  mechanism,  which 
contributed to the impact of the first crisis on our banks being relatively lighter.  
The main lesson of this process has been the importance of what we call “macroprudential” 
instruments, which did not exist at the time and which have now been set in place in all 
developed countries following the work of the Financial Stability Board created by the G20 
in 2009, and of the European Systemic Risk Board, linked to the European System of Central 
Banks, created in 2011.  
As highlighted in the Report (pp. 64-65), while the appropriate compulsory rules for banks 
did  not  then  exist,  the  Bank  could  have  promoted  the  application  of  ceilings  on  the 
expansion of credit along three different avenues: containing or limiting risk concentration 
in the real estate development and construction sector; controlling or limiting leverage (the 
relationship  between  assets  and  liabilities,  between  exposures  and  their  financing);  and 
controlling or limiting the mortgage loan amount as a proportion of the value of the collateral 
(LTV).  But  these  instruments  were  not  at  that  time  those  habitually  used  by  supervision, 
given that a microprudential approach was followed, focusing on ensuring the solvency of 
individual institutions.  
 The restructuring and recapitalisation strategy  
Secondly, I am going to address the strategy adopted as from late 2008, which is analysed 
in detail in the second and third chapters of the Report. I shall review the main developments 
using, as the Report does, a timeline that helps better explain the measures adopted in their 
context  at  each  point  in  time.  I  shall  later  also  refer  to  some  of  the  most  frequent  or 
significant questions posed about the strategy that was adopted.  
From late 2008, at a time marked by the serious downturn in international financial markets 
following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  that  year,  liquidity  support 
mechanisms  for  the  financial  system  were  set  in  place  through  the  establishment  of  the 
Fund for the acquisition of high-quality financial assets and the development of a system 
for the granting of State guarantees for specific issues. In line with the reforms being rolled 
out in various European countries, it was moreover decided  to extend deposit guarantee 
coverage from €20,000 to €100,000.  
As from 2009, the difficulties in the financial system intensified. In March that year the case 
of  Caja  Castilla  la  Mancha  marked  a  turning  point,  as  it  highlighted  how  necessary  new 
arrangements were to address the restructuring of ailing institutions. Given the constraints 
on savings banks (duly detailed in the Report), a strategy was adopted between 2009 and 
2011  turning  on  two  pillars:  to  assist  the  restructuring  of  the  system  through  voluntary 
6/14 
 mergers  and  the  resolution  of  less  viable  institutions;  and  the  strengthening  of  solvency 
through the clean-up of institutions’ balance sheets and the shoring up of their capital.  
As regards the first of these pillars, two measures are worth noting: the creation of the Fund 
for  the  Orderly  Restructuring  of  the  Banking  Sector  (FROB),  and  the  reform  of  the 
institutional protection scheme (IPS).  
 including 
financial  support, 
The  FROB  was  created  in  June  2009  to  support  restructuring  and  voluntary  integration 
processes, 
in  the  main,  through  the  acquisition  of 
“participaciones preferentes” (preference debt instruments) or, where appropriate, through 
managing bank interventions. Later, in February 2011, the FROB was reformed following 
the worsening of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, which increasingly hampered access 
by banks from various countries, Spain among them, to the wholesale funding markets, and 
which had led to the Greek and Irish programmes in May and December 2010. The role of 
the FROB was adapted, enabling it to acquire ordinary shares temporarily (up to 5 years), 
which was known as FROB II. 
The FROB covered shortcomings in the pre-existing arrangements on two main fronts: the 
insufficiency of the deposit guarantee schemes’ funds, as their capacity was not calculated 
to  tackle  systemic  crises,  with  potential  contagion  arising  in  the  event  of  their  members 
being  demanded  to  make  extraordinary  contributions;  and  to  provide  swift  capital 
contributions for ailing banks, obviating the problems posed by mercantile regulations and, 
in  particular,  the need  to  obtain the  approval of  banks’ General Meetings.  As  detailed in 
Table 2.8 of the Report, the contributions from FROB I and FROB II totalled €15,617 million, 
assigned  in  their  entirety  to  savings  banks  and  conditional  upon  restructuring  and  the 
enhanced efficiency and governance of the recipient institutions.  
In April 2010 the regulations governing IPSs – dating from 2007 –were amended to afford 
them  greater  stability,  reinforcing  banks’  commitment  to  permanence,  requiring  that  the 
central institution should take the form of a public limited company and that it should be at 
least  50%-held  by  the  savings  banks.  The  IPSs  offered  a  flexible  formula  for  integration 
analogous to mergers for practical purposes, but retaining the institutions’ individual legal 
personality and thereby facilitating integration processes principally between savings banks 
which,  given  their  nature,  did  not  have  the  same  flexibility  as  banks  to  conclude  merger 
agreements.  
As to reinforcing institutions’ solvency, mention may be made of the July 2010 savings bank 
reform (Decree-Law 11/2010 of 9 July 2010) which, among other measures, sought to ease 
their access to capital markets through the issuance of equity units with voting rights, or the 
pursuit  of  activity  through  a  bank,  separating  banking  activity  from  the  Foundations  that 
could control the savings banks; and the February 2011 Royal Decree-Law to reinforce the 
financial system, which included new solvency requirements in line with the standards of 
the  revised  Basel  II  Accord,  stealing  a  march  on  the  European  Directive.  Among  other 
aspects,  the  legislation  introduced  greater  capital  requirements  and  more  demanding 
definitions  for  their  various  components,  along  with  stricter  definitions  for  risk-weighted 
assets.  
  7/14 
 Moreover, in June 2010, the Banco de España reinforced accounting requirements with a 
view to increasing coverage more swiftly through provisions for non-performing assets. As 
a  result  of  these  measures,  deposit  institutions’  overall  solvency  ratio  increased  from 
December  2007  to  December  2011  from  10.6%  212.2%.  At  end-2011,  the  volume  of 
provisioning set aside by our banking system and savings banks as a whole exceeded €138 
billion (13% of GDP).  
This strategy was greatly affected and indeed interrupted in 2012, with the euro area crisis. 
The crisis saw various periods of tension, the result of the interaction between sovereign, 
banking and macroeconomic risks.  
The first half of 2012 saw a stepping up of so-called “redenomination” risk, which was a 
euphemism for the doubts over certain countries, Spain among them, remaining in the euro 
area and, indeed, over the survival of the single currency. In March, a second bail-out was 
approved for Greece and, in May, with the inconclusive Greek elections, rumours were again 
unleashed about the country exiting the Monetary Union. In parallel, there was a fresh bout 
of tension centred on Spain and on Italy, where two-year risk premia relative to the German 
Bund climbed to over 700 and 500 basis points, respectively.  
Fears intensified in Spain over the impact of the double-dip recession on the position of 
credit institutions and on the feedback loop between sovereign and banking risk. Funding 
conditions  on  the  wholesale  markets  once  again  tightened  and  net  fund  outflows  to  the 
external  sector  stepped  up,  totalling  €320  billion  in  cumulative  12-month  terms,  29%  of 
GDP. In mid-2012, Spain was facing what was practically a collapse in external funding, 
which it was able to offset with a substantial increase in Eurosystem funding, which came 
to account for €412 billion in August 2012, 34% of the liquidity injected by the Eurosystem 
into banks across the whole euro area. 
In response to the worsening of the crisis, the Government approved two Decree-Laws in 
February  and  in  May  2012  on  the  write-down  of  real  estate  risks  on  credit  institutions’ 
balance  sheets;  and  in  July  2012,  a  reinforced  strategy  for  capital  restructuring  and 
strengthening  was  adopted  through  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  with  the 
European Commission. This included an injection of funds, provided through the European 
Stability  Mechanism,  for  more  than  €41  billion.  That  same  summer,  the  European  Union 
took  further  steps  in  the  reform  of  the  euro  area’s  institutional  architecture,  which  were 
crucial in dispelling redenomination risk. The measures included the approval of the plans 
for the Banking Union and the decision in September 2012 by the European Central Bank 
on  possible  direct  purchases  in  the  secondary  market  for  government  bonds  subject  to 
economic adjustment programmes or precautionary programmes.  
Chapter III in the Report explains the strategy agreed upon in the MoU. The main features 
of  the  measures  were  as  follows:  a  new  recapitalisation  and  restructuring  process  with 
public aid via the FROB, including an external assessment of the Spanish financial system, 
all of which is  detailed  in  Diagram  3.1  and Table 3.3  of the  Report; the  segregation  of a 
substantial  volume of  impaired  assets  of  the  banks  that  received  public  aid,  which were 
transferred to Sareb, as detailed in Table 3.5 of the Report; and compliance by all banks 
with a level of top-quality capital of 9 %.  
 8/14 
  Chapter III also describes the measures adopted to support the retail holders of shares and 
hybrid instruments affected by the restructuring exercises at the banks which moved into 
the FROB’s orbit (pp. 180-181). The two measures adopted were: 1) to enable the Deposit 
Guarantee  Scheme  (DGS)  to  purchase  the  shares  that  retail  holders  of  preference  debt 
instruments and subordinated debt had received in exchange for their securities when the 
shares were not listed (this was the case of Novacaixagalicia and Caixa Catalunya); and 2) 
to create a committee to establish the criteria that would govern the arbitration to be offered 
by FROB investee banks to the retail holders of these instruments to resolve cases of mis-
selling. Subsequently (Table 3.4, p. 194), the amount of the instruments issued by Bankia, 
Caixa Catalunya and Novacaixagalicia is given, along with the arbitration requests received 
and  the  awards  favourable  to  customers:  overall,  arbitration  with  a  favourable  award 
amounted to €3,125M, relating to almost 300,000 customers. 
Bearing in mind the doubts over the viability of the euro and over Spain continuing in the 
single currency, and given the serious crisis facing our financial system, I believe that the 
restructuring  strategy  and  its  financing  as  set  out  in  the  2012  Memorandum  of 
Understanding  was  proportionate  and  has  managed  to  achieve  the  normalisation  of  our 
financial system, as explained in Chapter IV of the Report. 
 Options in the restructuring process 
 Allow me now to turn to two questions: the options other than the strategy that was adopted; 
and why the reform and restructuring process under way since 2009 had to be reinforced, 
through the 2012 Memorandum of Understanding.  
As regards the options, I believe the debate mainly focuses on the early years of the crisis, 
between 2009 and 2011. The two scenarios usually mentioned are, first, not having bailed 
out non-solvent banks, facilitating their winding up; and second, as opposed to the gradual 
strategy launched,  to  have  acted  more  aggressively  from the outset,  with  an  injection of 
public funds in the form of capital and the segregation of impaired assets into purpose-built 
companies, such as that which was finally created, namely Sareb. 
With respect to the first scenario, and irrespective of political considerations, letting ailing 
banks go bankrupt was not a reasonable option in economic terms.  
The winding up of banks would have meant the paralysis of banking services and losses for 
depositors in the institutions concerned of that portion not covered by the DGS (a portion 
that could be very high), accentuating the risk of contagion to other institutions. This type 
of  strategy  would  have  had  a  devastating  impact  on  confidence  and  the  stability  of  the 
financial system, on the real economy and on employment, and it would very likely have 
meant a higher cost for taxpayers insofar as the DGS would almost certainly not have been 
able to meet the coverage of deposits without further public aid.  
Indeed, leaving aside the case of Lehman Brothers, which was not a commercial bank but 
an  investment  bank  without  retail  depositors,  and  the  most  particular  case  of  Cyprus  in 
2013, I know of no other instance during the crisis that began in 2008 of the authorities of a 
country having adopted a bank winding-up solution that entailed losses for depositors. 
 9/14 
 The strategy chosen sustained the viability of the banks that received aid, maintaining their 
regulatory  capital  and  the  continuity  of  their  core  functions,  and  thereby  protecting  their 
depositors.  As  Table  2.8  in  the  Report  (p.  137)  shows,  at  end-2011,  the  aid  assigned  to 
banks had already risen to €25.5 billion (€15.6 billion of which were in the form of public aid 
through the FROB, and the rest comprising private funds through the DGS). This aid enabled 
the banks that received it to sustain deposits, totalling around €487 billion, around one-third 
of credit institutions’ total deposits, of which over €250 billion were guaranteed.  
As  regards  the  second  scenario,  the  strategy  of  an  early  public  bail-out  for  a  significant 
portion of the system of credit institutions, which was at the time colloquially known as the 
“manguerazo” (liquidity dousing), was a means opted for in 2008-2009, with various formats, 
by countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States. 
However,  in  those  years  in  Spain,  private  solutions  prevailed,  with  liquidity  support 
measures in 2008 and, from 2009, with injections by the FROB, mainly through preference 
debt instruments, i.e. hybrid debt (not capital) instruments. It would not be until 2011 that, 
with the reform of the FROB, the way was paved for capital contributions with public funds 
and, into 2012, with the MoU, for further injections of public funds and for the creation of 
Sareb.  
From a fiscal standpoint, the option of massive and early capital injections with public funds 
could, perhaps, have been viable in Spain until 2007, while public finances were still running 
a surplus and GDP growth stood above 3.5%; and there was still some leeway in 2008, 
despite the slowdown in growth and the increase in the fiscal deficit, which rose that year 
to 4.4% of GDP. Nonetheless, from 2009 it became very difficult, if not indeed impossible, 
against a background of recession, with a decline in GDP of 3.6% and a rapid deterioration 
in  public  finances.  In  2009,  the  budget  deficit  climbed  to  11%  of  GDP;  and  public  debt 
increased in only two years by almost 20 pp of GDP to 52.8%, compared with 35.6% in 
2007.  
It should moreover be borne in mind that Spanish credit institutions generally had, in the 
initial  years  of  the  crisis,  high  levels  of  provisioning  and  profitability,  which  probably 
contributed to generating excessive confidence in their ability to finance, through exclusively 
private  means,  the  restructuring  and  strengthening  of  their  capital.  The  preference  for 
seeking out private solutions was naturally governed by the aim to minimise the impact for 
taxpayers;  but  another  determinant  here  was  the  objective  to  undertake  the  necessary 
reform  of  savings  banks,  which  were  by  then  subject  to  well-known  problems  of 
governance, it being considered that a strategy of widespread public aid could set back or 
make this reform more difficult. 
The  question  hanging  in  the  air  is  whether  the  alternative  of  strong  public  aid  to  credit 
institutions in the initial phases of the crisis would ultimately have entailed a lower fiscal cost 
than  the  gradual  approach  opted  for.  But  this  question  is,  as  economists  would  say, 
counterfactual, i.e. attempting to imagine the consequences – desired and undesired alike 
– of something that did not happen. Whatever interest this question may have, naturally the 
Report does not go into it, and I do not believe it is for the Banco de España to respond to 
it. 
 10/14 
  A second question is why some of the savings bank IPSs did not withstand the double-dip 
recession and had to undertake further restructuring measures as from 2012.  
With hindsight, the IPSs were in most cases clearly but a prior step to necessary and actual 
mergers, and several of these groups were evidently insufficient when faced with the second 
recession. Yet it should be recalled that the IPSs were an instrument that provided for the 
integration  of  savings  banks  and  of  credit  cooperatives,  which  had  less  flexibility  to 
undertake  true  mergers.  The  integration  processes  called  for  a  voluntary  agreement 
between the parties. In the midst of the crisis, these agreements were not easy and they 
required, moreover, the approval of the related regional government authorities.  
But in 2011 nobody, or practically nobody foresaw the double-dip recession and less still 
how violently it would affect the Spanish economy.  
In April 2011 most agencies, including the IMF, the OECD, the European Commission and 
the Banco de España, were forecasting growth for our economy of around 0.8%, which at 
the end of the year turned out to be a decline in GDP of 1.0%, the biggest forecasting error 
on record in recent times for these institutions. The European Central Bank was acting in 
response to what it saw as a recovery scenario for the euro area, as testified by the fact that 
it raised its benchmark interest rate by 25 bp on two occasions, in April and in July 2011, 
only to reverse these rises from November, in light of the worsening sovereign debt crisis. 
The  forecasting  error  was  also  most  significant in  2012:  in  their  2012  spring  projections, 
most institutions estimated a decline in GDP of around 1.6%, and ultimately it was 2.9%.  
 Overview  
As is addressed in the final chapter of the Report, I should now like to take an overall view 
of the crisis.  
With regard to the regulatory and supervisory architecture of the financial system, we now 
have new arrangements underpinned by the European System of Financial Supervision and 
by the Banking Union in the euro area. New and more powerful regulatory and supervisory 
tools  are  at  hand,  including  higher  capital  requirements,  increased  in  the  case  of 
systemically important institutions, and the new instruments provided by macroprudential 
policy and resolution policy, also within the European framework. There is still work to be 
done with these arrangements, mainly the development of  the third pillar of the Banking 
Union, comprising a common deposit guarantee scheme and the pooling of resources in 
the Single Resolution Mechanism.  
The Spanish financial system, for its part, has undergone most significant restructuring. This 
is  reflected  in  the  reduction  in  the  number  of  institutions,  mainly  among  savings  banks, 
whose  number  fell  from  45  to  10  institutions,  8  of  which  are  currently  banks;  and  in  the 
reform of the banking sector which, from 2008 to 2015, saw the number of offices fall by 
one-third and staff numbers by more than one-quarter.  
Spanish banks are today better capitalised. Deposit institutions’ overall solvency ratio rose, 
in terms of capital relative to risk-weighted assets, from 10.6% at end-2007 to 14.5% at 
end-2015. From 2008 to 2015 the sector undertook a major clean-up of its balance sheets 
 11/14 
 through  provisioning  totalling  almost  €300  billion,  close  to  20%  of  the  total  credit  to 
residents at the time the crisis broke and to 28% of GDP in 2015.  
At this juncture I should point out that, on reading these paragraphs, I am not forgetting the 
case of Banco Popular Español.  
The Report provides details on the results for this bank, and on the assessment made under 
the July 2012 Memorandum of Understanding with regard to our banks’ capital needs. As 
is known, this assessment was conducted by the consultancy firm Oliver Wyman, and its 
outcome was that Banco Popular evidenced capital needs in excess of €3.2 billion. But in 
October 2012 it was concluded that both Banco Popular, and the other institution for which 
capital needs have been identified, namely Ibercaja, could cover these needs by their own 
means,  without  resort  to  public  funds  and,  therefore,  also  without  transferring  assets  to 
Sareb. I believe the resolution of Banco Popular, undertaken early in June in accordance 
with the provisions of the 2014 European Directive, is set in a different context to that of the 
analysis of the crisis from 2008 to 2014, even if it is considered that the still-distant source 
of the problems of Banco Popular can be found in the period covered by the Report. But 
here I shall naturally defer to what this Commission should decide.  
Regarding  public  aid,  the  Report  details  in  its  various  chapters  the  aid  injected  into  the 
financial system during the crisis. This is summarised in Tables 5.5 and 5.6 (pp. 246-247).  
At the close of 2015, recorded total net funds assigned to supporting the Spanish financial 
system were €60,613 million, €39,542 million of which relate to public funds provided by the 
FROB and €21,071 million to private funds provided by the DGS. Naturally, these figures 
will vary depending on the recoverable value of the assets currently owned by the FROB 
and the DGS.  
In  terms  of  the  comparison  with  other  developed  countries,  there  are  various  metrics  to 
evaluate the fiscal cost of public aid.  
The  most  general  one  is  the  outstanding  balance  of  accumulated  public  debt.  In  gross 
terms, Spain’s public debt as a consequence of assistance to the financial sector was 4.7% 
of GDP in 2015 and 4.6% in 2016, in line with the average for the euro area. However, in 
terms of net debt assumed by the public sector (accumulated liabilities minus the value of 
publicly owned assets), the euro area average stood at end-2015 at 1.8% of GDP and at 
1.9% in 2016. Greece and Ireland are the countries that have assumed most net public debt 
(around 20% of GDP), followed by Slovenia and Portugal (7-8% of GDP). In Spain’s case, 
this figure in 2015 was 3.7% of GDP, and it had risen to 3.8% in 2016.   
 Conclusions 
I  should  like  to  conclude  by  summarising  the  reflections  contained  in  the  Report  on  the 
conduct of the Banco de España. 
Firstly, our Report indicates that the Banco de España did not adopt measures that could, 
perhaps,  have  checked  the  sizeable  increase  in  credit  to  the  private  sector  recorded 
between  2001  and  2007,  in  particular  in  the  construction  and  real  estate  development 
12/14 
  sectors, and in mortgage lending for house purchases. But  it should be pointed out that 
there were then no legal regulations that could have provided for such action and that other 
measures  adopted  in  those  years  –  the  countercyclical  provisions  and  the  more  severe 
treatment of the so-called “special-purpose vehicles” – were effective in helping withstand 
the  first  crisis,  although  they  did  not  suffice  to  protect  our  banks  from  the  double-dip 
recession that began in 2011.  
Secondly, the treatment of the most characteristic problems of the savings banks through 
the  risk-pooling  schemes  contained  in  the  institutional  protection  systems  (IPSs)  did  not 
suffice to resolve the solvency and governance problems of most savings banks; nor was 
there much success with certain innovations such as equity units with voting rights, with 
which  it  was  sought  to  resolve,  or  at  least  alleviate,  savings  banks’  difficulties  in  raising 
resources equivalent to capital.  
Thirdly, it seems clear that the Banco de España estimated that the 2009 recession would 
have what the economists call a “V” shape, and not a “W” shape, without anticipating the 
strong impact of the second recession on many credit institutions’ solvency. Here I should 
point out, as the Report does on different occasions, that acknowledging the impact of the 
second recession is crucial, because there is a tendency to ignore it, as though it were an 
incident without importance when actually it was fundamental to how events unfolded and 
in terms of its impact on our credit institutions.  
Fourthly, there were errors of perception as to how the imbalances that built up with the real 
estate bubble – among others, the imbalances on bank balance sheets – could be corrected. 
It was thought they could be corrected mildly, in a gradual fashion. Circumstances showed 
that this expectation was overly optimistic because the correction was rapid, brutal and with 
consequences that have not yet been entirely overcome.  
A further reflection – although I should say here that the opinion cannot be  construed as 
forceful, or very certain – is that the attempt to minimise in the short term the cost of the 
resolution of the banking crisis for public finances by means of a gradual approach, facing 
problems as and when they emerged, might ultimately have involved committing a greater 
volume of public resources than, say, a more aggressive or more ambitious approach from 
the onset of the crisis. I insist, though, that this is a question for which there is no reply 
exempt from objections and counter-arguments. In any event, the Bank could obviously not 
act  independently  of  the  course  of  our  public  finances  and  of  the  decisions  by  other 
authorities. 
Our Report has sought to explain what happened, to provide fundamental data, to set out 
the decisions adopted, along with their consequences and costs, avoiding pre-judgements 
and relatively unfounded conclusions; but it has not masked the failings or insufficiencies, 
placing them in their context. In short, our Report was drafted in an attempt to serve the 
general interest as best possible.  
 Thank you for your attention. 
  13/14 
