Seychelles Leasing Investment Forum 
Welcoming remarks by the Governor of the Central Bank of 
Seychelles 
 April 12 – 13, 2017 
Venue: Savoy Resort and Spa 
 Honourable Ministers  
Honourable Members of the National Assembly  
International Finance Corporation (IFC) Country Manager  
Chief Executive Officer of the Seychelles Investment Board  
Distinguished Guests, 
Colleagues, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good  morning  and  thank  you  for  being  with  us  this  morning.    It  is  a 
pleasure and honour for me to address you this morning at the opening of 
this  Forum.    In  collaboration  with  the  International  Finance  Corporation 
and  the  Seychelles  Investment  Board,  the  Central  Bank  of  Seychelles 
welcomes you all to the Leasing Investment Forum, the first to be held in 
the  Seychelles.    May  I  extend  a  special  welcome  to  our  foreign 
participants who have travelled from afar to be here with us for this event.   
 Leasing as a financing tool can contribute meaningfully to increase access 
to finance, an objective which the Central Bank, the government and other 
stakeholders are pursuing with vigour.  As you may be aware, leasing as 
a  financial  instrument  is  widely  recognised  in  both  developed  and 
developing  countries  as  one  of  the  most  effective  and  accessible 
mechanisms  for  financing  the  expansion  and  development  of  business, 
means  of  production,  asset  finance  necessary  for  the  development  and 
for the application of new technologies in business.  Changes in the global 
economy  and  financial  markets  and  the  need  for  more  efficient  use  of 
financial resources have led to increased uptake of financial leasing as an 
effective  investment  tool.  It  is  worth  noting  however,  that  the  use  of 
financial leasing as an effective investment tool does not depend only on 
the  legislative  and  regulatory  framework  but  also  on  the  accuracy  of 
leasing  operations,  effective  risk  management  and  a 
favourable 
investment climate. 
 Developing  greater  access  to  finance  remains  a  priority  for  the  Central 
Bank, especially now having put greater emphasis on financial inclusion 
. In pursuit of this objective, we work in collaboration with the government 
and other stakeholders, to put in place policy measures to improve access 
to  credit.    Current  government  policies  are  aimed  to  support  increased 
access  to  finance  for  SMEs.    The  recent  establishment  and  ongoing 
development  of  a  favourable  regulatory  and  legislative  environment  for 
the introduction of a finance leasing industry in Seychelles reinforces this 
commitment.  Since November 2013, a legislative framework for leasing 
was introduced in Seychelles through enactment of the Financial Leasing 
Act.  In support of the Act, three pieces of regulations were issued in 2014, 
namely  the  Financial  Leasing  (Licensing)  Regulations,  the  Capital 
Adequacy  Regulations  and  Lease  Classification  and  Provisioning 
Regulations. 
 Tasked with the mandate to regulate leasing business in Seychelles, the 
Central Bank is committed to the development of the leasing regulatory 
framework which will assist in creating the enabling environment for this 
new  financial  tool  to  prosper  in  Seychelles.    Further  work  on  the 
development  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  financial 
leasing is ongoing and will continue to progress as the industry develops 
and grows.  Over these two days, you will be taken through the initiatives 
taken  by  the  Central  Bank  and  other  policy  makers  to  introduce  and 
develop leasing in Seychelles. 
 It is important to consider that while the authorities will devote resources 
and  work  towards  establishing  mechanisms  that  will  support  financial 
leasing as a means of alternative finance, the need for all stakeholders to 
work in partnership remains fundamental for the successful development 
of leasing in Seychelles.  Collaboration with both the public and the private 
sectors is essential to foster this enabling environment.  Your participation 
in this forum strengthens the importance of this partnership.  I hope that 
you  take  the  opportunity  to  discuss,  debate,  and  share  ideas  and 
experiences  which  will  allow  us  to  translate  these  consultations  into 
actions which will realise the potential of financial leasing in Seychelles.  
 Allow me to stress that in consideration of today’s economic environment 
and realities, the focus on financial leasing in Seychelles is happening at 
an opportune time.  We have gone a long way in the transformation of our 
financial sector which has supported the economic reforms.  Our economy 
continues  to  grow.    It  is  time  now  to  look  beyond  the  present  financing 
opportunities  and  develop  alternatives  and  new  possibilities  to  achieve 
greater economic and inclusive growth. 
 As  you  are  aware,  access  to  finance  is  a  major  constraint  for  the 
development of SMEs globally, as is the case in Seychelles, particularly 
in  consideration  of  some  of  the  requirements  for  securing  traditional 
financing  through  loans.  In  comparison,  financing  through  leasing 
provides less constraints in terms of requirements and eligibility criteria.  
It  creates  the  possibility  for  SMEs  to  expand  their  access  to  short  and 
medium  term  financing.    Hence  leasing  is  an  alternative  mechanism  to 
facilitate  access  to  finance.    It  enables  the  use  of  capital  equipment,  in 
particular for new enterprises without credit track records and with limited 
possibilities  to  provide  collateral.    Of  note,  the  beneficiaries  of  financial 
leasing are not only SMEs but the advantages associated to this type of 
lending translate into gains also for the public and private sector such as 
investment opportunities for local and foreign companies and creation of 
new job opportunities.  
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  our  initiatives  and  engagements  towards  the 
development of a thriving leasing market  would not have been possible 
without  the  support  and  commitment  of  our  faithful  partners.    I  wish  to 
conclude my remarks with a few words of acknowledgement.  On behalf 
of the Central Bank, I wish to particularly extend my appreciation to the 
International  Finance  Corporation  (IFC)  for  its  support  throughout  the 
development of the financial leasing legislative framework, its unwavering 
assistance throughout the organisation of the forum and its contribution to 
the funding of this project.  IFC remains one of our key committed partners 
in  the  development  of  leasing  in  Seychelles  since  2013,  in  line  with  its 
mandate.  May  I  also  acknowledge  our  local  partner,  the  Seychelles 
Investment Board which has assisted with the organisation of the forum 
and all other stakeholders which have contributed in one way or another 
to realise this event.  A warm thank you to the team of panelists who have 
gracefully accepted to be here with us today to share their knowledge and 
experiences.  I  would  urge  all  participants to  engage  actively  with them 
and make the most of their knowledge.  Let us all contribute to create a 
dynamic financial leasing sector in the Seychelles. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your attention and I 
wish you all fruitful deliberations over the course of the two days. To our 
international  guests,  may  your  stay  in  the  Seychelles  be  a  memorable 
one. 
 Thank you.  
  