  RESERVE BANK OF MALAWI 
REMARKS 
BY 
 DALITSO KABAMBE, PhD 
GOVERNOR 
 AT THE INAUGURAL FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION INDABA AND LAUNCH OF THE 
NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR FINANCIAL 
INCLUSION 
AT BINGU INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE CENTRE (BICC) 
LILONGWE 
 27 JULY, 2017 
 1 
  The Secretary to the Treasury, Mr. Ben Botolo; 
Senior  Private  Sector  Development  Economist, 
World Bank Country Office, Mr E Chilima;  
The  Deputy  Governor,  Economics 
and 
Regulation,  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  Dr  Grant 
Kabango; 
Representatives  of  all  Development  Partners 
here present;  
Representatives of FinMark Trust;  
Senior Government Officials here present; 
Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of 
Financial Institutions; 
Representatives of Non-Governmental and Civil 
Society Organizations here present; 
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  be  part  of  this  Indaba  where  the 
country’s Strategy for Financial Inclusion for the period 
2016 to 2020 is being launched.  
 2 
Firstly,  I  wish  to  agree  with  other  speakers  that  this 
meeting  could  never  have  taken  place  at  such  an 
opportune  time  other  than  this.  Our  country  has  just 
weathered  off  some  of  the  major  shocks  of  our  time. 
First was the historic devaluation in 2012, then cashgate 
in  2013  which  led  to  withdrawal  of  general  budget 
support  and  then  the  effects  of  climate  change  in  2015 
and  2016.    As  a  result  of  these  shocks,  inflation 
persistently remained high over the years, interest rates 
were  also  high,  Kwacha  was  volatile  and  public  debt 
soared.   
However, the Malawi economy has  now weathered  off 
these shocks.  The economy is now steadily recovering.  
Inflation,  at  11.3  percent  is  now  the  lowest  in  7  years, 
and is expected to be in single digit very soon, Kwacha 
has been  stable for  the  past 15 months  and is expected 
to  remain  so.  Foreign  exchange  reserves  are  at  3.3 
months  of imports  and  are  expected  to remain  above 3 
months  of  imports.  Lending  rates  are  now  on  a 
 3 
downward trajectory and growth which was subdued in 
the previous years is expected to rebound to 4.5 percent 
or  higher  this  year.    These  are  all  hallmarks  of  a 
recovering economy. 
The  Indaba  therefore  is  coming  at  such  an  opportune 
time that we can discuss how we can consolidate these 
gains  going  forward  and  deepening  of  financial 
inclusions  is  one  such option  to  support  the  needs of  a 
growing economy.   
The  case  for  financial  inclusion  can  never  be  over 
emphasized. The country has many people who are not 
yet reached  with  financial services.  The  Strategy  being 
launched today therefore highlights what can be done to 
ensure 
that  all  Malawians 
regardless  of 
their 
geographical  disposition  are  reached  with  financial 
services.  On  one  hand,  we  know  that  Malawi  is 
predominantly  a  cash  based  society  to  the  extent  that 
75% of the cash in the economy is outside the banking 
system leaving only 25% in the banking system. Going 
4 
 forward,  we  need  to  reverse  this  trend  and  ensure  that 
all  Malawians  are  reached  with  various  financial 
services  and  products  so  that  people  can  intelligently 
invest their money and also be able to access capital for 
their various needs. 
A practical example is where if one had K100 in 1996, 
then  he/she  decided  to  keep  it  in  the  pocket,  it  could 
remain K100 today but with inflation, that money could 
have lost value in terms of how much that money could 
buy today. If it was put in savings account in the Bank, 
it  could  be  around  K2,300  with  interest  by  now.  If  it 
was  invested  in  Treasury  Bills,  it  would  be  around 
K13,000 while if it was invested in shares, the value of 
those  shares  in  one  of  the  companies  could  be  around 
K23,000  by  now.  These  are  the  issues  which  must  be 
brought  to  the  attention  of  all  Malawians  so  that  they 
can make intelligent and informed decisions at all times 
whether  they  choose  to  keep  their  money  in  the  home, 
 5 
invest  in  business,  buy  shares  or  deposit  in  Banks. 
Financial Inclusion is therefore critical in this regard. 
On the other hand, if one wishes to access capital to do 
a  business  or  otherwise,  financial  inclusion  is  also 
critical  so  that  people  across  the  country  can  access 
capital  for  their  various  needs  including  running  of 
businesses. Our country needs to grow and as it grows, 
create  jobs  most  needed  especially  by  the  youths.  As 
such,  our  investments  decisions  and  how  we  use  our 
money is very critical. The economy  could do better if 
all the resources around us are intelligently invested so 
that the Private Sector, the engine of growth, should use 
the  resources  to  develop  our  country.  Hence,  the  issue 
of access and cost of capital to all Malawians across the 
country are the issues the Strategy is addressing. 
On our part, as a Registrar of Financial Institutions, the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi is involved in drafting various 
pieces  of  legislation  and  regulations  for  the  smooth 
running  of  the  financial  sector.  The  Bank  is  also 
6 
 involved  in  enforcing  the  various  pieces  of  legislation 
that have been approved by the National Assembly. We 
will  continue  to  play  this  role  and  do  it  better  all  the 
time.  
As  part  of  this,  we  take  pride  in  some  of  the  efforts 
which  have  been  made  over  the  years  in  this  area 
including  modernization  of  existing  financial  sector 
laws,  such  as 
the  banking, 
insurance,  securities, 
microfinance,  pension,  financial  cooperatives,  agent 
banking,  credit  reference  bureau,  payment  systems, 
introduction of the National Switch which has promoted 
mobile  money  banking,  which  have  all  improved  the 
architecture  of  our  financial  systems  and  advanced  the 
financial inclusion agenda.   
The  Reserve  Bank  continues  to  play  this  pivotal  role 
and 
is  currently  championing 
the  Microfinance 
Processing Hub, the Automated Trading System for the 
Malawi  Stock  Exchange, 
the  Central  Securities 
Depository  system  for  securities  and  equities.  These 
7 
 initiatives  will  benefit  the  public  through  increased 
access  to  finance  and,  most  importantly,  at  affordable 
cost.    
The  Bank  is  also  active  in  consumer  protection  and 
financial  literacy.  The  importance  of  the  consumer 
protection  and  financial  awareness  needs  no  emphasis 
here.  It  aims  to  empower  the  consumer  so  that  they 
transact  in  the  financial  sector  with  confidence.  In 
keeping with this, the Reserve Bank created a Unit to be 
responsible  for  Financial  Consumer  Complaints  and 
Literacy  matters.  The  Reserve  Bank,  in  collaboration 
with 
its  stakeholders,  has 
implemented  financial 
awareness  campaigns  in  order  to  empower  financial 
services  consumers.  But,  I  must  mention  that  the 
implementation  of  the  financial  awareness  program 
requires a lot of financial resources. The Reserve Bank 
will  therefore  put  in  place  a  sustainable  way  of 
implementing the program.  
 8 
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me 
conclude  my 
remarks  by 
congratulating 
and 
commending 
the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Economic 
Planning and Development for coming up with the 2016 
–  2020  Strategy  for  Financial  Inclusion.  This  strategy 
will surely provide a guided direction to achieving and 
promoting inclusive finance in this country. This being 
the  second  strategy,  we  trust  that  it  has  built  on  the 
shortfalls of the initial strategy.  
I  thank  you  all  for  your  kind  attention  and  may  God 
bless our country. 
 9 
