Benoît  Cœuré:  The  use  of  local  currencies  in  EU  canddate  and
potential candidate countries
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  International  Conference  on  the  occasion  of  the  20th  anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sarajevo, 22 September 2017.
 Dear Governor,
Dear Member of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Dear Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Dear Ambassador,
Dear colleagues from the central banks,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to be here in Sarajevo today to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the Central Bank
of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  (CBBH).  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Softić  for  the  invitation  to
speak to you on this occasion.
When  the  CBBH  was  founded  in  1997,  people  in  western  Europe  were  still  paying  with  their
national currencies. The ECB did not yet exist and there had not even been a decision on which
countries would eventually participate in monetary union from its launch. For a European central
banker, this almost feels like ancient history. The past 20 years have been too hectic, too exciting
and too eventful to fully appreciate the passage of time.
So significant birthdays are always a welcome opportunity to take a step back and consider what
has worked and what has not. And for the CBBH, like for many other central banks, there can
only be one yardstick to measure success: the achievement of monetary stability, the primary
objective of the CBBH. And looking back over the past 20 years, you clearly have delivered on
your mandate. By effectively implementing the currency board arrangement, you created trust
and confidence in the currency and you were able to secure this confidence over time. I would
like to congratulate the past and present management and all staff of the CBBH for this success
over the past 20 years.
Your achievements are particularly remarkable when seen in the light of the challenges you have
faced  in  implementing  the  monetary  framework.  A  small,  open  economy  like  Bosnia  and
Herzegovina, where total merchandise trade accounts for more than two-thirds of nominal GDP,
is constantly exposed to foreign shocks that are often hard to anticipate. This is a demanding
environment for central banks, in particular when several shocks hit the economy at the same
time,  as  has  been  the  case  in  recent  years.  In  fact,  it  is  probably  fair  to  say  that  the  global
economy was in almost constant flux following the outbreak of the financial crisis ten years ago.
Here in Europe, of course, and in the euro area in particular, we faced significant challenges that
required unprecedented action by central banks and governments.
So  the  current  resilience  and  broad-based  strengthening  of  the  global  economy  represents  a
welcome  change  for  policymakers,  here  and  in  many  other  parts  of  the  world. An  increasing
number  of  economies,  across  both  advanced  and  emerging  markets,  are  benefiting  from  the
recovery.  Unemployment  has  fallen  to  pre-crisis  levels  in  many  countries.  And  the  broad
stabilisation  of  oil  prices  has  reduced  the  strong  disinflationary  pressures  that  were  putting
additional  downside  pressure  on  headline  inflation  at  a  time  of  economic  hardship  in  many
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
regions around the globe.
The euro area too is now contributing to global growth, rather than subtracting from it, in large
part thanks to the range of monetary policy measures taken by the ECB in recent years. This is
certainly good news for Bosnia and Herzegovina, where exports to the euro area account for
more than half of total exports.
Making the cyclical recovery sustainable
At the same time, the current global cyclical recovery also harbours risks – risks of complacency
and inaction. Despite the encouraging upturn in growth and the shift in consumer and investor
sentiment,  some  of  the  more  fundamental  obstacles  to  sustainable  growth  have  not
disappeared. In the euro area, for example, there is still considerable scope in all Member States
to  improve  the  range  of  economic,  social  and  legal  frameworks  that  shape  the  conditions  in
which households and businesses operate. We should not allow ourselves to succumb to the
false impression that the current cyclical recovery will heal all wounds.
Deep-seated structural reforms are needed to boost potential growth, raise productivity, increase
resilience to shocks and, ultimately, foster sustainable real convergence among Member States.
In a speech in Brussels a few months ago, I highlighted the clear empirical relationship in Europe
1
between the quality of institutions and GDP per capita.
For more information, see B. Cœuré (2017), “Convergence matters for monetary policy”, speech
at the Competitiveness Research Network (CompNet) conference, Brussels, 30 June.
This means that sustainable growth requires unfailing policy efforts to ensure that our institutions
are fit for purpose.
In a globalised world, where we are more likely than not to be directly affected by the actions of
others, this is probably true for all countries, whether inside or outside the euro area or the EU.
What the EU offers, however, is a framework to overcome common global challenges together,
as long as all Member States play by the rules. For candidate and potential candidate countries
this  means  that  adopting  suitable  economic  and  legal  structures  and  putting  in  place  the
appropriate  institutions  in  good  time  will  allow  many  of  the  benefits  of  EU  membership  to  be
frontloaded.
This also applies to central banking. The ECB, and in fact the entire European System of Central
Banks (ESCB), supports central banks in the region on their path towards joining the EU. While
the  ECB  plays  no  formal  role  in  the  EU  accession  process,  it  contributes  in  its  areas  of
competence. As  you  know,  we  maintain  close  relations  with  central  banks  in  candidate  and
potential  candidate  countries,  which  will  eventually  become  part  of  the  ESCB  and  later  the
Eurosystem.
Through  technical  cooperation,  we  also  support  central  banks  in  building  and  enhancing
institutional capacity. This may take the form of EU-funded programmes, twinnings with ESCB
national central banks or regional workshops and seminars hosted by the ECB. The CBBH was
one of the first beneficiaries of such technical cooperation in the region through EU-funded and
ECB-coordinated  programmes  in  2007  and  2010–11.  These  programmes  also  involved  many
EU national central banks and are remembered as being very successful.
In addition, the ECB contributes to the assessment of the Economic Reform Programmes of
candidate and potential candidate countries as part of the EU’s economic and financial dialogue
with applicants. Here the ECB naturally focuses on monetary and exchange rate policies and
financial stability. Our views then feed into the joint conclusions of the economic and financial
dialogue between the EU and the Western Balkans and Turkey.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
This year the ECB recommended that countries take five main actions: (i) adopt and implement
comprehensive non-performing loan (NPL) resolution strategies; (ii) strengthen the use of local
currencies;  (iii)  expand  the  analytical  and  policy  toolkits  of  central  banks;  (iv)  reinforce  the
medium-term  orientation  of  fiscal  policies;  and,  finally,  (v)  improve  the  overall  business  and
institutional environment, with a view to reducing external vulnerabilities, among other things.
Many of these recommendations also apply to current EU Member States, as I alluded to before.
In particular, low productivity, together with large stocks of NPLs and sovereign debt, remain a
drag on growth in large parts of the euro area. Also with respect to the third recommendation, on
expanding the policy toolkit of central banks, the ECB is no exception. The environment of low
interest rates and low inflation forces us to constantly review and upgrade our analytical toolkit to
2
ensure we take the best possible decisions in our pursuit of price stability.
See also Draghi, M. (2017), “The interdependence of research and policymaking”, speech at the
Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting, Lindau, Germany, 23 August.
Unofficial euroisation as a policy challenge
Let me therefore spend a few minutes on the one recommendation that is specific to candidate
and  potential  candidate  countries,  albeit  not  uniformly  to  all,  namely  that  the  use  of  local
currencies be strengthened.
As you know, the high degree of unofficial euroisation is a striking feature of the banking systems
in the Western Balkans. In the region as a whole, on average 56% of total loans and 52% of total
3
deposits are denominated in, or indexed to, foreign currencies, in most cases the euro.
Mid-2017 data. For further details, see the special feature on “Unofficial euroisation in CESEE
countries” in the International role of the euro, ECB, 2017, pp. 45–49.
This phenomenon, also known as currency substitution, is driven by many factors, such as low
confidence  in  the  domestic  currency,  which  is  often  the  result  of  not-so-distant  memories  of
monetary instability.
Another  factor  relates  to  the  fact  that  the  risk  premium  on  loans  in  the  domestic  currency  is
higher, thereby providing an incentive to take out foreign currency loans. Lower funding costs, in
turn,  are  often  supported  through  strong  integration  with  the  euro  area  via  trade  and  financial
channels,  but  also  via  migration  and  remittances,  which  contribute  to  the  holding  of  bank
deposits in euro. All this is conducive to widespread unofficial “euroisation”.
But a high degree of foreign currency use also has serious drawbacks. For example, unofficial
euroisation,  while  being  a  sign  of  trust  in  the  euro  as  a  stable  store  of  value,  constitutes  a
financial  stability  risk  in  the  event  of  sudden  and  substantial  exchange  rate  fluctuations.
Households  and  firms  may  suddenly  no  longer  be  able  to  service  their  foreign  currency-
denominated debt, creating credit risk for banks. The same holds true for dollarisation in other
parts of the world, as the Asian financial crisis vividly demonstrated.
Unofficial euroisation also impedes monetary policy transmission and may limit the overall room
for manoeuvre of monetary policy. In Albania and Serbia, for instance, where central banks have
adopted  inflation-targeting  frameworks,  exchange  rate  flexibility  remains  relatively  limited  as
policymakers are mindful of adverse balance sheet effects resulting from sudden and substantial
exchange rate fluctuations. In countries that have opted to stabilise the exchange rate in the first
place,  such  as  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  maintaining  the  credibility  of  the  framework  remains
central to keeping financial stability risks contained.
Prospective EU countries that have their own legal tender and monetary policy have recognised
these risks and constraints, and are thus making efforts to promote the use of the local currency,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in line with the ECB’s recommendations. This is certainly not an easy task. Success crucially
hinges  upon  the  track  record  of  the  domestic  monetary  authority  in  maintaining  monetary
stability. To this end, central banks in the region have made laudable progress in recent years.
Efforts need to be channelled towards extending this track record.
History  teaches  us  that  central  banks’  success  in  sustainably  maintaining  confidence  in  the
currency  critically  hinges  on  two  elements:  political  independence  and  a  clear  mandate.  The
ECB  was  successfully  built  on  these  principles.  Independence  and  a  clear  stability-oriented
mandate  ensure  that  central  banks  are  not  overburdened  with  pursuing  other,  potentially
conflicting objectives, and that monetary policy makes the best possible contribution to growth
and  employment.  They  are  therefore  also  a  necessary  condition  for  strengthening  the  use  of
local currencies.
Experience in other regions of the world – in Latin America, for example – suggests that targeted
prudential measures as well as deeper local capital markets in domestic currency can reinforce
4
the use of local currencies.
Windischbauer,  U.  (2016),  “Strengthening  the  role  of  local  currencies  in  EU  candidate  and
potential candidate countries”, Occasional Paper Series, No 170, ECB, April.
Such  advances  should  ideally  be  embedded  in  a  carefully  designed  comprehensive  strategy
involving all relevant stakeholders. Serbia adopted such strategies in 2012, and Albania has done
so more recently, while other countries have started to put in place measures of this nature or
are considering designing similar strategies.
So progress is clearly visible, in particular on the lending side, but more remains to be done.
There are certainly no quick fixes, as currency substitution tends to be a sticky phenomenon. But
the  drawbacks  of  unofficial  euroisation  deserve  policymakers’  attention.  The  expectation  that
countries  will  at  some  point  join  the  EU,  and  eventually  also  the  euro  area,  should  not  divert
attention from such policy efforts.
Conclusion
Remaining  challenges,  however,  should  not  distract  from  past  achievements.  So  let  me
conclude by congratulating you once more on the impressive track record that the CBBH has
built up over the past 20 years.
The ECB will continue to offer technical cooperation and advice whenever possible, and we will
accompany you and other central banks in the Western Balkans on your journey towards the EU.
We  look  forward  to  our  future  work  with  colleagues  from  the  region,  including  you,  Governor
Softić, and the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I wish you and your colleagues all the
best for the next 20 years and beyond.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
For  more  information,  see  B.  Cœuré  (2017),  “Convergence  matters  for  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the
Competitiveness Research Network (CompNet) conference, Brussels, 30 June.
See also Draghi, M. (2017), “The interdependence of research and policymaking”, speech at the Lindau Nobel
Laureate Meeting, Lindau, Germany, 23 August.
Mid-2017 data. For further details, see the special feature on “Unofficial euroisation in CESEE countries” in the
International role of the euro, ECB, 2017, pp. 45–49.
Windischbauer, U. (2016), “Strengthening the role of local currencies in EU candidate and potential candidate
countries”, Occasional Paper Series, No 170, ECB, April.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
