Guy Debelle: Global influences on domestic monetary policy
Address by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Committee
for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Mid-Year Economic Update, Adelaide, 21 July
2017.
 Thanks to Dan Rees and Rachael McCririck for their work on the neutral rate, which this draws
directly on.
There are a large number of factors that the Reserve Bank Board takes into consideration in
making its interest rate decision each month, both domestic and global. Today I would like to talk
about some of the global influences on domestic monetary policy.
As you are well aware, the Australian economy doesn’t operate in isolation from the rest of the
world. This is also true when it comes to monetary policy. While the goals of monetary policy are
very much domestic, in terms of inflation and employment, the influences on the achievement of
these goals are both domestic and global.
In talking about the global influences on the setting of monetary policy, I will make the probably
obvious point that the policy rate here in Australia is at a historic low, in no small part because
policy rates elsewhere in the world are also around historic lows.
Why are global policy rates as low as they are? Part of the explanation is that to meet their policy
goals, central banks in other advanced economies have had expansionary policy settings since
the  start  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Moreover,  in  the  largest  advanced  economies,
policymakers have provided further monetary stimulus through large asset purchase programs,
which have seen central bank balance sheets increase significantly.
Another part of the explanation is that the neutral level of the policy rate has declined in most
countries, including here in Australia. That is, the level of the policy rate where monetary policy is
neither providing stimulus nor restraint is lower than it used to be. Central banks have had to set
their policy rates even lower than that already lower neutral policy rate to provide the appropriate
stimulus to their economies.
I  will  start  by  talking  about  four  common  global  factors  that  have  led  to  the  expansionary
monetary policy settings seen in most advanced economies for almost a decade. These four
factors are present in Australia to varying degrees. I will then discuss the neutral policy rate and
its  decline  over  the  past  decade.  I  will  finish  with  some  comments  on  the  influence  of  global
financial factors on domestic monetary policy considerations.
Four Common Global Factors
The  first  and  most  obvious  factor  influencing  monetary  policy  settings  globally  is  the  financial
crisis  and  its  aftermath.  The  large  and  rapid  decline  in  policy  rate  settings  in  most  advanced
economies  occurred  in  2007  and  2008.  Over  this  period,  many  policy  rates  were  reduced  to
close to zero and subsequently, in some cases, even below zero. The collapse in global output
and  trade  at  the  end  of  2008  was  sharp  and  significant.  The  severity  of  the  episode  was
increased by the fact that it was synchronised across the global economy.
It is now ten years since the onset of the crisis, and nearly nine years since its nadir in the last
quarter of 2008, yet we still see policy rates at their post-crisis lows. The Federal Reserve in the
US  has  raised  its  policy  rate  in  recent  times,  but  even  then  only  four  times  in  quarter  point
increments, so that the policy rate has only just reached 1 per cent. That said, broader measures
of financial conditions in the US suggest that financial conditions there aren’t tighter since the Fed
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
started  increasing  its  policy  rate:  longer-term  government  bond  yields  and  the  US  dollar
exchange rate are both no higher than when the Fed first increased its policy rate. Corporate
bond yields remain near historic lows and US equity prices are higher.
The  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  on  most  parts  of  the  advanced  world  have  been  very  long-
lasting.  Global  economic  growth  has  mostly  fallen  a  little  short  of  expectations  for  the  past
decade.  As  a  result,  even  with  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  settings,  aggregate  global
growth has been average over this time, but not better than average, which would be desirable
given the large loss of output in 2008/09.
As I’m sure you all know, Australia did not suffer from the same decline in output that many other
advanced economies underwent. The level of GDP in Australia is 27 per cent higher than it was
in 2007. In comparison, in the US, it is 13 per cent; in the UK, 10 per cent; while in the euro area,
the pre-crisis level of GDP was only regained in 2015.
It is only quite recently that forecasts for the global economy have been revised higher for the first
time in many years. This has reflected an upswing in industrial production and exports across a
broad  swathe  of  the  global  economy.  A  critical  question  is  whether  this  upswing  will  be
sustained.
1
One of the reasons that global growth after the financial crisis has been only moderate is the
second common factor I’d like to highlight: the low level of corporate investment over the past
decade.  Many of the preconditions that historically led to a pick-up in business investment have
been in place: low policy interest rates, low borrowing costs for business, strong corporate debt
markets. Something has clearly been missing that has prevented these positive preconditions
from generating an upswing in business investment. One obvious candidate is uncertainty about
future demand or, as it is often referred to, animal spirits. To some extent, this lack of animal
spirits is self-fulfilling. If businesses are not confident about whether there will be enough demand
in the future to justify more investment, they hold off spending on investment, which means that,
indeed,  there  isn’t  enough  demand  in  the  future. As  the  global  economy  has  become  more
integrated, there seems to be a more important common global element in animal spirits. One
driver of this may well be multinational firms making investment decisions across a number of
economies.
In Australia, the investment dynamics have been clearly different. In marked contrast to the rest
of the world, business investment in Australia has been at historic highs in recent years, largely
as a result of investment in the resources sector. But now resource investment has fallen most
of the way back to its pre-boom levels. Investment outside the resources sector in Australia has
remained at a low level, as in other countries, though it has grown modestly in the past couple of
years.
In recent months, there have been some positive signs on investment spending in a number of
countries. If this is sustained, then it is possible animal spirits switch from being self-fulfillingly
negative to self-fulfillingly positive. As we see signs of investment picking up this year in some
other countries, there is an increased chance this will be reflected in Australia. A gradual pick-up
in investment is embodied in the RBA’s growth forecast.
The third common global element is low wage growth (Graph 1). This is occurring despite very
low  unemployment  rates  in  countries  such  as  the  US,  Germany,  Japan  and  the  UK.  The
unemployment rates in these countries are at levels that have historically been associated with
an acceleration in wage growth. The Governor talked about this in a speech late last year.  Andy
Haldane at the Bank of England recently discussed some of the possible explanations for this
stubbornly  low  wage  growth  and  concluded  that,  in  the  end,  we  don’t  yet  have  a  particularly
persuasive explanation.  That said, we know that the labour supply curve ultimately does slope
upwards. So if unemployment rates continue to decline in these countries, we must get closer to
2
3
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the point where wage pressures materialise.
Wage growth in Australia is subdued, as it is elsewhere. One noteworthy difference in Australia
is that labour productivity growth has generally been higher than it has been in other countries
over  recent  years. As  a  result,  there  has  been  no  growth  in  unit  labour  costs  (that  is,  wages
adjusted for productivity) in Australia for five years, whereas in other countries, unit labour cost
growth has been quite a bit higher.
The fourth and last common factor is the sustained low inflation that has been evident globally for
the past decade (Graph 2). This is a direct consequence of the three previous factors I have just
talked about. In addition to those influences, there has been a continuation of the disinflationary
pressure resulting from the integration of China into the global economy. There are signs that this
latter  force  might  be  waning,  with  producer  prices  in  China  actually  growing,  following  many
years of continual, often quite substantial, declines. Throughout the past decade, expectations
about future inflation have remained broadly anchored, which, at times, has helped stave off a
shift towards deflation, but currently may be dampening the prospects of a sustained pick-up in
global inflation.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  four  factors  –  the  subdued  global  recovery,  low  investment,  subdued  wages  growth
despite  low  unemployment  rates  and  low  inflation  –  are  the  primary  explanation  for  the  very
stimulatory policy settings in place globally (Graph 3). The fact that they are at such low levels
has a material influence on why the policy interest rate in Australia is also at a historically low
level.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Beyond these factors that I have just discussed, another significant factor contributing to the low
level of policy rates globally is that the neutral policy rate in many countries has declined over the
past decade.
The Neutral Interest Rate
The neutral interest rate  provides  a  benchmark  for  assessing  the  current  stance  of  monetary
policy.  If  the  real  policy  rate  –  that  is,  the  cash  rate  less  inflation  expectations  –  is  below  the
neutral rate, then monetary policy is exerting an expansionary influence on the economy. If the
real  policy  rate  is  above  the  neutral  rate,  then  monetary  policy  is  exerting  a  contractionary
influence on the economy. The neutral rate is often associated with the turn of the 20th century
Swedish economist Knut Wicksell and was picked up by Keynes.  The previous Governor Glenn
5
Stevens discussed the neutral rate in the Australian context more than a decade ago.  
4
There was a discussion of the neutral rate at the most recent Board meeting, as detailed in the
minutes of the meeting released earlier this week. No significance should be read into the fact
the neutral rate was discussed at this particular meeting. Most meetings, the Board allocates
some time to discussing a policy-relevant issue in more detail, and on this occasion it was the
neutral rate.
The neutral interest rate aligns the amount of saving and investment in the economy at a level
that is consistent with full employment and stable inflation. That is, the neutral rate is where the
policy rate would settle down in the medium term when the goals of monetary policy are being
achieved. Accordingly, most explanations of the neutral interest rate start with the factors that
influence saving or investment. Developments that increase saving will tend to lower the neutral
interest rate; developments that increase investment will tend to raise the neutral interest rate.
There are three main factors that, in my view, affect the neutral rate in Australia:
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
the economy’s potential growth rate
the degree of risk aversion
international factors.
One of the major determinants of the neutral interest rate is the economy’s potential growth rate.
In an economy with a high potential growth rate, because it has strong productivity or population
growth, the expectation of increased future demand provides a strong incentive for firms to invest
and the prospect of higher real incomes reduces the incentives of households to save. Both of
these forces will tend to raise the neutral interest rate. The economy’s potential growth rate tends
to evolve quite slowly, and hence we should expect the neutral interest rate also to change only
very gradually as a result of this influence.
Another influence on the neutral rate is the risk appetite of firms and households and the way risk
has been priced into market interest rates. This influence can move rapidly. When risk aversion
rises, firms require more compensation to make long-term investments with an uncertain return.
At the same time, the increased risk aversion will cause households to save more. This lowers
the neutral interest rate, as any given level of the policy rate is less expansionary because of the
increased risk aversion. If there is an increase in risk aversion, it is also likely that there will be a
widening  in  the  spreads  between  the  policy  rate  and  market  interest  rates  that  determine  the
behaviour of households and firms. A given market interest rate will correspond to a lower policy
rate if spreads widen. This will further lower the neutral interest rate.
Finally, in an open economy, where capital can move reasonably freely across borders, global
interest  rates  will  also  influence  domestic  interest  rates.  This  means  that  trends  in  overseas
productivity  growth,  demographics  and  risk  appetite  will  affect  the  neutral  interest  rate  in
Australia.
So  how  do  we  calculate  the  neutral  interest  rate?  It  is  not  directly  observable.  There  are  a
number of different ways of estimating it from the behaviour of market interest rates and other
economic variables . The shaded area in Graph 4 shows a range of plausible estimates for the
neutral real interest rate obtained using a number of different approaches. As you can see, there
is a reasonable amount of uncertainty about the exact level of the neutral rate.
6
Graph  4  also  shows  the  (ex  post)  real  cash  rate  calculated  by  deducting  the  trimmed  mean
inflation rate from the cash rate.  When the real cash rate is above the neutral rate, the monetary
policy stance is contractionary. When it is below, the stance is expansionary. As you look at the
graph, you can see that this lines up with most assessments of the stance of monetary policy
over the past 25 years. It suggests that monetary policy was clearly expansionary in the early
2000s, in 2008 and for the past five years or so.
7
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The estimates of the neutral rate suggest that it was fairly stable for much of the 1990s up until
2007. In Glenn Stevens’ speech that I mentioned earlier, he noted that the neutral real cash rate
at  the  time  (2004)  was  probably  somewhere  between  2½  per  cent  and  3¾  per  cent.  This  is
consistent with the estimates shown here.
The graph shows a clear step down in all the estimates of the neutral rate in 2007/08 and that it
has  probably  drifted  lower  since.  It  suggests  that Australia’s  neutral  interest  rate  is  currently
around 150 basis points lower now than in 2007. This decline can largely be accounted for by a
slowdown in potential growth and an increase in risk aversion.
The  Bank  estimates  that Australia’s  long-run  potential  growth  rate  has  declined  by  around  ½
percentage point from the mid 1990s.  Part of the decline reflects slower labour force growth.
The rest of the decline reflects a slowdown in trend productivity growth, which is common to
many  advanced  economies.  This  slowdown  in  potential  growth  has  probably  translated  about
one-for-one into a decline in the neutral rate, though the decline has been gradual.
8
The  sharper  decline  in  the  neutral  rate  in  2007/08  can  be  most  easily  related  to  the  sharp
increase  in  risk  aversion  with  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis.  This  increased  risk  aversion
probably accounts for most of the large fall in estimated neutral interest rates in Australia and
abroad  that  occurred  at  this  time.  This  heightened  risk  aversion  has  also  contributed  to  an
increase  in  spreads  between  the  cash  rate  and  market  interest  rates,  which  should  have  a
9
roughly one-for-one effect on the neutral interest rate.  
At the same time, increased risk aversion means that companies are investing less than one
would expect given financing conditions and the economic outlook. Households are less willing
than  in  the  past  to  borrow  in  order  to  fund  consumption. Although  these  effects  are  hard  to
quantify, they would both lower the neutral interest rate.
To return to a global perspective, Graph 5 compares the average estimate of the neutral interest
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
rate  for Australia  to  a  range  of  international  estimates.  On  average,  the  neutral  interest  rate
estimates for Australia are similar to those of the United Kingdom and Canada, but higher than
those for the United States and the euro area.
As is the case for Australia, estimates of neutral interest rates in other developed economies
were fairly stable until around the mid 2000s and have fallen since then. The decline in the neutral
rate was particularly sharp in 2007/08 and, again, most likely reflects the increase in risk aversion
at the onset of the financial crisis.
Because trends in determinants of the neutral interest rate, such as productivity growth and risk
appetite,  tend  to  be  highly  correlated  across  advanced  economies,  it  is  hard  to  distinguish
between international influences and domestic influences. But it is very likely that global factors
have contributed to a decline in Australia’s neutral policy rate.
So in short, the policy rate in Australia is low because the neutral rate is lower than it used to be
as  a  result  of  both  international  and  domestic  developments.  This  means  that  the  current
(nominal)  cash  rate  setting  of  1½  per  cent  today  is  not  as  expansionary  as  a  cash  rate  of
1½ per cent would have been in the 1990s or the first half of the 2000s.
Looking  ahead,  the  neutral  policy  rate  both  here  in  Australia  as  well  as  in  other  advanced
economies is likely to remain lower than it was in the past. It is plausible that the degree of risk
aversion might abate in time, which would see the neutral rate rise from its current low level. But
other  developments  contributing  to  the  lower  neutral  rates,  particularly  lower  potential  growth
rates, could be more permanent.
Global Financial Influences
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition to the neutral rate declining, policy rates in other countries have been set even lower to
provide the appropriate stimulus. On top of that, in a number of the major economies, policy is
more  expansionary  than  indicated  by  just  the  level  of  the  policy  interest  rate.  Central  bank
balance  sheets  have  expanded  considerably  as  the  central  banks  have  purchased  assets,  in
large part government debt (Graph 6). This program of asset purchases has finished in the US
and the UK, but is still ongoing in the euro area and Japan.
The  fact  that  monetary  policy  settings  are  more  expansionary  in  the  rest  of  the  world  than  in
Australia, both through lower policy rates and balance sheet expansion, puts upward pressure on
the Australian dollar. Capital is attracted by the higher rates of returns on offer here, which is
likely  to  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate.  So,  while  an  easier  monetary  policy
elsewhere in the world should lead to faster growth in the world economy, which is good for the
Australian  economy,  an  appreciating  exchange  rate  works  against  this.  To  put  it  in  economic
terms, there are offsetting income and substitution effects for the Australian economy. Whether
this  is  positive  or  negative  in  net  terms  for  Australia  is  an  empirical  issue.
  Generally,  the
evidence  suggests  that  widening  interest  rate  differentials  do  lead  to  an  appreciation  of  the
Australian dollar. So that does counteract the benefit to the Australian economy of faster global
growth.
10
It  is  conceivable  that  unconventional  monetary  policy  may  have  a  larger  financial  impact  than
movements in interest rates.
 That is, the effect of unconventional policy through the exchange
rate channel may be larger while the effect in terms of higher output may be smaller. Again, it is
an empirical issue.
11
Central bank asset purchases generate cross-border capital flows from investors seeking higher
returns. Some of that we see directly in a higher Australian dollar exchange rate. But some of
those cross-border flows are not quite so obvious. Investors often tend to hedge their exchange
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
rate exposures to protect their offshore investments from exchange rate movements. As these
investments increase there is more demand for such hedges, which causes the cost of hedging
to  increase.  A  direct  measure  of  this  is  the  cross-currency  basis,  which  I  spoke  about
recently.
 For example, the relatively wide yen basis in part reflects the increased capital flows
out of Japan.
13
 
12
If fewer of these investments were hedged, we would see more of these capital flows reflected in
the exchange rate. If there was less hedging in the example I just used, the yen may well have
depreciated further and currencies where Japanese investors have placed their funds, such as
the Australian dollar, would have appreciated by more. So hedging, which is reflected in the wider
cross-currency  basis,  has  served  as  something  of  a  shock  absorber  for  these  cross-border
flows.
But this aside, the expansionary settings of monetary policy globally clearly have had a material
influence on domestic policy settings through the impact of capital flows on the exchange rate.
Hélène  Rey  has  recently  described  this  state  of  affairs  as  a  monetary  dilemma:  ‘Independent
monetary policies are possible if and only if the capital account is managed…’
 That is, we can
only set the monetary policy we want if we impose controls on the flow of capital in and out of the
country. I don’t think the situation is quite as stark as that. There is still a substantial degree of
flexibility  to  set  domestic  monetary  policy  appropriately  for  domestic  conditions.  But  I  would
certainly agree that the monetary policy decisions of other central banks are a significant factor to
be taken into account in our monetary policy deliberations.
 Another way of stating this is that
we don’t have the independence to set the neutral rate, which is significantly influenced by global
forces, but we do have the independence as to where we set our policy rate relative to the neutral
rate.
Conclusion
14
15
To  conclude,  I  have  outlined  today  a  number  of  the  channels  of  influence  that  global
developments  have  on  domestic  monetary  policy  settings.  Some  of  these  global  forces  are
transmitted through the real economy, some through financial channels.
The effects of these global influences on the Australian economy have been material. The global
economic environment and global policy settings that have been in place for the past decade
have contributed significantly to the monetary policy settings in Australia that we have today and
will likely continue to do so for the foreseeable future.
Currently,  financial  markets  don’t  expect  any  further  lowering  of  policy  rates  in  the  major
economies,  nor  any  further  expansion  in  policy  settings.  Hence  the  downward  pressure  on
domestic  policy  settings  from  this  source  does  not  look  like  it  will  intensify  in  the  foreseeable
future. But the four common factors that are highlighted in the first half of my speech are still
present. While there are some tentative signs that they are abating, the evidence is inconclusive
at this stage.
As I said earlier, the Federal Reserve has raised its policy rate very gradually four times over the
past two years. And last week the Bank of Canada increased its policy rate to 0.75 per cent. Just
as the policy rate in Australia did not need to decline to the very low levels seen in other parts of
the  world,  the  fact  that  other  central  banks  increase  their  policy  rates  does  not  automatically
mean that the policy rate here needs to increase. The policy rates in both the US and Canada still
remain below that in Australia.
Ultimately, in Australia as is the case elsewhere, policy rates are set at the level assessed to be
appropriate  to  achieve  the  domestic  policy  objectives.  While  global  influences,  including
monetary policy settings in other economies, have a significant impact on that assessment, they
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
are, in the end, only one of a number of considerations to be taken into account.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See also Carney M (2017), ‘Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies’, Remarks at 2017 ECB Forum on
Central 
at
<www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2017/speech986.pdf>.
Available 
Banking, 
Sintra, 
June. 
28 
Lowe  P  (2016),  ‘Inflation  and  Monetary  Policy’,  Address  to  Citi’s  8th  Annual  Australian  &  New  Zealand
Investment Conference, Sydney, 18 October.
Haldane A (2017), ‘Work, Wages and Monetary Policy’, Speech at the National Science and Media Museum,
Bradford, 
at
<www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2017/speech984.pdf>.
Available 
June. 
20 
Given  I  am  speaking  in Adelaide,  it  is  appropriate  to  thank  my  former  macro/money  professor  at Adelaide
University, Colin Rogers, for getting me to read Wicksell’s Interest and Prices in my honours year.
Stevens  G  (2004), ‘Recent  Issues  for  the  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy’, Address  to  the Australian  Business
Economists and the Economic Society (NSW Branch), Sydney, 17 February.
See Laubach T and J Williams (2016), ‘Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux’, Finance and Economics
Discussion  Series  2016–011.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of 
the  Federal  Reserve  System,
<dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.011>.
Note that is an ex post measure of the real cash rate as I am using actual inflation rather than expected inflation.
The Treasury has very similar estimates in the Commonwealth Budget.
The Bank has noted on many occasions over the past decade that it has taken account of this widening in
spreads in the setting of monetary policy.
Adler G and CO Buitron (2017), ‘Tipping the Scale? The Workings of Monetary Policy through Trade’ IMF Working
Paper 17/142. Available at <www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/WP/2017/wp17142.ashx>.
Ferrari M, J Kearns and A Schrimpf (2017), ‘Monetary Policy’s Rising FX Impact in the Era of Ultra-low Rates’,
BIS Working paper No 626, April. Available at <www.bis.org/publ/work626.pdf>.
Debelle G (2017), ‘How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Basis’, Dinner Address at the BIS Symposium:
CIP–RIP? Basel, 22 May.
The yen basis refers to the cost for a Japanese investor of hedging a US dollar or Australian dollar investment,
say, back into yen.
Rey  H  (2013),  ‘Dilemma  not  Trilemma:  The  Global  Financial  Cycle  and  Monetary  Policy  Independence’,
Proceedings of a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,
23–24 August, pp 285–333. Available at <www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2013/2013rey.pdf>.
See also Obstfeld M and A Taylor (2017), ‘International Monetary Relations: Taking Finance Seriously’, NBER
Working paper No 23440. Available at <www.nber.org/papers/w23440>.
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
