Guy Debelle: Regulatory overview: The FX Global Code - defining
the next steps towards a standard industry Code of Conduct
Opening remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
TradeTech FX Asia Conference (appearance via video link), Singapore, 22 March 2017.
 Today I am going to talk about the FX Global Code. The Code is on track to be released in two
months’ time at the end of May. This is a culmination of two years’ effort, involving considerable
input from a sizeable number of foreign exchange market participants, both public and private.
Today I will reiterate the motivation for the work we have been doing on the Code, why you all
should be interested in it, and then update you on where we are at with the process and outline
the way forward.
1
As  I  hope  most  of  you  know,  Phase  1  of  the  Code  was  launched  in  May  last  year  in  New
York.  The Code is pretty easy to find. It is available via the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS) website or on the website of a number of foreign exchange committees (FXCs), including
both  the Australian  Foreign  Exchange  Committee  (AFXC)  website  and  the  Singaporean  FXC.
The text of the complete Code will be available in the same places from 25 May, following its
public release.
Why is the work going on? As I have stated before, the foreign exchange (FX) industry has been
suffering  from  a  lack  of  trust  in  its  functioning.  This  lack  of  trust  is  evident  both  between
participants in the market and, at least as importantly, between the public and the market. The
market needs to move toward a more favourable and desirable location, and allow participants to
have much greater confidence that the market is functioning appropriately.
A well-functioning foreign exchange market is very much in the interest of all market participants.
This clearly includes central banks, both in their own role as market participants but also as the
exchange rate is an important channel of monetary policy transmission. In a globalised world, the
foreign exchange market is one of the most vital parts of the financial plumbing.
The Code sets out global principles of good practice in the foreign exchange market to provide a
common set of guidance to the market, including in areas where there is a degree of uncertainty
about  what  sort  of  practices  are  acceptable,  and  what  are  not.  This  should  help  to  restore
confidence and promote the effective functioning of the wholesale FX market.
To that end, one of the guiding principles underpinning our work is that the Code should promote
a robust, fair, liquid, open and transparent market. A diverse set of buyers and sellers, supported
by  resilient  infrastructure,  should  be  able  to  confidently  and  effectively  transact  at  competitive
prices  that  reflect  available  market  information  and  in  a  manner  that  conforms  to  acceptable
standards of behaviour.
The work to develop the Code commenced two years ago, in May 2015, when the BIS Governors
commissioned a working group of the Markets Committee of the BIS (which I chaired until early
January  this  year)  to  facilitate  the  establishment  of  a  single  global  code  of  conduct  for  the
wholesale FX market and to come up with mechanisms to promote greater adherence to the
2
Code.
Our group comprises representatives of the central banks of all the major FX centres. Cindy Mok
from the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) has made a major contribution to the process,
and is very much the person you should speak to in the Singapore market about the Code. The
central banks of China, Hong Kong, Japan and Korea, as well as my country, Australia, are the
other Asian central banks on the group.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This work is also very much a public sector–private sector partnership. We have been ably and
vigorously supported in this work by a group of market participants, chaired by David Puth, CEO
of  CLS.  David’s  group  contains  people  from  all  around  the  world  on  the  buy  side,  including
corporates and asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNs and non-
bank participants, drawing from the various Foreign Exchange Committees and beyond. All parts
of the market have been involved in the drafting of the Code to make sure all perspectives are
heard and appropriately reflected.
There are two important points worth highlighting: first, it’s a single code for the whole industry
and second, it’s a global code.
On the first point, the Code is supplanting the existing codes that have been present in the FX
market, including the Blue Book that is used in Singapore, and the ACI model code that is used in
Australia.
Importantly, the Code covers all of the wholesale FX industry. This is not a code for just the sell
side. It is there for the sell side, the buy side, non-bank participants and the platforms; its breadth
is both across the globe and across the whole structure of the industry.
Hence  the  Code  is  relevant  for  all  of  you  here  at  this  conference.  The  way  it  is  relevant  will
depend on your engagement with the market. The guidelines for appropriate conduct are relevant
for the buy side as well as the sell side. On the buy side it will also help to give you guidance as
to what you can reasonably expect from your counterparty as you transact your FX business.
What  this  means  in  practice  is  that  the  steps  different  market  participants  take  to  align  their
activities with the principles of the Code will necessarily reflect the size, complexity, type and
extent of their engagement with the FX market.
As I mentioned earlier, the first phase of the Code was released in May 2016. It covers areas
such as ethics, information sharing, aspects of execution and confirmation and settlement. The
second  phase  covers  further  aspects  of  execution  including  e-trading  and  platforms,  prime
brokerage, as well as governance, and risk management and compliance.
We have provided market participants with a number of opportunities to comment on the Code,
in addition to receiving the direct input of the Market Participants Group led by David Puth. Over
the  past  few  months,  drafts  of  the  full  text  of  the  Code  have  been  distributed  to  market
participants for their review, principally through the various FXCs, but also through other industry
associations  to  ensure  all  perspectives  are  appropriately  reflected  in  the  Code.  Through  this
process, quite a few thousand comments were received.
In my view, the text of the Code provides the best and most appropriate guidance we could give,
given  the  sometimes  wide  range  of  feedback  received,  particularly  on  those  small  number  of
issues which are most controversial in the market. The most obvious example of this is ‘last
look’.  This  issue  has  generated  considerable  passionate  discussion.  I  would  expect  that
discussion to continue after the release of the Code in May and that the Code might evolve as a
function of that discussion. I would like to make the point that if market participants think it would
be preferable for the Code to have gone further, they are welcome to go down that path in their
operations. On the other hand, it would not be desirable for the converse to occur, namely for
market participants’ practices to fall short of the principles described in the Code. That said, I
think it is good outcome of the process that we were able to distil the points of contention down to
a small number of (not insignificant) issues. Outside of a small number of contentious areas, the
feedback  was  reflective  of  a  widely  held  consensus.  Market  participants  have  recognised  the
Code’s aim of helping move the FX market to a better place.
I will illustrate that with a couple of the areas that were addressed in the first phase of the Code,
which is already in the public domain. In the first phase, topics were covered that the market was
looking for guidance on sooner rather than later and that were potentially having an adverse effect
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
on market functioning.
One  example  of  this  is  around  information  sharing,  where  many  market  participants  have
highlighted that they are unsure what information can be conveyed to counterparties and other
market participants. While it is clear (or at least should be) that disclosing the details of a client’s
order book to a counterparty is not acceptable, market participants have noted that there is much
less clarity around what level of aggregation, say, is necessary in order to convey market colour
appropriately.
As  a  result,  it  appears  some  market  participants  are  being  very  conservative  in  sharing
information,  which  can  have  implications  for  the  effective  functioning  of  the  market.  This  is
notwithstanding the guidance provided in this area in the Global Preamble put out by the global
Foreign Exchange Committee, in March 2015.  The Global Code takes the material in the Global
Preamble  and  fleshes  it  out  a  bit  more,  including  with  some  examples  of  what  is,  and  isn’t,
appropriate communication, and why.
3
Similarly,  there  have  been  diverse  opinions  around  what  is  appropriate  behaviour  in  terms  of
order handling. There have been some very public instances of inappropriate behaviour around
order handling that have come to light in recent years. The market is seeking greater guidance as
to what principles should be followed, including the different standards that may apply depending
on whether an intermediary is functioning as principal or agent.
This is one area that was not adequately covered in the pre-existing codes that the various FXCs
had endorsed for the FX market. It is an area where we are aiming to provide the sought-after
guidance.  But  we  are  not  writing  a  procedures  manual  for  order  handling.  Rather  we  are
articulating principles that need to be taken into account. Individual firms may then take these
principles  and  reflect  them  in  their  own  procedures  manual.  Our  aim  in  articulating  these
principles is to provide market participants with the framework in which to think about how they
handle stop-loss orders. The emphasis here is very much on the word ‘think’. The Global Code
will not provide the answers to all your questions, but it should help you ask the right questions.
Adherence to the Code
Alongside drafting the Code, we have also been devoting considerable time and effort to thinking
about how to ensure widespread adoption of the Code by market participants. Clearly, that has
been an issue with the various existing codes that have been in place in a number of markets
over many years. It is evident that they were ignored on occasion, wilfully or otherwise.
One of our central aims in drafting the Code is for it to be principles-based rather than rules-
based. There are a number of reasons why this is so but, for me, an important reason is that the
more prescriptive the Code is, the easier it is to get around. Rules are easier to arbitrage than
principles. If it’s not expressly prohibited or explicitly discouraged, then it must be okay seems to
be the historical experience. Moreover, the more prescriptive and the more precise the Code, the
less people will think about what they are doing. If it’s principles-based and less prescriptive then,
as I just said, market participants will have to think about whether their actions are consistent
with the principles of the Code.
So, we are working with the industry to produce a principles-based code rather than a set of
prescriptive  regulatory  standards.  It  will  not  impose  legal  or  regulatory  obligations  on  market
participants, nor will it supplant existing regulatory standards or expectations. But we do expect
the principles in the Code to be understood and adopted across the entire FX market.
Our approach to adherence has a number of dimensions. We laid out our overall approach to
4
 We will provide a more comprehensive
adherence to the Code in New York in May last year.
description of the suite of mechanisms to support adherence to the Code alongside the release
of the Code in May.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  critical  dimension  is  market-based  adherence  mechanisms.  An  important  element  of
discipline should come from the market itself and we are working closely with market participants
on this. The adherence to a voluntary code will only come about if firms judge it to be in their
interest and take the practical steps to ensure the code is embedded in their practices.
Firms  will  need  to  take  practical  steps  such  as  training  their  staff  and  putting  in  appropriate
policies  and  procedures.  We  have  provided  a  draft  Statement  of  Commitment  for  firms  to
publicly demonstrate their adherence to the Code. One reason for a public demonstration is that
firms are more likely to adhere to the Code if they believe that their peers are doing so too.
Without blaming them for what occurred, more scrutiny from counterparties about how their FX
transactions were being executed may have helped to reduce the incidence and severity of the
market abuses that occurred in the past. FX transactions were sometimes regarded as ancillary
to the core business, notwithstanding their potential impact on returns.
Ultimately  the  success  of  the  Code  in  promoting  integrity  and  restoring  confidence  in  the
wholesale FX market lies in the hands of its participants. That is why the Global FXCs issued a
joint statement of support at the launch of the Code in New York as well as stating their intention
to make adherence to the Code a likely requirement of FXC membership.  That would ensure
the Code is embedded at the core of the FX market, but it is also important that it extends beyond
that, and that there is, at the very least, an awareness of it across all market participants.
5
A second dimension of adherence is that the BIS central banks have signalled their commitment
by  announcing  that  they  themselves  will  follow  the  Code,  and  that  they  expect  that  their
counterparties will do so too.  To that end, the RBA will no longer transact in the FX market with
those that don’t commit to adhere to the Code after its release in May.
6
A third dimension of adherence is that we are talking to regulators in our various jurisdictions as
to  how  they  might  use  the  Code  in  monitoring  market  conduct.  In  Australia,  the  securities
regulator, ASIC is very supportive of the development of the Code and is considering how it might
utilise the Code in its market surveillance. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) in the UK is
considering how they might incorporate the Code in the Senior Managers Regime there.
Given that we are only providing the full text of the Code to the market in May, there will be a
period of time for market participants to adjust their practices where necessary (which should
hopefully not be much) to be in line with the principles in the Code. This period of time might
potentially be as short as six months, but no more than twelve months for the vast majority of
market  participants.  How  much  effort  this  might  require  will  in  part  depend  on  the  nature  and
extent of your engagement with the FX market. In drafting the Code, we have always kept the
principle of proportionality at front of mind.
Conclusion
We are on track to complete the Code so that it will be released in London in May. At the end of
that process, for the Code to be effective and for it to achieve what we want it to achieve, it will
need to be accepted and endorsed across the full spectrum of market participants. I ask you all
as participants in the foreign exchange market to familiarise yourself with the principles of the
Code and verify that your operations in the market align with them.
That said, the process does not really end, because as the foreign exchange market continues to
evolve, the Code will need to evolve with it.
The work to date has reflected a very constructive and cooperative effort between the central
banks and market participants. I would particularly like to acknowledge the enormous time and
energy contributed by David Puth and the Market Participants Group as well as the team of my
fellow  central  bankers. All  of  us  recognise  the  need  to  restore  the  public’s  faith  in  the  foreign
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
exchange market and the value of the Global Code in assisting that process and also in helping
improve market functioning and confidence in the market.
Let me finish with three things to take away with you:
Read the FX Global Code when it is released on May 25th.
Adapt your business where appropriate to conform with the principles of the Global Code.
Ask your FX counterparties whether they are committed to the principles of the Global Code.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/gc_may16.pdf>.
See <www.bis.org/press/p150511.htm>.
See <www.rba.gov.au/afxc/about-us/pdf/global-preamble.pdf>.
Code”: 
See <www.bis.org/mktc/fxwg/am_may16.pdf>. See also C Salmon (2016), ‘Rebuilding Trust through the “FX
Global 
at
<www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech924.pdf>,  Speech  at  the  ACI  UK
Square Mile Debate, London, 21 September; and S Potter (2016), ‘The Role of Best Practices in Supporting
Market Integrity and Effectiveness’, Remarks at the 2016 Primary Dealers Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of
New 
7 
at
<www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2016/pot160907>.
September, 
Optimism’, 
Reasons 
available 
available 
York, 
New 
York 
City, 
for 
See <afxc.rba.gov.au/news/afxc-26052016.html>.
See <www.bis.org/press/p160526a.htm>.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
