 BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
  Uganda Bankers’ Association  
Annual Bankers’ Conference 
   July 19, 2017 
 The Keynote Speaker, Prof. Njuguna-Ndugu, Emeritus 
Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, 
The Chief Executives and Senior Staff of Banks Present, 
The  Senior  Management  of  the  Uganda  Institute  of 
Banking and Financial Services, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
 Good morning to you all.  
 Let  me  begin  by  commending  the  Uganda  Bankers’ 
Association  for  organising  this 
inaugural  Annual 
Bankers’ Conference. We have a very busy schedule of 
sessions  on  a  variety  of  important  topics  to  look 
forward  to  today.  In  my  brief  remarks  I  would  like  to 
outline  what  I  believe  are  some  of  the  key  challenges 
for the Ugandan banking industry in the years ahead. 
 Page 2 of 14 
As  will  become  clear,  these  challenges  are  in  some 
respects interrelated, as progress in one area will make 
it easier to make progress in others.   
 A major challenge for the banking industry; one which 
is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  rest  of  the 
economy,  is  how  to  strengthen  bank  lending  to  the 
private sector.  
 Bank  lending  expanded  rapidly  in  the  first  decade  of 
this century; in real terms the stock of credit expanded 
four-fold  between  2001  and  2011,  and  this  enabled 
many new borrowers to access credit.   
 But  since  2011  credit  growth  has  slowed  and  over  the 
last  two  years,  there  has  been  virtually  no  growth  in 
real terms (after adjusting for inflation).  
  Page 3 of 14 
The main reasons for the stagnation of bank lending lie 
on  the  supply  side  of  the  credit  market.  Over  the  last 
five years, since the first half of 2012, loan demand, as 
proxied  by  the  value  of  loan  applications  received  by 
banks,  has  grown  robustly,  by  about  17  per  cent  per 
annum  in  real  terms,  but  the  value  of  loans  actually 
approved  by  banks  has  grown  much  more  slowly. 
Consequently,  whereas  in  the  first  half  of  2012,  banks 
approved  loans  in  value  amounting  to  70  per  cent  of 
the  total  loan  applications  that  they  received,  that 
figure had fallen to 51 per cent in the first four months 
of 2017.  
 It  is  clear  that,  against  a  background  of  rising  non-
performing loans and difficulties in realising the value 
of  loan  collateral  in  property  markets,  banks  have 
become much more wary about the creditworthiness of 
loan  applicants  and  as  a  result  have  become  more 
reluctant to extend credit to them.  
 Page 4 of 14 
Unfortunately,  the  pool  of  prime  borrowers  –  mainly 
large, well established companies – is small in Uganda. 
Hence  if  they  are  to  expand  their  loan  portfolios  in  a 
financially  sustainable  manner,  banks  will  have  to 
bring  into  the  credit  market  more  small  and  medium 
sized enterprises (SMEs). 
 To  do  this,  banks  will  need  to  strengthen  their 
capacities for identifying and evaluating potential new 
loan customers and ensuring that the characteristics of 
the loan products on offer are suitable for the types of 
business  undertaken  by  their  customers,  especially  in 
aligning  loan  repayments  with  the  future  stream  of 
business  revenues.  Given  that  an  expansion  of  banks’ 
loan  portfolios  will  almost  inevitably  involve  banks 
being  exposed  to  greater  credit  risk,  it  is  essential  that 
this  is  accompanied  by  a  strengthening  of  banks’  risk 
management strategies.  
 Page 5 of 14 
The  ability  of  borrowers  to  service  their  loans  and, 
therefore, their creditworthiness, is not independent of 
the interest rates charged on these loans. The higher are 
lending rates of interest, the larger is the burden placed 
on the borrower to service his or her loans.  
 Ceteris  paribus,  lower  interest  rates  would,  therefore, 
contribute  to  enhancing  the  capacities  of  borrowers  to 
service  their  loans  out  of  their  business  revenue  and 
thereby  help  to  alleviate  credit  risk.  Reducing  lending 
interest rates in a financially sustainable manner is the 
second major challenge facing the banking industry. 
 Unfortunately,  high 
lending  rates  of 
interest  are 
primarily  the  result  of  the  high  cost  structure  of 
banking in Uganda, and lending rates will not fall in a 
sustainable manner until banks have been able to bring 
down their operating costs.  
 Page 6 of 14 
The average annual operating costs of Ugandan banks, 
as  percentage  of  their  income  earning  assets,  is 
currently  around  11  per  cent,  which  is  very  high  by 
international standards.  
 Large  branch  networks  and  the  high  cost  of  staff  are 
major contributors to the high operating costs of banks.  
When  the  interest  costs  of  deposits  and  provisions  for 
bad  debts  are  added  to  operating  costs,  banks’  annual 
costs  as  a  per  cent  of  their  income  earning  assets  rises 
to  almost  18  per  cent,  which  obviously  constrains  the 
extent to which average lending rates can fall.  
 Hence, the third challenge facing the Ugandan banking 
industry  is  how  to  reduce  its  high  operating  costs, 
without  compromising  service  delivery  or  customers’ 
access to services. 
  Page 7 of 14 
The  structural  factors,  which  underlie  the  high  bank 
lending  rates  point  to  the  inevitable  consequences  of 
any attempt to force banks to reduce their lending rates 
by legislation, as has happened in Kenya.  
 If  lending  rates  were  capped  by  legislation  at  levels 
below  the  real  cost  of  lending,  taking  into  account 
operating  costs,  provisions,  and  the  costs  of  funds, 
banks would make losses on their loan portfolios.  
 They  would  respond  by  curtailing  their  lending  to 
those borrowers to whom lending involves the highest 
costs,  in  the  form  of  high  transaction  costs  for  loan 
evaluation  and  monitoring,  and/or  because  of  higher 
credit risk premiums. The banks might also attempt to 
recover some of their losses by increasing the fees and 
charges levied on their customers.  
  Page 8 of 14 
If  lending  rates  were  capped,  the  borrowers  who 
would  suffer  the  most,  in  terms  of  losing  access  to 
credit,  would  be  SMEs.  This  is  because  SMEs  are  both 
more risky and involve higher transaction costs for the 
banks  as  a  share  of  the  amount  that  they  borrow  than 
prime borrowers.  
 Given  these  costs,  banks  can  only  extend  credit  to 
SMEs in a commercially viable manner if they are free 
to  set  lending  rates  at  levels,  which  can  cover  the 
expected costs of lending, including the default risk.  
 Instead  of  lending  to  SMEs,  capping  lending  rates 
would  encourage  the  banks  to  concentrate  their 
reduced  loan  portfolios  on  their  prime  borrowers, 
which already benefit from the lowest lending rates in 
the economy.  
 Page 9 of 14 
Thus  capping 
lending 
rates  would  be  highly 
counterproductive  in  that  it  would  damage  the  SME 
sector  by  constraining  its  ability  to  obtain  working 
capital and finance for investment to expand capacity.  
As the SME sector is crucial for the future growth of the 
economy  and  the  creation  of  employment,  capping 
lending rates would constitute an act of economic self-
harm.  
 We  already  have  the  salutary  experience  of  the  1970s 
and  1980s  to  teach  us  how  damaging  the  control  of 
interest rates can be. In that period, the banking sector 
shrank  dramatically  because  many  types  of  banking 
business,  including  lending  to  the  private  sector,  were 
not  financially  viable.  Uganda  cannot  afford  to  repeat 
the  mistakes  of  the  past;  mistakes,  which  proved  so 
ruinous to our economy.  
  Page 10 of 14 
I  cannot  stress  strongly  enough  that  it  will  only  be 
possible  to  reduce  bank  lending  rates  in  a  financially 
sustainable  manner  if  banks  can  lower  their  operating 
costs.  
 Bringing  down  operating  costs  will  almost  certainly 
entail greater use of innovative technologies, including 
IT, to deliver banking services.  
 A  major  shift  towards  digital,  or  electronic  banking  is 
already underway worldwide, as we will be discussing 
in  the  session  on  the  digital  financial  revolution  later 
this morning.  
 The  adoption  of  mobile  and  online  banking,  together 
with  smart  ATMs,  will  help  banks  reduce  their  costs, 
although  unfortunately  that  will  also  mean  lower 
employment in the banking industry.  
 Page 11 of 14 
As  they  adopt  electronic  banking  technologies,  key 
challenges  for  banks  will  be  to  ensure  that  these  new 
technologies can deliver the same quality of, and access 
to,  services  for  their  customers  as  the  more  traditional 
technologies  and  that  the  risks  entailed  in  electronic 
banking  are  fully  understood  and  can  be  managed 
effectively.  
 In  particular,  banks  must  ensure  that  their  electronic 
systems can be safeguarded against cyber-attacks, both 
to  protect  the 
integrity  of 
individual  customer’s 
accounts  and  to  prevent  threats  to  the  financial  safety 
of the bank itself.  
 The adoption of electronic banking has implications for 
bank regulation and supervision, which in Uganda has 
traditionally focussed on banks’ management of credit 
risk.  
 Page 12 of 14 
In  future,  operational  risks  arising  from  electronic 
banking are likely to become of greater significance as 
potential  threats  to  the  financial  soundness  of  banks 
and  their  ability  to  command  the  confidence  of  their 
customers.  Bank  regulators  need  to  strengthen  their 
capacities  for  monitoring  the  security  of  banks’  IT 
systems.  
 To  conclude,  I  believe  that  the  future  of  the  banking 
industry in Uganda is bright. In terms of productivity, 
the adoption of international best practises and its use 
of  modern  technology,  banking  is  one  of  the  leading 
industries in Uganda. 
 Banking  also  operates 
in  a  macroeconomic  and 
prudential  regulatory  environment,  which  provides 
scope for investment and innovation while, at the same 
time,  safeguarding  the  interests  of  depositors  and  the 
safety and soundness of the financial system.  
 Page 13 of 14 
 Consequently I am confident that banks will be able to 
meet  successfully  the  challenges  that  they  face,  and  in 
doing so, continue to contribute to the development of 
the Ugandan economy.   
 Finally I would like to wish you all the best for the rest 
of this conference.  
 Thank you for listening to me. 
 Page 14 of 14 
