Jorgovanka  Tabaković:  Serbia  reform  programme  –  what  can  we
learn from past mistakes
Introductory speech by Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the
Kopaonik Business Forum 2017 “Reform agenda for Serbia – what can we learn from the past
and the way forward”, Kopaonik, 7 March 2017.
Accompanying slides
 Esteemed  representatives  of  the  diplomatic  corps,  esteemed  members  of  the  Government,
fellow economists, businesspeople, ladies and gentlemen,
(Slide 1)  I would like to begin today’s presentation by saying that the difficulty lies not so much in
developing new ideas as in escaping from old ones. How did I earn the right, privilege and credit
to open today’s event? Allow me to answer this question myself.
If one successful year  could  be  attributed  to  coincidence,  two  successive  years  to  fortuitous
circumstances, then three such years in a row, or an entire “Olympic cycle” of good results, are
an  indicator  of  undisputable  quality,  commitment  and  knowledge. All  that  we,  at  the  National
Bank of Serbia (NBS), have achieved reminds us only too well that we have struck a path of
sustainable progress which we must maintain and improve.
The great John Maynard Keynes said: “The difficulty lies not so much in developing new ideas
as in escaping from old ones.” To which I would add: the problems lie in the inability to sense the
right  moment,  the  inability  to  sense  the  final  moment.  In  underestimating  the  resistance  to
change,  in  overestimating  the  results  we  expect,  and  in  impatience. A  sense  of  measure  is
above all a key to success.
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. This is what we are talking
about  today.  There  is  too  much  negative  experience  behind  us  cautioning  us,  mistakes  that
must not be repeated. For the price is much too high.
At this event, where I am pleased to present the results of my work, back in 2014 I spoke about
Serbia’s problems reflected in temporariness, dissent and a lack of continuity. I spoke about a
historic desire, which persisted throughout Serbia’s long history, to create a man who pays his
taxes regularly, is subject to courts, and acquires knowledge. About the need to create a lasting
order and system.
In the Balkans, however, this task is much more difficult to carry out than elsewhere. Isidora
Sekulić noted this accurately: “Many fought for the freedom and beauty of this land, yet everyone
pillaged it and hated it. There is nobody who would make it his homeland and farmland to be
cultivated  for  its  own  sake.  The  Balkans  is  one  vast  cemetery  of  different  lordships  and
civilisations.” The very same history is cautioning us today, and it is speaking to us in a loud
voice.
That  is  why  stability  is  the  key  word  for  all  decision-bearers  and  decision-makers,  and
stakeholders in the public, economic, political and any other life. For years we were witnesses to
short-sighted illusions of positive movements – unrealistic wage increases and growing debts
with no grounds or footholds. The situation in public finances was becoming critical. Individual
gain outweighed the common, state interests. It was up to us to make sure that this is never
repeated.
In  economies  which  are  not  experiencing  growth,  spending  in  advance  and  projecting  an
improvement in the standard of living is not sustainable, yet reforms are implemented because
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of people, therefore we must also take into account the social dimension and sustainability of
reforms.
We realised that the long-standing irrational focus of the domestic economy on consumption
had  to  be  replaced  by  an  investment  and  export-oriented  use  of  financing  sources,  both
domestic  and  foreign.  Today,  it  is  investment  and  net  exports,  broadly  dispersed  across
economic sectors, that drive the growth of Serbia’s GDP.
I am pleased that we have managed to regain the confidence in institutions, in the bearers of
economic policy, in the domestic currency. This is attested by the results we achieve within our
arrangement  with  the  IMF.  It  is  also  attested  by  the  number  of  investors  interested  in  dinar
securities. Yet another proof of that is Serbia’s advance on the World Bank’s Doing Business
list.
What we have achieved commits us to persevere in this.
What was one of the major problems we faced? Over the last decade, the relationship between
monetary  and  executive  authorities  could  be  defined  by  the  phenomenon  of  “competitive
decadence between the West and Russia.” It was a relationship of superiors and subordinates,
a relationship where everyone wanted to have the victors and the defeated, where everyone took
part in the tug-of-war. You may be familiar with this phenomenon in practice as the “prisoner’s
dilemma” – the larger the personal contribution, the lower the potential for cooperation. We had
competitions, instead of coordinating activities to try and find the best solutions. Solutions which
would be the best for society and for the majority of citizens.
What were the consequences – high interest rates, high and volatile inflation and an unstable
exchange rate. This is why a relationship which implies coordination and cooperation between
the  monetary  and  executive  authorities,  with  strictly  divided  competencies,  is  of  such
importance today.
Cooperation of the NBS with the Government and all ministries has been at its highest level for
several  years  now.  At  the  same  time,  each  institution  has  retained  independence  in  its
operation.  We  are  working  together  to  improve  the  composition  of  investors  in  government
bonds. We do not want to depend on individual investors who come here, make a quick and
easy profit and leave. Investors are now many; they are sound, and they are here for longer
periods – this is the future. Equally so, we do not want to be unprotected from external impacts.
Public  debt  will  be  safe  from  fluctuations  in  foreign  currencies  and  the  exchange  rate  more
resilient to shocks from abroad.
(Slide 2) Since August 2012, the NBS has made a considerable shift in its approach to monetary
policy  and  to  establishing  and  maintaining  financial  system  stability.  And  now  we  have  the
results. The year 2016 ended with y-o-y inflation at 1.6%, a stable exchange rate, lower interest
rates and the lowest level of non-performing loans (NPLs) in six years. As a result of all that, the
inflation  target  was  revised  down  to  3±1.5%.  Thus,  we  have  come  closer  to  developed
economies.
Let us go back and touch on continuity. In order to maintain continuity, and turn these results into
a good starting point for the continuation and conclusion of transition, we must not give up on
such results because it would take us more than ten or twenty years to return to where we are
now, and perhaps even longer than that to build credibility.
(Slides  3  and  4)  During  2016,  inflation  remained  low  and  stable,  and  stood  at  1.6%  y-o-y.
Average  annual  inflation  in  2016  was  1.2%.  In  January  2017,  it  equalled  2.4%  y-o-y  and  was
within the bounds of the new target tolerance band.
As for factors arising from the domestic environment, a contribution to low inflationary pressures
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
came  from  the  effects  of  fiscal  consolidation,  relative  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  and  a
successful agricultural season, as well as low and stable inflation expectations of the financial
and corporate sectors which are within the tolerance band. In terms of external factors, as in
prior years, low inflation was maintained owing to low prices of primary products, as well as to
generally low headline inflation in the international environment.
The  greatest  contribution  to  inflation  came  from  petroleum  products,  fresh  meat,  travel
packages and administered prices (chiefly cigarettes and electricity).
We expect inflation to move within the target tolerance band over the projection horizon. In the
short  run,  a  rise  in  inflation  will  be  primarily  driven  by  the  low  base  effect  from  prices  of
petroleum products and the January increase in cigarette prices. In the medium run, a rise in
inflation will be driven by an increase in aggregate demand and inflation abroad.
The  risks  to  the  projection  are  judged  to  be  symmetric  and  primarily  relate  to  trends  in  the
international financial and commodity markets, and the spill-over effect of global oil prices on the
prices of petroleum products at home. Also, the price trajectory will be shaped by the degree of
success of this year’s agricultural season.
(Slide 5) Ladies and gentlemen, when all think likewise in the market, no one actually does any
thinking. When the market consensus is achieved, markets grow more vulnerable than ever.
We were not swayed by persuasions of many that Brexit would not take place, or that surveys in
the USA hinted at an unambiguous outcome of the presidential election. We were prepared for
the “unexpected” and not for a moment did we let the turbulences roil the domestic market and
reflect on the exchange rate. In times of tranquillity we were honing our defence system for the
upcoming pressures, while in the times of turbulences we invested wisely in stability.
From January 2008 to August 2012, the dinar lost 33.2% against the euro. Since then, it has
weakened seven and a half times less. At the same time, four times less FX reserves have
been spent. I call this commitment, efficiency and conscientiousness, dedication to the general
interest!
(Slide 6) In 2016, the dinar depreciated by 1.5% against the euro. Depreciation pressures mostly
came  from  turbulences  in  the  world  financial  markets  which  affected  non-resident  activity.
Appreciation  pressures  followed  in  July,  aided  by  increased  interest  of  foreign  investors  who
wished to invest in dinar government securities, and these pressures lasted into the following
months (until November 2016). Appreciation pressures were fuelled by a significant recovery of
domestic macroeconomic indicators, positive IMF reviews of the implementation of the stand-by
arrangement  and  greater  investor  confidence  in  Serbia,  which  was  confirmed  by  the
improvement in credit rating by Fitch (on 17 June 2016 the rating was raised from B+(p) to BB-
(s)).
Depreciation pressures at the turn of the year came from stepped-up sale of dinar government
securities by non-residents in the secondary market, payout of profit to non-residents through
dividends, a seasonal increase in FX demand of domestic energy importers and a reduction in
net indexed bank assets. The key risk from abroad emanates from the Fed’s rate hike and the
resulting  withdrawal  of  international  portfolio  investors  from  capital  markets  of  emerging
countries, which spurs depreciation pressures on currencies of those countries.
To moderate excessive daily exchange rate volatility, in 2015 the NBS intervened in the IFEM by
buying EUR 970 million and selling EUR 450 million (net purchase of EUR 520 million), thus
creating a buffer to subdue depreciation pressures that prevailed in the first half of 2016. In 2016,
the NBS sold EUR 980 million and bought EUR 820 million in the IFEM (net sale of EUR 160
million), intervening mostly on the purchase side from July till November. The first half of 2016
saw  depreciation  pressures,  while  the  latter  half  was  primarily  characterised  by  appreciation
pressures. Since the start of 2017 (as at 28 February), the NBS sold EUR 330 million in the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
IFEM. Since the start of 2017 (until 28 February), the dinar lost 0.4% against the euro.
(Slide  7)  How much is the domestic currency used nowadays? What is the level of interest
rates? In 2008, only a fifth of total household loans were in dinars. Today, they account for nearly
50% and you must admit that this is a significant result. The cost of new dinar borrowing has
been cut by over 10 pp.
(Slide 8) Interest rates in the dinar segment of the market mirror the trends in the key policy rate.
Since May 2013, when the easing cycle began, the NBS has trimmed the key policy rate by 7.75
pp, and interest rates on dinar loans have dropped by over 10 pp, both in the corporate and
household sectors.
From 2012 to 2016, interest rates on newly approved dinar loans to corporates were cut by 11.6
pp, while interest rates on newly approved dinar loans to households were trimmed by 10.7 pp.
Total loans to corporates and households rose by 1.9% y-o-y in December 2016, led by the rise
in household lending (10.1% y-o-y). Excluding the effect of corporate loans write-off and early
loan repayment by a public enterprise to domestic banks in October, covered by a cross-border
loan, the y-o-y rise in corporate lending equalled around 1.5% in December.
(Slide 9) In 2016, internal imbalance continued to narrow, as shown by the general government
deficit of 1.4% of GDP (vs. 3.7% in 2015 and 6.6% in 2014), mostly on account of improved
collection of all categories of tax revenue. Favourable fiscal movements persisted in January,
according to preliminary data at Republic level.
As regards the projection of fiscal movements, in 2017 consolidated deficit is expected to be at
a  level  similar  to  that  in  2016,  despite  the  wage  and  pension  increase  and  higher  capital
expenditures, mainly due to the continued rise in tax revenues.
In late 2016 public debt was lower than in late 2015 (a year prior relative to the initial projection).
It will stay on a downward path in 2017, and I believe in the coming years as well.
We all tend to be impressed with the achievements of physics and information technologies and
often disregard the importance of economic theory and its most direct and unfaltering impact on
our  everyday  lives.  A  bad  reform  or  wrong  economic  moves  can  have  devastating
consequences. They can pauperise and make jobless people across the social strata.
Wrong theories suggest wrong reforms, but the responsibility has never been with theoreticians
and  advisers.  The  responsibility  lies  with  decision-makers.  We  shall  therefore  listen  to  what
everyone has to say at this event, but we shall work in a way that will help us come here before
you  next  year  with  the  best  possible  results.  And  I  am  referring  to  fiscal  consolidation  and
structural reforms.
(Slide 10)  Dear colleagues, while improving our macro- and investment environment, we have
preserved the necessary stability of the financial sector. Though the objectives in this area are
hard to measure, the results achieved by the NBS are indisputable. It is enough to look behind
and remember 2012 and the challenges we faced at the time. The presence of a number of
weak banks called for an urgent solution. We have today a banking sector with higher capital
adequacy  and  a  significantly  lower  level  of  NPLs.  We  have  come  a  long  way  –  we  have
preserved both financial stability and citizens’ trust in the Republic of Serbia’s banking sector.
This is corroborated also  by  household  foreign  exchange  savings  exceeding  EUR  9  billion  in
January this year for the first time on record.
With the exception of several smaller banks, Serbia’s banking sector remained stable during the
crisis.  The  capital  adequacy  ratio  is  much  above  the  regulatory  threshold  of  12%  –  at  end-
September 2016 it equalled 21.2% (end-June 2016: 21.6%), owing mainly to a 3.1% rise in risk-
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
weighted assets (reflecting primarily growth in credit risk-weighted assets).
According to preliminary data, the profitability of the banking sector improved in 2016 compared
to 2015. Net pre-tax profit was around EUR 217 million.
(Slides  11  and  12)   What  remains  to  be  tackled  is  the  amount,  level  and  structure  of  NPLs.
Credit risk reflected in a relatively high share of NPLs in total loans poses the greatest problem
for us. However, it should be borne in mind that a considerable portion of NPLs was inherited
from the pre-crisis period. At the same time, during the crisis the NPL growth in Serbia was
lower than in other countries of the region. Since end-May 2015, when it reached its peak, the
NPL  ratio  has  been  on  a  downward  path,  though  remaining  relatively  high  (17%  at  end-
December 2016, down by 4.6 pp relative to the same period the year before).
As  regards  the  NPL  structure,  the  corporate  sector  still  accounts  for  the  largest  share.  It
accounted for around 45% of total NPLs in December 2016. At the same time, the NPL ratio has
been on a decline (17.5% at end-December 2016).
The gross NPL ratio for the household sector is much lower than for corporates (it equalled 10%
at  end-December  2016).  In  late  December  2016,  the  NPL  ratio  for  housing  loans  was  8.7%,
followed by 7.5% for cash loans.
It is noteworthy that gross NPLs remain fully covered by loan loss reserves. At end-December
2016, loan loss reserves covered 131% of gross NPLs, while allowances for impairment (under
the IFRS) covered 67% of gross NPLs.
Movements in NPLs in the coming period will depend primarily on the situation in the real sector,
but  also  on  the  domestic  legal  framework  and  its  efficiency.  Confirming  the  commitment  of
competent government authorities to tackling NPLs in a systematic and comprehensive way, in
August 2015 the Government of the Republic of Serbia adopted the National NPL Resolution
Strategy. The Strategy is  being  implemented  by  experts  from  the  NBS,  ministries  of  finance,
justice,  economy  and  construction,  the  Deposit  Insurance  Agency  and  other  competent
authorities  and  institutions.  The  NBS  has  implemented  all  activities  envisaged  by  the Action
Plan. The results are already visible as NPLs fell by 4.6 pp in 2016 to their lowest since January
2011.
It is high time we dedicated a part of our future endeavours to increasing efficiency, availability
and quality of services of the financial sector, particularly to ensuring further growth in sound
credit activity. There are no perfect, competitive markets anywhere in the world, Serbia included.
From a social viewpoint, it is important that profit be at least partly transferred from companies
to consumers, from banks to clients – in the form of lower prices and better services. We are
confident that banks will be led by the objectives of long-term sound and sustainable operation,
while at the same time mindful of the interests of financial services consumers.
Dear colleagues and friends, some people examine the past to define the future. I believe that
we need to glance at the past only occasionally, just to be reminded of what we have learned
and  experienced,  and  look  around  us  to  see  what  we  have  accomplished,  but  that  we  must
constantly  look  towards  future  challenges.  This  is  the  only  recipe  for  success! And  maybe,
using the example of the NBS, in a part where we are similar to the economy, I could comment
on it with Mr [Group Executive of Market Development for Europe, Jason] Lane, and invite him to
help Serbia, using the reputation of the large and well-known company such as MasterCard, to
preserve a domestic card called “Dina” by co-branding, because until we value ourselves, we
will not be valued by others. And I value the opinion of each and every one of you. Thank you for
your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
