A lecture by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Unisa Graduate School of Business 
 30 August 2017 
 Balanced and sustainable growth: the role and mandate of the SARB 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.   
  The mandate and role of central banks is a hotly debated topic in many 
countries  around  the  world.  In  South  Africa,  we  tend  to  engage  in  this 
debate  through  rhetoric  rather  than  facts.  In  our  article  published  on  2 
July,  we  set  the  basis  for  a  more  informed  discussion.1  I  would  like  to 
open the next chapter in that dialogue tonight. 
 Let me start by asking: why does our money have value? Why can you 
exchange it for goods and services? The money is not backed by silver 
or gold or platinum. It is not backed by land. It is not pegged to another 
currency,  such  as  the  dollar  or  the  pound.  It  works  because  of  trust  – 
trust  in  a  promise  made  in  the  Constitution,  which  gives  the  South 
African Reserve Bank (SARB) a very specific job: “to protect  the value 
of  the  currency  in  the  interests  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic 
growth in the Republic.”  
 Today,  I  will  explain  how  we  go  about  doing  that  job.  While  there  are 
questions of constitutional principle in recent debates about the SARB‟s 
mandate, I would prefer to give you the economic argument for what we 
do.  Independence  needs  to  be  earned;  it  is  not  enough  for  it  to  be 
                                                           
1 Kganyago, Lesetja. „Why low inflation is the best way to stimulate economic growth‟. The Sunday 
Times, 2 July 2017. 
 Page 1 of 17 
enshrined  in  the  Constitution.  The  economic  argument  is  crucial  for 
assessing  our  effectiveness  –  and  for  understanding  why  the  SARB 
should be independent.  
 There  is  no  distinction,  and  hence  no  choice  to  be  made,  between 
protecting the value of the currency and attending to the socio-economic 
well-being  of  South  Africans.  Destroying  the  value  of  the  rand  through 
inflation, reducing what it purchases in terms of daily sustenance, would 
be of no benefit to anyone. The recent report by Statistics South Africa 
shows  that  our  tragic  rise  in  poverty  coincides  with  a  time  of  rising 
inflation and weakening growth, between 2011 and 2015.2   
 While  we  are  happy  to  discuss  alternatives  to  policy  targets  and  to  the 
way  in  which  we  now  make  monetary  policy,  the  case  for  the  existing 
framework  is  very  strong;  our  own  experiences  and  those  of  other 
countries overwhelmingly support it. Our monetary policy framework has 
helped  us  to  achieve  a  historically  low  rate  of  inflation  and,  as  a  direct 
consequence of that, historically low interest rates. This suggests that, in 
our  current  economic  predicament,  rethinking  monetary  policy  may  not 
be the best use of our time. South Africa has far more urgent economic 
challenges, in particular reducing our structural unemployment rate.  
                                                             
2 Statistics South Africa, Poverty trends in South Africa: an examination of absolute poverty between 
2006 and 2011, 2015. 22 August 2017. The South African Multidimensional Poverty Index (SAMPI) 
shows a sharp decline in poverty, from 17.9% in 2001 to 8% in 2011, falling somewhat further to 
7% by 2016. 
 Page 2 of 17 
How we protect the value of the currency 
 Let  me  start  with  a  classic  problem  of  central  banking.  In  general, 
everyone wants money to keep its value. However, everyone also wants 
lower  interest  rates  –  and  there  are  always  some  people  who  ignore 
inflation and demand lower rates straight away. Unfortunately, if you give 
in  to  these  short-term  demands,  you  end  up  with  more  inflation  and 
higher  interest  rates.  When  people  see  that  the  short-term  demand  for 
low  interest  rates  is  stronger  than  the  long-term  preference  for  low 
inflation,  they  change  their  behaviour.  For  instance,  banks  may  charge 
more  to  lend,  as protection  against  higher  inflation.  Or  businesses  may 
put  up  prices  in  advance,  speeding  up  inflation.  As  a  result,  the  short-
term  desire  for  lower  rates  ultimately  gives  you  higher  inflation  and 
higher rates.    
 This  is  a  well-understood  problem.  It  is  what  economists  call  a  „time 
inconsistency‟  problem.  A  solution  is  to  make  a  binding  commitment,  a 
promise  people  can  believe  over  time.  In  monetary  policy,  this  has 
meant  giving  central  banks  their  independence,  leaving  them  to  target 
inflation  and  set  the  marginal  cost  of  borrowing  in  the  money  markets. 
The  inflation  target  allows  for  some  inflation  but  not  too  much.  This  is 
precisely  why  the  Constitution  tells  us  to  protect  the  value  of  the 
currency – and to do so without fear or favour. We disregard short-term, 
private demands for higher inflation so that we can look after the longer-
run interests of the general public. 
 How, then, do we go about delivering on this mandate? Since 2000 we 
have  used  an  inflation  target.  This  means  we  protect  the  value  of  the 
currency  as  measured  by  changes  in  consumer  prices.  We  like  this 
 Page 3 of 17 
measure of value because it is relevant to the lives of all South Africans. 
Furthermore, we have had more success hitting our inflation targets than 
we  have  had  with  other,  older  approaches,  such  as  pursuing  money 
supply  targets  or  trying  to  control  the  exchange  rate.  Importantly,  like 
many other countries, we have found that inflation targeting has helped 
to deliver good economic outcomes.  
 Why inflation targeting produces good economic outcomes 
 For  a  start,  as  intended,  inflation  targeting  has  helped  us  to  get  lower 
inflation. In the 1980s inflation averaged about 15%. It was almost 10% 
in the 1990s. Since the adoption of inflation targeting in 2000 it has been 
close to 6%.  
 Lower  inflation  protects  South  Africans‟  living  standards,  especially  of 
people  without  the  power  or  financial  knowledge  to  shield  themselves 
from price increases – most of all the poor. I will give you a very simple 
example.  Bread  costs  about  R11 at  the  moment.3  If  inflation  stays  at 
around 6%, bread is going to cost R35 in 20 years‟ time. If inflation goes 
back  to  pre-democracy  levels,  that  same  loaf  of  bread  is  going  to  cost 
R180 in 20 years. These kinds of  huge price increases will leave many 
more  people  behind.  This  is  why  higher  inflation  is  a  recipe  for  more 
poverty and more inequality. 
 Lower  inflation  has  also  permitted  lower  interest  rates.  The  average 
prime rate in the 1990s was almost 19%. It was about 13% in the 2000s 
and  has  averaged  just  under  10%  since  2010.  Among  other  benefits  – 
like supporting long-term, job-creating investment – this decline in rates 
                                                           
3 Sasko Premium Brown Bread, 700g, Pick ‟n Pay, R10.99, priced on 13 July 2017 
 Page 4 of 17 
has  contributed  to  the  inclusion  of  millions  more  South  Africans  in  the 
market for financial services.4  
 Furthermore, targeting inflation has allowed us to be more flexible. When 
you are aiming at a relatively slow-moving variable like inflation, you do 
not  need  to  react  as  rapidly  as  you  might  have  had  to  with  something 
like  the  exchange  rate.  As  a  result,  interest  rate  changes  have  been 
smoother.  Back  in  1998,  for  example,  before  we  started  inflation 
targeting, we raised interest rates by almost 7 percentage points in just 
five  months.  The  policy  rate  went  to  nearly  22%  and  the  prime  rate 
reached  25.5%.  In  more  recent  years,  by  contrast,  we  adjusted  the 
policy  rate  by  just  2  percentage  points  over  three-and-a-half  years,  to 
7%, before lowering it to 6.75% in July. This sort of smooth adjustment is 
much  easier  on  firms,  households  and  government  than  large,  rapid 
adjustments. 
 In textbooks, there is a short-term trade-off between growth and inflation. 
Many  people  think  of  this  as  permanent  and  wonder  why  we  do  not 
accept more inflation so we can have more growth and more jobs. This 
is  not  how  it  works.  In  fact,  the  data  show  clearly  that  inflation  and 
growth have moved in opposite directions, with more inflation coinciding 
with  lower  growth  and  higher  growth  accompanied  by  lower  inflation. 
This  makes  sense:  inflation  eats  into  peoples‟  real  incomes,  making 
them poorer – as they can buy fewer goods with the same money. It also 
generates  higher  and  more  volatile  interest  rates.  All  of  this  affects 
                                                           
4 For instance, the proportion of South Africans with a financial product from a regulated provider has 
risen from 55% in 2005 to 85% in 2016. See National Treasury, 2017, A financial sector that serves 
all South Africans, available at 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/documents/national%20budget/2017/review/Annexure%20F.pdf.  
 Page 5 of 17 
growth.  So  keeping  inflation  under  control  should  be  growth-friendly, 
which is just what the numbers show.  
 This pattern also holds in a comparison across countries. Besides South 
Africa, 11 other emerging markets adopted inflation targeting in the late 
1990s and early 2000s. These included Brazil, Thailand, and Colombia. 
Those with lower inflation than South Africa have had better growth and 
less  unemployment.  This  suggests  that  there  is  nothing  growth-friendly 
about  higher  inflation  targets.  Of  course,  there  are  many  things  that 
affect  a  country‟s  growth  rate.  But  if  inflation  targeting  is  such  a  big 
„problem‟,  and  if  there  is  a  significant  trade-off  between  growth  and 
inflation,  then  countries  with  lower,  tighter  targets  should  have  suffered 
more. They did not. They did better.5 
 Since  the  Public  Protector‟s  report,  some  old  complaints  about  the 
inflation-targeting  framework  have  reappeared  in  the  press.  One 
objection  is  that  inflation  targeting  is  appropriate  only  for  advanced 
economies,  not  for  emerging  markets.  A  second  is  that  we  should  be 
targeting growth or employment instead. A third objection is that inflation 
targeting  hurts  exports  because  high  interest  rates  keep  the  rand  too 
strong.  I  would  like  to  explain  why  these  are  not  convincing  arguments 
for replacing inflation targeting.  
 First, let me tackle the criticism that  inflation targeting is allegedly more 
of  a  „rich  country  policy‟.  In  fact,  inflation  targeting  is  popular  in  both 
advanced  economies  and  emerging  markets.  Research  by 
the 
                                                           
5 Since 2000, South Africa has had the second-highest inflation rate, on average, of these 
12 countries. (Brazil is first.) South Africa ranks eighth for growth and last for unemployment. Since 
the most recent global financial crisis, South Africa has once again had the second-highest inflation 
rate, after Brazil, but its growth rank has slipped to ninth place. It remains last for unemployment. 
 Page 6 of 17 
International  Monetary  Fund 
identifies  28 „pure‟ 
inflation-targeting 
countries.6  Of  these,  20  (or  71%)  are  emerging  markets.  If  we  use  a 
broader definition, more countries qualify. There are 64 countries with a 
published  inflation  target  for  2017;  49  of  these  (or  77%)  are  emerging 
markets.7  Furthermore,  if  anyone  is  having  trouble  hitting  inflation 
targets, it is the advanced economies.  
 Most  of  the  central  banks  in  the  major  advanced  economies  are  below 
their  inflation  targets  and  have  been  so  for  some  time.  By  contrast, 
emerging  markets  are  mostly  on  target  or  getting  there.  South  African 
inflation, to take the most immediate example, fell back within the target 
range in April this year and is expected to stay there for the foreseeable 
future. The reason why emerging market central banks are doing better 
than  their  rich  country  peers  is  probably  because  we  know  more  about 
lowering  inflation  than  raising  it  –  especially  when  interest  rates  are 
already at zero. My conclusion is therefore that inflation targeting is more 
of  an  emerging  market  practice  than  an  advanced  economy  one  –  one 
that has been working better in emerging markets, too.  
 Should we be targeting something besides inflation? I know of no central 
banks  that  are  employment  targeters  or  growth  targeters.  There  are 
good  reasons  for  this.  Contemporary  economic  thinking  and  lots  of 
experience  indicates  that  monetary  policies  cannot  do  much  about 
structural growth and employment problems. If you do not have enough 
skilled workers, the central bank cannot mint doctors and engineers. The 
thinking and experience also stresses that any trade-off between growth 
                                                           
6 See Sarwat J, March 2012, Inflation targeting: holding the line, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/basics/target.htm.  
7 The data for 2017 inflation targets are drawn from http://www.centralbanknews.info/p/inflation-
targets.html.  
 Page 7 of 17 
and  inflation,  or  unemployment  and  inflation,  is  short-term  only.  What 
you can do is stabilise inflation at the target and employment or growth 
at its sustainable rate.  
 For  this  reason,  even  the  central  banks  with  multiple  mandates  tend  to 
behave  a  lot  like  inflation targeters.  The  US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed), for 
instance, has a triple mandate, for low inflation, low unemployment, and 
low  interest  rates.8  In  practice,  the  Fed  aims  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations in line with its 2% target. In turn, low inflation helps to keep 
interest rates low, and the two together help to maximise employment. 
 One  can  explain  US  interest  rate  decisions  pretty  well  using  a  simple 
rule,  as  the  economist  John  Taylor  famously  showed.  Simply  put,  the 
Fed  reacts  when  inflation  is  not  on  target  and  when  unemployment  is 
away  from  its  normal  levels.  We  consult  very  similar  models  in  the 
SARB,  and  they  also  describe  our  policy  decisions  pretty  well.  This  is 
because  we,  as  monetary  policymakers,  already  care  about  cyclical 
variations  in  employment  and  growth.  This  is  the  nature  of  flexible 
inflation  targeting;  I  have  never  sat  in  an  MPC9  meeting  where  we  just 
looked  at  the  inflation  rate  and  ignored  everything  else.  Of  course,  any 
inflation-targeting  central  bank  can  give  you  low  rates  if  inflation  is  well 
behaved; you do not need an extra mandate to do that. We try very hard 
to keep interest rates as low as they can be given the inflation forecast.  
 Finally,  does  inflation  targeting  get  in  the  way  of  export-led  growth,  by 
keeping  the  exchange  rate  too  strong?  Back  in  the  late  2000s,  the 
visiting  International  Growth  Advisory  Panel  suggested  that  a  more 
                                                           
8 Although the Fed is widely thought to have a dual mandate, the Federal Reserve Act actually 
specifies three objectives. Ben Bernanke discusses this in The Courage to Act, published in 2015.  
9 Monetary Policy Committee 
 Page 8 of 17 
competitive  exchange  rate  could  be  helpful  for  boosting  exports.  The 
Panel also suggested running a fiscal surplus to create space for  lower 
interest rates, and they encouraged us to keep inflation targeting.10 More 
recently,  some  people  have  claimed  that  the  Harvard  Panel  report 
shows  that  even  experts  have  a  problem  with  inflation  targeting  – 
ignoring  what  the  Panel  really  said.11  They  also  forget  that  by  the  time 
the Panel‟s report was released, this suggestion had been overtaken by 
events, with the rand having weakened again.12  
 In  fact,  under  inflation  targeting,  excessive  exchange  rate  appreciation 
has  been  rare  and  short-lived.  These  discrete  periods  occurred  when 
capital  flowed  in  as  a  result  of  high  commodity  prices,  sustained  public 
borrowing,  and  low  yields  in  advanced  economies  –  not  because  of 
inflation targeting. The inflation-targeting framework, all else being equal, 
has lowered inflation and interest rates, reducing the pull on hot money 
in  recent  times.  In  fact,  a  fundamental,  and  achieved,  objective  of 
inflation  targeting  was  to  obtain  a  more  competitive  exchange  rate. 
Exchange  rate  targeting,  the  implicit  policy  of  the  1990s,  kept  the  rand 
uncompetitive.  
 It  is  likely  that  the  act  of  introducing  the  inflation-targeting  framework 
helped to attract capital in 2000 because it signalled a move to a much 
better  policy  framework,  but  South  Africa  was  starved  of  capital  at  the 
                                                           
10 For the Panel‟s recommendations, see Ricardo Hausmann‟s Final recommendations of the 
International Panel on Growth, available at 
http://www.treasury.gov.za/comm_media/press/2008/Final%20Recommendations%20of%20the%20I
nternational%20Panel.pdf, especially pages 6 and 12-13. 
11 See, for instance, Luke Jordan‟s It’s time to debate the central bank’s mandate, available at 
https://www.dailymaverick.co.za/opinionista/2017-06-23-its-time-to-debate-the-central-banks-
mandate/#.WVuR5RWGOUm (June 2017). 
12 This point was made at the time by Kenneth Creamer, in “SA needs an inclusive growth path”, Mail 
& Guardian, published on 4 July 2008. 
 Page 9 of 17 
time.  Any  other  policy  framework  that  improved  on  the  previous  one 
would have had the same effect.   
 Let  me  make  a  broader  point  about  this  debate.  South  Africa  needs 
capital to develop. It also needs a reasonably competitive real exchange 
rate.  Achieving  both  is  not  easy,  but  the  simple  solutions  occasionally 
proffered  are  seriously  inadequate.  First,  they  invariably  focus  on 
nominal depreciation and not on real depreciation; the inflationary side-
effects of nominal depreciation are ignored. Second, the proposals never 
say anything about the implications for the fiscus, for interest rates, and 
for  the  broader  economy  of  targeting  a  specific  exchange  rate  level.13 
Third,  I  would  like  to  hear  why  this  effort  would  be  successful  in  South 
Africa when it has not worked well in other democracies that have tried 
it. Even a cursory review of the Asian success stories shows they had a 
very high savings rate and used financial and wage repression and price 
controls  to  achieve  real  undervaluation.  How  exactly  would  these 
authoritarian approaches to policy be implemented here? 
 At the end of the day, we have had a major depreciation in both nominal 
and  real  terms  of  the  exchange  rate  since  2011,  yet  the  net  export 
response has  been  very  weak. If  nominal  depreciation is so critical,  we 
should  have  experienced  an  export  boom.  I  do  not  doubt  that  a 
competitive  exchange  rate  is  useful,  but  it  is  the  real  depreciation  that 
matters  here  and,  on  balance,  keeping  inflation  low  contributes  to  that 
aim.   
                                                             
13 Maintaining a specific exchange rate level requires the daily management of the supply and 
demand for foreign currency, often involving large and abrupt moves in interest rates, access to 
unlimited foreign currency, and large swings in economic activity.   
 Page 10 of 17 
Have we been too focused on inflation? 
 I  think  that  inflation  targeting  makes  sense  for  South  Africa  as  it  is  an 
effective way to uphold our constitutional duty to protect the value of the 
rand.  That  said,  we  need  to  have  some  important  conversations  about 
the  South  African  version  of  inflation  targeting.  Reading  (and  believing) 
some of our critics, you would think the SARB is obsessed with inflation 
– and little else. 
 From  a  worldwide  comparative  perspective,  South  African  inflation  has 
become quite high. Back in 2005, we had lower inflation than 60% of all 
countries.  More  recently,  in  2011,  we  were  about  in  the  middle  –  lower 
than  half,  higher  than  half.  In  2016,  however,  we  had  higher  inflation 
than  most  other  countries  –  80%  of  them.  This  is  not  just  because  we 
had a drought and food prices were high. Based on forecasts, it will be 
much the same story for 2017.14  
 One big reason  why  we have higher inflation than most other countries 
is because our target is unusually high and wide, plus we typically have 
inflation right at the top of the target range, close to 6%. Furthermore, of 
the  peer  emerging  markets  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  are  the  only  one 
where  the  inflation  target  has  not  been  revised  down  at  least  once. 
Nowadays  most  emerging  markets  have  targets  of  around  3%  or  4%. 
For instance, India adopted a 4% inflation target last year, and Brazil has 
just  revised  its  target  down  to  4%.  A  frank  reassessment  of  the  3-6% 
inflation  target  –  which  is  now  almost  18  years  old  –  would  probably 
conclude  that  the  target  should  be  lower.  My  economists  have  worked 
on the numbers, and  they report that if  we  want an inflation rate in line 
                                                           
14 This comparison uses IMF data from the April 2017 World Economic Outlook. 
 Page 11 of 17 
with  our  trading  partners,  we  should  be  aiming  for  3-4%15  -  that  is  not 
where we are today.  
 As you can see, we are certainly willing to reflect critically on monetary 
policy.  But  let  me  add  that  we  also  need  to  prioritise.  We  have  been 
suffering from a recession provoked chiefly by a collapse in confidence, 
driven  by  serious  policy  uncertainty.  We  have  been  downgraded  by  all 
the  major  ratings  agencies,  and  we  are  barely  clinging  to  investment 
grade status for our rand-denominated debt. The ratings agencies tell us 
that  the  major  policy  pillar  that  supports  the  South  African  investment 
case  is  our  monetary  policy  framework.  Why  then,  in  this  environment, 
would  you  want  to  make  the  discussion  about  changing  the  monetary 
policy framework? As a matter of science, there are no settled questions 
and  more  research  is  always  appropriate.  As  a  matter  of  policy,  this 
focus seems misguided.  
 Central bank accountability 
 What about accountability? Our fundamental purpose, as with the other 
parts  of  South  Africa‟s  system  of  government,  comes  from  the 
Constitution.  Our  job  is  to  figure  out  a  monetary  policy  framework  that 
delivers  on  this  mandate.  In  line  with  many  other  countries,  we  use  an 
inflation target. We identify the precise inflation target after consultation 
with National Treasury. This is as transparent to the public as it can be. 
No  one  can  give  the  SARB  secret  instructions.  Our  mission  is  in  plain 
view,  and  the  evidence  for  judging  us  is  independently  produced  and 
                                                           
15 For details, see „Box 4, South African inflation: an international perspective‟ in the Monetary Policy 
Review, published by the SARB in October 2016, available at 
http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/7504/MPROctober2016.p
df.  
 Page 12 of 17 
publicly available, in the form of  the consumer price index published by 
Statistics South Africa.  
 Of  course,  this  is  not  the  only  way  in  which  the  SARB  is  held 
accountable. Our other roles and powers, such as bank supervision and 
financial stability, are assigned to us by laws passed by Parliament and 
signed  by  the  President.  We  submit  our  Annual  Report  to  Parliament. 
Furthermore, the Governor and the Deputy Governors are appointed by 
the President following consultation with the Minister of Finance and the 
SARB‟s  Board  of  Directors.16  This  system  is  designed  to  create  the 
space  for  the  SARB  to  make  good  decisions  while  maintaining 
democratic  accountability. 
If  you  believe 
that 
the  SARB 
is  so 
independent that it can ignore the public interest, you need to reflect on 
how our work is specified in law and how we consult on our target.  
 At this point in the conversation, you can usually rely on someone to ask 
about  the  SARB‟s  private  shareholders.  What  is  a  central  bank  with 
private shareholders doing in South Africa‟s Constitution? Does this not 
mean  the  SARB  is  run  in  the  interests  of  private  individuals,  not  in  the 
interests  of  South  Africans?  This  has  become  something  of  a  zombie 
argument:  no  matter  how  many  times  you  kill  it,  it  keeps  coming  back. 
The  fact  is:  private  shareholders  have  no  influence  whatsoever  on 
monetary policy, financial stability, or banking regulation. Their rights are 
highly  circumscribed.  A  shareholder,  and  his  or  her  associates,  cannot 
hold more than 10 000 shares out of the total of 2 million shares in issue. 
According  to  the  SARB  Act,  shareholders  receive  a  fixed  annual 
                                                           
16 Governors and Deputy Governors are appointed for fixed five-year terms. My current term, for 
instance, began in November 2014 and expires in late 2019. Of the Deputy Governors, Daniel 
Mminele concludes his current term in June 2019, Kuben Naidoo in March 2020, and Francois 
Groepe in December 2022?. 
 Page 13 of 17 
dividend of 10c per share. This dividend policy has not been updated in 
90 years, so I am afraid it has not been a great investment.  
 Our  total  dividend  payout  each  year  is  R200  000.  Some  of  the 
shareholders are annoyed by this and would like to be paid much more. 
However, this is not the way the shares work. Instead, the SARB‟s after-
tax profits – which were R1.4 billion for the last financial year – mostly go 
to National Treasury, with a small portion being kept for the SARB‟s own 
reserves. The shareholders got 0.014%, or roughly one ten-thousandth, 
of  total  profits  made.  For  the  record,  R200  000  is  somewhat  less  than 
the salary we pay a single junior economist. In other words, come work 
for  us  in  a  junior  role  and  you  will  make  more  than  all  the  SARB‟s 
shareholders combined.  
 The fact that we have private shareholders is admittedly slightly unusual. 
It  used  to  be  a  common  practice,  and  today  there  are  still  a  few  other 
central banks with a degree of private ownership, including those of the 
US, Japan, Turkey, and Switzerland. I think our shareholders are helpful 
with some governance issues. It is useful, for instance, to hear from the 
members  of  our  Board  with  experience  in  the  agriculture,  mining,  and 
public sectors. 
 However,  if  we  had  a  fully  nationalised  central  bank,  I  would  not  be 
giving  speeches  suggesting  that  we  privatise  it.  So  why  not  just 
nationalise the SARB? Simple. It would not change anything useful that 
we  cannot  change  anyway,  and  it  would  be  expensive.  It  would  not 
change  anything  useful  because  shareholders  already  have  no  control 
over the SARB‟s policy responsibilities, as I have explained. Why would 
it be expensive? I will tell you another story. SARB shares normally trade 
 Page 14 of 17 
for about R3. The funny thing is: if you ask about buying SARB shares, 
you will find there are standing offers to sell from people whose price is 
R7 900 per share. Who would charge almost R8 000 for something that 
normally sells for R3? I suspect there are sellers out there who think we 
will have to nationalise the  SARB in the end because it will be the only 
way to kill this zombie argument about private shareholders once and for 
all. As a result, they will get to make a nice profit at the expense of the 
South African people. My economic advice is: let us not pay large sums 
of money for purely cosmetic changes.  
 Conclusion 
 In  this  lecture,  I  have  discussed  how  the  SARB  protects  the  long-run 
interests  of  South  Africans,  and  I  have  demonstrated  that  South  Africa 
has  experienced  better  economic  outcomes  under  inflation  targeting 
than  it  did  previously.  We  are  always  interested  in  monetary  policy 
research,  but  a  major  overhaul  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  does 
not  strike  me  as  our  most  pressing  issue.  Maintaining  a  relatively  low 
inflation  rate  helps  to  keep  long-term  interest  rates  low,  and,  all  else 
being equal, supports long-term investment. This also works against the 
real  appreciation  of  our  currency.  This  is  as  much  as  monetary  policy 
can do to support economic growth. Low inflation and low interest rates 
–  just  like  our  commodity  endowment,  our  population  growth  rate  and 
demographic  dividend,  our  excellent  higher  education  system,  and  our 
creativity and spirit – are critical to long-run growth and job creation.  
 Thank you. 
   Page 15 of 17 
Charts: 
Bread prices at different inflation rates 
Average inflation @ 4.5% p.a.
Avg inflation 2003 to 2016 @ 6% p.a.
R180 
Avg inflation 1993 to 2002 @ 8% p.a.
Avg inflation 1983 to 1992 @ 15% p.a.
200
160
120
80
40
0
R10 
R51 
R35 
R27 
2037
 2017
2022
2027
2032
Share of countries with public inflation 
targets for 2017 
Advanced 
Economies 
23% 
Emerging 
Markets 
77% 
Source: Central Bank News 
  Page 16 of 17 
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
SA's inflation rank in the world (IMF data) 
75 
[VALUE] 
[VALUE] 
2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017
Share of countries with higher inflation
Share of countries with lower inflation
SA percentage rank
  Page 17 of 17 
