Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 19 January 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, first of all let me wish you a Happy New Year. The Vice-President and I
are very pleased to welcome you to our press conference. We will now report on the outcome of
today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for
an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that we will continue to make
purchases  under  the  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  at  the  current  monthly  pace  of  €80
billion until the end of March 2017 and that, from April 2017, our net asset purchases are intended
to  continue  at  a  monthly  pace  of  €60  billion  until  the  end  of  December  2017,  or  beyond,  if
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of  inflation  consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  The  net  purchases  will  be  made  alongside
reinvestments of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP.
The  Governing  Council  today  also  decided  on  further  details  of  how  the  Eurosystem  will  buy
assets with yields below the interest rate on the deposit facility under its public sector purchase
programme. These decisions will be published in a separate press release at 15.30 CET.
The monetary policy decisions taken in December 2016 have succeeded in preserving the very
favourable financing conditions that are necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation
rates towards levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Borrowing conditions for
firms and households continue to benefit from the pass-through of our measures. As expected,
headline  inflation  has  increased  lately,  largely  owing  to  base  effects  in  energy  prices,  but
underlying  inflation  pressures  remain  subdued.  The  Governing  Council  will  continue  to  look
through  changes  in  HICP  inflation  if  judged  to  be  transient  and  to  have  no  implication  for  the
medium-term outlook for price stability.
A  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  needed  for  euro  area  inflation
pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term. If warranted to achieve
its  objective,  the  Governing  Council  will  act  by  using  all  the  instruments  available  within  its
mandate. In particular, if the outlook becomes less favourable, or if financial conditions become
inconsistent  with  further  progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  we
stand ready to increase our asset purchase programme in terms of size and/or duration.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.3%, quarter on quarter, in the third quarter of 2016, after recording
a similar pace of growth in the second quarter. Incoming data, notably survey results, point to
somewhat stronger growth in the last quarter of 2016. Looking ahead, we expect the economic
expansion  to  firm  further.  The  pass-through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  is  supporting
domestic  demand  and  facilitating  the  ongoing  deleveraging  process.  The  very  favourable
financing conditions and improvements in corporate profitability continue to promote the recovery
in  investment.  Moreover,  sustained  employment  gains,  which  are  also  benefiting  from  past
structural  reforms,  provide  support  for  private  consumption  via  increases  in  households’  real
disposable income. At the same time, there are signs of a somewhat stronger global recovery.
However, economic growth in the euro area is expected to be dampened by a sluggish pace of
implementation of structural reforms and remaining balance sheet adjustments in a number of
sectors. The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
relate predominantly to global factors.
According  to  Eurostat,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  markedly  from  0.6%  in
November 2016 to 1.1% in December. This reflected mainly a strong increase in annual energy
inflation, while there are no signs yet of a convincing upward trend in underlying inflation. Looking
ahead, on the basis of current oil futures prices, headline inflation is likely to pick up further in the
near term, largely reflecting movements in the annual rate of change of energy prices. However,
measures  of  underlying  inflation  are  expected  to  rise  more  gradually  over  the  medium  term,
supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  expected  economic  recovery  and  the
corresponding gradual absorption of slack.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
its annual rate of growth increasing to 4.8% in November 2016, up from 4.4% in October. As in
previous months, annual growth in M3 was mainly supported by its most liquid components, with
the narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 8.7% in November, up from
8.0% in October.
Loan dynamics followed the path of gradual recovery observed since the beginning of 2014. The
annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations was 2.2% in November 2016, after 2.1%
in the previous month. The annual growth rate of loans to households was 1.9% in November,
after  1.8%  in  October.  Although  developments  in  bank  credit  continue  to  reflect  the  lagged
relationship with the business cycle, credit risk and the ongoing adjustment of financial and non-
financial sector balance sheets, the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 are
significantly supporting borrowing conditions for firms and households and thereby credit flows
across the euro area. The euro area bank lending survey for the fourth quarter of 2016 indicates
that  credit  standards  for  loans  to  enterprises  are  broadly  stabilising,  while  loan  demand  has
continued to expand at a robust pace across all loan categories.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
Monetary  policy  is  focused  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  and  its
accommodative  stance  supports  economic  activity.  In  order  to  reap  the  full  benefits  from  our
monetary policy measures, other policy areas must contribute much more decisively, both at the
national  and  at  the  European  level.  The  implementation  of structural  reforms  needs  to  be
substantially  stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost
investment,  productivity  and  potential  output  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Structural  reforms  are
necessary in all euro area countries. In particular, reforms are needed to improve the business
environment,  including  the  provision  of  an  adequate  public  infrastructure.  In  addition,  the
enhancement  of  current  investment  initiatives,  progress  on  the  capital  markets  union  and
reforms that will improve the resolution of non-performing loans, are a priority. Fiscal policies
should also support the economic recovery, while remaining in compliance with the fiscal rules of
the European Union. Full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact over
time and across countries remains crucial to ensure confidence in the fiscal framework. At the
same time, it is essential that all countries intensify efforts towards achieving a more growth-
friendly composition of fiscal policies.
We are now at your disposal for questions
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
