Philip R Lane: Prospects for the Irish economy
Speech by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Cork Chamber of
Commerce, Cork, 23 February 2017.
 Acknowledgements: I thank John Flynn and Terry Quinn for their inputs into this speech.
Good  afternoon.    It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Cork  Chamber  of
Commerce.  Today, I want to focus on the prospects for the Irish economy.  First, I will give an
overview of our latest projections for the economy.  Next, I will discuss some external challenges
facing  the  economy.  Finally,  I  will  turn  to  the  role  played  by  our  macroprudential  mortgage
measures in underpinning macro-financial stability.
The Irish economy:  current developments
The  highly-globalised  nature  of  the  Irish  economy  and  the  impact  of  the  activities  of  foreign
multinational firms on the headline national accounts mean that it is necessary to look at a range
of domestically-focused spending and activity indicators to get a more accurate measure of the
level and composition of activity in the domestic economy.  The evidence from indicators such
as  employment,  consumer  spending  and  a  suitably-adjusted  measure  of  investment  is  that
economic activity continues to grow at a significant pace.
1
The recovery of the economy in recent years has been led by the strength of domestic demand.
This  has  been  supported  by  the  combination  of  relatively  strong  and  broad-based  growth  in
employment, increasing real disposable incomes and more favourable financial conditions. Since
the low point reached in 2012, employment has grown by over  200,000, at an average annual
rate  of  almost  2.5  per  cent.  Employment  growth  has  been  broadly  based  across  the  private
sector and has predominantly reflected growth in full-time employment. This has helped incomes
to  recover  and  has  supported  strong  growth  in  consumption  in  recent  years,  with  per  capita
2
consumption moving back towards its pre-crisis peak.
The impact of the economic crisis in the South West region (including Cork) and the subsequent
recovery has been broadly similar to the national experience. Employment declined by 16 per
cent nationally, which was also the scale of the decline in the South West region. Since then,
both  nationally  and  in  the  South  West,  about  two-thirds  of  jobs  lost  in  the  crisis  have  been
recovered. However, unemployment at just under 7 per cent nationally and slightly below 6 per
cent in the South West remains above pre-crisis levels.
In  many  ways,  the  economy  of  the  Cork  region  mirrors  the  national  economy,  having  both
significant  multinational  and  domestic  components.  Cork  is  at  the  centre  of  the  Irish
pharmaceuticals industry and has a vibrant IT sector, as well as having significant indigenous
business and tourism sectors. Given its diversified economic structure, it is likely that the outlook
for the region will be subject to the same risk factors as for the rest of the country.
External risk factors
Looking ahead, the central forecast is for economic activity to continue to grow at a healthy pace,
with the main impetus to growth expected to come from domestic factors. However, the outlook
is  characterised  by  uncertainty  about  the  external  environment  such  that  risks  to  economic
forecasts  are  to  the  downside.  One  obvious  risk  factor  relates  to  Brexit.  Looking  at  the  wider
international picture, given the strong presence of multinationals in the economy, there are also
risks  related  to  the  potential  for  changes  to  broader  international  taxation  and  trade
arrangements.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Both in the short term and the longer term, the economic impact of Brexit on Ireland is set to be
negative. Reflecting this, the Central Bank revised down its economic forecasts in the wake of
the UK referendum. To date, in the absence of any weakening in the UK economy, the impact of
Brexit  has  mainly  been  experienced  through  the  sizeable  depreciation  of  Sterling  against  the
euro.
In addition, however, those sectors with a high dependency on exports to the UK remain exposed
to any future adverse UK economic developments and also the threat of new barriers to trade.
Even for those parts of the economy not directly dependent on the UK market, there are potential
indirect  effects  via  competition  from  UK  imports,  supply-chain  linkages  and  increased  cross-
border shopping.
While exporters selling to the UK are most immediately affected, there are additional channels by
which  shifts  in  the  Sterling-euro  exchange  rate  affects  the  economy.  First,  in  many  domestic
sectors, the market share of domestic firms will be affected by import competition from the UK.
Second, many domestically-orientated firms are suppliers to exporters or rely on employees in
exporting  firms  as  customers.  Third,  Sterling  depreciation  is  associated  with  an  increase  in
cross-border shopping, including a greater volume of online purchases from UK websites. 
While  these  are  adverse  forces,  it  is  also  important  to  point  out  that  a  weaker  Sterling  may
benefit  some  firms  that  rely  on  imported  inputs  from  the  UK  and  that  real  income  gains  to
households due to cheaper imports from the UK may in part be recycled into higher spending on
domestically-produced goods and services.
Over the longer term, Irish firms will have to adapt to the post-Brexit environment.  The current
uncertainty about the future UK-EU relationship will delay many investment plans.  In turn, as
clarity about the post-Brexit world improves, firms will have to develop new strategies to respond
to the new configuration.  In response to higher trade barriers between the UK and the EU, some
firms may plan to serve UK customers through FDI into the UK, while others may search for new
export markets.  In the other direction, some UK firms may look to set up affiliates in Ireland both
to serve the Irish market and as a platform for EU-wide trading.  
Turning to global risk factors, any increase in protectionism is sure to pose a challenge for Irish-
resident exporters and especially the multinational sector.  This is of most concern to firms that
export primarily to countries that might seek to penalise importers relative to domestic producers
but the complex characteristics of global value chains and inter-sectoral linkages mean that the
impact of protectionism will also affect firms and locations through indirect channels. Shifts in tax
policies  and  exchange  rates  are  additional  factors  that  may  influence  the  strategies  of
multinational firms in the coming years.  Given the importance of the multinational sector to the
Irish economy, monitoring and assessing external developments in these areas must be a high
priority for domestic policymakers.
The policy framework
The intrinsic volatility of highly-open economies means that domestic economic policies should
be firmly focused on underpinning stability by ensuring resilience in the face of external shocks. 
A  robust  macro-financial  policy  framework  must  include  a  prudent  fiscal  framework  that
recognises  the  value  of  building  buffers  during  high-growth  phases  in  order  to  act  counter-
cyclically during downturns.   
In addition, it is essential that the Central Bank plays its part in underpinning financial stability.  As
part of the ECB’s Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), an important dimension is to make sure
that capital ratios and liquidity ratios are sufficient for banks to withstand adverse shocks, which
is further reinforced by a proactive supervisory engagement programme. In cooperation with the
Single  Resolution  Board  (SRB),  a  second  important  element  is  that  the  balance  sheets  and
organisational structures of banks are designed to facilitate the restructuring and resolution of
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
troubled institutions while minimising the need for injections of taxpayer funds.
A third component is provided by the national macroprudential policy framework, under which the
Central Bank sets additional capital buffers for banks and also enacts borrower-based measures
to  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  boom-bust  financial  cycles.  We  view  our  mortgage
measures that put ceilings on loan-to-income (LTI) and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios as essential in
limiting systemic financial risk, while acting to protect consumers from the risks associated with
overborrowing.
It is critically important to appreciate that our framework sets limits on the size of mortgages: the
LTI and LTV ratios are not targets but ceilings. In buying a home, a household should take into
account the protections offered by putting down a higher deposit in terms of limiting repayment
burden and risks associated with excessive debt levels. Equally, lenders are required to assess
the loan-bearing capacity of each mortgage customer and restrict the size of the mortgage if
indicated by the analysis of the borrower’s credit risk.
While the November 2016 revisions to the mortgage rules do raise the maximum loan size for
first-time  buyers  seeking  to  buy  homes  above  €220,000  in  value,  it  is  important  to  take  into
account several considerations.  First, borrowers also have to satisfy the LTI requirement, which
remains unchanged at a cap on loans of 3.5 times income. For many households, this will limit
the capacity to increase the mortgage size. Second, to the extent that the revisions lead to an
increase in aggregate mortgage credit volumes, this should be interpreted in the context of the
subdued level of lending in the aftermath of the crisis.
Third,  our  framework  is  designed  to  avoid  spiral  dynamics  between  house  prices  and  credit
volumes.  Since  the  mortgage  measures  were  initially  flagged  in  late  2014,  there  has  been  a
sharp moderation in expectations for annual gains in house prices, since it is widely understood
that  persistently-high  rates  of  increase  in  house  prices  are  not  likely  in  a  system  in  which
measures place ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios.
In particular, the LTI rule limits the capacity of house prices to grow too quickly relative to income
levels, while the 80 percent LTV ceiling on loans taken out by second and subsequent buyers
attenuates the feedback loop by which rising house prices increase the capacity of existing home
owners to increase leverage. Furthermore, our macroprudential regulations can be tightened if
there is emerging evidence of elevated risks in the mortgage market, especially in relation to the
rate of credit growth.
Finally, it is important to appreciate that many factors influence the dynamics of house prices.
 While rising incomes typically support some trend growth in house prices, the prospect of future
expansion in housing supply and tightening in the international funding conditions for lenders are
significant factors that will restrain house prices over the medium term.  In addition, the highly-
open nature of the Irish economy means that income and employment levels are highly sensitive
to  external  shocks.    For  instance,  slowdowns  in  output  growth  in  our  major  trading  partners,
major currency movements and adverse shifts in global trading regimes could trigger a reversal
in the currently benign growth and employment environment. 
For these reasons, the range of uncertainty about the future path for house prices is an important
risk factor that motivates the need for ceilings on LTI and LTV ratios, while also making it vitally
important  that  households  and  lenders  conduct  rigorous  assessments  as  to  the  level  of  risk-
adjusted sustainable debt in each individual case.
Conclusions
In  these  remarks,  I  have  attempted  to  convey  the  Central  Bank’s  current  perspective  on  Irish
economic  prospects.      It  is  certainly  welcome  to  be  able  to  observe  strong  recent  economic
performance, with a projected continuation of favourable trends in the near term. At the same
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
time,  it  is  important  to  avoid  the  temptation  to  extrapolate  recent  success  by  adopting  overly-
optimistic medium-term forecasts.  Most important, it is essential that Ireland’s macro-financial
policy  framework  recognises  the  intrinsic  volatility  of  highly-open  economies.  For  the  Central
Bank  of  Ireland,  this  means  setting  regulatory  and  macro-prudential  policies  that  will  enhance
resilience in the event of future reversals in the economy.
1
2
I recently chaired the Economic Statistics Review Group (ESRG), which was commissioned by the Central
Statistics Office to examine the implications of globalisation for the Irish national accounts.  The ESRG report
recommends that the CSO develop a set of supplementary indicators in order to provide a better guide to the
evolution of the size and structure of the Irish economy.
In volume terms, aggregate consumption has returned to its pre-crisis level; however, it still remains below its
pre-crisis level on a per capita basis.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
