Claudia Buch: Economic challenges facing Europe and the world -
policy  priorities  of  the  Italian  G7  presidency  and  German  G20
presidency in 2017
Statement by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the panel
discussion with Claudia Buch and Luigi Federico Signorini (Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy),
Collegio Carlo Alberto, Turin, 19 December 2016.
1. Challenges
 In the year 2016 we have witnessed important political events – some of them with unexpected
outcomes and market reactions. Financial markets recovered rather quickly from the Brexit vote
in  June;  they  first  plunged  and  then  went  up  after  the  US  presidential  election  in  November;
markets did not react much to this month’s referendum about constitutional reform in Italy.
Post-crisis  financial  regulatory  reforms  sought  to  make  the  financial  system  more  resilient
against  shocks.  Market  responses  to  the  Brexit  vote  showed  the  importance  of  buffers  in  the
system. Market participants built up liquidity buffers before the referendum, and the depreciation
of the British pound cushioned some of the adjustment.
But the extent to which we have already seen the longer-term stock adjustment, the revaluation
of  assets,  and  the  full  response  of  markets  to  these  events  remains  an  open  issue.  Recent
political developments reflect global challenges that go much deeper. There is a great deal of
uncertainty about how the rising tide of populism and protectionism will affect the global economy
over the longer term. The benefits of globalization are being questioned.
Policymakers  must  therefore  strike  the  right  balance  between  sustaining  integration,  fostering
economic prosperity, and addressing concerns about inequality. In Europe, the 25th anniversary
of the Maastricht Treaty and the upcoming 60th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome remind us of
the many achievements of the European integration project. These include 70 years of peace
and lasting democracy, freedom of movement, free trade of goods and services, and a rise in
economic  prosperity  for  many  citizens. A  precise  measurement  of  the  benefits  of  economic
integration is hardly feasible, but a recent study estimates the gain in GDP per capita due to EU
1
membership at approximately 12% (Campos et al., 2014).
At the same time, economic integration has distributional consequences. Not every individual, not
every  firm  benefits  from  free  trade  and  from  increasing  (international)  competition.  There  is  a
need for appropriate policy responses such that both potential winners and losers continue to
share a feeling of belonging together.
Many of the policy issues involved go well beyond the analytical contributions that economists
can  provide.  And  they  also  extend  far  beyond  the  policies  that  central  banks  have  at  their
disposal.  Let  me  therefore  focus  on  the  two  main  topics  that  Germany  has  made  its  priority
under its G20 presidency, which began this month. These topics address two key challenges for
global and, in particular, European policymakers: resilience and digitization.
The  G20  or  “Group  of  Twenty”  is  an  international  forum  for  governments  and  central  bank
governors from 20 major economies. It was founded in 1999 with the aim of studying, reviewing,
and promoting high-level discussion of policy issues pertaining to the promotion of international
financial stability. The G20 presidency rotates among the G20 member countries – Germany’s
presidency follows that of China and will be followed by Argentina. While each presidency has its
own key projects, continuity is key in the G20 process. With its focus on resilience, the German
G20 presidency builds on previous work on structural reforms and growth-promoting policies.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
2. Strong real economies are the basis of resilience
More  resilient  economies  are  less  prone  to  severe  downturns,  rebound  faster  from  negative
shocks, and adapt more easily to structural changes. The ability of the private and public sector
to  absorb  shocks  is  therefore  an  important  factor  affecting  resilience.  High  levels  of  debt
constrain  this  ability,  in  particular  if  low  productivity  growth  weakens  the  ability  to  service
outstanding levels of debt. A stable financial system and a resilient real economy are two sides of
the same coin.
Yet productivity growth has declined over time in many countries. In the euro area, for instance,
labor productivity is currently growing at a rate of 0.4%.  It lags behind the growth rates of the US
and other advanced economies. The gap in productivity growth between Europe and the US has
been  widening  since  the  mid-1990s.  Empirically,  it  is  difficult  to  attribute  differences  in
productivity growth across countries and regions to specific factors. Factors such as institutions,
demographic trends, or the macroeconomic environment interact and are difficult to isolate. 
2
Regional differences in productivity within countries can also be very persistent. And here I am
not  referring  to  regional  differences  within  Italy.  Instead,  what  I  have  in  mind  are  differences
between eastern and western Germany. The former East German states have developed very
differently than the West German states since German reunification. After the wall came down
and markets were opened up, there was a rapid convergence process. Over the first ten years
following reunification, investments per employee that were 30% above the western level made
firms more efficient and boosted productivity (IWH, 2014).
In the first half of the 1990s, GDP per capita in eastern Germany rose from 43% of the western
German  level  to  66%  (German  Ministry  of  Economics,  2016).  From  then  on,  convergence
practically stopped. More than 25 years after the wall came down, income per capita still stands
at about 70% and productivity at roughly 80% of the western level (IWH, 2014). Eastern German
firms remain smaller and less internationally integrated than their western German counterparts;
there are few headquarter activities located in eastern Germany.
Hence, unification brought many new opportunities in terms of free travel and gains in economic
prosperity.  However,  the  adjustment  process  was  also  very  painful.  Many  East  German  firms
became insolvent; unemployment rates increased sharply.
Investment into research and development (R&D) can promote innovations and thus growth. But
triggering R&D investment is not easy. In eastern Germany, public subsidies have been used to
stimulate  R&D  investment  in  structurally  weak  regions.  Recent  research  shows  that  such
subsidies  can  indeed  increase  gross  value  added  and  productivity  in  the  private  sector
(Dettmann  et  al.,  2016).  But  the  effectiveness  of  public  subsidies  also  depends  on  the  right
combination  of  an  educated  workforce,  a  supportive  regulatory  environment,  and  demand  for
new products.
One important insight gained from the recent globalization period is the importance of integrated
markets for productivity growth.  On the one hand, international trade linkages and foreign direct
investment allow technological advances to diffuse, thereby boosting productivity. On the other
hand, firms which are small and insufficiently productive cannot shoulder the fixed and variable
costs of market entry. Hence, barriers to international integration are more binding for small and
mid-sized firms than for their larger – and more productive – counterparts.  
3
  2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. High levels of debt weaken resilience
Let me come to the second factor that affects resilience – the level of debt. Here, crisis legacies
still weigh on the world economy. Debt levels in the private and public sector remain high. At the
end of 2013, world total debt (ex-financials) stood at over 210% of global GDP, up from about
160% at the beginning of the 2000s (Buttiglione et al., 2014). More recent data from the Bank for
International  Settlements  covering  42  advanced  and  emerging  economies  indicate  a  further
increase  in  debt  at  the  global  level,  in  particular  due  to  rising  debt  ratios  in  emerging  market
economies.  In  the  third  quarter  of  2015,  total  non-financial  debt  levels  amounted  to  218%  of
GDP.  In the euro area, public debt currently amounts to 91%; debt of the non-financial private
5
corporate sector stands at 105% of GDP.
4
Post-crisis reforms of financial regulation play a vital role in making economies more resilient.
These reforms have the explicit goal to enhance the stability of financial systems at the national
and  global  level.  Many  of  them  are  coordinated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB),  an
international  body  that  monitors  and  makes  recommendations  regarding  the  global  financial
system. It was established at the initiative of the G20 in 2009.
The  key  to  a  resilient  banking  sector  is  higher  capital.  Better  capitalized  banks  have  stronger
cushions against unforeseen risks. This increases the stability not only of individual banks but
also of the entire financial system. Recent research by the Bank for International Settlements
shows, in addition, that better capitalized banks lend more to the real economy and have lower
funding costs (Gambacorta and Shin, 2016).
Post-crisis reforms were also aimed at reducing the too-big-to-fail problem in the banking sector.
Insolvent  banks  differ  from  insolvent  firms.  Because  dealing  with  distressed  banks  is  difficult,
large banks typically enjoy an implicit subsidy. Therefore, making large banks more resilient by
imposing additional capital buffers has been a major goal of reforms. Other important reforms
have  dealt  with  establishing  central  clearing  of  derivatives  trading,  and  transforming  shadow
banking into market-based finance.
Ultimately, these reforms aim at mitigating the negative side-effects of financial integration and
allowing countries to enjoy the benefits. There are two ways in which financial integration can
contribute to economic prosperity.
First, financial integration allows the channeling of funds to productivity-enhancing investments,
which  fosters  economic  growth.  Research  suggests  that  financial  integration  can  affect
economic performance through higher total factor productivity (Bonfiglioli, 2008).
Second,  integrated  financial  markets  can  improve  international  risk  sharing  and  help  absorb
adverse shocks hitting the domestic economy (Balli et al., 2012). Equity in particular provides an
ex ante risk-sharing mechanism, namely a claim on real assets. Debt, by contrast, is a claim on
nominal assets and is insensitive to a borrower’s situation. An adjustment to idiosyncratic shocks
can  only  occur  through  new  lending  or  through  haircuts  on  existing  loans  after  risks  have
materialized. By contrast, the value of equity adjusts if the borrower’s situation changes.
The stabilizing features of equity contracts have been visible during the European debt crisis. In
Europe,  debt  finance  has  been  more  prone  to  capital  flight  than  equity  finance.  Furthermore,
diversified  cross-border  equity  holdings  help  detach  consumption  from  business  cycle
fluctuations.  Cross-border  equity  allows  more  effective  cross-border  risk  sharing  and
consumption smoothing. Increased reliance on equity finance would be particularly beneficial in
the  European  Monetary  Union,  where  nominal  exchange  rates  cannot  adjust  to  cope  with
(regional) macroeconomic shocks.
Yet,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  revealed  that  financial  integration  can  be  a  double-edged
sword. Financial linkages can lead to financial contagion. Financial markets are highly connected
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
across  borders;  the  financial  and  real  sectors  within  countries  are  closely  linked.  Financial
regulation must therefore take a system-wide perspective. Against this backdrop, promoting and
improving the international financial architecture has been on the agenda of the G20 for many
years.
 
4. Digital financial services affect the efficiency and stability of financial markets
While financial development promotes global growth, it might also have made “the world riskier”
(Rajan, 2005). Therefore, it is important to shape financial regulation and other policies to allow
for a beneficial interaction of financial markets and productivity.
The opportunities that are offered by digital technology can be a driving force to achieve this goal.
One important topic of the Finance Track under the German G20 presidency is the digitization of
the  financial  sector.  The  quantity,  quality,  and  diffusion  of  technological  innovations  are  at  the
heart of productivity growth.
One  explanation  for  the  growing  productivity  gap  between  Europe  and  the  US  is  strong
productivity growth in the US. This, in turn, can be attributed to information and communication
technologies or ICT (Havik et al., 2008). The contribution of ICT to US growth went up from 43%
for the period 1971–1995 to 59% for the period 1995–2000 (Jorgenson et al., 2008). The growth
contribution  of  increased  investment  in  ICT  capital  almost  doubled.  ICT  is  a  general  purpose
technology with a broad impact on many sectors of the economy.
New digital technologies might spur productivity growth in a similar manner as the last wave of
information  and  communication  technologies.  They  can  contribute  towards  closing  gaps  in
productivity. We therefore need policies that create an environment in which such innovations
diffuse easily and create positive spillovers.
Innovative digital financial services can contribute to well-functioning financial markets. Fintech
firms  and  innovations  such  as  crowd-funding  and  distributed-ledger  technologies  are  at  the
center of this debate. Fintechs can facilitate access to financial services. These innovations can
foster competition, lower transaction costs, and improve risk sharing – thus promoting innovation
and growth. But financial innovations might also affect systemic risks. They might induce pro-
cyclical  behavior.  Risks  posed  by  cyber-crime  need  to  be  monitored  closely  and,  where
necessary,  addressed.  This  is  to  say  that  digital  innovations  should  not  undermine  secure,
transparent, and stable financial markets.
 
5. Conclusion
There  is  no  lack  of  short-  and  long-term  challenges  facing  Europe  and  the  world.  Under  the
German G20 presidency, we will be addressing two important issues: resilience and digitization.
Strong real economies are the basis for resilience. Economic growth is therefore not an end in
itself.  Strong  growth  is  rather  the  basis  for  inclusive  growth,  as  it  opens  up  space  for
redistributional  policies.  Strong  growth  is  also  built  on  innovation,  which  can  contribute  to
sustainable growth.
Robust financial markets are the second pillar of resilience. As we are completing the reform
agenda, we are gradually moving from policy implementation to (ex post) impact assessments.
We need impact assessments to demonstrate the long-term benefits of the reforms – benefits in
terms of financing innovation, growth, and the allocation of risk in the economy. We need to look
at the effectiveness of individual reforms, the interaction between reforms, and their aggregate
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
affect.
At the global level, maintaining a dialogue on economic policy is crucial. The G20 as well as the
G7 are fora that play an important part in addressing the above challenges. They allow countries
to learn from best practice across countries and to develop their policy framework. The member
countries have diverse experience with regard to stability issues and national policy discussions.
Every financial crisis may be different, but core elements and mechanisms repeat themselves.
Therefore,  by  sharing  experiences,  policymakers  can  collectively  learn  from  each  other  and
improve their policy responses.
 
6.  References
Balli, F., Kalemli-Ozcan, S. and B.E. Sørensen (2012). Risk sharing through capital gains.
Canadian Journal of Economics 45(2), 472–492.
Bonfiglioli, A. (2008). Financial integration, productivity and capital accumulation. Journal of
International Economics, 76(2), 337–355.
Buttiglione,  L.,  Lane,  P.,  Reichlin,  L.  and  Reinhart,  V.  (2014).  Deleveraging?  What
deleveraging?  The  16th  Geneva  Report  on  the  world  economy.  International  Center  for
Monetary and Banking Studies/Center for Economic Policy Research, September.
Campos,  N.  F.,  Coricelli,  F.  and  Moretti,  L.  (2014).  Economic  Growth  and  Political
Integration:  Estimating  the  Benefits  from  Membership  in  the  European  Union  Using  the
Synthetic Counterfactuals Method. CEPR Discussion Papers 9968, CEPR.
Dettmann,  E.,  Brachert,  M.,  &  Titze,  M.  (2016).  Identifying  the  Effects  of  Place-Based
Policies – Causal Evidence from Germany. CESifo Working Paper No. 5901, CESifo Group
Munich.
Gambacorta, L. and Shin, H. S. (2016). Why bank capital matters for monetary policy. BIS
Working Paper No. 558, Bank for International Settlements.
Halle Institute for Economic Research – IWH (2014). 25 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall:
The economic integration of East Germany. Halle, Germany.
Havik,  K.,  Mc  Morrow,  K.,  Röger,  W.  and  A.  Turrini  (2008).  The  EU-US  total  factor
productivity  gap: An  industry  perspective.  Economic  Papers  339,  European  Commission,
September.
Melitz, Marc J., and Stephen J. Redding (2014). Heterogeneous Firms and Trade. Handbook
of International Economics, 4th edition (4): 1-54.
Rajan, R. (2005). Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? National Bureau of
Economics Research (NBER) Working Paper 11728. Cambridge MA 
1
2
3
4
5
This number refers to the average effect per country for the whole post-accession period up to 2008.
This number refers to the year-over-year growth rate in the third quarter of 2016 (ECB calculations based on
Eurostat data).
For a review of recent literature, see Melitz and Redding (2014).
These are aggregate numbers based on conversion to US dollars at purchasing power exchange rates.
These figures refer to the first quarter of 2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
