Sabine Lautenschläger: Taming the fire
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, at
the Credit Risk 2017 forum, Vienna, 23 March 2017.
 Theodore  Roosevelt  is  supposed  to  have  said:  “Risk  is  like  fire:  if  controlled  it  will  help  us;  if
uncontrolled it will rise up and destroy us”. I think that describes quite well the modern financial
world and its risks. Managing financial risks is a bit like controlling a fire.
It’s the job of chief risk officers, the CROs, to constantly remind decision-makers about the “fire
safety rules”.
The recent financial crisis showed how important that job is. It’s a job that requires CROs to be
steadfast and to speak unpleasant truths from time to time – just like banking supervisors have to
do.
It’s regulation that helps us to do our job. Regulation seeks to control risks as well. Following the
devastating  “fire”  of  the  financial  crisis,  we  have  overhauled  the  rules  for  banks.  We  have
mended them, strengthened them, and expanded them.
That was the correct and necessary thing to do. But now it is time to finish the job. More than
eight years after the crisis, banks need regulatory certainty.
But the job needs be finished at the global level. The financial system is global and so should be
the  rules  that  govern  it.  You  cannot  enjoy  fresh  air  on  your  patch  of  land  while  there  is  a  fire
raging on your neighbour’s – sooner or later the wind will blow smoke and sparks over the fence.
Against  that  backdrop,  I  welcome  the  fact  that,  last  weekend,  the  G20  have  confirmed  their
support for the work to finalise Basel III.
But there are still some voices who question the general extent of the regulation. To be crystal
clear: it would be wrong to soften the rules. This would just prepare the ground for the next crisis.
I cannot deny, though, that rules put a burden on those who have to comply – the banks, that is.
In  that  regard,  it  is  often  claimed  that  the  burden  on  banks  translates  into  a  burden  on  the
economy.
It’s  said  that  banks  could  no  longer  pursue  their  traditional  business  because  the  capital
requirements are too strict. It’s also said that new business models would not make economic
sense because of the regulatory cost. All that would hurt the economy.
There are two things I can say in response.
First,  I  do  not  see  that  regulation  keeps  banks  from  their  traditional  business  of  financing  the
economy. Loans to private households and smaller companies are treated very favourably when
it  comes  to  capital  requirements.  Think  of  the  support  factor  in  Article  501  of  the  Capital
Requirements  Regulation.  This  factor  was  introduced  to  facilitate  the  financing  of  small  and
medium-sized enterprises.
I also do not see that regulation keeps banks from developing new business models – those, for
instance, that follow from digitalisation.
Second, critics neglect the benefits of strong rules. Strong rules prevent crises, and crises hurt
the economy.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the end of the day, it is only well-managed and well-capitalised banks that are able to finance
the economy – even when the going gets tough. They can finance the economy throughout the
entire business cycle.
Poorly capitalised and poorly managed banks, on the other hand, cannot support the economy
during downturns – they get into difficulty themselves. Strong rules therefore help the economy in
a sustainable way.
And even if we only consider the banks, we still see benefits. Stronger rules increase trust. And
as a result of the crisis, a great deal of trust was lost. And that’s a problem for banks because
trust is a crucial asset for them.
Trust has a positive impact on funding costs for banks, and it determines how attractive a bank is
for business partners who think long-term.
Strong rules thus help the banks, too.
Altogether, I am convinced that the benefits of regulation are greater than the costs. But rules can
only take us so far.
Ultimately, it is people who make good or bad decisions. And this is where banks’ risk managers
come into play. They are the first line of defence against excessive risks.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
