Richard Dzina: Advancing the Fed's wholesale services in an era of
unprecedented challenge and change
Remarks by Mr Richard Dzina, Executive Vice President of the Financial Services Group of the
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets
Association's Operations Conference and Exhibition 2017, Boca Raton, Florida, 9 May 2017.
 Thank  you  and  good  morning.  In  leading  the  Federal  Reserve’s  wholesale  services  I  am
continually reminded that my stewardship responsibilities for this extraordinary business run in at
least  three  directions.  Organizationally,  I  am  accountable  to  principals  across  the  Federal
Reserve System and to the Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Managerially, I
am accountable to the men and women who make this business function, as capable and as
dedicated a cadre of public servants as has served our nation anytime, anywhere. Operationally,
and  the  sensation  I  feel  most  keenly  standing  before  this  audience  of  industry  leaders,  I  am
accountable to our depository  institution  customers,  and  their  end  users,  which  rely  upon  our
services  to  send  and  receive  time  critical  payments;  to  transfer,  maintain,  and  provide
safekeeping for Fedwire-eligible securities; and to settle positions derived from transactions in
other markets. I’d like to thank SIFMA for the opportunity to participate in today’s program, and for
the visceral reminder of accountability that comes with this invitation.
I have long maintained that the Federal Reserve’s wholesale services represent the franchise
when  it  comes  to  our  nation’s  financial  market  infrastructure.  It  is  a  bold  assertion,  but  not
necessarily an unreasonable one, reflecting the dollar value of transactions processed across
the  Fedwire  Funds,  Fedwire  Securities,  and  National  Settlement  Services; 
inter-
connectedness  and  dependencies  between  these  services  and  other  systemically  important
infrastructures;  our  role  as  central  securities  depository  and  as  fiscal  agent  for  the  issuance,
maintenance, and redemption of all Fedwire-eligible securities; and as the platform across which
the Federal Reserve ultimately settles its monetary policy operations. Any one of these elements
would  likely  qualify  the  wholesale  services  as  “systemic”;  in  the  aggregate  they  represent  a
staggering  portfolio  on  which  the  execution  of  both  our  nation’s  fiscal  and  monetary  policies
ultimately depends.
the 
In recognition that a wholesale service outage risks a significant shock to the United States, and
in light of the escalating threat landscape in which collectively we operate, last year before this
audience I shared a series of reflections endeavoring to advance a new paradigm for resiliency
and security for financial market infrastructures. This year I’d like to provide an update on our
progress on this front, and then to elaborate on the portfolio of wholesale service initiatives that
we  are  endeavoring  to  advance  to  add  value  for  customers  and  end  users. As  always,  my
remarks reflect my own views and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
The anchor premise of my remarks last year was an appeal for greater technological diversity in
our  third  level  resiliency  and  security  schemes,  representing  an  impregnable  firebreak,  and  a
platform  for  recovery,  should  the  core  of  an  infrastructure  become  corrupted.  This  work
complements our traditional focus on geographic dispersion of infrastructure and human capital,
but recognizes a fundamental distinction between cyber resiliency and traditional resiliency: what
works  for  us  in  conventional  resiliency  scenarios,  namely  the  automatic  and  instantaneous
replication  of  data,  works  against  us  in  cyber  scenarios,  reflecting  risks  that  a  pernicious
malware,  or  a  severe  data  corruption,  or  even  an  application  failure  propagates  itself  across
primary, secondary, and tertiary operating sites, rendering a systemic infrastructure functionally
inoperable.
Examples  of  technological  diversity  may  take  many  forms,  from  the  application  code  to
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
middleware  components  to  the  operating  platform,  and  may  canvass  physical,  distributed,
hosted, or cloud-based solutions. Reflecting their unique circumstances and assessments of the
threat,  financial  market  infrastructures  will  likely  respond  differently  to  the  present  challenge.
Without  prescribing  any  particular  solution,  I  will  merely  suggest  that  in  the  event  of  severe
disruption efforts to enhance technological diversity represent an infrastructure’s best chance to
achieve the two hour recovery objective promulgated by the Committee on Payment and Market
Infrastructures  (CPMI)  and 
International  Organization  of  Securities
Commissions (IOSCO).
the  Board  of 
the 
Beyond measures to enhance technological diversity in our core infrastructure, we continue to
make  meaningful  progress  developing  manual  contingency  procedures  in  the  event  of  a
protracted wholesale service disruption from which we cannot recover on a same day basis, our
best  efforts  to  ensure  resiliency  notwithstanding.  Recognizing  the  constraints  on  operating
capacity in such a scenario, this work seeks to maintain critical functionality and to identify and
support systemically important payments in our transaction flow to mitigate customer and market
impacts.
Increasingly, this work extends beyond the Federal Reserve to include infrastructure peers and
other systemically important market participants to test our protracted outage hypotheses and
manual contingency procedures. It also complements a number of industry initiatives, including
the  work  of  the  Payments  Risk  Committee  and  the  newly  established  Financial  Systemic
Analysis  and  Resilience  Center,  to  consider  systemic  risk  mitigants  in  the  event  of  a  major
outage of a large payments processing financial institution. Notwithstanding progress advancing
these  important  initiatives,  and  in  recognition  of  their  enormous  complexity,  the  message  for
policy makers, boards of directors, and senior management of systemically important institutions
is  to  invest  sufficiently  in  resiliency  and  security  such  that  we  never  find  ourselves  reliant  on
manual  contingency  measures  whose 
to  produce  profound,  and
unpredictable, consequences.
invocation 
likely 
is 
One sphere of resiliency that has grown in prominence for payment and market infrastructures
over the past year has been the focus on endpoint security, a theme that has also captured the
attention  of  global  policy  makers.  Work  in  support  of  this  collective  interest  proceeds  across
multiple  fronts,  including  efforts  to  enhance  end-to-end  understanding  of  the  links  and
relationships  within  a  network;  initiatives  to  enhance  assurance  that  external  endpoints  are
operating  in  adherence  with  an  operator’s  security  requirements;  and  the  development  of
centralized information services and application tools to enhance a participant’s management of
fraud risk. Examples of  these  services  and  tools  might  include  features  that  restrict  transfers
beyond a maximum dollar threshold, or to foreign beneficiaries, or outside of specified hours.
Historically, and understandably, market infrastructures have operated on the presumption that
endpoint  security  is  principally  the  responsibility  of  the  endpoint,  and  infrastructure  security  is
principally  the  responsibility  of  the  operator.  Increasingly,  reflecting  the  elevated  cyber  threat
landscape,  this  distinction  is  not  so  clear,  especially  as  endpoint  security  breaches  can
potentially  have  implications  for  public  confidence  in  the  network  as  a  whole,  even  in
circumstances when the operator’s infrastructure, applications, and security perimeter have not
been compromised.
Arguably, the collective industry focus on resiliency and security represents the challenge of our
generation, with direct implications not merely for the functioning of financial markets but, even
more fundamentally, for the commercial and economic activity they support. At the same time,
and notwithstanding their consuming focus, security and resiliency do not represent ends, but
means to an end. I’d therefore like to spend the balance of my valuable time with you reviewing a
series of initiatives we are undertaking to enhance the value proposition of the Federal Reserve’s
wholesale service suite.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The industry environment is complex far beyond the security and resiliency domain. Financial
market  infrastructures  face  an  unprecedented  volume  of  technological  change,  market
developments,  and  regulatory  scrutiny.  For  the  Fedwire  Funds  Service,  at  least  two  market
developments promise to have major strategic implications over a 3-5 year horizon: the advent of
real time retail payments, which the Federal Reserve is actively promoting as a desired outcome
in its Strategies for Improving the Payments System; and the trend toward global adoption of ISO
20022  payment  message  standards.  For  the  Fedwire  Securities  Service,  the  successful
modernization in November 2015 of the application suite and hardware platform supporting this
critical  business  presents  an  historic  opportunity  to  articulate  a  future  vision  that  responds  to
customer and stakeholder needs. Straddling both domains, the emergence of new technologies
such as distributed ledgers presents both challenge and opportunity.
A key desired outcome identified in the Federal Reserve’s Strategies for Improving the Payment
System (SIPS) is to increase the speed of retail payments. An unmistakable global trend toward
real time retail payments has emerged reflecting the advent of new technologies, the rapid pace
of private sector innovation, the proliferation of mobile payment devices, and the recognition that
a  world  of  24x7  commerce  requires  a  payment  system  that  can  keep  pace.  As  this  trend
inevitably accelerates, the question of interbank settlement to address credit exposures that may
accumulate outside of conventional banking hours must be addressed.
Reflecting  the  Federal  Reserve’s  historical  interest  in  the  mitigation  of  settlement  risk,  and  in
anticipation of the emergence of real time retail payments in the United States, we are currently
exploring an expansion in operating hours of the National Settlement Service to support the final
and irrevocable settlement of interbank positions in central bank money. We are pursuing this
interest in three phases. In 2015, we expanded the NSS operating window modestly, opening an
hour earlier at 7:30am and closing a half hour later at 5:30p.m. Subsequently, we announced our
readiness  to  open  NSS  as  early  as  9:00  p.m.  on  the  prior  calendar  date,  consistent  with  the
operating window of the Fedwire Funds Service, if requested. Finally, we are currently evaluating
prospects for weekend settlement hours, perhaps encompassing a 24x7 operating window for
NSS, for which we are validating demand prior to finalizing our direction. It is critical to consider
these matters in advance of the advent of real time retail payments to anticipate the needs of
customers and to respond to the interests of policy makers.
The  Federal  Reserve’s  Strategies  for  Improving  the  Payment  System  also  aspire  to  achieve
greater end-to-end efficiency in cross-border payments, an historical pain point for end users. In
support of this interest, and following an exhaustive season of consultation with industry leaders,
we are currently in the midst of a multi-year effort to adopt the ISO 20022 payment message
formats for the Fedwire Funds Service. This body of work reflects the emergence of ISO 20022
as  the  global  standard  in  payment  systems,  and  seeks  to  achieve  greater  efficiency  and
interoperability in cross border payments for financial institutions and end users. Moreover, the
structured  and  robust  nature  of  the  ISO  20022  message  format  provides  an  opportunity  to
enhance the information content carried in a payment message, including remittance information
to support straight through processing of corporate payments, and to promote greater innovation
across a common message suite. Finally, for both the long term competitiveness of our financial
institutions and end users, and for the primacy of the dollar as a global settlement currency, it is
imperative that the anchor element of our nation’s payment system remains well integrated in an
increasingly global marketplace. With detailed planning well underway, by the end of 2017 we
expect to announce ISO 20022 message format specifications and an implementation timeline.
While  I  recognize  that  I  am  speaking  principally  to  an  audience  of  securities  professionals,  I
appreciate your indulgence of these critically important and strategic payment themes, especially
given  the  inter-connectedness  and  mutual  dependencies  that  exist  across  payment,  clearing,
and settlement infrastructures.
Closer to your world, and as previously mentioned, we migrated the Fedwire Securities Service
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
in November 2015 to a new hardware and software platform. This undertaking was, by far, the
largest element of the Fedwire Modernization Program and the most significant change to the
Federal  Reserve’s  wholesale  services  in  a  generation.  If  you  heard  nothing  of  it,  or  have
subsequently  forgotten,  that  is  the  greatest  affirmation  of  success.  Notwithstanding  the
significance of this accomplishment, the conversion was “like for like”, meaning no new service
enhancements for customers or in support of policy interests. In parallel to System-wide efforts
to advance Strategies for Improving the Payments System, we have therefore embarked on a
corresponding set of Strategies for Improving the Fedwire Securities Service (SIFSS).
The formation of these strategies actually commenced before the modernization even concluded
in consultation with a range of stakeholders including securities issuers, depository institutions,
financial  market  infrastructures,  and  policy  makers.  Prospective  service  enhancements  were
identified  and  assessed  based  upon  their  capacity  to  increase  operational  efficiency,  mitigate
risk, and reduce costs, among other factors, and were subsequently categorized in four main
strategies:
Strategy  1  seeks  to  improve  and  expand  the  Fedwire  Securities  Automated  Claims
Adjustment Process (ACAP). ACAP is a service that enables Fedwire participants to redirect
principal and interest payments related to repo transactions or to failures to deliver or return
securities by an agreed-upon date. The new offering, targeted for 2019, expands the service
from  MBS  securities  to  Treasury  and Agency  securities;  adds  the  capability  for  Fedwire
participants  to  identify  transfers  related  to  securities  lending  activity  in  addition  to  repo;
increases  operational  and  technology  efficiencies,  and  reduces  the  time  (and  thus  risk)
between  when  P&I  payments  are  made  and  their  repatriation.  Members  of  the  SIFMA
Government  Operations  Committee  and  the  Wholesale  Securities  Customer  Advisory
Group  have  consistently  expressed  their  desire  for  this  enhancement,  which  reflects  an
important opportunity for customers to realize value from the modernized Fedwire Securities
platform.
Strategy 2 seeks to  provide  customers  with  greater  and  more  flexible  access  to  Fedwire
Securities  Service  data 
to  support  reconciliation,  perform  analytics,  enhance  risk
management reporting, and project liquidity needs.
Strategy  3  seeks  to  improve  credit  and  liquidity  risk  management  tools  available  to
depository institutions and the Reserve Banks to manage and control daylight overdrafts that
derive from the delivery-versus-payment nature of the Fedwire Securities Service.
Strategy  4  seeks  to  examine  the  costs  and  benefits  of  expanded  operating  hours  for  the
Fedwire  Securities  Service,  reflecting  an  increasingly  global  world  in  which  financial
institutions  and  their  customers  conduct  transactions  at  all  hours  across  multiple
jurisdictions. Many stakeholders have suggested that expanded hours will enhance the ability
of  financial  institutions  to  mobilize  collateral  in  domestic  and  international  markets  and
provide  participants  with  better  access  to  liquidity,  especially  during  periods  of  stress,
recognizing that we serve as central securities depository for the largest, deepest, and most
liquid  pool  of  collateral  in  the  world.  While  these  prospective  benefits  must  be  assessed
against  potential  costs,  and  require  more  comprehensive  study  across  a  wide  range  of
stakeholders  before  any  commitment  can  be  made,  the  time  to  assess  an  expansion  in
operating hours for the Fedwire Securities Service has come.
As  a  final  reflection,  and  to  the  surprise  of  no  one  in  this  room,  we  are  experiencing  an
unprecedented  period  of  innovation  in  financial  services,  with  nascent  technologies  such  as
distributed  ledger  garnering  substantial  attention.  These  emerging  technologies  possess  the
potential to revolutionize financial services, making them faster, more efficient, and more secure.
Notwithstanding this promise, challenges remain in their application to critical financial market
infrastructures  whose  operational  integrity  represent  a  non-negotiable  pre-requisite  for  our
financial system. As we enhance existing services or develop new ones, our consideration of
new  technologies  must  strike  an  appropriate  balance  to  ensure  the  risks  are  thoroughly
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
understood before their transformative potential is realized.
In pursuing this suite of initiatives straddling the wholesale services, we seek to advance both the
interests  of  customers  and  policy  makers  during  this  era  of  unprecedented  challenge  and
change. Standing before you today convicts me that our success as stewards of this business
depends absolutely upon our active engagement with the depository institutions and end users to
which we are operationally accountable. Across this sphere and all others, either intentionally we
are progressing or inevitably we are regressing; there is no idleness.
Thank you for your generous attention today. I’d be pleased to respond to a few questions.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
