Jon  Nicolaisen:  Covered  bonds  and  their  impact  on  investors,
banks and the real economy
Remarks by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at
the European Covered Bond Council (ECBC) Plenary Meeting, Oslo, 6 April 2017.
Accompanying slides
 Good  morning  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me.  Today,  I  will  briefly  discuss  three  issues  that  I
believe will be central to further market development. First, the role of covered bonds in asset
markets in general; second, the impact of covered bonds on the balance sheet of banks; and,
third, the potential impact on the allocation of capital between households and enterprises. The
market  for  covered  bonds  is  perhaps  especially  interesting  for  us,  given  the  strong  growth  of
covered bonds in Norway over the last 10 years.
Chart 1  Covered bonds outstanding
Covered  bonds  remain  a  key  funding  tool  for  residential  mortgage  loans  in  many  European
countries. They have confirmed their position as a resilient source of funding also under stressed
market conditions. This has been particularly evident in the Nordic region.
Role in asset markets
Covered  bonds  provide  investors  with  a  liquid  and  safe  asset.    The  small  premium  above
government  bonds  indicates  that  these  securities  are  considered  almost  as  safe  as  triple-A
sovereign debt. Relative to senior bonds, covered bonds now appear more attractive than before
the financial crisis.
Chart 2 Covered bond spreads
The  fundamental  characteristics  of  covered  bonds  support  this  pricing.  Covered  bonds  are
secured primarily by a preferential claim on a pool of residential or commercial mortgage loans.
They are protected from potential bail-in under the new crisis resolution regime and are subject
to special supervisory monitoring.
The  European  Commission  has  determined  that  covered  bonds  may  be  included  as  level  1
qualifying  assets  in  fulfilling  banks’  liquidity  coverage  ratio  requirements.  Covered  bonds  also
receive favourable treatment both under Solvency 2 and in the regulation of large exposures. In
addition,  the  European  Central  Bank’s  Asset  purchase  programmes  have  supported  market
liquidity.
Covered bonds have a long history of strong performance in general and they have survived and
developed  during  shifting  market  conditions.  The  safety  of  covered  bonds  supports  high  and
stable ratings. It also drives demand and market depth, confirming their position as liquid assets.
Large  falls  in  house  prices  may  present  a  key  risk  for  the  covered  bonds  market,  given  the
dominance of residential mortgages as collateral. At Norges Bank, we have looked at this risk
and we have so far concluded that Norwegian covered bonds are quite robust against a potential
decline in house prices. In the 2015 Financial Stability Report, Norges Bank estimated that a 40%
fall  in  house  prices  would  reduce  the  eligible  cover  pool  by  around  20%.  In  such  an  extreme
scenario,  refinancing  costs  may  rise  for  covered  bonds.  However,  the  rise  in  costs  would
probably be somewhat limited compared with the rise in refinancing costs for unsecured funding.
Thus, even under extreme market conditions, covered bonds would remain attractive, at least in
relative terms.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Role in balance sheet of banks
While  covered  bonds  provide  investors  with  a  broad  range  of  options  to  the  investment
opportunity  set  and  contribute  to  deep  and  liquid  markets,  they  also  impact  banks’  balance
sheets.
When  banks  use  covered  bonds  as  a  source  of  funding,  a  proportion  of  the  banks’  assets
become pledged to covered bond creditors. One issue that arises is what effect this may have
on the quality of the balance sheet of banks.
At the outset, a banking group’s liquidity and credit risk will rise since covered bonds reduce the
volume  of  encumber-able  assets  available  to  the  bank.  In  addition,  banks  are  often  both
significant issuers and holders of covered bonds. Such interconnection may increase systemic
risk.  However,  market  participants  may  assume  that  resolution  rules  and  liquidity  and  capital
requirements nonetheless limit the risk.
For example, all banks are subject to regulation of their core equity – notably through the Basel III
standard of the Basel Committee, implemented in Europe through the CRD4/CRR regulation.
This is the primary insurance for tax payers and investors against the potential failure of large
banks. Sufficient equity and a resilient banking system will always be the main instruments to
ensure stability in the financial system as a whole. This is why senior bonds are also considered
a relatively safe asset.
Impact on the supply of credit and capital allocation
How do covered bonds impact the supply of credit and capital allocation?
Capital  requirements  under  Basel  II  and  III  incentivise  banks  to  supply  residential  mortgage
lending. The introduction of IRB models for calculation of capital requirements have resulted in
low  risk  weights  for  residential  mortgages.  This  may  encourage  leveraging.  Some  countries
where large shares of covered bonds are backed by residential mortgages, have experienced
relatively  strong  growth  in  residential  mortgage  lending  and  brisk  house  price  growth.  The
availability of a large and liquid covered bond market may have facilitated this development.
One  would  expect  that  the  emergence  of  a  vibrant  residential  covered  bond  market  would
generally deepen fixed income markets through larger volumes and better liquidity. The cheaper
financing  of  residential  mortgages  through  covered  bonds  has  been  reflected  in  household
lending  rates.  In  combination  with  very  low  risk  weights  and  corresponding  low  capital
requirements on residential mortgages, banks may have favoured such lending.
As a result, corporations seeking financing may be pushed into bond markets through a crowding
out  effect.  In  addition,  a  vibrant  market  could  make  bond  financing  more  attractive
and pull corporate borrowers to the market. Higher interest rates on banks’ corporate loans may
contribute  to  this  effect.  In  some  of  the  markets  in  Europe  that  have  seen  substantial
deleveraging, loans to SMEs have been provided at steep interest rates. However, the economic
situation and investment demand in general are probably much more important in determining
overall growth in investment financing by banks. In general, banks still provide loans to profitable
enterprises.
To  sum  up:  The  covered  bond  market  provides  investors  with  a  broad  set  of  investment
opportunities, banks with cheap funding and house buyers with ample credit. At the same time,
extensive regulatory measures safeguard the solvency and liquidity of the banking system as a
whole. A well-capitalized banking system with stable and liquid funding options is a prerequisite
for markets to develop and thrive.  That includes the covered bond market.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
