Maja Kadievska-Vojnovik: Drivers of European Payment Integration
- Innovations and Cooperation (opening speech)
Speech by Mrs Maja Kadievska–Vojnovic, Vice Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of
Macedonia at the opening of the 10th jubilee edition of the NBRM's Conference on Payments and
Market Infrastructures: Drivers of European Payment Integration - Innovations and Cooperation,
Ohrid, 5-7 July 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear guests from home and abroad, 
 It is a great pleasure to wish you very warm welcome to the annual Conference on Payments
and Market Infrastructures. 
This year marks the 10th anniversary of the Conference and we are very proud to host it here in
Ohrid in front of a group of eminent speakers and distinguished audience. Let me first thank you
all for coming as you are the ones who bring the success to the Conference. I hope you find the
next  couple  of  days  interesting,  informative  and  productive  and  most  of  all  enjoyable  as  we
celebrate the occasion. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  and  extend  my  sincerest  gratitude  and  appreciation  to  De
Nederlandsche Bank and Banco de Portugal, as institutions with whom we maintain close and
fruitful  collaboration  on  many  fronts,  and  particularly  with  respect  to  this  conference.  Your
continued support and cooperation is highly appreciated and I believe it will only grow stronger in
the future to come.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,
We named this 10th jubilee Conference – Drivers of European Payment Integration – Innovations
and Cooperation. Innovations indeed move the world with financial technology, transforming the
financial  services  industry  as  we  know  it  –  moving  it  towards  the  digital  arena.  In  such  an
environment,  building  and  maintaining  close  cooperation  becomes  essential  for  sustaining
financial  stability  and  protecting  consumers  from  security  threats.  The  Conference  will  cover
various topics related to the latest developments at global, European and national level. 
The emergence of FinTech – financial technology marked the global developments in recent
years by attracting financial institutions attention to its implementation for improving the present
financial  products  and  new  products  development.  On  the  other  hand,  FinTech  companies
started  offering  their  own  financial  services,  thus  entering  into  competition  against  banks.
Moreover,  digital  technologies  pose  challenges  to  financial  institutions,  including  the  central
banks, in the context of digital banking and digital transformations. Implementation of Distributed
Ledger  Technology,  particularly  Blockchain,  could  cause  disruption  to  financial  market
infrastructures  and  furthermore,  to  worldwide  financial  system.  Theoretically,  it  could  facilitate
cross-border payments, improve the efficiency of back-office operations, eliminate the need of
data reconciliation, facilitate financial inclusion and information sharing, but also, it could reduce
the need or completely replace some financial market intermediaries. DLT strongly emphasizes
the  questions  about  effective  regulation,  prudential  supervision,  oversight  and  cyber  security
issues, but it could also catalyze the issuance of digital currencies backed by the central banks
and facilitate the implementation of monetary policy.
In the European context, the Second Payment Services Directive (PSD2) is fundamental part
of the European payments regulation and significant step towards single digital market in Europe.
It  encourages  introduction  of  new  types  of  payment  services  and  sophistication  of  customer
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
protection and security. Also, much attention is paid on evaluation of SEPA-regulation and further
integration via implementation of Pan-European instant payments solution. The innovations in the
field of financial market infrastructures are expected to bring synergies between TARGET2 and
T2S, which is in the scope of the Eurosystem’s Vision 2020.
At the national level, we made significant progress towards fulfilling the European standards in
the payment area. A new Law on payment services and systems implementing PSD and some
articles of PSD2, E-money 2 and Settlement Finality Directive was drafted with the EU support
via  IPA  project.  In  the  field  of  payment  systems  oversight,  the  Principles  for  Financial  Market
Infrastructures were adopted. Furthermore, we aligned our methodology for collecting payment
statistics  data  with  the  EU  regulation  on  payment  statistics.    Last  but  not  least  is  the  recent
project  to  enhance  euro  cross-border  payment  infrastructure  by  establishing  an  alternative
payment channel via the Macedonian Interbank Payment System (MIPS) RTGS system, which
was connected with the TARGET2, via Banca d’Italia. 
I  am  very  glad  that  all  these  issues  will  be  discussed  by  eminent  experts  from  the  Bank  for
International Settlements, European Commission, De Nederlandsche Bank, Banco de Portugal,
Commerzbank,  Euroclear,  ProgressSoft  as  well  as  domestic  financial  institutions.  I  am
particularly  pleased  that  on  the  last  day  of  the  Conference  the  honored  governors,  board
members  and  experts  from  the  European  Central  Bank,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  Banco  de
Portugal,  Croatian  National  Bank,  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  Global
Sovereign Advisors and the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia will reflect on innovations
and  cooperation  as  the  main  drivers  of  the  European  payment  integration  as  well  as  on  how
consumers, firms and government users will pay in the future.
Without  further  ado,  I  now  declare  the  10th  jubilee  Conference  on  Payments  and  Market
Infrastructures open.
I wish you pleasant days here in Ohrid and many fruitful discussions.
Thank you! 
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
