Jens  Weidmann:  Exercising  responsibility  -  how  monetary  union
can be made future-proof
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Austrian Society for European
Politics, Vienna, 6 July 2017.
 1. Welcome
Ewald
Mr Liebscher
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for inviting me to Vienna. It gives me great pleasure to talk about Europe with you this
evening.
It’s always a delight to pay a visit to Vienna – not just because it’s such a remarkably beautiful
city,  but  also  because  of  the  exceptionally  good  cooperation  between  the  Bundesbank  and
Austria’s  central  bank,  the  Österreichische  Nationalbank.  It’s  a  relationship  that  goes  back
decades and whose importance we recently underlined by convening a joint board meeting.
Though I’ve visited Vienna so many times, I’ve never once managed to visit one of the city’s true
landmarks,  the  giant  Ferris  wheel  in  the  Prater  public  park.  This  attraction,  incidentally,  is
celebrating its 120th birthday this year.
Yet  as  an  economist,  I’d  do  well  to  take  a  ride  on  Vienna’s  famous  Ferris  wheel  –  after  all,
economists are keen to take a bird’s eye view of developments – at least that’s what I’ve been
told.  That  can  be  a  good  way  of  broadening  one’s  horizons  and  seeing  things  in  the  right
perspective. But an aerial vantage point doesn’t always make argumentation any easier because
it sometimes means that key details go unnoticed. And one notable such detail, I have found, is
the institutional framework, which I will be returning to later in my speech.
I came here today to share my thoughts on the euro area and on ways in which monetary union
can be made future-proof.
My speech this evening will begin by casting a glance at the economic outlook and the monetary
policy  stance,  before  moving  on  the  responsibility  incumbent  upon  governments  to  foster
sustained  economic  growth.  And  I  will  conclude  by  discussing  a  number  of  proposals  for
changes to the euro area’s institutional architecture – changes which I feel are necessary if the
euro area is to be preserved once and for all as a union of stability.
2. The economy
Ladies and gentlemen, the euro-area economy has been expanding for 16 consecutive quarters
now, and anyone looking at the purchasing managers’ index of late will even have come across
headings  like  “Firms  barely  coping  with  demand”.  The  upswing,  then,  is  turning  out  to  be
increasingly robust, and it has now spread to pretty much every single euro-area country.
Growth also picked up distinctly in France and Italy recently, so the divergence observed in the
GDP growth rates of the euro area’s three largest countries over the past three years has come
to a halt, at least. It’s perfectly normal, of course, for economies in the euro area to differ to a
degree, but stubbornly heterogeneous economic paths certainly make life difficult, not least for
monetary  policymakers.  Monetary  policy  does,  after  all,  need  to  be  geared  to  the  euro-area
average,  and  if  growth  rates  are  scattered  too  broadly,  we  end  up  tailoring  a  monetary  policy
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
garment that doesn’t really fit any member state.
Consistent with the prospect of a continuing recovery, the ECB staff nudged their June growth
projection a little higher, to 1.9% this year and 1.8% in 2018. And the ECB Governing Council
agrees unanimously that the risks to the economic outlook throughout the forecast horizon are
now largely balanced.
The inflation rate, too, has risen sharply over the past twelve months. Saying that, the rate of
inflation  has  mainly  gained  traction  because  energy  prices  have  climbed  substantially  on  the
year.  But  with  oil  prices  leaning  somewhat  to  the  downside  of  late,  the  energy  component  is
unlikely to add any further inflationary pressure. That is why inflation rates look set to return to a
slightly lower level at year-end.
This is partly because domestic price pressures are still relatively subdued. One measure we
use to gauge domestic price pressures is the inflation rate with energy and food price increases
stripped out. This core rate of inflation, as it is known, is currently just over 1%.
Yet  another  point  on  which  the  Governing  Council  agrees  unanimously  is  that  domestic  price
pressures in the euro area will likewise pick up over time – not least as labour market conditions
continue to improve. Unemployment has dropped substantially since the crisis was raging and,
at 9.3%, it’s now just one percentage point, more or less, above the pre-crisis average. And as
for employment, more people in the euro area are in work today than before the crisis.
But for all this predominantly good news from the labour markets and the increasing utilisation of
production capacity, wage growth is stubbornly refusing to pick up pace. To some extent, this is
down  to  the  labour  market  reforms  adopted  in  the  past  and  the  rising  level  of  labour  force
participation which have been dampening wage growth. Plus there is evidence to suggest that
wage- and price-setting behaviour during the crisis evolved towards a state where the inflation
rate is currently less responsive to shrinking slack than it was in the pre-crisis era. But that most
certainly does not mean that the Phillips curve, as it is known, has flattened out for good – this is
a point which Mario Draghi also highlighted recently.  And incidentally, I share his view that as the
economy continues to pick up and stimulate greater demand, there will also be greater scope for
passing through prices and thus for mounting price pressures as well.
1
But  for  now,  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  is  the  right  calibration  for  bolstering
economic  recovery  and  thus  for  strengthening  inflationary  pressures  in  the  euro  area  –  that’s
another point we agree upon in the Governing Council. There are, however, different opinions as
to how strongly we need to step on the monetary policy pedal and what instruments we should
use.
It won’t come as a shock to you that I’m more sceptical than many of my Governing Council
colleagues,  especially  when  it  comes  to  government  bond  purchases.  In  essence,  I  am
concerned  that  purchases  of  government  bonds  might  blur  that  all-important  boundary  in  a
currency union – the one dividing monetary policy and fiscal policy. Eurosystem central banks
have now become the euro-area countries’ biggest creditors. At the end of the day, this can lead
to  political  pressure  being  exerted  on  the  Eurosystem  to  maintain  the  very  accommodative
monetary  policy  for  longer  than  appropriate  from  a  price  stability  standpoint.  After  all,  in  the
context of asset purchases, changes in monetary policy impact more directly on governments’
funding costs than they  do  under  normal  conditions. And  that’s  naturally  also  problematical  in
view of the disciplining effect of the capital markets on government finances because at the end
of  the  day,  sovereigns  pay  pretty  much  the  same  rate  of  interest  on  our  holdings  of  assets,
regardless of their credit quality.
Hence my view that government bond purchases are an instrument of last resort – one which
should mainly be used to fend off deflation. But I’ve said in the past that the fears of deflation are
overblown. They’ve now become even less of an issue, and the Eurosystem’s price projections
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
reflect as much, of course.
At any rate, the credibility of monetary policy hinges on monetary policy accommodation coming
to an end once the time is right from a price stability perspective.
The ongoing economic recovery is now opening up the prospect of a normalisation of monetary
policy. It’s not a question of slamming on the brakes – to stay with the imagery I used earlier on –
but of taking our foot off the accelerator a little. Both the timing and the pace of monetary policy
normalisation depend on the extent to which price pressures are sustainable and self-sustaining.
I’m  well  aware  that  savers  feel  pinched  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  and  the  low
interest rates. But monetary policy isn’t the only variable that has a bearing on interest rate levels
– real long-term interest rates over the economic cycle also depend to a large extent on trend
growth. A persistently higher rate of economic growth in the euro area not only helps to ease the
pressure on monetary policy because it drives up equilibrium interest rates and thus widens the
gap to the zero lower bound on interest rates. It would also represent an opportunity for more
people to benefit from rising prosperity and for Europe to once again deliver on its promise of
welfare.
Yet the longer-term outlook for growth in the euro area is looking cloudy, not least because of the
looming burden of demographic change in the euro-area countries, of which Germany looks set
to bear the brunt. That is why adding momentum to the forces of growth must be at the heart of
the euro-area countries’ endeavours.
Monetary policy cannot bring about that kind of stronger economic growth – it’s an objective that
only  smart  fiscal  and  economic  policy,  such  as  structural  reforms,  can  achieve.  Yet  the
willingness to embrace reform has dwindled quite substantially overall since the sovereign debt
crisis  came  to  a  head  –  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  not  alone  in  highlighting  this
2
issue.
Needless to say, the euro-area countries are each starting out from different positions, with their
own particular economic structures, so it would be wrong to pursue a “one size fits all” approach.
That  said,  I  am  convinced  that  measures  that  strengthen  public  finances  and  help  produce
competitive economic systems would also stimulate growth and also enable the benefits to be
more  widely  shared.  For  one  thing,  competition  among  businesses  encourages  them  to
innovate,  boosting  economic  growth.   For  another,  studies  show  that  there  is  a  level  of
4
government debt above which economic growth is stifled.
3
There’s no lack of reform proposals. Recommendations are in abundant supply, not just from the
European Commission, but from other national and international organisations as well.
Germany,  too,  is  facing  major  challenges.  It  needs  to  ready  its  social  security  systems  to
withstand the challenges posed by demographic trends, push labour force participation higher
still, and step up investment in education so that those in work are more productive and less at
risk of losing their jobs, plus it will have to expand its digital infrastructure.
But aside from these major challenges, IT-related productivity gains can also be harnessed on a
smaller scale, such as in the country’s public administration, which is another area which has
some catching up to do in the deployment of digital information and communication technology.
For  instance,  to  apply  for  a  German  ID  card,  you  still  have  to  turn  up  in  person  at  your  local
municipal administration office.
Regrettably,  very  little  progress  has  been  made  on  this  score,  as  a  recent  European
Commission  report  on  the  digital  economy  and  society  in  the  EU  member  states  confirms.
Germany ranks a meagre 20th for its public services, while Austria occupies a far-superior sixth
place.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The European level still has a great deal of unharnessed growth potential of its own, however.
The  EU  Single  Market  has  been  a  success  story,  but  the  tale  isn’t  over  yet.  One  huge  step
forward  would  be  the  completion  of  the  single  market  for  services,  because  unlike  the  single
market for goods, trade in services is still subject to national barriers.
The  forces  of  growth  would  also  be  given  a  shot  in  the  arm  if  the  Single  Market  switched
wholesale  to  digital  goods.   Europe’s  markets  for  digital  goods  remain  heavily  fragmented,
especially where the protection of privacy, copyright, and liability issues are concerned.
5
Yet  businesses  would  reap  rewards  not  just  from  a  complete  single  market  but  also  from
broader funding opportunities. This is where the capital markets union comes into play.
European businesses still mainly use bank loans as their chief source of funding. Harmonising
regulation or, for example, boosting investor protection in the venture capital market might make
it easier for businesses to source equity capital on a larger scale. Not only would that broaden
enterprises’ funding options; it would also make them more resilient to economic shocks. That’s
because equity capital absorbs losses, while debt capital still needs to be serviced in full, even
when times are hard, if a company is to fend off insolvency.
What  is  more,  research  for  the  United  States  reveals  that  private  risk  sharing  via  integrated
capital markets is far more conducive to cushioning shocks that public risk sharing, which is the
main  talking  point  in  Europe.  The  integrated  capital  markets  in  the  United  States  absorb
something  like  40%  of  the  overall  cyclical  fluctuations  between  the  US  federal  states  –  fiscal
policy just between 10% and 20%.  If a negative shock hits an industry or a specific region, then
losses are spread widely beyond the region affected if a business’s shareholder base is spread
across  many  different  states.  And  that  works  in  the  other  direction,  too,  of  course  –  during
upturns, investors benefit from the investment opportunities in other states.
6
So there are plenty of ways in which economic growth at the European level can be stimulated
by embracing the right reforms. I do, however, see the risk that the exit negotiations which have
now  kicked  off  between  the  EU  and  the  UK  will  absorb  so  much  political  attention  among
European decision-makers that little scope will remain for other major projects. Which makes it
all the more important for the member states to embrace reform with renewed vigour. On this
score, the announcements made by the new French president are a positive sign.
3. Taking the institutional architecture of monetary union to the next level
Ladies and gentlemen, the economic recovery may be robust, but that shouldn’t blind us to the
continued vulnerability of European monetary union.
One fundamental stumbling block existed from day one because of the euro area’s asymmetric
design. Member states surrendered their sovereignty in monetary policy matters to the ECB, but
retained ownership of their fiscal and economic policies. 
This construction makes the monetary union potentially vulnerable because the crisis showed
that  at  the  end  of  the  day,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  had  no  option  but  to  cushion  unsound
developments in individual member states if it was to prevent the stability of the entire union from
being jeopardised.
In any case, there is less of an incentive to run a sound fiscal policy in a currency union because
the consequences of member states accumulating excessive levels of debt can be passed on in
part to the community.
In a currency union, the interest rate hike for a highly indebted country is smaller than it would be
if it had its own independent currency. By the same token, however, rates also edge a little higher
for all the other member states as well – not to mention the stability-jeopardising situation that
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
would arise if that country even ended up brushing with insolvency.
This phenomenon is known as the “common pool problem” in economic theory, and overfishing
is often used to explain it. A single fisherman who catches too many fish leaves fewer behind for
others  in  his  profession  and  ultimately  jeopardises  the  long-term  sustainability  of  fish  stocks.
Overfishing, then, is dangerous for the fishing community. But an individual fisherman is out to
net as many fish as possible, ignoring the interests of other fishermen or future generations of
fishermen.
This is arguably one reason why historian and winner of the 2017 Charlemagne Prize Timothy
Gordon Ash described the story of monetary union so far as a “crisis foretold”.
Yet  that  remark  isn’t  really  entirely  fair  to  the  founding  fathers  of  monetary  union,  who  most
certainly  did  have  their  eye  on  the  particular  incentive  to  run  up  debt.  Their  idea  was  that  a
combination  of  market  discipline  and  fiscal  policy  would  keep  fiscal  policymaking  on  a  sound
basis. 
That,  of  course,  is  why  a  no-bailout  clause  was  built  into  the  Maastricht  Treaty  contains  to
prohibit member states from assuming each other’s debts. And it also bans monetary financing
of  government  debt  by  the  Eurosystem.  Together,  the  thinking  goes,  these  safeguards  would
ensure that investors themselves – and not other parties such as the taxpayer – would bear the
risks of investing in government bonds.
The Treaty also contains rules which curb government debt and fiscal deficits, not only to ensure
that public finances remain on a sustainable path, but also to pave the way for the automatic
stabilisers to function when the economy experiences a downturn or even, if need be, to provide
sufficient leeway for active fiscal policymaking without raising any doubts over the sustainability
of  debt.  These  rules  bolster  the  principle  of  individual  national  ownership  of  fiscal  policy  upon
which the Maastricht Treaty is founded.
Walter  Eucken,  founder  of  the  Freiburg  school  and  a  pioneer  of  the  social  market  economy,
condensed  this  liability  principle,  as  it  is  known,  into  a  simple  formula:  “Whoever  reaps  the
benefits must also bear the liability.” And what goes for the economy goes for countries as well:
decisions will only ever be taken responsibly if those who decide also bear responsibility for the
consequences of their actions.
Thus, the Maastricht Treaty largely assigned the power to act and liability in matters of economic
and fiscal policy to the member states.
Yet  the  safeguards  I  have  just  mentioned  were  unable  to  prevent  government  debt  from
ballooning in a number of euro-area countries. This was partly due to repeated breaches of the
fiscal rules – incidentally by Germany too, shortly after the launch of monetary union – which the
capital  markets  failed  to  punish  by  demanding  higher  risk  premiums  because  the  no-bailout
clause lacked credibility. But another reason for the ballooning debt levels was undoubtedly the
financial  crisis,  which  saw  a  number  of  euro-area  countries  being  forced  to  shore  up  their
banking systems.
This was compounded in the subsequent sovereign debt crisis by emerging doubts over debt
sustainability in some member states. Rescue measures were swiftly rolled out to prevent the
crisis from coming to a head.
These measures, however, did not make monetary union crisis-proof once and for all. Quite the
opposite,  in  fact.  By  adding  further  elements  of  mutual  liability,  they  softened  the  principle  of
independent responsibility.
Since  economic  and  fiscal  policy  matters  continue  to  be  issues  of  national  ownership,  the
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
relationship between actions and liability has got out of kilter.
The euro area will only ever be crisis-proof once and for all if renewed importance is attached to
the liability principle. There are two ways in which this can be achieved. Either through deeper
integration, ie a situation where every member state surrenders decision-making powers in fiscal
and economic policy matters to the European level, or by returning to an overhauled Maastricht
Treaty, which would mean more national ownership and each member state being liable for the
decisions it takes.
The first solution is the road to a fiscal union with centralised decision-making powers. While a
fiscal union would not guarantee sound fiscal policymaking, it could curb the propensity to run a
deficit I mentioned earlier this evening.
Former German Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl, who sadly passed away recently, was already
a firm believer that monetary union was merely one step on the path leading to political union.
Addressing the Bundestag in November 1991, he remarked that “the idea of sustaining economic
and monetary union over time without political union is a fallacy”.
Genuine political union proved unfeasible back in the early 1990s, however, and it appears to me
that  little  has  changed  in  this  regard  since  then.  Not  least  because  the  necessary  transfer  of
sovereign rights would require comprehensive changes to be made to the EU Treaty and national
constitutions.
It would appear, then, as though option number two stands a more realistic chance of restoring
the balance between actions and liability. That would mean reinforcing the principle of individual
national responsibility.
Only  when  sound  finances  are  assured  in  this  way  and  countries  are  no  longer  drifting  apart
economically  will  there  finally  be  an  ebbing  of  the  pressure  on  the  Eurosystem  to  intervene
constantly as a firefighter. And only then will the financial markets do their job of taking adequate
account of risks in their lending activity.
But what would have to change for the monetary union’s regulatory framework to function better
than it has done in the past?
As  long  ago  the  17th  century,  Blaise  Pascal,  the  French  mathematician,  physicist,  inventor,
writer and theologian, noted that all good intentions already exist in the world, they only have to be
applied.
In my opinion, the same thing could also be said about the fiscal rules in the euro area. They
have been around for a long time; now they also have to be applied consistently.
The latest reform of the Stability and Growth Pact had the aim of strengthening the binding force
of the rules on debt. In actual fact, it created considerable discretionary scope, mainly for the
European  Commission.  We  also  point  this  out  in  our  current  Monthly  Report.   And  the
Commission has already exploited this scope on several occasions and invariably interpreted the
rules very generously in doing so.
7
The Commission’s dual role as guardian of the EU treaties, on the one hand, and, on the other,
as a political institution concerned with striking a balance between the various policy interests of
the member states, has undoubtedly played a part in comprises having been reached time and
again at the expense of budgetary discipline. Some euro-area countries have been breaching the
rules for nine years now.
Werner  Schneyder,  the  Austrian  comedian,  once  characterised  the  situation  accurately  as
Europe  consisting  of  countries  that  didn’t  want  to  be  told  to  do  what  they  had  decided  to  do
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
themselves.
What  is  needed  to  strengthen  the  fiscal  rules  is  a  simple  and  transparent  design  and
implementation  of  the  rules.  An  independent  institution  taking  over  responsibility  for  fiscal
surveillance  from  the  Commission  would  be  a  key  step  towards  a  less  political  approach. At
least, that would clearly show where unbiased analysis ends and political concessions begin. For
that  reason,  the  Bundesbank  suggests  strengthening  the  role  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism (ESM) in fiscal surveillance, for example.
One thing does seem obvious to me, however. If member states retain their fiscal autonomy, the
sustainability of public finances cannot be safeguarded by rules alone.
It  is  therefore  essential  that  the  binding  force  of  the  rules  is  additionally  shored  up  by  the
disciplining  effect  of  the  market.  In  other  words,  interest  rate  levels  have  to  be  aligned  more
strongly again with the risks in government budgets.
The only way to achieve that, however, is if the no bail-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty gains
more credibility again. Investors have to perceive a more credible threat of losing their money if
they buy bonds from governments that have unsound public finances. One proposal put forward
by the Bundesbank thus envisages changing the contractual terms for sovereign bonds in the
euro  area  by  introducing  an  automatic  maturity  extension  for  them  as  soon  as  the  issuing
government applies for an ESM programme.
Up to now it has been the case that a large part of the assistance loans are being used to pay off
the original creditors. This means that the original creditors, such as banks, are then let off the
hook – at the expense of taxpayers.
Extending maturities, on the other hand, would leave them on the hook, and they could be still
held liable in the event of a later debt restructuring. In an emergency, it can be very difficult to tell
for certain whether a debtor is temporarily illiquid or actually insolvent. An automatic extension of
maturities, however, would allow the ESM significantly more time to give careful consideration to
the question of debt sustainability – and without releasing the original creditors from liability during
this period.
A  maturity  extension  would  have  the  added  advantage  of  substantially  reducing  the  need  for
financial  aid  under  an  ESM  programme.  It  would  also  broaden  the  range  and  scope  of  the
existing rescue mechanism. Had an automatic maturity extension had been available to us in
2011, for example, Portugal would have needed only about €43 billion to cover its entire budget
deficit until 2014 rather than the €76 billion in total it received in assistance loans.
However,  restructuring  sovereign  debt  would  be  a  realistic  option  only  if  the  financial  system
could  also  cope  with  a  haircut.  That’s  because  not  much  would  be  gained  by  bringing  the
financial system to its knees. There would also be an incentive for the community of states to
step in for private creditors.
For that reason, the close link between banks and sovereigns that exists in the euro area has to
be severed. Experience of the crisis years has shown that – especially in times of crisis – banks
have a big appetite for sovereign bonds, preferably bonds issued by their own government.
Banks’  appetite  for  government  bonds  would  indeed  be  curbed  if  they  had  to  back  sovereign
issues on the books with capital in future like they have to do with private loans. Unlike in the
case of corporate bonds, euro-area financial institutions are not required to hold capital against
government bonds in order to cover potential defaults. And there are also no upper limits on how
many government bonds the banks are allowed to buy. The regulations still treat sovereign bonds
as risk-free, even though the euro-area debt crisis clearly revealed that this assumption is not
accurate.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Banks  will  be  able  to  cope  with  the  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt  only  when  banks  hold
sufficient  capital  against  government  bonds  and  a  limit  is  placed  on  the  size  of  individual
exposures. And only then is there also likely to exist the political will to take such action.
4. Sovereign bond-backed securities
One  advantage  of  abolishing  the  preferential  treatment  of  government  bonds  would  be  giving
banks incentives to further diversify their sovereign bond portfolio and, thus, their credit risk. That
would represent a major contribution to severing the sovereign-bank nexus that served to fan the
flames of the crisis.
Many fear that abolishing the preferential treatment of sovereign bonds might result in a lack of
safe  assets.  For  that  reason,  Markus  Brunnermeier  and  his  colleagues  have  proposed  the
8
creation of what are known as “sovereign bond-backed securities”.
The aim of the proposal is to increase the range of AAA-rated bonds in the euro area. To this
end,  two  tranches  of  a  new  type  of  securities  are  to  be  issued.  Both  tranches  are  to  be
collateralised with sovereign bonds of all the euro-area countries.
Losses from the sovereign bonds would initially occur in the junior tranche. As a result, the senior
tranche  is  intended  to  be  especially  safe.  And  that  is  why  this  tranche  is  designated  in  the
proposal as “European Safe Bonds”, or ESBies for short. 
In principle – and depending on how it is designed – this model could indeed help make it easier
to  diversity  portfolios.  It  is  highly  uncertain,  however,  whether  this  would  have  the  hoped-for
impact on the available range of safe forms of investment.
The  rating  agency  Standard  and  Poors,  for  example,  points  out  that  the  risk  of  defaults  on
sovereign bonds is highly correlated.  If a country is struggling to service its bonds, it is probably
not the only one.
9
That is why the risks of euro-area sovereign bonds cannot be be so easily diversified. At least
Standard and Poors does not anticipate that ESBies would gain the secure AAA rating. Under
such circumstances, the supply of secure assets in the euro area might become scarcer, not
more abundant
Above and beyond that, the proposal leaves a number of further open questions. Only when such
questions have been answered will be it possible to assess what implications the introduction of
sovereign bond-backed securities would have for the functioning of the national sovereign debt
markets.
Furthermore, it would be necessary to rule out the possibility of such securities leading to greater
mutual liability. Such a development would further undermine individual national responsibility in
the euro area – with all the problems I have already discussed.
It would therefore have to be ensured that sovereign bond-backed securities are issued only by
private financial market players – and certainly not by a European debt agency that potentially
possesses a government guarantee.
One simple fact cannot be avoided either. Risks don’t disappear just by packaging them; they
simply become concentrated in junior tranches – we learned that much from the subprime crisis.
That is why the banks have to back all tranches of securitisation in a risk-appropriate manner
with  capital  in  future.  There  should  be  no  preferential  treatment  of  sovereign  bond-backed
securities  compared  with  sovereign  or  private  bonds.  That  is  because  preferential  regulatory
treatment would encourage a mispricing of sovereign default risks and thus harbour a further risk
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
to financial stability.
Notwithstanding  such  unanswered  questions,  if  there  were  a  desire  to  persist  in  separating
sovereign bonds into safe and less safe components, the obvious thing to do would be for each
government  to  package  its  own  bonds  into  different  tranches  so  that  especially  safe  national
securities would then be created.
5. Concluding remarks
Ladies and gentlemen
You can look at it from any angle, and you can’t avoid one fact. Sovereign default risks cannot be
eradicated  by  packaging  sovereign  bonds  or  by  splitting  up  bonds  into  safe  and  less  safe
tranches.  Safe  opportunities  for  investment  can  only  be  created  by  the  member  states
themselves  by  ensuring  sound  public  budgets.  This  is  best  achieved  by  consistently
implementing the liability principle.
I  spoke  about  that  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech.  Like  riding  on  the  big  wheel,  I’ve  therefore
almost come back to the point from where I started. That means it’s time for me to get off. And,
as  everyone  knows,  when  someone  gets  off  the  big  wheel,  places  become  available  for  new
passengers.
Stefan Zweig once remarked that thoughts thrive just as much on affirmation as on contradiction.
That doesn’t just apply to the Governing Council of the ECB but also to the discussion on which
we are now embarking.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
M  Draghi  (2017), Accompanying  the  economic  recovery,  Introductory  speech  at  the  ECB  Forum  on  Central
Banking, Sintra, 27 June 2017.
www.oecd.org/eco/goingforgrowth.htm
M J Melitz, The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity, Econometrics,
Vol 71, 2003, pp 1695–1725.
S Cecchetti, M Mohanty and F Zampolli (2011), The real effects of debt, BIS Working Paper No 352.
European Commission (2015), A digital single market strategy for Europe – analysis and evidence. SWD(2015)
100 final.
P Asdrubali, B E Sørensen and O Yosha (1996), Channels of interstate risk sharing: US 1963–1990, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly Report, June
2017.
Brunnermeier, M, S Langfield, M Pagano, R Reis, S Van Nieuwerburgh, and D Vayanos (2016), “ ESBies: Safety
in the tranches”, European Systemic Risk Board Working Paper No. 21 
S&P  Global  Ratings  (2017),  How  S&P  Global  Ratings  Would  Assess  European  “Safe”  Bonds  (ESBies).
RatingsDirect.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
