Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Charting a path for the future
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the National Public Sector Accountants Conference 2017 "Charting a Path for the
Future", Penang, 15 August 2017.
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  today.  My  congratulations  to  Jabatan Akauntan  Negara
Malaysia and Persatuan Akauntan Sektor Awam Malaysia on the successful organisation of the
28th National Public Sector Accountants Conference.
In two weeks’ time, we will be celebrating our 60th year of independence. Our nation has come a
long away – economically, socially and politically. Faced with the challenge of the new and the
unknown at the dawn of our independence, our nation has risen to the occasion time and again.
We have persevered. We have adapted. We have transformed. We have grown from strength to
strength despite the many challenges.
This  boldness  of  spirit  is  something  that  has  driven  us  from  the  very  first  moments  of  our
nationhood.  Upon  the  proclamation  of  our  independence  in  1957,  Tunku Abdul  Rahman  had
imparted  these  important  words:  “From  henceforth,  we  are  masters  of  our  destiny,  and  the
welfare of this beloved land is our own responsibility.” 
These last six decades have been a journey committed to this endeavor. Where rubber and tin
once dominated, we now have an integrated, open and diversified economy. Where roads once
laid bare, now stands world class infrastructure. Where others had led, our economy now thrives
on high-skilled industries, some on the frontiers of innovation.
Looking back, we can take great pride in our achievements as a nation. Looking forward, there
are  infinite  possibilities  that  await  us.  But  there  are  challenges  that  we  need  to  navigate  and
overcome. I shall mention some of them.
First, a challenging global environment. Nearly a decade on from the Global Financial Crisis, the
global economy continues to remain relatively weak.
World growth is projected to grow an average of 3.5% in the next two years. Amid a mood of
economic  uncertainty,  protectionism,  once  thought  of  as  an  irrelevant  concept,  has  made  an
unexpected re-entry into the global discourse on international trade.
Second, technological progress. The speed at which this is occurring means that our greatest
challenge is anticipating the technologies that will have the greatest impact on our lives. As public
officials, we need to appreciate how technological progress will influence the way public policies
are formulated and communicated.
Third, demographic shifts. At present, an estimated 26.3% of our total population is between the
ages  of  25  to  40  years  old.  This  represents  a  group  of  better-educated  individuals,  used  to
unfettered access to information. They are likely to have higher expectations on public service.
The era of “government knows best” is a past participle. Our engagements must therefore adapt
and respond to evolving norms of our society.
These are some of the challenges we are facing. The challenges are enormous yet exciting. The
public  sector  must  be  ready  to  steer  and  lead  the  nation  onto  a  new,  uncharted  path  with
confidence, certainty and conviction. This is a heavy responsibility. What we do today will have
ramifications on the future of our children and our children’s children. We must rethink the way
we formulate policies, the way we deliver on our mandates and the way we think about public
policy.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Today, I would like to speak about three possible characteristics that will be necessary for the
public sector to navigate the challenges of the future. These are: Integrity, Agility and Validity of
Measurement.
Integrity: The courage to take the road less travelled
As  public  servants,  our  duty  is  to  serve  and  protect  the  public  interest.  Our  legitimacy  is
strengthened by their confidence. Discharging this responsibility will become more challenging
as we move forward: Priorities and needs will continue to expand faster than our resources.
In these times, moral courage, integrity and transparency will be more important than ever. We
must be brave enough to pursue the right course of action, doing the right thing, unpopular as
they may be in the short-term. We must also be accountable for our decisions. This requires that
we engage and communicate with the public as never before, explaining clearly the rationale of
our policies.
It is also important that we foster a culture and environment that prioritises these values at the
level of the individual. The integrity of the public sector rests on the strength of character of each
and  every  public  official,  without  any  exception.  This  will  require  leadership,  incentives  and
structures that will enable individuals to be clear-eyed and independent-minded. This is a spirit
best summed up in Mahatma Gandhi’s words: “Even if you are a minority of one, the truth is the
truth.”
Integrity is best demonstrated through the transparency and thoroughness of disclosures. The
publication of financial and non-financial information is the central means by which the public can
truly hold its government and public institutions to account.
Public sector accountants, tasked with the preparation and audit of such information, naturally
take on an immense moral responsibility.
It is critical that the public sector appreciates and respects the importance and impartiality of this
role. Accountants and auditors must be provided with the platform and stature to pursue facts
and voice any concerns  in  a  meaningful  and  constructive  manner.  This  includes  follow-up  on
investigations or corrective actions, where necessary.
As  the  demands  and  expectations  of  public  service  grow,  the  use  of  data  and  the  mined
information will take centre stage in the administration of the public sector. Accountants will be in
the unique position to define, provide and interpret the facts and figures that can greatly influence
and shape policy and strategy.
Agility: New environment, new challenges and new set of competencies
We  live  in  a  world  that  is  constantly  changing.  One  shaped  by  evolving  factors  influencing
societal behaviors and norms. In this environment, it is easy to fall into the trap of short-termism
or pandering to popular opinion. We must resist this addictive and damaging behavior.
Instead,  a  long-term  strategy  that  prepares  for  the  society  and  industries  of  the  future  is
warranted. This will be difficult. Faced with these challenges, we must be willing to re-invent, re-
skill  and  re-adapt.  The  future  will  require  a  multidisciplinary  of  knowledge.  Our  agility  in
responding to evolving circumstances will also depend on a new set of competencies, but would
requires new approaches.
For  one,  the  approach  towards  policy-making  will  need  to  be  more  flexible.  In  a  fast-moving
environment, we must allow ourselves more room to fine-tune our policies, or change course
where necessary.
This  is  not  ‘policy  flip-flopping’.  Instead,  policymakers  should  be  bold  enough  to  reverse  or
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
change policy direction if it is no longer serving the public interest effectively. The expectation is
not for the public sector to be infallible, but for it be agile enough to respond calmly and assuredly
to unintended outcomes.
Maintaining  public  confidence  in  this  day  and  age  requires  a  highly  adaptive  communication
strategy. Information and knowledge is no longer monopolized by a select few. Technology has
empowered  every  individual  to  spread  knowledge  or  falsehood  within  seconds.  And  it  could
quickly  lead  to  negative  perception.  But  this  risk  can  be  addressed  through  wider  and  more
frequent engagements with the public and key stakeholders.
Going  forward,  new  competencies  are  required.  Foremost  of  these  is  communication  skill.
Technical know-how alone is not enough. Our communication strategy should be guided by three
principles:  To  say  it  correctly,  to  say  it  well,  to  say  it  differently.  This  will  require  an  astute
awareness  of  relationships  from  a  social,  economic  and  political  standpoint.  Through  this
understanding, we will be able to articulate our ideas or positions more clearly and coherently.
The use of multiple platforms, such as social media, instant messaging services, or public online
forums will offer new possibilities.
Ralph  Waldo  Emerson,  an  essayist  and  poet  who  led  the  transcendentalist  movement  of  the
mid-19th century, once said, “In skating over thin ice, our safety is in our speed.” This analogy is
appropriate  in  our  current  environment.  Responding  to  a  dynamic  environment  in  a  timely
manner will require the intuition of skill and knowledge. Many professions will see a dramatic shift
in  skill  sets  required  over  the  coming  decade,  and  the  accountancy  profession  will  be  no
exception.  Given  finite  resources,  public  policy  is  likely  to  be  overwhelmed  by  a  sense  of
cynicism or pessimism. This is where public sector accountants may offer a breakthrough by
taking  on  a  more  strategic  role. As  financial  data  expands  in  scope,  volume  and  complexity,
operational efficiency demands a new set of technical skills and knowledge. Complex problem
solving, critical thinking, coordinating with others, service orientation, cognitive flexibility, just to
name a few.
Amid  new  international  accounting  standards,  rising  trends  in  financial  technology  and  the
attendant changes required, accountants are becoming among the most flexible and multi-skilled
individuals.
This is a major transformation in role of accountants compared to only two decades ago. As the
profession grows in technical mastery and sophistication, accountants will contribute significantly
to  charting  a  new  path  for  the  public  sector. A  key  area  that  I  foresee  accountants  will  wield
considerable  influence  is  in  performance  measurement.  This  brings  me  to  my  final  point  on
Validity of Measurement.
Validity of Measurement: Identifying, measuring and assessing outcomes
I  have  so  far  alluded  to  initiatives  and  policies  for  the  transformation  of  the  public  sector.
However, these would be futile if we do not know how effective they are. In this respect, we must
develop identifiable, measurable and practical performance indicators.
Our  performance  indicators  should  be  defined  by  three  key  features:  Long-term  in  outlook,
integrated  with  overall  strategic  objectives  and  should  also  focused  on  impact  of  social
outcomes.
Achieving the objectives of national development requires strong coordination across all parts of
the government machinery. It is important to eradicate silo mentality and turf protection. Cross
collaboration will generate unique and fresh policy perspectives. Collaborative ownership will also
increase the probability of policy success. It will also minimize unnecessary and costly overlaps.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Performance  measurement  should  go  beyond  budgetary  considerations.  Our  performance  as
public officials is mainly determined by how well we have served the needs of the public. We
must  consider  public  satisfaction  and  post-completion  financial  sustainability.  Unintended
consequences or externalities should also be taken into account, particularly in terms of socio-
economic and environmental impact.
Many  among  the  audience  would  be  familiar  with  a  concept  that  is  fast  gaining  traction,
“integrated  reporting”.  This  approach,  as  described  by  the  International  Integrated  Reporting
Council,  “communicates  a  clear,  concise,  integrated  story  that  explains  how  resources  are
creating value”.
It covers a much  broader  scope  of  factors  connected  to  business  activities,  including  greater
consideration of social impact and value creation for the future. By identifying the inter-linkages
between  financial,  environmental,  social  and  corporate  governance,  we  are  better  placed  to
adopt a more holistic and socially meaningful approach towards strategy development.
Adopting  the  ‘Integrated  Reporting’  approach  has  immense  potential  for  public  sector
disclosures.  It  provides  an  excellent  template  that  will  help  the  public  better  understand  the
governance,  deliverables  and  long-term  direction  of  the  public  sector.  It  also  motivates
institutions  to  think  about  how  best  to  measure  and  describe  outcomes  in  relation  to  their
mandates.  Going  forward,  accountants  will  likely  have  an  important  say  on  how  these
performance measurements are designed and defined.
Conclusion
Peter  Bakker,  the  president  of  the  World  Business  Council  for  Sustainable  Development,
famously said that “Accountants would save the world.” There is some truth to the statement.
Few  other  professions  have  the  same  power  to  dictate  the  language  and  context  of  that
discourse.
As  we  work  together  towards  change,  our  ability  to  continuously  learn,  improve  and  reinvent
ourselves will ensure that we emerge a more successful nation in the decades to come. With
integrity,  agility  and  vision,  I  am  confident  that  we  will  triumph  over  the  unfamiliar  which  most
likely characterize our future.
Thank you, and I wish all of you a fruitful and engaging conference ahead.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
