Paris Europlace International Financial Forum – Paris, Wednesday 12th July 2017 
Roundtable 3: capitalizing on the new G20 regulatory steps 
  Introductory remarks by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France  
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be with you today to introduce this roundtable, which could not be more topical, 
just a few days after the leaders of the G20 met in Hamburg. From London in 2009 to Hamburg 
last week, there is only 450 miles as the crow flies; but there has been considerable progress in 
terms  of  financial  regulation.  Thanks  to  international  cooperation  between  the  20  major 
economies, the resilience of the global financial system has significantly improved in eight years, 
without impeding the financing of the economy or global economic growth. We can all be proud of 
these achievements, but there is no room for complacency today. Let me elaborate on what I see 
as  the  three  priorities  for  further  work,  and  the  two  requirements  to  consolidate  what  we  have 
achieved so far.  
 1.  Three priority areas where further work is needed.  
First, we have to finalise the Basel III framework, “without further significantly increasing overall 
capital  requirements  across  the  banking  sector,  while  promoting  a  level  playing  field”.  I  wish  to 
stress  that  this  commitment  was  reaffirmed  in  Hamburg  a  few  days  ago  by  the  whole  G20, 
including  the  United States  –  and  this  is important  as  we  need  to  preserve,  in  the  words  of  the 
G20  Leaders’  Declaration,  “an  open  and  resilient  financial  system,  grounded  in  agreed 
international  standards”i.  Regarding  Basel  III,  I  sincerely  hope  that  we  can  reach  a  balanced 
agreement among Basel Committee members by next autumn. The vast majority of the Basel III 
framework  has  indeed  already  been  agreed and is  now  largely  implemented,  notably  in Europe 
since 2014 with the CRD IV package. The main outstanding point of discussion is, as you know, 
the  so-called  “output  floor”  which  would  apply  to  banks  using  internal  models.  The  objective  of 
Basel III is to lay the foundations for a strong, balanced and risk-sensitive international regulation, 
while reducing the undue variability of risk-weighted assets (RWAs). So we need a prudent but a 
 1 
reasonable  level  of  the  output  floor,  combined  with  strengthened  supervision  of  banks’  internal 
models – and Europeans made sensible proposals to achieve this. But should the output floor be 
set  at  too  high  a  level,  the  consequences  in  terms  of  the  reduction  of  risk  sensitivity  and  the 
increase in capital requirements would be unacceptable:  for example, a 75% output floor would 
affect half of international banks. It would de facto result in creating a “Basel IV” framework based 
on  the  standardised  approach.  The  output  floor  is  to  serve  as  a  backstop,  not  as  the  primary 
driver of capital requirements: yes to Basel III, no to Basel IV.  
Having said that, the main issue now is no longer the solvency of banks, but the liquidity of 
non-banks.  Therefore  the  bulk  of  the  regulatory  efforts  must  now  be  focused  on  the  shadow 
banking  system,  which  has  risen  from  USD 73  trillion  of  assets  in  2007  to  USD 92  trillion  in 
2015ii –  i.e.  150%  of  total  GDP  –  in  the  jurisdictions  monitored  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board. 
And  those  parts  of  shadow  banking  that  may  pose  financial  stability  risks  represent  USD 34 
trillion; two-thirds of which is composed of collective investment vehicles (CIVs) with features that 
make  them  susceptible  to  runs.  It  is  thus  of  key  importance  that  authorities  develop  and  use 
system-wide liquidity stress-testing tools, in order to address the risks of a “funds-run” in adverse 
market conditions. The FSB decided on this; it has to be implemented with a strong commitment 
by IOSCO and national regulators.  
The third main area of work is the regulatory framework for central counterparties (CCPs). The 
clearing obligation of OTC derivatives has fortunately reduced OTC transactions, but as a result 
CCPs  have  also  become  more  and  more  systemic  and  concentrated.    The  FSB  guidance  on  a 
recovery  and  resolution framework,  which is  currently  being  transposed into EU legislation,  is  a 
good step forward. Faced with Brexit, Europe has the additional imperative of not letting sources 
of systemic risk for the EU grow outside the EU. In this regard, the proposal recently made by the 
EU Commission is a step in the right direction, but it should be streamlined and strengthened to 
make  sure  that  euro-denominated  clearing  activities  are  supervised  and  so  located  in  the 
European Union when they exceed certain thresholds.  
One  additional  word  about  cyber-risks:  as  we  have  been  reminded  by  the  two  viral  attacks 
carried out in the last two months, we are at the same stage that medicine was at before Pasteur 
and vaccinations. The challenge is to take swift and decisive actions to enhance cyber resilience 
in the financial system, building notably on the G7 recommendations: the G7 is, at this stage, the 
key forum to act.    
 2.  Two requirements to consolidate what we have achieved so far.  
Although there are still some areas of work, tremendous progress has been made since the crisis 
to  enhance  the  resilience  of  the  global  financial  system.  I  believe  that  two  requirements  are 
necessary  to  consolidate  our  achievements.  The  first  one  is  to  remain  vigilant  to  avoid  any 
backtracking.  As  you  know,  the  US  Treasury  recently  published  a  “Report”,  exploring  the 
 2 
possibility  of  adjusting  its  national  banking  regulations iii .  Some  adjustments  to  national 
regulations,  applying  for  instance  to  locally-active  entities,  or  the  Volcker  rule,  may  indeed  be 
deemed  appropriate  and  legitimate.  But  withdrawing  from  internationally-agreed  minimum 
requirements which apply to globally-active entities – such as the FRTB or the NSFR standards, I 
want to insist on the Trading Book – would be completely different and a source of great concern 
for  all.  Any  temptation  of  competitive  deregulation  would  be  a  lose-lose  game  which  would 
increase the risks of a new financial crisis and therefore weigh on economic growth. International 
cooperation  on  financial  sector  regulation  is  our  common  good,  and,  fortunately,  the  Hamburg 
G20 Summit reaffirmed it.  
The second requirement is to carefully assess the impact of these new financial regulations. 
The Banque de France has supported the work of the FSB from its inception, notably to build the 
“policy  evaluation  framework”  to  assess  the  effects  of  G20  reforms.  This  was  endorsed  by  the 
Leaders of the G20 at the Hamburg Summit. This is a key part of the credibility of global financial 
reforms.  Ex-post  evaluations  will  make  it  possible  to  assess  whether  G20  financial  regulatory 
reforms  have  actually  achieved  their  intended  outcomes.  Going  forward,  these  evaluations  are 
meant  to  provide  a  basis  for  the  possible  fine-tuning  of  post-crisis  regulatory  reforms,  where 
relevant. What matters now is to make sure  that this framework is used in a timely manner. To 
this end, a tight schedule should be defined by the end of the year, so that  the first evaluations 
can be carried out in 2018.  
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  conclude  by  a  word  on  the  Paris  ecosystem  in  a  post-Brexit 
Europe. Brexit was and remains bad news, above all for our British friends. But it brings for us an 
opportunity.  The  EU  post-Brexit  financial  system  will  certainly  be  less  concentrated  than  it  is 
today and more active on the continent, based on Eurozone abundant savings. And, in this new 
environment,  the  Paris  financial  centre  has  obvious  advantages,  building  on  the  very  welcome 
measures announced by the Prime Minister to strengthen Paris’ attractiveness. To name a few, 
France  has  the  most  developed  capital  market  in  continental  Europe,  the  largest  asset 
management industry and is the leading private equity investor; French universities are renowned 
worldwide for the excellence of their finance teaching. Paris has everything it needs to be one of 
the best financial centres in the euro area: it depends on us, on all of us. You can rest assured 
that Banque de France and ACPR are strongly committed to fully playing their part in supporting 
the Paris ecosystem.  
                                                            
i G20 Leaders’ Declaration, Hamburg, 7/8 July 2017. 
ii Assets of “Other Financial Intermediaries” (OFIs); sample of 21 individual non-euro area jurisdictions and the 
euro area aggregate. Source: FSB, Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2016, May 2017. 
iii See U.S. Department of the Treasury, “A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities”, June 2017. 
 3 
