Yannis Stournaras: Greece and the euro area going forward
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  Delphi  Economic
Forum II "Greece and the euro area going forward", Delphi, 4 March 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  in  Delphi  to  address  an  audience  of  such
distinguished people, from academics to those involved in policy-making at the highest levels. In
my speech, I want to focus on two main themes. First, Greece. What progress has been made?
Where do we stand? What are the prospects for the economy not just over the short-to-medium
term but also in the long term? Second, I want to say a few remarks about the euro area. In
particular I want to discuss the steps taken by the ECB in order to lessen the impact of the crisis
in  the  euro  area,  including  changes  to  governance  in  EMU.  However,  looking  forward,  the
challenge facing the euro area is to make it more resilient to shocks and I will outline how, in my
view, resilience can be enhanced.
Greece: the current juncture
The Greek economy is at a turning point. Growth turned positive in the second quarter of 2016
and,  contrary  to  initial  forecasts,  it  turned  out  positive  for  the  year  as  a  whole.  Some  recent
softening of economic indicators can be put down to uncertainty in the face of delays in closing
the second review of the programme. Hopefully this is now moving forward. A rapid closure of
the review will help the economy to build on the 2016 over-performance and move quickly to a
faster growth path.
 1 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is important to emphasise just how far Greece has come since the onset of the crisis in 2009.
Adjustment, particularly of the flow disequilibria which characterized the Greek economy on the
eve of the crisis, has been considerable. The twin deficits have been eliminated. Between 2009
and  2016,  the  general  government  deficit  is  estimated  to  have  shrunk  by  approximately  14
percentage  points  of  GDP.  The  primary  balance  according  to  the  programme  definition  is
expected to have improved by 12 percentage points and is currently projected to reach a surplus
of around 2 percent of GDP in 2016, against a target of 0.5 percent of GDP. Adjusting for the
effect of the business cycle, the improvement in the primary balance comes in at more than 17
percentage points of potential GDP. This represents one of the largest fiscal adjustments ever
undertaken.
 2 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 The current account deficit as a percentage of GDP has fallen by 15 percentage points. For the
last two years the current account has effectively been in balance. Labour cost competitiveness
has been fully restored and price competitiveness is almost back at its level of 2000 and can be
expected to continue to improve with the implementation of further product market reforms that
raise competition in various sectors of the economy.
At  the  same  time,  sweeping  structural  reforms  have  been  implemented  covering  the  pension
system, the health system, labour markets, product markets, the business environment, public
administration,  the  tax  system  and  the  framework  in  which  fiscal  policy  is  conducted.  The
privatization programme is on-going, though there is a pressing need to speed up the process
and  actively  attract  foreign  investment.  Foreign  direct  investment  would  provide  an  additional
boost to growth, not least by financing new investment.
 4 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
  5 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is evidence that the economy has been undergoing a rebalancing towards the tradables
sector. The size of the tradables sector relative to that of nontradables has been increasing since
2010 – whether measured in terms of gross value added, employment or the volume of output.
The  ratio  of  tradables-to-nontradables  prices  has  also  risen,  encouraging  resources  in  the
economy to move into tradables. This rebalancing has been reflected in a rise in the openness of
the  economy.  Exports  of  goods  have  also  grown  in  line  with  our  euro  area  partners.
Underperformance  in  services  is  related  to  tourism  and  shipping.  Tourism  underperformed  in
2011–2012  as  a  consequence  of  uncertainty,  but  has  since  seen  a  sharp  rise.  Shipping
underperformed largely due to global factors and, latterly, the imposition of capital controls.
 6 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  spite  of  these  positive  developments,  I  do  not  wish  to  underplay  the  fact  that  considerable
stock  disequilibria  remain.  Unemployment,  though  falling,  remains  high.  The  labour  market
reforms already enacted have contributed significantly to moving us into a recovery stage where
there is a high elasticity between GDP growth and employment growth. Indeed, even in 2015,
when  growth  was  negative,  positive  employment  growth  was  observed.  However,  the
composition  of  unemployment,  coupled  with  the  high  percentage  of  young  people  “Not  in
Education, Employment or Training”, highlight a need to focus on life-long learning and a better
matching of skills. The active employment policies and the vocational training programmes of the
Greek  Manpower  Employment  Organisation  (OAED)  can  contribute  in  this  direction,  with
appropriate planning and targeting and the optimal utilisation of available, mostly EU, funds.
 7 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Non-performing  loans  remain  high  and  an  efficient  management  of  those  loans  is  of  utmost
importance  for  the  banking  sector  and  economic  growth.  Many  initiatives  have  already  been
taken, such as, the Bank’s Guidelines for an enhanced governance framework and the adoption
of  operational  targets  agreed  by  the  banks  and  the  Bank  of  Greece/ECB  to  reduce  non-
performing  exposures  by  40%  by  2019.  On-going  initiatives  include  the  revision  of  the  out-of-
court workout and bankruptcy law.
 8 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Finally, the ratio of general government debt to GDP is still high. In 2008 that ratio stood at around
110%.  It  is  now  around  180%.  The  debt  path  has  been  strongly  affected  by  the  so-called
snowball effect – that arises from a combination of interest rates on debt being much higher than
growth. Indeed, from 2010 to 2016, the snowball effect is estimated at some 82% of GDP. But
whatever the causes of its rise, it is crucial that it is placed on a sustainable path.
 9 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
Prospects for the Greek economy
  10 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
What are the prospects for the Greek economy? Strong positive growth rates are expected over
the short and medium term as the output gap closes. Consumption is expected to continue to
rebound,  driven  by  employment  growth.  Investment  and  exports  are  expected  to  increase  as
confidence is restored and financial conditions improve. At the same time, the fiscal outlook is
promising.  Over-performance  in  2016  will  be  carried  over  into  2017.  Indeed,  we  have  already
seen  tax  revenue  over-performance  in  January  of  this  year.  Finally,  the  clearance  of  arrears
accelerated in the second half of 2016 injecting much needed liquidity into the real economy.
 The recently published Winter Forecasts by the European Commission are in line with the above
story.  Growth  is  expected  to  accelerate  to  2.7%  in  2017  and  to  3.1%  in  2018,  supported  by
consumption growth of 1.6% in both years, two-digit growth in gross fixed capital formation and
export growth of around 4% in 2017, rising to almost 5% in 2018.
 11 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 What  about  the  longer-term  economic  outlook?  Labour  force  dynamics  will  support  potential
growth in the medium term. But in the long run, growth will come from increased productivity. In
this respect, structural reforms will unleash the growth potential of the Greek economy, with the
OECD estimating that the impact of implemented and planned reforms over 10 years would be
to raise output by 13.4 per cent. Analysis done by my colleagues in the Bank provides a baseline
scenario  for  a  rebalancing  of  the  economy  from  the  demand  side  that  has  the  following
characteristics. Consumption as a percentage of GDP declines by around 10 percentage points,
moving closer to the euro area average. Investment and exports fill the gap in domestic demand.
From the supply-side, I have already noted the rebalancing towards tradables, supported by the
shift in relative price inflation since 2010.
 12 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 The Bank of Greece has recently made a number of proposals in the area of fiscal policy and
government debt which would go a long way to securing the performance outlined above and
reducing these stock imbalances.
Firstly, there is the issue of the fiscal mix. To a significant extent, the overperformance of fiscal
policy relative to target in 2016 was due to increases in tax rates – both indirect and direct tax
rates  along  with  social  security  contribution  rates.  This  emphasis  on  taxation  needs  to  be
reduced since it stifles growth, increases unpaid debts of the private sector towards the public
sector and encourages tax evasion and undeclared employment. Rather emphasis needs to be
placed on restraining and restructuring non-productive spending and making more effective and
efficient use of the public sector’s assets, especially land.
Second, there is the issue of the fiscal target. According to estimates from the Bank of Greece, a
lowering of the general government primary surplus target from 2021 onwards to 2 per cent of
GDP, from the 3.5 per cent that is envisaged now, would be consistent with debt sustainability if
combined with some mild debt relief measures and structural reforms to raise potential growth.
The  easing  of  the  primary  surplus  targets,  together  with  the  implementation  of  the  agreed
structural  reforms,  would  put  the  necessary  conditions  in  place  for  a  gradual  lowering  of  tax
rates, with positive multiplier effects on economic growth.
Finally, there is the issue of what debt relief measures. The short-term measures decided at the
Eurogroup  meeting  of  the  5th  of  December  last  year  are  a  positive  step  and  are  expected  to
reduce public debt as a ratio of GDP by 20 percentage points by 2060. At the same time they
also reduce the annual gross financing needs of the general government by around 5 percentage
points of GDP.
However,  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  debt  going  forward,  additional  medium-term
measures  are  also  necessary.  When  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  above  100%,  measures  that
reduce  interest  payments  on  debt  can  improve  the  ratio  quicker  than  a  rise  in  the  primary
balance. For example, with a debt-to-GDP ratio of 180%, a 1 percentage point reduction in the
 13 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
average interest rate on debt will reduce the ratio of debt to GDP by 1.8 percentage points. By
contrast, a rise in the primary surplus as a percentage of GDP by 1 percentage point lowers the
debt-to-GDP ratio by only 1 percentage point (assuming that the fiscal multiplier is 0 which, as
we well know, it is not). A similar effect to lowering the interest rate can be achieved through a
rise in nominal growth.
For  debt  to  be  sustainable,  it  is  important  to  look  at  the  gross  financing  needs  of  the  general
government. The Eurogroup agreement of the 24th May last year set the goal for gross financing
needs of the government to be below 15 per cent of GDP in the medium term and below 20 per
cent over the long term. With a primary surplus goal of 2 per cent, gross financing needs are
higher than they would be if the primary surplus were held at 3.5 per cent.
 14 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 However,  mild  debt  relief  could  reduce  them  and  keep  them  within  the  limits  set  by  the
Eurogroup. The interest burden is low until 2021 but increases substantially thereafter because
of payments of deferred interest on the EFSF loans and interest on new debt issued in financial
markets. An exercise done at the Bank looks at the impact of smoothing interest payments for
EFSF loans. Looking at the right-hand-side diagram on the slide, the exercise entails that interest
payments  are  smoothed,  as  in  option  1,  instead  of  remaining  as  they  are  now  (the  baseline
scenario). What does such an exercise imply for the path of debt and gross financing needs?
The  baseline  high  surplus  scenario  assumes  primary  surpluses  of  3.5  per  cent  of  GDP  until
2027 and a gradual decline to 2 per cent by 2037. The baseline low surplus assumes only three
years of primary surpluses of 3.5 per cent of GDP and 2 per cent thereafter. Clearly the lower
surpluses  imply  a  smaller  fall  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  and  higher  gross  financing  needs.
However, the smoothing of interest can mimic the baseline high surplus case both on the path of
the debt-to-GDP ratio and in terms of gross financing needs. On the basis of the definition of
sustainability  agreed  by  the  Eurogroup,  the  debt  is  sustainable  since  gross  financing  needs
remain under 15 per cent of GDP in the medium term and under 20 per cent in the long term.
This exercise is indicative of how even a mild debt relief can have significant effects on the debt
profile.  Of  course,  were  the  interest  smoothing  accompanied  by  higher  growth,  as  a
consequence  of  lower  primary  surpluses,  then  the  debt-to-GDP  profile  and  gross  financing
needs would be even more favourable. Alternatively if interest rate smoothing were to occur and
the costs shared equally between Greece and the ESM, this would also lead to more favorable
outcomes.
 15 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
The euro area: steps taken to address the crisis and to strengthen the governance of
EMU
Let me now turn to the issue of the euro area and the steps that have been taken to address the
sovereign debt crisis.
 The ECB forcefully lessened country risks in 2012 with the announcement of unlimited Outright
Monetary Transactions (OMT) and the signal sent by ECB President Mario Draghi that the ECB
would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro. More generally, the ECB has been addressing
the severe and persistent disinflationary forces in the euro area with a broad set of standard and
non-standard  monetary  policy  measures.  To  a  great  extent,  these  measures  have  helped  to
improve financial conditions and boost the recovery in the euro area. Macroprudential policy tools
are also now available to secure financial stability.
After the ad-hoc Greek Loan Facility that financed the first Greek bailout programme in 2010, the
euro area set up the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to provide financial assistance
to distressed Member States. The EFSF was replaced by the more powerful European Stability
Mechanism (ESM) in October 2012.
In response to the strong negative feedback loops between banks and sovereigns as well as
contagion  among  national  financial  markets,  European  leaders,  in  2012,  initiated  the  Banking
Union. Its three pillars are: the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the Single Resolution Mechanism
and the still-to-be completed common Deposit Insurance Scheme.
Significant  progress  has  also  been  made  as  regards  fiscal  and  economic  surveillance.  The
 16 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) was substantially strengthened by the adoption of the so-called
“Six Pack”, and surveillance and coordination were enhanced through the so-called “Two Pack”.
The European Semester, the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure and the Country Specific
Recommendations are all contributing to stronger macroeconomic surveillance.
The way forward
 The  euro  area  is  now  recovering.  However,  the  recovery  faces  headwinds,  relating  both  to
political  uncertainty  linked  to  the  rise  of  populism  and  anti-EU  rhetoric  and  the  surge  of
protectionist  voices.  The  populist  voices  around  the  globe  ‒  and  particularly  in  developed
economies  ‒  can  be  traced  to  the  undesirable  consequences  of  globalization  and  technical
progress. Yet protectionism is not a first best response. Specific concerns include the failure to
tackle high and persistent unemployment, worsening income distribution, the fear that the influx
of immigrants will affect societies’ identities and living standards, and tax evasion by multinational
companies ‒ mostly related to uncontrolled off-shore activities. Additionally, the refugee crisis,
fear  of  rising  terrorism  and  Brexit  generate  more  uncertainty.  Finally,  there  are  considerable
worries related to US policy and especially its policies in the financial sector.
 17 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 18 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Moreover, the recovery in the euro area is slow compared to past recoveries, inflation remains
persistently low, the output gap is still large in several Member States, investment as a share of
GDP continues to be below its pre-crisis levels, and the rising current account surplus in the
euro area as a whole reflects weak internal demand relative to production. Crisis legacies such
as high and persistent unemployment, low total hours worked, high public and private debt are
factors weighing negatively on recovery prospects.
In  view  of  the  aforementioned  risks  and  challenges,  and  given  the  fact  that  the  ECB  cannot
maintain  loose  monetary  policy  for  ever,  the  way  forward  should  involve  structural  reforms  to
improve potential growth, reduce structural unemployment and make the euro area more resilient
to future shocks. Greater economic policy coordination, convergence and risk-sharing inside the
euro area are also necessary.
 19 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
Make the euro area more resilient to future shocks
Euro area economies should strengthen economic resilience by reducing their vulnerability and
fostering smoother adjustment to future shocks. To achieve this, it is imperative to address crisis
legacies  and  macroeconomic  imbalances.  In  addition,  member  states  should  improve  their
capacity  to  absorb  shocks  internally.  Building  such  a  capacity  implies  removing  rigidities  in
labour,  product  and  services  markets.  This  will  support  economic  adjustment  through  price
flexibility and facilitate a smooth and speedy reallocation of resources. Price flexibility allows for
the recovery of any loss in competitiveness, and fosters a faster adjustment of relative prices,
which,  in  the  absence  of  exchange  rate  adjustment,  is  crucial  for  the  rapid  reallocation  of
production resources to the most dynamic sectors and firms.
According  to  a  European  Commission  study,  price  flexibility  and  the  rapid  reallocation  of
resources require wage flexibility, ease of market entry of new firms, an effective and efficient
insolvency framework including a second chance for entrepreneurs, a friendly environment for
doing business, a well-functioning justice system, low levels of corruption, the availability of high
quality  public  services  and  public  infrastructure,  and  a  regulatory  framework  conducive  to
competition.
Such  reforms,  besides  increasing  the  capacity  of  euro  area  economies  to  absorb  shocks
internally, increase productivity and long-term growth. Furthermore, some structural reforms (for
example,  cutting  red  tape)  raise  expectations  of  future  income,  and  thus  boost  confidence,
investment and domestic demand in the short term, supporting the recovery. In addition, policies
that raise labour force participation and reduce structural unemployment are essential to boost
future growth and employment.
These reforms effectively make markets more flexible. But they can also make individuals’ lives
more uncertain. To this end, it is important to improve social protection – a policy that has come
 20 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
to be known as flexicurity.
Reforms  to  the  institutional  setting  of  EMU  to  improve  economic  policy  coordination,
convergence and risk sharing
Euro  area  Member  States  should  enhance  real  and  cyclical  convergence,  which  requires
establishing closer economic policy coordination. Improved transparency and predictability in the
interpretation  and  enforcement  of  fiscal  rules  (Stability  and  Growth  Pact)  and  ownership  and
credible  implementation  of  the  country  specific  recommendations  are  prerequisites  for
successful policy coordination.
Furthermore,  the  adjustment  mechanism  within  EMU  should  be  facilitated  by  ensuring  that  it
works in a symmetric way, i.e. both for countries with sustained external deficits and for those
with  sustained  external  surpluses.  To  this  end,  the  Macroeconomic  Imbalances  Procedure
should be strengthened and foster reforms in countries that have been accumulating large and
sustained  current  account  surpluses.  Crisis  stricken  countries  have  improved  their  external
positions on account of both higher exports driven by structural reforms and lower imports due to
the  economic  recession.  By  contrast,  countries  that  had  high  pre-crisis  current  account
surpluses have not contributed to the much-needed rebalancing as domestic demand remains
insufficient and potential growth low. This lack of progress in countries with sustained current
account surpluses puts further strain on the adjustment efforts of deficit countries as it implies
that more internal devaluation is required to achieve sustainable competitive gains. Moreover, this
is even more difficult in the current low inflation environment.
Risk-sharing in EMU should be enhanced along the lines proposed in the Five Presidents’ Report
in  2015  and  other  proposals,  such  as  those  released  by  the  Jacques  Delors  Institute  in  the
autumn of 2016. Private risk-sharing can be encouraged by actions that lead to a true financial
 21 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
union  with  fully  integrated  financial  and  capital  markets.  These  actions  involve  completing  the
Banking Union, by creating a common Deposit Insurance Scheme and by setting up a credible
common  fiscal  backstop  to  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  that  underlies  the  Single  Resolution
Mechanism,  perhaps  by  strengthening  the  financial  resources  of  the  ESM.  There  are  various
options for the formation of a common Deposit Insurance Scheme, some involve a re-insurance
mechanism and lending arrangements between national insurance schemes, while others the
formation of a single European Deposit Insurance Scheme. The ESM could be upgraded in order
to  become  the  fiscal  backstop  for  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  and  the  common  Deposit
Insurance  Scheme.  Such  steps  are  necessary  to  improve  confidence  in  the  banking  system,
break the feedback loops between banks and sovereigns and improve risk-sharing.
A  genuine  Capital  Markets  Union  can  be  promoted  through  legislative  changes  that  impose
harmonization  towards  best  practices  on  securitization,  accounting,  insolvency  and  company
law,  property  rights  etc.  Such  changes  would  allow  for  deeper  integration  of  bond  and  equity
markets and ensure that companies (and in particular SMEs) can gain access to capital markets
on  top  of  bank  funding.  The  Capital  Markets  Union  will  enhance  cross-border  investment  and
consequently strengthen private sector risk-sharing across countries, as returns on assets and
access  to  credit  become  less  correlated  with  domestic  economic  conditions  in  individual
Member States.
Besides enhancing the channels of private risk-sharing, a fiscal stabilization tool to cushion large
macroeconomic shocks, that is, public risk-sharing, is warranted in the euro area. Such a tool,
possibly  administered  by  a  euro  area  finance  ministry  with  parliamentary  legitimacy  and
responsibility, would provide essential insurance against asymmetric shocks that induce regional
disparities, while, in case of symmetric shocks, it would complement the single monetary policy
in  its  role  as  a  cyclical  stabilization  tool,  in  particular  when  policy  rates  are  at  the  zero  lower
bound.
Whilst there appears little appetite at present for fiscal union, there are alternative ways forward
as  proposed  by  both  policy  makers  and  academics  alike.  For  example,  building  on  the
experience of the already-existing European Fund for Strategic Investments (the Juncker Plan), it
would  be  politically  feasible  to  strike  a  deal  that  promotes  structural  reforms  in  exchange  for
investment financed through a common pool of EU funds. These EU funds could come either
from some intergovernmental investment fund or from the EU budget, while Eurobonds issued
by  the  ESM  could  also  be  considered  when  conditions  permit,  using  the  appropriate
conditionality. Such a “reform-for-investment policy” would provide the impetus for, on the one
hand, more structural reforms that increase cyclical convergence and reduce macroeconomic
imbalances and, on the other, more private and public investment that enhance productivity, spur
convergence and foster social cohesion. Such a policy would thus strengthen both supply and
demand. Public investment could be encouraged by including only amortization in the general
government balance in exchange for reforms.
Alternative options involve a common unemployment insurance scheme, financed through social
insurance contributions, or an all-purpose “rainy day” fund financed by annual contributions of
Member States in good times. Such options could work to enhance the attractiveness of further
integration in the euro area.
To avoid moral hazard, public risk sharing has to go hand-in-hand with greater coordination of
economic  policies  and  could  be 
implementation  of  country  specific
recommendations  and  structural  reforms,  as  well  as  sound  and  responsible  fiscal  policies  in
compliance with the existing EU rules. In the long run, a European Monetary Fund could be set
up  to  replace  the  ESM.  This  Fund  would  act  as  a  lender  of  last  resort  to  member  states.
Governments  in  distress  would  be  able  to  borrow  from  the  Fund  in  exchange  for  ever  tighter
conditionality. The Head of the Fund would be the euro area finance minister and at the same
time the EU Finance Commissioner. His/her remit would be to represent the interests of the euro
linked 
the 
to 
 22 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
area  as  a  whole  and  he/she  would  be  accountable  to  a  Joint  Committee  of  the  European
Parliament and the national parliaments.
Conclusions
Ladies and Gentlemen,
In  conclusion,  I  want  to  emphasize  that,  despite  the  progress  achieved  in  recent  years,  both
Greece  and  the  euro  area  face  several  challenges  and  risks  ahead.  There  is  no  time  for
complacency because Europe is not adequately prepared for a new crisis and the ECB cannot
maintain loose monetary policy for ever. Further action is imperative. The completion of the EMU
along the lines proposed in the 2015 Five Presidents’ Report is a prerequisite for its long-term
viability  and  the  long-term  prosperity  of  its  Member  States.  That  this  will  inevitably  require
changes  to  the  Treaty  is  surely  clear.  But  Treaties  should  not  be  written  in  stone.  Periodic
revisions are necessary to adapt to changing circumstances.
As  regards  Greece,  the  rapid  completion  of  the  second  review  and  the  consistent  and
determined  implementation  of  the  programme  are  prerequisites  for  ensuring  a  sustainable
economic  recovery.  Moreover,  following  the  recent  approval  of  the  short-term  debt  relief
measures  by  the  ESM  and  the  EFSF,  the  completion  of  the  second  review  would  enable  the
adoption of decisions on medium- and long-term measures to ensure the sustainability of Greek
public debt, and on the inclusion of Greek government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative easing
programme.
The actions described above, if implemented, will set in motion a virtuous circle paving the way
to the full return of the Greek government and Greek businesses to international financial markets
and the gradual relaxation and ultimately the lifting of capital controls. Such developments will
signal  the  definite  exit  from  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  return  to  financial  normality  and  to
sustainable medium-term growth
 23 / 23
BIS central bankers' speeches
