Gent Sejko: Ninth and tenth review of the arrangement with the IMF
concluded
Speech by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference with the
IMF mission and the Minister of Finance, Tirana, 24 January 2017.
 On the completion of the ninth and tenth review of the Arrangement with the IMF
The beginning of 2017 coincides with the conclusion of Albania’s arrangement with the IMF. This
Arrangement has guided our development policies over the past three years, and has been a
roadmap  for  our  structural  reforms  agenda  in  the  long  term. Against  this  backdrop,  the  last
review  of  the  Arrangement  not  only  provides  for  a  comprehensive  assessment  on  the
achievement  of  its  objectives,  but  also  helps  in  identifying  challenges  to  the  country’s
development  and  contributes  to  discussions  on  the  policies  that  need  to  be  designed  and
implemented for supporting the development.
Let me now outline the opinion of the Bank of Albania on this review.
The  Arrangement  with  the  IMF  was  signed  amid  an  external  economic  and  financial
environment  surrounded  by  uncertainties,  and  in  response  to  deepening  internal
development  challenges.  Economic  growth  was  on  the  downtrend,  public  debt  and  non-
performing  loans  were  set  on  the  uptrend,  and  uncertainties  in  the  Albanian  economy  and
financial markets were relatively high. With the support provided through expertise and funds, the
agreed programme with the IMF has aimed at drawing up an appropriate monetary and fiscal
policy mix, correcting fiscal imbalances, improving the balance sheets of economic agents, and
implementing an ambitious structural reforms programme, to support the long-term development
of Albania.
The  Bank  of  Albania  assesses  that  the  Arrangement  has  achieved 
its  major
objectives: correcting structural imbalances and setting the country on a steadier path to long-
term development.
Economic growth has been improving in the recent years, driven – among others – by the
combination of the monetary stimulus and fiscal consolidation, reduction of risk premiums in the
economy  and  improvement  of  the  balance  sheets  in  the  real  sector  of  the  economy.  From  a
longer-term perspective, the structural reforms and the improved business climate should open
the way for faster, more balanced and stable growth.
In  addition,  excluding  the  effects  of  supply-side  shocks,  inflation  has  trended  upward
recently. The improvement of economic activity, implementation of a prudent monetary policy
and  a  better  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  render  us  confident  for  the  stable  return  of
inflation to our 3% target.
Lastly, Albania has made notable progress with regard to strengthening other economic
and financial equilibriums. Safety nets in the financial system have been strengthened. The
institutional framework that shapes the coordination, design and implementation of measures for
safeguarding financial stability has been improved. The legal framework that disciplines contract
enforcement has been improved. Credit risk has been lowered and non-performing loans have
been  reduced,  although  their  level  remains  high. After  peaking  in  2015, Albania’s  public  debt
appears to be set on a downward trend. Also, our external position remains stable and current
account deficits have been financed by high levels of foreign direct investments.
Turning to the latest developments, the Bank of Albania deems that the recent economic
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
and financial indicators have been in line with our projections.
This performance reconfirms our scenario of expectations for the outlook.  The  Bank  of
Albania expects economic activity to improve in the medium-term horizon. This improvement will
enable  the  return  of  the  economy  to  equilibrium,  the  further  improvement  of  indicators  in  the
labour market, and the return of inflation to target.
The outlook remains positive, but its guaranteeing requires prudent economic policies
and  further  structural  reforms.  Such  policies  and  reforms  should  be,  in  essence,  a
continuation of the philosophy that has guided the initiatives and steps we have undertaken in the
recent years.
To sum up, the Bank of Albania judges that:
The  actual  economic  policy  combination,  based  on  an  accommodative  monetary
policy  and  fiscal  policy  stance  set  on  public  debt  reduction,  should  be
maintained.  The  monetary  policy  should  maintain  the  accommodative  stance  in  the
medium-term horizon, whereas the intensity of the monetary stimulus should adapt to the
needs of the country’s development.
The  business  climate  at  home  should  be  further  improved.  The  Bank  of  Albania
considers that the attraction of foreign investments as well as the support and stimulation of
domestic investments should be at the focus of decision makers.
Structural  reforms  should  be  accelerated  and  Albania’s  competitive  advantages
should be enhanced further.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank the IMF Mission for the useful and constructive
discussions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
