   SPEECH  
 BY 
 THE GOVERNOR OF THE RESERVE BANK OF MALAWI 
Mr DALITSO KABAMBE, PhD 
 ON THE 
 OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF TIP-OFFS ANONYMOUS 
PROGRAMME 
 11 JULY 2017 
Statement  by  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  Governor, 
Dalitso Kabambe, PhD on the Official Launch of the RBM 
Tip-offs Anonymous Scheme  
 
-  The  Director,  of  the  Anti-Corruption  Bureau,  Mr  Lucas 
Kondowe; 
-  The  Director,  Financial 
Intelligence  Authority,  Mrs 
Atuweni Juwayeyi-Agbermodji; 
-  The  Representative  From  Deloitte  Tip-Offs  Anonymous, 
Mrs Vanda Phekani; 
-  The  Deputy  Governor,  Corporate  Services,  Ms  Meg 
Kajiyanike; 
-  The  Deputy  Governor,  Economics  and  Regulation,  Dr 
Grant P. Kabango; 
-  Members of Staff in the Reserve Bank; 
-  Members of the Press here present; 
-  Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Cashgate  is  the  worst  tragedy  this  nation  has  witnessed  in 
modern  times.    Our  nation  has  been  taken  backwards  many 
years  while  our  sister  countries  from  within  the  region  and 
beyond  have  progressed.  We  have  learnt  bitter  lessons  and 
bounce back as an  economy, we need to  move with  renewed 
commitment and zeal to fight corruption in all its forms in all 
our places. 
This  is  the  reason  why,  among  the  core  principles,  His 
Excellency  Prof  Arthur  Peter  Mutharika,  the  President  of  the 
Republic  of  Malawi,  is  advocating  that  we  must  be  a  nation 
 Page 2 
not  only  of  hard  working  and  patriotism  but  also  of  high 
integrity. 
When  I  got  appointed  on  21st  April,  this  year,  when  I  was 
asked about priorities, I included one where the Reserve Bank 
of  Malawi  plays  a  central  role  in  ensuring  that  no  public 
money under any circumstances  to be pilfered through theft. 
I am delighted therefore today that I am joined by the Director 
of  the  Anti-Corruption  Bureau,  Mr  Lucas  Kondowe,  the 
Director of the Financial Intelligence Authority, Mrs Atuweni 
Juwayeyi-Agbermodji  and  the  Deloitte’s  representative  Mrs 
Vanda  Phekani,  as  we  launch  the  first  scheme  towards  the 
fight against corruption in the RBM and on public resources. 
In  a  few  days’  time  from  today,  the  RBM  will  also  be 
launching another scheme, whereby for any payment above a 
particular  threshold,  say  K5  million,  from  Government 
resources, an alert in form of a text message will be sent to the 
Minister  of  Finance,  the  Secretary  to  the  Treasury,  the 
Accountant  General  and 
the 
respective  Minister  from  which  the  transaction  is  being 
charged, the Principle Secretary in that Ministry, the Head of 
Finance and all those who need to know about the transaction 
will be informed by way of their mobile phones so that where 
the transaction is dubious, immediate corrective measures can 
be taken. 
the  Budget  Director  and 
We  live  in  a  changing  world.  In  the  past,  we  were  worried 
with people standing by the roadside at night to steal from us, 
today  thieves  have  become  sophisticated  and  are  in  white 
collar,  robbing  us  in  broad  day  light  and  often  these  acts  are 
perpetrated  by  those  we  trust  and  in  position.    We  need  to 
remain  vigilant  and  we  need  to  raise  our  sophistication  even 
 Page 3 
more,  so  that  they  do  not  beat  us.    This  is  why  the  RBM  is 
leading  the  way  in  complementing  Government  efforts  and 
those  of 
the  Financial 
Intelligence  Authority  and  others  to  ensure  that  the  RBM  is 
free  of  corruption  in  all  its  staff,  premises,  processes  and 
systems. 
the  Anti-Corruption  Bureau, 
We  stand  here  to  declare  total  war  on  corruption.  It  is 
therefore  my  absolute  delight  that  I  can  preside  over  this 
function. 
The  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi  also  recently 
approved our Fraud and Anti-corruption Policy, which defines 
the  stance  of  the  Bank  on  fraud  and  corruption.  The  Policy 
reinforces existing systems, policies and procedures, rules and 
regulations  of  the  Bank  towards  the  fight  against  fraud  and 
corruption. It aims at deterring, preventing, detecting, reacting 
to  and  reducing  the  likelihood  of  fraud  and  corruption.    The 
Policy  confirms  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  a  culture  of  zero 
tolerance  to  fraud  and  corruption  in  all  its  forms  within  and 
outside  the  Bank.    Our  Motto  speaks  for  itself,  “Not  in  the 
Reserve Bank of Malawi”. 
The  Tip-Offs  Anonymous  is  one  of  the  measures  of  curbing 
corruption  within  the  Bank.    With  the  Tip-Offs  Anonymous, 
you  can  report  malpractices  and  still  remain  anonymous 
which  has  proven  a  success  with  other  public  institutions.  I 
am  sure  that  this  whistle-blower  hotline  creates  a  better 
alternative  for  members  of  staff  and  the  general  public  to 
report any unethical behaviours. 
I  am  aware  that  misguided  persons  may  want  to  misuse  the 
system  to  the  detriment  of  others.  Let  me  be  clear  here  that 
 Page 4 
each  and  every 
investigated and scrutinised before arriving at a conclusion. 
item  would  be 
reported 
thoroughly 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  some  of  you  might  wonder  why  the 
public launch and not just issue an internal communication to 
members  of  staff.  This  programme  has  to  be  used  by  all 
stakeholders  who  deal  with  the  Bank  including  the  general 
public  if  we are  to  win the war  against  fraud and corruption. 
We  would  like  the  general  public  to  report  on  many  issues 
including; 
a. Production of counterfeit currency; 
b. Illegal externalisation of currency; 
c. Operation of unlicensed financial institutions; 
d. Fraud and mismanagement; 
e. Corrupt practices; 
f.  Abuse of office and office facilities; 
g. Procurement related malpractices. 
It  is  therefore,  against  this  background,  distinguished  guests, 
ladies  and  gentlemen  that  the  Bank  decided  to  subscribe  to 
Tip-Offs Anonymous as a mechanism for early detection and 
a  deterrent  against  fraud,  corruption  and  any  unethical 
concerns the Bank may encounter. 
therefore, 
I  am  particularly  pleased, 
the 
programme  has  already  started  producing  fruits  and  it  is 
expected that with this launch, more reports will be received. 
It is imperative that we should, indeed, be adequately familiar 
with  the  reporting  procedures  like  the  Toll  Free  hotline,  the 
to  note 
that 
 Page 5 
postal address, emails and the website as they have to become 
part  of  our  daily  operations  in  reporting  any  malpractices 
observed. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  this  programme  will  only  work  if 
people  use  it.  I  therefore,  urge  you  to  take  this  programme 
seriously as  it is  the  safe  way  to  report  any  malpractices and 
remain  anonymous  and  also  get  rewarded  for  the  good  tip 
made. Please inform as many as you can so that together we 
can root out the evil among us. I need to reiterate that we are 
serious  as  our  motto  states  “Not  in  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Malawi”.  
With  these  few  remarks,  I  now  declare  the  RBM  Tip-Offs 
Anonymous Programme officially launched. Let’s Join Hands 
in the fight against unethical behaviour. 
I thank you all for your kind attention. 
 RESERVE BANK OF MALAWI 
11 July 2017 
 Page 6 
