Hiroshi Nakaso: Japan's economy and monetary policy
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with business
leaders, Hiroshima, 26 July 2017.
Accomompanying slides.
Introduction
 It is my pleasure to have the opportunity today to exchange views with administrative, financial,
and business leaders in Hiroshima Prefecture. I would like to take this opportunity to express my
sincerest  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  Hiroshima
Branch.
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held last week, the Bank formulated its projections, such
as for Japan’s economic activity and prices through fiscal 2019, and released them in the July
2017 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report). Today, I would like to talk about
the Bank’s outlook for Japan’s economic activity and prices as well as its thinking behind the
conduct of monetary policy, while outlining the Outlook Report.
I. Recent developments in and outlook for economic activity
Overseas economies
Let  me  start  by  talking  about  developments  in  economic  activity.  I  would  first  like  to  touch  on
developments in overseas economies.
Overseas  economies  have  continued  to  grow  at  a  moderate  pace  on  the  whole  (Chart  1).  In
particular, remarkable improvements have been observed in the manufacturing sector and trade
activity, and their positive effects have spread globally. Indicators of business sentiment in the
manufacturing sector have been on an improving trend in many economies since the second half
of 2016, and trade volumes have accelerated their pace of increase recently on a global basis,
mainly for the United States and Asia.
By  region,  the  U.S.  and  European  economies  have  continued  to  recover  firmly,  mainly  in  the
household sector, particularly owing to an improvement in the employment and income situation.
The Chinese economy has continued to see stable growth on the whole, partly due to the effects
of  authorities’  measures  to  support  economic  activity.  Under  such  circumstances,  other
emerging  economies  and  commodity-exporting  economies  have  picked  up  on  the  whole,
particularly  reflecting  a  pick-up  in  exports  and  a  bottoming  out  of  commodity  prices.  Positive
developments have started to be observed in Russia and Brazil, for which economic recovery
had been lagging behind.
With regard to the outlook, the growth rates of overseas economies are expected to increase
moderately  as  advanced  economies  continue  growing  steadily  and  a  recovery  in  emerging
economies takes hold on the back of the steady growth in advanced economies and the effects
of  policy  measures  taken  by  emerging  economies.  Looking  at  the  weighted  averages  of  the
International Monetary Fund’s (IMF’s) July 2017 projections for real GDP growth rates of individual
economies  and  regions,  by  value  of  exports  from  Japan,  the  growth  rates  of  overseas
economies  are  projected  to  increase  moderately  through  2018  from  3.1  percent  in  2016,  and
remain stable at around 3.5 percent.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Recent developments in Japan’s economic activity
Japan’s  economy  is  expanding  moderately,  strongly  supported  by  such  growth  in  overseas
economies, along with an increase in domestic demand (Chart 2). It is the first time in about nine
years — since March 2008, that is, before the collapse of Lehman Brothers — that the Bank
assesses the current situation of the economy as “expanding.” This assessment is based on the
fact that, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating, the output gap that shows the
utilization  of  capital  and  labor  has  exceeded  the  long-term  average  of  0  percent  and  that  a
positive output gap has taken hold.
Let me elaborate on this point. First, in the corporate sector, exports have been on an increasing
trend  on  the  back  of  a  pick-up  in  emerging  economies,  and  production  also  has  been  on  an
increasing trend reflecting an increase in demand both at home and abroad (Chart 3). In this
situation, corporate profits have improved, and the ratio of current profits to sales for all industries
and  enterprises  marked  a  record  high  level  for  two  consecutive  quarters  since  the  October-
December  quarter  of  2016.  It  was  reconfirmed  in  the  Bank’s  June  2017 Tankan  (Short-Term
Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  released  at  the  beginning  of  July  that  business
sentiment has improved, and across a wider range of industries, as seen in the diffusion index
(DI)  for  business  conditions  for  all  industries  and  enterprises  having  improved  for  four
consecutive quarters. Under such a favorable environment, business fixed investment has been
on a moderate increasing trend.
Turning to the household sector, supply-demand conditions in the labor market have continued to
tighten  steadily  and  employee  income  has  increased  moderately  (Chart  4).  The  active  job
openings-to-applicants  ratio  for  May  2017  stands  at  1.49  times,  exceeding  the  highest  figure
during  the  bubble  period  and  reaching  a  level  last  seen  in  1974.  The  unemployment  rate  has
declined to around 3 percent recently, which shows that the employment situation has remained
close to full employment. Against the background of such tightening of labor market conditions,
wages have risen moderately. In particular, the year-on-year rate of increase in hourly scheduled
cash earnings of part-time employees has seen a clear improvement, being in the range of 2.0-
2.5  percent  of  late.  Meanwhile,  with  regard  to  private  consumption,  although  relatively  weak
developments had been seen in some of its indicators through the first half of 2016, it has picked
up thereafter and has increased its resilience recently (Chart 5). Although replacement demand
for durable goods such as automobiles and household electrical appliances is pushing up private
consumption to a certain degree, a steady improvement in the employment and income situation
—  including  its  effects  on  consumer  sentiment  —  is  likely  to  be  substantially  contributing  to
growth in private consumption.
Outlook for Japan’s economic activity
Next, I would like to turn to the Bank’s outlook for Japan’s economic activity. Japan’s economy is
likely  to  continue  its  moderate  expansion.  Specifically,  exports  are  expected  to  continue  their
moderate  increasing  trend  backed  by  an  improvement  in  overseas  economies,  and  business
fixed investment and private consumption are projected to follow an increasing trend on the back
of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  the  effects  of  the  government’s  large-scale
stimulus measures. Japan’s economy is likely to see sustainable expansion in a well-balanced
manner in which demand at home and abroad increases with a virtuous cycle from income to
spending being maintained. In the July 2017 Outlook Report, the medians of the Policy Board
members’ forecasts of the real GDP growth rates for fiscal 2017 and fiscal 2018 are 1.8 percent
and  1.4  percent,  respectively  (Chart  6).  These  rates  are  revised  somewhat  upward  from  the
projections made three months ago, being above the potential growth rate, which is estimated to
be  in  the  range  of  0.5-1.0  percent.  In  fiscal  2019,  the  growth  pace  is  projected  to  decelerate,
mainly reflecting cyclical adjustments in capital stock after the prolonged economic expansion,
Olympic Games-related demand peaking out, and the effects of the scheduled consumption tax
hike. Nevertheless, the economy is expected to continue expanding, supported by the increase in
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
exports  on  the  back  of  the  growth  in  overseas  economies,  and  the  median  of  the  real  GDP
growth rate for fiscal 2019 is 0.7 percent.
There  are,  of  course,  upside  and  downside  risks  to  this  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for
Japan’s economic activity. The biggest risk factor is developments in overseas economies. As I
have explained, the main scenario is that the growth rates of overseas economies are expected
to increase moderately, but it is subject to various uncertainties. For example, with regard to the
U.S. economic policies, heightened uncertainties concerning fiscal policy and the impact of the
pace of the policy interest rate hike on global capital flows warrant attention. The following are
also  considered  as  risks:  developments  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies;
negotiations  on  the  United  Kingdom’s  exit  from  the  European  Union  (EU)  and  their  effects;
prospects regarding the European debt problem, including the financial sector; and geopolitical
risks.  If  these  risks  were  to  materialize,  they  could  exert  downward  pressure  on  economic
activity. Therefore, the Bank will continue examining these developments thoroughly.
II. Price developments and their outlook
Price developments
Let  me  move  on  to  the  price  developments  in  Japan.  Although  energy  prices  had  exerted
downward pressure on prices since the second half of 2014, they have been pushing up prices
reflecting a pick-up in crude oil prices since last spring. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year
rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food turned positive in
January 2017 for the first time in 13 months, and rose to 0.4 percent in May (Chart 7).
Nevertheless, when excluding the effects of energy prices, price developments in Japan have
been  relatively  weak.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and
energy has remained on a decelerating trend after marking a peak of 1.2 percent at end-2015,
and has been at around 0 percent lately. This is partly attributable to temporary factors such as a
reduction in sales prices of and charges for mobile phones. However, as I will explain later, the
fact that increases in wages and prices have been sluggish, despite tight labor market conditions
and high corporate profits, also affects price developments.
Outlook for prices
As I have explained, the recent developments in prices have been relatively weak. However, I
believe that we can expect to see a turnaround in such developments going forward. Specifically,
the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward
2 percent, which is the Bank’s price stability target. This is expected to be realized through the
following mechanism.
First, prices of items such as processed food and daily necessities — which are responsive to
economic activity — are likely to rise gradually as private consumption increases its resilience,
and the yen’s depreciation as well as the pick-up in crude oil prices to date are expected to push
up import prices.
Second, as the economy continues to expand, the output gap is expected to widen further within
positive  territory  and  remain  positive.  Under  such  circumstances,  firms’  stance  is  likely  to
gradually  shift  toward  raising  wages  and  prices,  and  the  inflation  rate  is  projected  to  rise
accompanied by wage increases (Chart 8).
Third, with these factors pushing up actual inflation rates, people’s inflation expectations are also
expected to rise accordingly, leading to an increase in the underlying trend in inflation.
Based on the underlying scenario that I just explained, the July Outlook Report presents that the
medians of the Policy Board members’ forecasts for the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
excluding fresh food are 1.1 percent for fiscal 2017, 1.5 percent for fiscal 2018, and on a basis
excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, 1.8 percent for fiscal 2019 (Chart 6). As the
recent  price  developments  have  been  relatively  weak,  the  forecasts  for  fiscal  2017  and  fiscal
2018 in particular were revised downward from those presented in the previous Outlook Report
three months ago. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI will likely reach about 2 percent
around fiscal 2019.
Relationship among labor market conditions, wages, and prices
So far, I have explained Japan’s economic activity and prices. This can be briefly summarized as
somewhat  strong  economic  activity  and  relatively  weak  prices.  That  being  said,  I  believe  the
question that many would pose is why the rates of increase in wages and prices are not rising
despite  the  moderate  economic  expansion  —  especially  when  labor  market  conditions  have
tightened so acutely that the issue of labor shortage has been covered by the media day after
day. Another  question  is  whether  the  mechanism  for  higher  inflation,  which  I  just  mentioned,
would  operate  as  intended. Although  both  are  difficult  questions,  I  would  like  to  offer  possible
answers to them, while focusing on the relationship among labor market conditions, wages, and
prices in Japan.
To begin with, from a theoretical point of view, the fact that there is a correlation between labor
market conditions and prices can be found in almost every economic textbook, and also can be
confirmed  based  on  historical  data  in  Japan.  The  following  mechanism  is  assumed  to  be  in
place. First, firms that have come to face a labor shortage would raise wages in order to secure
the number of employees needed. Then, in order to secure a certain level of profits, these firms
are likely to consider raising their products’ sales prices in light of the rise in labor costs. At the
same time, another possible channel for raising prices is that, when wages increase, employee
income would increase and consumption activity would rise accordingly, leading to a raising of
prices  in  reflection  of  an  increase  in  demand. As  this  shows,  the  tightening  of  labor  market
conditions essentially would push up prices through increases in wages and demand.
In other words, such a theoretical mechanism is not operating sufficiently in Japan’s economy
today. In what follows, I would like to consider this point from two aspects, first touching on the
relationship  between  labor  market  conditions  and  wages,  and  then  that  between  wages  and
prices.
The first point is that the pace of improvement in wages has remained only moderate despite the
tightening of labor market conditions. This is likely to be attributable to a certain degree to the
structure of Japan’s labor market, in which the wage-setting mechanism between full-time and
part-time employees is different. As I explained earlier, wages of part-time employees are rising
in response to the tightening of labor market conditions, and the pace of increase is almost in line
with  the  relationship  between  wages  of  part-time  employees  and  labor  market  conditions
observed in the past. On the other hand, wages of full-time employees are not rising as much as
those of part-time employees (Chart 9). As a reason for this, some point to the fact that since
both  labor  and  management  in  Japan  have  been  placing  priority  on  the  long-term  stability  of
employment  and  wages  over  wage  increases,  the  following  has  been  observed:  employment
adjustment  and  wage  reductions  had  rarely  been  conducted  even  under  deflation,  and  firms’
stance can hardly shift toward raising wages even if labor market conditions tighten.
The  second  point  is  the  relationship  between  wages  and  prices;  namely,  that  the  recent
developments  in  prices  have  been  relatively  weak,  although  nominal  wages  have  been  rising,
albeit at a moderate pace (Chart 10). This can be explained by the following three cases of firms’
initiatives.
First, it has been pointed out that these developments reflect firms’ initiatives to absorb a rise in
costs resulting from wage increases by streamlining their business process. Specifically, firms
recently appear to be increasingly cutting back services for which labor costs are high in light of
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
profitability, even those that had been taken for granted thus far. For example, even in the case of
a discontinuation of business late at night and early in the morning, at which time sales are low,
reducing business hours — or the amount of labor input — might not lower sales as much. This
results in a rise in labor productivity. Even if hourly wages of employees are raised, firms’ overall
labor costs would not rise due to the reduction in business hours. In this case, firms would not
have to pass on the rise in labor costs to sales prices, and thus the upward pressure on prices
would be limited accordingly.
Second,  labor-saving  and  efficiency-improving  investment  that  makes  use  of  information
technology is likely to bring about similar effects to those explained earlier. In recent years, such
items as self-checkout machines and online reservation systems have been widely introduced,
mainly in sectors such as “retailing” and “accommodations, eating and drinking services.” This
would  produce  the  same  effects  as  streamlining  of  the  business  process,  in  that  the  same
amount of sales can be realized even with a reduced amount of labor input, and also would result
in  a  rise  in  labor  productivity. As  the  effects  of  raising  employees’  wages  on  the  overall  labor
costs are limited, wage increases would not necessarily lead to inflation, as was the case earlier.
Third,  it  also  can  be  pointed  out  that  firms  are  trying  to  make  better  use  of  existing  human
resources. A typical example is to reallocate employees to divisions that have relatively high work
demand  from  those  with  low  work  demand.  In  such  a  case,  labor  productivity  will  improve
because firms increase their sales without having to increase the total amount of labor input. The
pass on to sales prices would be limited as a rise in labor costs is constrained.
In further examining the background to these initiatives that I have just mentioned, what appears
to lie behind them is the mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages and prices
will not increase easily, having been deeply entrenched among firms and households in Japan. It
is a well-known fact that wages of full-time employees are not so responsive to developments in
labor market conditions due to the relationship between labor and management over the years,
which is specific to Japan, including base pay increases. In addition, consumers are not used to
price rises and firms become cautious in raising prices in expectation of consumers’ response to
price rises; this seems to be a reason why firms refrain from passing on cost increases to sales
prices. As I mentioned earlier, firms’ initiatives to absorb a rise in labor costs lead to a reduction
in upward pressure on prices in the economy as a whole. There is no doubt that each initiative is
the  outcome  of  firms’  earnest  and  reasonable  decision-making,  though.  This  situation  might
reflect the difficulty in dispelling the deflationary mindset that has been entrenched among people
for a long period.
That being said, I would like to add that the Bank does not hold the view that this situation will last
forever.  The  output  gap  has  been  improving  steadily,  and  under  such  circumstances,  firms’
stance is likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices. We should not be optimistic,
given that the timing of manifestation of this stance is uncertain. However, it might be difficult for
firms to address the labor shortage going forward only by increasing the number of part-time
employees in particular, given that the employment rate already has increased significantly amid
the labor shortage intensifying. In fact, the ratio of part-time employees in Japan, which had been
on the rise for more than ten years, has shown a clearer trend of peaking out since the turn of the
year  (Chart  11).  There  is  a  certain  limit  to  a  reduction  in  business  hours  and  a  cutback  in
services, and it is not the case that labor-saving investment can be promoted in all industries.
Initiatives  such  as  reallocation  of  employees  have  their  limit.  That  being  said,  if  households’
consumption  is  stimulated,  reflecting  economic  expansion  and  an  improvement  in  the
employment  and  income  situation,  price  rises  will  be  widely  accepted  across  the  entire
economy. The DI for output prices in the June 2017 Tankan shows that an increasing trend in
sales prices has become widely evident in labor-intensive sectors such as “transport and postal
activities,”  “wholesaling  and  retailing,”  and  “accommodations,  eating  and  drinking  services”
(Chart 12). Recently, it is reported more frequently that the number of firms that are considering
raising prices going forward is on the increase.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
If  actual  prices  start  to  rise  reflecting  these  developments,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation
expectations  are  expected  to  increase  accordingly.  Recently,  some  indicators  have  started  to
show that firms’ and households’ inflation expectations are rising, which also serves as a positive
factor for overcoming deflation (Chart 13). Once an expectation that prices will go up is shared
widely  among  firms  and  households,  a  rise  in  wages  of  full-time  employees  will  be  observed
clearly  and  it  will  become  easier  for  firms  to  pass  on  wage  increases  to  sales  prices.  I  am
convinced that, if that happens, a virtuous cycle between an increase in wages for a wide range
of employees and a sustainable rise in the inflation rate will start operating fully.
Before I conclude this part of my speech, I would like to touch on labor productivity once again.
While  giving  you  labor-saving  investment  as  an  example,  I  explained  that  a  rise  in  labor
productivity has been exerting downward pressure on prices. However, that only explains part of
its impact on prices. I do not intend at all to say that an improvement in labor productivity should
be  viewed  negatively.  If  the  value-added  per  worker  increases  along  with  an  improvement  in
productivity,  firms’  profitability  will  be  enhanced  accordingly.  From  a  somewhat  longer-term
perspective,  once  firms  have  additional  profits,  they  will  start  to  consider  raising  wages  in  a
manner  that  is  consistent  with  an  improvement  in  productivity.  In  fact,  when  analyzing
developments  in  base  pay  increases  in  recent  years,  it  can  be  observed  that  a  rise  in  labor
productivity leads to an acceleration in base pay increases.
Moreover, if labor productivity of the economy as a whole improves and the long-term economic
growth rate rises, business fixed investment and private consumption are likely to be stimulated
through rises in growth expectations and permanent income, and prices are expected to rise with
the  improvement  in  the  output  gap.  Although  it  would  take  time,  structural  policies  also  will
support this path. For example, if labor market reform makes it possible to smoothly reallocate
needed staff to firms and industries that face a labor shortage, productivity of the economy as a
whole will increase. It is said that there is greater room for improvement in mobility in Japan’s
labor  market  compared  with  other  major  economies,  and  this  implies  that  the  government’s
initiatives  of  late  —  including  working-style  reforms  —  are  very  meaningful.  Thus,  the  current
labor shortage can be described as having an aspect of the ultimate growth strategy for Japan’s
economy to powerfully urge its structural reform.
III. The Bank’s conduct of monetary policy
So far, I have explained the reasons why prices are not rising as much despite the tightening
labor market conditions. In this regard, some of you may ask why the Bank is aiming at a rise in
prices. Rather, it may be natural to believe that lower goods prices are favorable. Therefore, in
explaining the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy, I would like to start with the reason why the
Bank  is  aiming  at  a  situation  in  which  prices  rise  in  a  stable  manner.  Under  deflation,  or  a
sustained decline in prices, a decline in prices of goods and services leads to a decrease in
firms’ sales and profits, which in turn results in wage restraint. Consequently, the economy falls
into a vicious cycle where sluggish consumption leads to a further decline in prices. On the other
hand, the opposite cycle would arise if prices rise in a stable manner, and firms and households
start  to  behave  based  on  this  assumption.  If  firms’  sales  and  profits  increase  due  to  rises  in
prices  of  goods  and  services,  wages  would  increase  accordingly,  leading  to  more  active
consumption.  What  the  Bank  is  aiming  at  is  realizing  such  a  virtuous  cycle,  and  this
consequently would bring about benefits to a wide range of economic entities.
What is important is that prices rise in a stable manner. The Bank considers the annual rate of
increase in the inflation rate of around 2 percent to represent a “stable manner,” and sets this as
the  target  of  monetary  policy  conduct.  We  sometimes  receive  comments  that  the  2  percent
inflation target is too high, perhaps given that recent economic activity is already firm. However,
we believe that it is crucial to aim at 2 percent for the following three reasons.
First, the CPI has a statistical tendency of demonstrating a higher inflation rate than the actual
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
one. Therefore, in order to actually ensure price stability, the inflation rate should be sufficiently
positive.
Second, the policy response needs a buffer to a certain extent. In order not to fall into deflation
again,  it  is  desirable  to  ensure  that  the  inflation  rate  be  positive  to  some  extent.  In  general,  a
central bank can respond to higher inflation by raising its policy interest rate. On the other hand,
in the case of deflation, despite the central bank’s efforts to stimulate the economy, it is difficult to
lower  the  policy  interest  rate  substantially  below  0  percent,  and  room  for  the  monetary  policy
response as a tool for macroeconomic policy would be limited.
Third, the 2 percent target is a global standard. Major advanced economies set the target level of
inflation  rate  at  2  percent.  When  relevant  economies  aim  at  the  same  target  level,  it  will
contribute to the stability of foreign exchange rates in the long run as well as that of corporate
activities and the economy as a whole.
The Bank has conducted “Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve
Control” since September 2016 with a view to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent. The
framework of this policy consists of two components (Chart 14).
The first is an inflation-overshooting commitment. This is a strong commitment that the Bank will
continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the actual CPI
exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. It is crucial that people actually
experience  inflation  above  2  percent  and  thereby  the  perception  takes  hold  among  them  that
prices of goods and services tend to go up every year by around 2 percent.
The  second  component  is  yield  curve  control.  Under  yield  curve  control,  the  Bank  has  been
facilitating the formation of the yield curve that is considered most appropriate for achieving the
price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, taking account of developments in
Japan’s economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. Specifically, the Bank sets
the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  of  the  10-year
Japanese government bond (JGB) yields at around 0 percent, conducting JGB purchases so as
to achieve this target level. Based on this yield curve, issuance rates for CP and corporate bonds
have  remained  at  extremely  low  levels.  Financial  institutions’  lending  attitudes  have  been
proactive,  and  lending  rates  have  declined  to  around  historical  low  levels.  In  these
circumstances, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending has
accelerated  at  a  moderate  pace  to  the  range  of  3.0-3.5  percent.  Meanwhile,  firms’  financial
positions  have  improved  for  all  firm  sizes.  These  developments  suggest  that  accommodative
financial conditions brought about by yield curve control have been strongly supporting corporate
activities in Japan.
As I have explained thus far, price developments in Japan have been relatively weak compared
with the improvement seen in economic activity, and there is still a long way to go to achieve the
price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  We  are  well  aware  that  the  Bank  should  take  this  point
seriously. Going forward, firms’ stance is likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices
with the steady improvement in the output gap. Medium- to long-term inflation expectations are
projected to rise steadily as further price rises come to be observed widely with some indicators
of such expectations showing a rise. As such, the momentum toward achieving the price stability
target  of  2  percent  is  maintained  firmly.  Therefore,  in  order  to  maintain  these  positive
developments and achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time, the
Bank  will  persistently  pursue  the  current  powerful  monetary  easing.  I  believe  that  the  Bank’s
monetary policy and the government’s structural policy working perfectly in line with each other
will bring Japan’s economy back to a sustainable growth path.
Conclusion
So far, I have explained the developments in economic activity and prices in Japan as well as the
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Bank’s policy response. To conclude, I would like to talk about some of my impressions of the
economy of Hiroshima Prefecture.
Hiroshima Prefecture’s economy is currently expanding moderately. Exports are picking up on
the back of growth in overseas economies, and private consumption is increasing its resilience
against  the  backdrop  of  a  steady  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income  situation.
Reflecting  the  increase  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad,  production  is  increasing  at  a
moderate pace.
Hiroshima Prefecture’s active job openings-to-applicants ratio marked 1.77 times in May, which
suggests  that  labor  market  conditions  of  the  prefecture  are  tighter  than  those  of  Japan  as  a
whole. Under such circumstances, local firms are devising various ways to address the labor
shortage, such as the introduction of automated systems that utilize the excellent technologies
and ideas developed over the years — even in areas in which automation had been regarded as
impossible. In addition, in the automobile industry — the main industry of this prefecture — bold
efforts  are  being  made  to  introduce  new  technologies  with  the  aim  of  responding  to  stricter
environmental regulations and further improving safety. As I mentioned earlier, if the value-added
per  worker  increases  thanks  to  such  initiatives,  firms’  productivity  will  improve  and  their
profitability will be enhanced accordingly. From such a viewpoint, the current labor shortage not
only leads to enhancing the growth potential of the prefecture’s economy as a whole in the long
run, but also might provide an opportunity to tackle structural issues of the local economy such
as the declining population and the outflow of young people.
In Hiroshima Prefecture, there are efforts toward creating new demand not only in the field of
manufacturing but also in tourism and other services industries. For example, in addition to two
World  Heritage  sites,  Hiroshima  Prefecture  has  garnered  both  domestic  and  international
attention as a result of the visit by the President of the United States in May 2016 and the first
baseball Central League championship by Hiroshima Toyo Carp in 25 years. Thus, the number
of tourists visiting the prefecture has increased considerably of late. Nevertheless, spending per
visitor is below the national average, suggesting that the prefecture is not making full use of its
opportunities.  In  order  to  address  such  a  situation,  Hiroshima  Prefecture  is  working  on
strengthening support for tourism products and services aimed at promoting tours and extending
visitors’  stay  by  providing  subsidies  to  private  business  operators.  In  addition,  Hiroshima
Prefecture, together with the six neighboring prefectures, set up in spring last year the “Setouchi
DMO”  —  a  destination  management/marketing  organization  to  promote  tourism  in  the  wider
region. Members include regional financial institutions that provide support from the funding side.
I place great trust in the active cooperation among industry, government, and the financial sector
toward boosting the tourism industry of the Setouchi region.
The Bank will strive to contribute to these efforts toward the revitalization of the region through
extensive information gathering and analyses by its Hiroshima Branch. In closing, let me express
my sincere hopes for the further development of Hiroshima Prefecture’s economy and convey
my best regards.
Thank you.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
