 “FinTech and the Future of Central Banking: A Latin American Perspective” 
Annual Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance Conference 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 Keynote speech by Mr Mario Marcel 
Governor of the Central Bank of Chile 
June 2017 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
Let me first thank the organizers for inviting me to participate in this Conference. This gives me the 
opportunity  to  link  my  present  job  as  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  with  my  past,  as a 
student of Economics at Cambridge, nearly 30 years ago.  
 
At that time, the Judge Business School was still in the making, but I am glad to see how it has grown 
to  become  a world  leader  in  business  education. The  Cambridge  Centre  for  Alternative  Finance, 
housed at JBS, is a good example of how a centuries-old university can undertake vibrant, emerging 
subjects and use good intellectual discipline to tackle them. 
 
I  attend  this  meeting  not  as  somebody  that  is  “navigating  the  contours”,  but  as  a  head  of  a 
quintessential mainstream economic institution—a Central Bank. In the past few days I attended 
the BIS Annual General Meeting of Governors and the ECB Forum on Central Banking, so it is good 
to switch to a more distended environment. Yet I am not the only one coming from that different 
world,  since  FSB  representatives  are  also  here  alongside  Juan  Ketterer  of  the  Inter-American 
Development Bank, with whom I was lucky to work a few years ago. 
 
Several central bankers have spoken about FinTech in the last couple of years, but I bring a little 
difference; my Central Bank is in an emerging country, where the usual challenges of controlling 
inflation and securing financial stability are intertwined with the distinct features of a developing 
financial  sector.  This  makes  the  achievement  of  central  bank  goals  a  little  more  difficult  and 
underscores their relationship to longer-term development objectives. 
 
So in this keynote I would like to discuss the difference that FinTech can make to the delivery of the 
responsibilities of a Central Bank of an emerging country. Note in this respect that since banking 
regulation in my country is in charge of a separate entity, I will focus mostly on the macro stability 
dimensions of financial markets.  Just in case  I issue some  nonconventional opinions, let me  also 
state that they do not necessarily represent the official view of the Central Bank of Chile or its Board.  
 
[SLIDE 1] In what follows, I will first provide a quick overview of the main features of central banking 
and its relationship with the  financial sector as well as the way the latter works in  a  developing 
country, including its role in the transmission of monetary policy. Then I will identify which features 
of  FinTech  development  can  have  a  greater  influence  on  central  banking,  financial  stability  and 
financial deepening. From here I will highlight some dilemmas that central banks and regulators face 
 1 
 
in  dealing  with  FinTech  in  developing  countries.  Finally,  I  will  summarize  some  features  of  the 
Chilean economy that, I believe, may help resolve them. 
 
Slide 1 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
  
A Central Bank view of the world 
 
A few years ago, when I was Budget Director in Chile and talked to my colleagues from  different 
countries I thought that budget officials were more or less the same everywhere. That was because 
I didn’t know central bankers yet. Central Banks face similar objectives and use similar tools all over 
the world. Moreover, economic thinking and policy development since the aftermath of the Asian 
Crisis have made them look even more alike. 
 
[SLIDE 2] First, almost all Central Banks have inflation control and financial stability as their core 
goals. Some may add employment, growth or even welfare objectives, but as long as the latter are 
correlated with the former most of the time, they don’t make much of a difference. To meet the 
twin  core  objectives,  central  banks  apply  monetary  policy  and  macro  financial  regulations,  like 
liquidity, reserve and capital requirements.  
 
Monetary policy and macro stability regulations operate through the financial system, particularly 
banks. Most of money in the economy is currently made of deposits that result from the maturity 
transformation—from  short-term  deposits  into  medium  term  loans—that  banks  perform.  Banks 
meet  their  liquidity  needs  for  disbursement  and  reserve  requirements  by  borrowing  from  the 
central bank. Monetary policy is then operationalized by setting the rate at which commercial banks 
can store or withdraw money from the central bank. 
 
 2 
 Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 2 
  
[SLIDE 3]  Today money and financial operations are overwhelmingly  composed of balance  sheet 
records.  For  this  reason,  banks  need  to  be  strictly  regulated  and  the  central  bank  must  manage 
monetary policy to ensure stability in the purchasing power of money. The transmission of monetary 
policy to the economy and, in the end, to inflation, depends on the smooth operation of commercial 
banks. At the same time, banks operate as a network and provide liquidity to all sorts of activities. 
Any  disruption  in  the  operation  of  a  bank  or  in  the  transmission  or  provision  of  funds  can  have 
serious economic consequences. 
 
Slide 3 
 
[SLIDE 4] Hence, a key concern of a central bank is risk. Risk from external shocks that may threaten 
price stability; risk of misjudging the macroeconomic scenario and make wrong policy decisions; risk 
of changes in the behaviour of banks that may compromise the transmission of monetary policy to 
market rates; risk of liquidity excess or shortage in the banking sector; risk of bank insolvency; risk 
  3 
 
of disruptions in the flow of funds at the interbank or retail level; risk of risk misjudgement, and, 
ultimately, risk of compromising trust. 
 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 4 
Slide 5 
    Thus,  while  technologically-supported  financial  products  can  potentially  improve  the  quality  and 
speed of financial services to the public or lower their cost, a central bank would focus on how they 
can influence the risks they face—either to lower or raise them. 
 
The financial sector, central banking, and economic development 
 
[SLIDE  5]  Development  is  closely  associated  to  financial  development,  both  historically  and 
comparatively across countries. Financial services are essential to channel domestic and external 
savings  to  investment,  support  personal  and  business  projects,  cushion  risks,  and  reduce  the 
transaction costs of economic exchanges. Efficient financial services are essential for an economy 
 4 
 
to grow and to make growth self-sustaining and inclusive. [SLIDE 6] While advanced economies are 
characterized  by  broad  and  deep  financial  markets,  finance  in  developing  countries  is  usually 
fragmented, unstable and costly.  
 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
  Slide 6 
Slide 7 
   
[SLIDE  7]  In middle  and  low-income  countries,  the  proportion of  population  holding  any  type  of 
account in a supervised financial institution under supervision amount to 37% and 20%, respectively. 
These figures are far below the 92% and 90% of OECD countries and high-income countries. The use 
of bank-intermediated debit and credit cards and savings in financial institutions follows a similar 
pattern. 
[SLIDE  8]  Insurance  services  contribute  to  deepen  the  financial  system  due  to  their  long-run 
investment perspective. Both life and non-life insurance is far less extended in emerging markets 
compared to high-income OECD countries. 
 5 
 Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 8 
  [SLIDE 9] The development of finance in developed countries of course didn’t prevent them from 
getting into a big crisis a decade ago. But if you think  that was  big you should consider  crises in 
developing  countries,  like  the  debt  crisis  of  the  early  1980s,  the  Tequila  crisis  of  1994  or  the 
economic and political crisis in Argentina in 2001. [SLIDES 11 and 12] They devastated the entire 
financial  system  of  those  countries,  evaporated  or  froze  deposits,  brought  countries  into  deep 
recessions  and  massive  unemployment  and  were  only  resolved  after  massive  bailouts  and  debt 
write offs. 
 
Slide 9 
  6 
  Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 10 
  [SLIDE 10] The latter are rather dramatic examples of the challenges posed by protracted financial 
development for price and financial stability, the twin goals of central banks. But such challenges 
can take many more shapes. A low coverage of banking and credit means that a substantial fraction 
of the population and companies may not have access to liquidity when they need it, nor credit to 
live through a contingency. Liquidity and credit constraints prevent relative prices from resolving 
disequilibria,  amplifying  the  impact  of  shocks  on  employment,  production  and  consumption. 
Inefficient  intermediation of  savings  reduces the  return  on  real  investment  and  tilt  incentives  in 
favor of speculation and rent-seeking. Shallow capital markets may be unable to hedge market risks, 
particularly exchange rate and term exposures, and foster concentration and vertical integration. 
 
Underdeveloped financial services can also contribute to economic informality. What is the point in 
registering a business, complying with regulations and paying taxes if you cannot get funding for 
working  capital  or  investment  projects?  The  financial  dimension  of  informality  is  shadow, 
unregulated banking, which is prone to insolvency, abuse and fraud. There is ample evidence that 
economic and financial informality—albeit a rational alternative for people with little choice—is a 
major obstacle for emerging economies to grow in a more inclusive way. 
Thus,  while  central  bankers  would  normally  emphasize  that  their  focus  is  on  short-term 
macroeconomics and price stability, there is little doubt that a more efficient, deeper and inclusive 
financial system would make things substantially easier for them and would provide a lasting push 
for development. 
  What difference can FinTech make? 
 
[SLIDE 11] The central bank and commercial banks have been traditionally close because maturity 
transformation  and  fractional  banking  is  in  the  DNA  of  universal  banking,  that  is,  the  ability  of 
commercial banks to provide a large set of interrelated services to the public.  
 
 7 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
In contrast,  FinTech refers to those  technologically enabled  innovations  in  financial  services  that 
could result in new business models, applications, processes or products with an associated material 
effect on the provision of financial services.1 Thus defined, the scope of products or activities that 
can  be  catalogued  as  FinTech  is  quite  broad.  Moreover,  products or  services  that  are  nowadays 
commonly or massively used could have been considered FinTech, e.g. banknotes, cheques, credit 
cards, ATMs, and electronic transfers. 
 
What makes a difference today is partly the speed at which change is happening and how different 
developments—programming, encryption, mobile devices—can combine to produce new financial 
services. But more important is that these innovations have the potential to “unbundle” key banking 
functions, like payments, risk transformation, risk sharing, and capital allocation. This can shatter 
the architecture upon which central banks rely.2 
 
Slide 11 
[SLIDE  12]  To  understand  the  potential  impact  of  FinTech  on  central  banking  and  on  economic 
development  it  is  useful  to  identify  specific  dimensions  of  FinTech  innovation,  whose  impact 
monetary policy, financial stability and economic development can be assessed one by one. These 
include the following: 
 
                                                            
1 FSB (2017), “Financial Stability Implications from Fin Tech, Supervisory and Regulatory Issues that Merit 
Authorities’ Attention,” June 2017. 
2 Carney, M. (2016), “Enabling the FinTech transformation: Revolution, Restoration or Reformation?” Speech 
delivered Lord Mayor's Banquet for Bankers and Merchants of the City of London at the Mansion House, on 
June 2016.  
 8 
 Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 12 
  
Payments,  transfers,  clearing,  and  settlement.  Mobile  payments  (either  by  banks  or  non-bank 
institutions),  digital  wallets,  digital  currencies  and  the  use  of  distributed  ledgers  for  payments 
infrastructures. These can contribute to the management of massive numbers of transactions as 
well as to the transfer and settlement of large sums among financial institutions. 
 
Lending and borrowing. The most common FinTech innovations in this area are crowdfunding and 
online P2P lending platforms. These applications are closely related to financial intermediation, a 
core and heavily regulated element of financial institutions. FinTech applications in this field are still 
a small fraction of overall credit but in some jurisdictions are growing very rapidly. 
 
Risk management. FinTech companies participating in the insurance sector (“InsurTech”) are getting 
traction in many jurisdictions. They have the potential to affect not only marketing and distribution 
of insurance, but also underwriting, pricing of risks and settlement claims3. Risk management also 
concerns the commitment and registration of guarantees and collateral in credit operations. 
 
Market support. The “tech” part of FinTech can provide simpler or more efficient processes such as 
ID verification, data storage and processing (cloud computing), or the execution of orders through 
smart contracts. The access and contestability of information is an important issue here.  
 
Investment management. This dimension includes both e-trading platforms that allow consumers 
to  invest  directly  through  its  computer  on  all  sort  of  assets,  and  FinTech  innovations  that  offer 
automated  advice  on  financial  services  (robo-advisors),  including  investment  and  portfolio 
management. 
                                                            
3  IAIS (2016), “FinTech Developments in the Insurance Industry”, February 2017.  
 9 
 Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 13 
  
Opportunities 
 
[SLIDE 13] Blockchain/Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) can enhance the efficiency of financial 
payments  systems  as  all  operations  are  jointly  kept  by  all  members  of  the  network  and  all  the 
processes of order-settlement-payment are implemented in real time. This compares with a current 
situation where most settlement processes take 2 or 3 days to execute, creating operational and 
counterparty risk. The benefits of FinTech applications in this field for financial stability may include: 
(i)  increased market  efficiency,  in  particular  for  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  (RTGS)  among  large 
financial institutions, (ii) enhanced risk measurement of each bank and a more transparent financial 
system, (iii) lower trade costs, robustness against cyber-attacks, and less need for collateral, (iv) a 
stronger wealth-channel for monetary policy if more agents access financial assets and loans. 
 
Similarly,  crowdfunding  and  P2P  reduce  systemic  risk  since  they  do  not  involve  money  creation 
through the conventional multiplier/maturity transformation mechanism of banks. While this may 
significantly limit the scale at which operations can develop, they can be an affordable alternative 
for businesses that are not covered by conventional financial institutions. 
 
FinTech market support tools can also contribute to financial stability to the extent that they can 
mobilize a larger volume of information to better assess credit risk and to mitigate it through smart 
contracts, guarantees and collateral. 
 10 
  Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 14 
  Risks 
 
[SLIDE 14] FinTech developments also pose a number of risks for financial stability and monetary 
policy. In the case of financial infrastructures new systems may have unknown weaknesses that are 
not apparent in the trials, leading to financial disruption and critical episodes such as “flash crashes”. 
Retail payment systems may add credit risks during offline operations and transparency issues in 
prepaid systems.  
 
Users  of  payments  and  transfers  systems  may  also  be  pressed  to  undertake  unwanted  credit 
operations, while “smart contracts” that are automatically executed may enhance instability if the 
system fails to check the solvency of each counterpart. Algorithm-based credit assessments may 
generate  biases  in  the  access  to  financial  products  and  replace  know-your-client  approaches, 
increasing  transactional  costs  and  engendering  volatility  and  herd  behavior.  Uninsured  deposit-
taking is an area of particular concern due to its exposure to fraud. 
 
The emergence of cryptocurrencies poses a number of challenges to financial systems and central 
banks  alike.  The  main  risks  in  the  use  of  DLT-blockchain  technology  to  support  privately  issued 
currencies lie in the monitoring of money aggregates, the potentially damaging volatility of rates of 
exchange, the broader risk of volatility under fixed or unexpected changes of supply, and the risk of 
runs due to losses of confidence when such currencies coexist with legal tender and deposit-taking 
banks.  
 
Perhaps the greatest risk of FinTech is that of cybersecurity. The more financial systems depend on 
electronic  platforms  and  digital  records,  the  more  exposed  they  are  to  cyberattacks,  which  can 
disrupt the flow of funds across the economy. Of course, this is not an exclusive risk of the more 
innovative FinTech developments, but of any electronic-based financial system. 
 11 
  Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
Slide 15 
  Potential for financial development 
 
[SLIDE 15] DLT  may contribute for the  development of  emerging countries in several aspects: (i) 
universal  access to  financial  services  by  consumers and  small-medium enterprises;  (ii)  enhanced 
security of remittances and transactions among vulnerable sectors (the poor, migrants, rural areas); 
(iii)  higher  competition  and  less  concentration  of  the  financial  sector,  and  (iv)  reduced  costs  for 
participation  in  the  formal  economy  and  easier  access  to  public  services  based  on  improved 
government databases. Recent experiences with M-Pesa in Africa and with Unique ID in India are 
good examples of such development trends.  
 
However, some obstacles and risks still deserve attention. An efficient use of financial services may 
require larger investments in education and financial literacy. Recent experience shows that even 
in  developed  countries  people  often  misuse  financial  instruments.  Consumers  often  suffer  from 
large  debt  burdens  and  complex  contracts  that  they  do  not  understand.  Also,  some  of  the  new 
financial  instruments—such  as  digital  currencies—may  facilitate  tax  evasion,  fraud  and  illegal 
transactions. Regulations of Anti Money Laundering (AML) and Know Your Customer (KYC) should 
be enhanced to prevent such risks. Finally, use of digital services requires better telecommunication 
infrastructure and internet access in some areas. 
 
Central Bank Digital Currencies 
 
Central  Bank  Digital  Currencies  (CBDC)  represent  an  even  more  ambitious  project  that  could  be 
developed  with  a  Blockchain/DLT  infrastructure.  A  CBDC  could  imply  several  advantages  for  its 
users: (i) lower costs and higher speed for the interbank market; (ii) the possibility to implement 
central bank open market operations in a calendar of 24h/7days and reduce the current overnight 
transaction  risk;  (iii)  an  easier  framework  to  pay  interests  on  central  bank  currency  and  avoid 
restrictions coming from a zero-lower-bound (ZLB), and (iv) separate the current joint roles of credit 
and money creation by commercial banks, creating a more narrow banking system in which banks 
and financial institutions work with a 100% equity and no  leverage.  
 12 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
 
Allowing a massive access, the balance sheet of the central bank creates almost unsurmountable 
challenges and risks, though. The main challenge is to move from a few dozens of wholesale partners 
to thousands or even millions of retail account holders, many of which could massively join as a part 
of a run on commercial banks. Speculators may observe relevant information about the weaknesses 
of  one  particular  financial  institution  or  the  system  as  a  whole  and  exploit  such  information  in 
speculative attacks that target certain assets when the central bank or another institution may have 
low reserves or liquidity problems. 
 
CBDC seems to lead inevitably to the replacement of the classical role of central banks at the top of 
a tiered liquidity system to that of a massive retailer, where deposit-taking may soon combine with 
loan-making. For this reason, the experiments with RSCoin at the Bank of England and CAD-Coin at 
the Bank of Canada take a very cautious approach, aiming at addressing technical issues before any 
definite step in such direction. This means that a real CBDC may still be many years away. 
 
Slide 16 
  
Challenges and dilemmas for central banks and financial regulators 
 [SLIDE 16] FinTech is not necessarily a threat to a central bank, no matter how striking the contrast 
between its sobriety and the exuberance of FinTech developers. The Governor of the National Bank 
of Belgium Jan Smets,4 has argued that FinTech offers good opportunities to central banks coming 
from the cost reduction implied by the “distributed ledgers” technology; in his opinion, the greatest 
revolution of FinTech. 
 
The  ability  to  align  FinTech  developments  with  the  objectives  of  inflation  control  and  financial 
stability  depends  to  a  large  extent  on  the  regulations  issued  by  central  banks  and  financial 
                                                           
4 Smets, J. (2016), “FinTech and Central Banks,” speech delivered at the Conference “FinTech and the Future 
of Retail Banking,” Brussels, 9 December, 2016. 
 13 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
authorities themselves. As a result, the latter face an acute dilemma: how to articulate regulations 
in a way that allows innovations to emerge and develop without compromising stability and trust? 
 According to the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, FinTech innovations should not be 
in the “Far West,” nor be choked at birth. In the same vein, Fed Governor Lael Brainard argues that 
regulators and supervisors  should  not  overburden  financial innovations, as this could  push them 
outside the regulatory perimeter, thus creating more risks and less transparency. 
 
But  the  dilemmas  for  economic  authorities  do  not  stop  at  this  philosophical  level.  There  are  a 
number of concrete dilemmas between valid policy goals. 
 
 Inclusiveness vs risk of uninformed decisions. One of the main potential benefits of FinTech 
innovations,  particularly  for  emerging  economies,  is  financial  inclusion,  as  many  more 
people can  have access to financial  services. However, while  this may be  unambiguously 
positive for the most basic financial products, such as payment systems, it may be not so if 
people make uniformed credit or investment decisions. In order to address this issue, the 
policy response should comprise financial education (which is a long-term solution) and a 
proper financial consumer protection framework. 
    ▪  Decentralization, choice and competition vs. operational efficiency, economies of scale and 
client knowledge. Should FinTech innovations result in an unbundling of the core functions 
of financial institutions, a large number of relatively small firms may have a large share of 
the  financial  industry  (decentralization).  Having  more  firms  would  allow  clients  to  be 
provided  with  more  choices  of  financial  services  and  an  overall  increased  competition. 
However, scale is important in the financial sector, and having too many firms providing the 
same service may not be efficient. In this sense, incumbents may have an edge over FinTech 
innovations, as they also have because of the prior knowledge of their clients. Striking the 
right balance between competition and efficiency is  up the market to decide; but from a 
regulator perspective ensuring a levelled playing field is important and how decentralization 
unfolds, if at all, should be followed closely. 
▪  Personal credit assessment and privacy. Financial information is very sensitive by its very 
nature, and ownership or access to it may be controversial. It is true that having access to 
that information could allow for a better and more targeted supply of financial products, 
and having a record of sound financial behavior can improve credit scoring, which can bring 
benefits for consumers. However, spreading that information raises concerns. Unrestricted 
access for FinTech companies to financial information is not an appealing option, whereas a 
full ban in practical terms may choke them. A middle ground can be to allow for some sort 
of access and use of financial information by FinTech companies, with strict sanctions for 
misuse or leakages.  
14 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
FinTech in Chile 
 
[SLIDES 17 and 18] According to the CCAF 2017 The Americas Alternative Finance Industry Report - 
Hitting Stride, Chile is the country with the largest development in FinTech services. This is due to a 
large  extent to  the fast  development of crowdfunding platforms in  Chile5, which appear to have 
flourished from their connection to factoring services. 
 
Slide 17 
Slide 18 
   
[SLIDE 19] This coexists with a rather large, diversified and deep market for conventional financial 
services. Under this framework firms can get financing from several sources including banks and 
bond  market  among  others.  In  recent  years,  an  increase  of  external  financing  is  consistent  with 
lower  cost  and  the  size  of  the operations  of  those  sources.  Firms  used  those  external  resources 
mainly for two purposes: (i) financing operations in the country or abroad and (ii) refinancing other 
                                                           
5 According to the Report “Breaking New Grounds” by the Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance, Chile 
accounts for half of Latin America’s  alternative financing industry.  
 15 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
debts. [SLIDE 20] Further, granular data confirm that currency risks are relative low from a historical 
perspective,  which  is  possible  due  to  availability  of  FX  derivatives  and  flows  from  investments 
abroad. It should be noted that about a third of the total debt of the corporate sector is holding by 
firms which get financing only with local sources and do not report to local supervisor (SVS). Most 
of that local financing is provided by commercial banks which cover those loans with collaterals and 
provisions.  
 
Slide 19 
 Slide 20 
   
[SLIDE  21]  In  addition  to  the  above,  it  should  be  noted  that  Chile  has  reached  almost  universal 
coverage of basic services through the so-called Cuenta RUT (ID bank  account), managed by the 
state bank (BancoEstado). This is a sight account that can be opened only with a legally issued ID. At 
present, there are some 9 million of these accounts under operation (for a total population of 17 
million), allowing its bearers access to electronic transfers, debit cards and ATM cash withdrawals.  
 
 16 
 
Cuenta RUT is a hybrid financial product that provides a good example of the factors that facilitate 
technologically-enabled  financial  products  in  Chile.  These  include:  universal  and  secure  identity 
registration; universal online invoicing; internet penetration, and regulations that foster cash-flow 
services, like factoring and leasing. 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 Slide 21 
 Slide 22 
   
[SLIDE  22]  These  same  factors  have  provided  the  basis  for  the  most  important  step  in  the 
development  of  electronic  retail  payment  services.  Last  year,  a  bill  was  passed  allowing  for  the 
issuance of prepaid cards by non-bank institutions. Its objective is to foster financial inclusion and 
competition.  Given  the  sensitive  nature  of  deposit-taking,  the  Law  establishes 
integrity 
requirements for these issuers, restrictions on how the funds can be used, and requires the Central 
Bank to issue regulations with the prudential requirements for this industry. 
 
 17 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
The Central Bank used this opportunity to undertake a full revision of its retail payments regulation. 
Following a public consultation process, its final version is about to be published and we expect it to 
be a relevant contribution to the development and updating of our retail payments market. The 
new regulations not only set the prudential requirements for non-bank prepaid card issuers. It also 
narrows  down  the  scope  of  regulated  entities  dealing  with  the  processing  of  transactions,  and 
changes  their  capital  requirements,  aiming  to  facilitate  the  entrance  of  new  participants  to  the 
acquiring and processing business.  
 
By removing requirements that may be burdensome for small entities, and by considering explicitly 
the possibility of non-physical payment cards, as well as remote purchase and acquiring, we expect 
to  see  the  retail  payments  market  in  Chile  taking  a  new  shape  in  the  near  future.  That  almost 
certainly would involve—and perhaps require—and active participation of FinTech entities.  
 
These features give some ground for optimism on the potential contribution of FinTech not only to 
the democratization of financial services but also to price and financial stability and development in 
Chile. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
A  few  blocks  from where we  are  gathering  today,  on  Regent  St.  and Park  Terrace  was  the  bank 
branch where I opened my checking account as a Cambridge student. There I was handed my first 
debit card, which I could use to withdraw cash from the automatic teller outside. Coming from a 
country where banks were places where people lined up in front of a human cashier to perform 
basic banking transactions, these seemed enormous changes to me. 
 
Revolutionary  as  they  were  for  the  public,  these  changes  didn’t  transform  the  banking  business 
substantially.  Banks  kept  taking  short-term  deposits  to  on-lend  at  longer  maturities.  They  kept 
clearing funds and settling balances with one another and with the central bank to meet liquidity 
and reserve requirements. The main change for monetary policy in most countries was to switch 
from  the  control  of  monetary  aggregates  to  the  fixing  of  the  policy  rate  for  overnight  liquidity 
operations. 
 
Technology  is  now  creating  opportunities  for  changes  in  financial  services  that  are  more  far-
reaching, both for the public, financial institutions and central banks. Information technologies are 
doing  this  because  finance  is  an  information  and  record  keeping  business.  By  challenging  the 
conventional  centralized,  multi-layered  settlement  and  clearing  system,  distributed  ledgers, 
supplemented  by  a  number  of  other  technological  developments,  create  the  possibility  of  an 
unbundling of financial services that question the very notion of a bank. 
 
These  are  exciting  times  not  only  for  financial  start-ups  and  the  public,  but  also  for  leaders  of 
developing  countries,  that  see  in  these  technological  developments  the  opportunity  to  leapfrog 
financial  development  and  remove  one  major  roadblock  to  inclusive  economic  growth.  To 
materialize this, however, policy makers—including central banks—need to make sure that they are 
not exposing people to greater risk, especially when they are using financial services for the first 
 18 
Central Bank of Chile 
29 June, 2017 
 
time. Moreover, they may want enhanced access to financial services to facilitate formalization of 
economic activity rather than grow the shadow economy further. 
 
To this end, FinTech innovations should be in principle governed by the same regulatory framework 
as traditional entities, adapting such regulations to jointly address issues like the transparency of 
financial charges, the clarity in remote contract opening and massive contract adjustment. I am sure 
that most of the developers and investors in FinTech start-ups aim at business opportunities that 
draw from and cultivate financial literacy, not the opposite. 
 
In  Chile,  we  have  a  solid  ground  to  build  from.  Safe  identity  registration,  massive  access  to  the 
internet, a broad supply of complementary net-based services and, above all, near-universal bank 
accounts mean that rather than leapfrog, we can move fast in the FinTech highway. This means that 
banks may play and important role in this trip rather than remain in the side-lines. But they will need 
to adapt  their business models  and to be  prepared to share the road with other non-traditional 
travellers. 
 
As for the Central Bank, we need to keep the pace with change. We need to be prepared to adapt 
our  regulations,  use  new  indicators  and  big  data  to  monitor  macroeconomic  developments  and 
assess financial risks. We need to adapt financial infrastructures and to enhance cybersecurity at all 
levels. To do this we can learn from other Central Banks that are facing the same challenges. 
 
The main asset of a Central Bank today is not gold stored in their vaults, but trust from the public. 
Being able to understand the FinTech revolution and to ensure that this contributes to economic 
stability and people’s welfare is one crucial way to remain trustworthy. 
 
 19 
