Philip Lowe: The next chapter
Address by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the American Chamber
of Commerce in Australia (AMCHAM), Perth, 21 September 2017.
 I would like to thank Andrea Brischetto for assistance in the preparation of this talk.
I would like to thank the American Chamber of Commerce in Australia for the invitation to speak
today. It is a pleasure to be in Perth again.
This lunch is being held at a time when one chapter in Australia’s economic history is drawing to
a close and another is about to start. A main theme in the chapter that is about to come to an end
is the mining investment boom. That boom, and its unwinding, has been central to the story of
the Australian and Western Australian economies for more than a decade now. The new chapter
will, almost certainly, have a different central theme.
Today, I would like to provide a sketch of some of the likely plot lines of the next chapter. Before
doing that, though, I will reflect on the current chapter.
The current chapter
The storyline of the current chapter is well known. It has had two main plot lines.
The first was a troubled global economy. A decade ago we had the global financial crisis and the
worst recession in many advanced economies since the 1930s. A gradual recovery then took
place, but it was painfully slow. Recently, things have improved noticeably and unemployment
rates in some advanced economies are now at the lowest levels in many decades. Throughout
this chapter, central banks have mostly worried that inflation rates might turn out to be too low,
not too high. Interest rates have been at record lows. And workers in advanced economies have
experienced low growth in their nominal wages. So it’s been a challenging international backdrop.
The  second  plot  line  was  the  resources  boom.  Strong  growth  in  China  saw  strong  growth  in
demand  for  resources.  Prices  rose  in  response,  with Australia’s  terms  of  trade  reaching  the
highest level in at least 150 years (Graph 1). Then an investment boom took place in response to
the higher prices, with investment in the resources sector reaching its highest level as a share of
GDP  in  over  a  century. And  now  we  are  seeing  the  dividends  of  this,  with  large  increases  in
Australia’s resource exports.
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall,  it  has  been  a  reasonably  successful  chapter  in  Australia’s  economic  history.  Real
income per person is around 20 per cent higher than it was in the mid 2000s and real wealth per
person is 40 per cent higher. Australia is one of the few advanced economies that avoided a
recession in 2008. And the biggest mining boom in a century did not end in a crash, as previous
booms  did.  Our  interest  rates  remained  positive,  unlike  those  in  many  other  advanced
economies. Since the mid 2000s, the unemployment rate has averaged 5¼ per cent, a better
outcome than in the previous three decades. Inflation has averaged 2½ per cent. And over this
period, GDP growth has averaged 2¾ per cent, higher than in most other advanced economies.
So, taking the period as a whole, it is a positive picture.
At the same time, though, as the chapter draws to a close, we do face some issues. I would like
to highlight three of these.
The first is the recent slow growth in real per capita income. For much of the past two decades,
real national income per person grew very strongly in Australia (Graph 2). We benefited from
strong  productivity  growth,  higher  commodity  prices  and  more  of  the  population  working.  In
contrast, since 2011 there has been little net growth in real per capita incomes. This change in
trend  is  proving  to  be  a  difficult  adjustment.  The  solutions  are  strong  productivity  growth  and
increased labour force participation.
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  second  issue  is  the  unusually  slow  growth  in  nominal  and  real  wages.  Over  the  past  four
years, the increase in average hourly earnings has been the slowest since at least the mid 1960s
(Graph  3).  This  is  partly  a  consequence  of  the  unwinding  of  the  mining  boom  but  there  are
structural factors at work as well. The slow growth in wages is putting a strain on household
budgets and contributing to low rates of inflation.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  third  issue  is  the  high  level  of  household  debt  and  housing  prices.  Over  recent  times,
Australians have borrowed a lot to purchase housing. This has added to the upward pressure on
housing  prices,  especially  in  our  two  largest  cities,  where  structural  factors  are  also  at  work.
Australians are coping well with the higher level of debt, but as debt levels have increased relative
to our incomes so too have the medium-term risks. The very high levels of housing prices in our
largest cities are also making it difficult for those on low and middle incomes to buy their own
home.
So as we turn the final pages of this chapter, these are some of the issues we face. But as we
turn these pages, we also see improvements on a number of fronts.
Business conditions, as reported in surveys, are at the highest level in almost 10 years. There
are also growing signs that private investment outside the resources sector is picking up. We
have  been  waiting  for  this  for  some  time.  For  a  number  of  years,  animal  spirits  had  been
missing, with many firms preferring to put off making decisions about capital spending. It appears
that  some  of  this  reluctance  to  invest  is  now  passing. According  to  the  June  quarter  national
accounts, private non-mining business investment increased strongly over the first half 2017, to
be  around  10  per  cent  above  the  level  at  the  start  of  2016.  Non-residential  building  approvals
have  increased  to  be  above  the  levels  of  recent  years  and  there  is  a  large  pipeline  of  public
infrastructure investment to be completed (Graph 4). The decline in mining investment has also
largely run its course.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
There has also been positive news on the employment front. Over the past year, the number of
people with jobs has increased by more than 2½ per cent, a positive outcome given that the
working-age  population  is  increasing  at  around  1½  per  cent  a  year.  Growth  in  full  time
employment  has  been  particularly  strong.  The  various  forward-looking  indicators  suggest  that
labour market conditions will remain positive in the period immediately ahead.
Here  in  Western Australia,  there  are  also  some  signs  of  improvement  after  what  has  been  a
difficult  few  years.  The  drag  from  declining  mining  investment  is  diminishing.  Businesses  are
feeling more positive than they were a year ago and employment has been rising after a period of
decline. At the same time though, conditions in the housing market remain difficult, with housing
prices and rents continuing to fall in Perth. Weak residential construction has also weighed on
aggregate demand over the first half of this year, although building approvals and liaison reports
point to some stabilisation in the period ahead (Graph 5).
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
For Australia as a whole, the recent national accounts – which showed a healthy increase in
output of 0.8 per cent in the June quarter – were in line with the Bank’s expectations. These, and
other  recent  data,  are  consistent  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  central  scenario  for  GDP  growth
averaging around the 3 per cent mark over the next couple of years. This is a bit faster than our
current  estimate  of  trend  growth  in  the Australian  economy,  so  we  expect  to  see  a  gradual
decline in the unemployment rate. This should lead to some pick-up in wage growth, although we
expect this to be a gradual process given the structural factors at work that I have spoken about
on previous occasions. We can also expect to see a gradual increase in inflation back towards
the middle of the 2 to 3 per cent medium-term target range.
There are clearly risks around this central scenario. We would like to see the improvement in
business investment consolidate and a continuation of job growth at a rate at least sufficient to
absorb the increase in Australia’s workforce. Some pick-up in wage growth in response to the
tighter labour market would also be a welcome development. So these are some areas to watch.
But as things stand, the economy does look to be improving.
The next chapter
I would now like to lift my gaze a little and turn to the next chapter in our economic story. I would
like to sketch out four of the possible plot lines, acknowledging that, as in all good stories, there
are likely to be plenty of surprises along the way.
Shifts in the global economy
A  first  likely  plot  line,  as  it  has  been  in  previous  chapters,  is  the  ongoing  shift  in  the  global
economy.  Here,  changes  in  technology  and  further  growth  in Asia  are  likely  to  be  prominent
themes.
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  some  quarters  there  is  pessimism  about  future  prospects  for  the  global  economy.  The
pessimists cite demographic trends, high debt levels, increasing regulatory burdens that stifle
innovation  and  political  issues.  They  see  a  future  of  low  productivity  growth  and  only  modest
increases in average living standards.
It’s right to be concerned about the issues that the pessimists focus on, but I am more optimistic
about the ability of technological progress to propel growth in the global economy, just as it has
done in the past. We are still learning how to take advantage of recent advances in technology,
including the advances in the tools of science. In time we will do this and new industries and
methods of production will evolve, some of which are hard to even imagine today. So there is still
plenty  of  upside.  The  challenge  we  face  is  to  make  sure  that  the  benefits  of  technological
progress are widely shared. How well we do this could have a major bearing on the next chapter.
Beyond  this  broad  theme,  it  is  appropriate  to  recognise  the  important  leadership  role  that  the
United States plays in the global economy. If the US economy does well, so does most of the
rest of the world. The United States has long been a strong supporter of open markets and a
rules-based international system. It has been the breeding ground for much of the progress in
technology. And it has been a safe place for people to invest and an important source of financial
capital  for  other  countries.  It  is  in  our  interests  that  the  United  States  continues  to  play  this
important role. A retreat would make our lives more complicated.
Another important influence on the next chapter is how things play out in China. While growth in
China is trending lower, the share of global output produced in China will continue to rise, as per
capita incomes converge towards  those  in  the  more  advanced  economies  (Graph  6). As  this
convergence  takes  place,  the  structure  of  the  Chinese  economy  will  change  and  so  too  will
China’s  economic  relationship  with  Australia.  Exports  of  resources  will  continue  to  be  an
important part of that relationship, but increasingly trade in services and other high value-added
activities, including food, will become more important. Notwithstanding this, there are risks on the
horizon, with the Chinese economy going through some difficult adjustments. One of these is the
switch  from  a  growth  model  based  on  industrial  expansion  to  one  based  more  on  services.
Another is managing an increasingly large and complex financial system. Australia has a strong
interest in China successfully managing these challenges.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another  shift  in  the  global  economy  that  could  shape  the  next  chapter  is  the  growth  of  other
economies in Asia. Developments in India and Indonesia bear especially close watching. Both of
these countries, especially India, have very large populations, and per capita incomes are still
quite low. In time, the effects of economic progress in these countries and others in the region
could  be  expected  to  have  a  substantial  effect  on  the  Australian  economy,  just  as  the
development of China has.
Normalisation of monetary conditions
A  second  likely  plot  line  of  the  next  chapter  is  a  return  to  more  normal  monetary  conditions
globally.  Since  the  financial  crisis  we  have  been  through  an  extraordinary  period  in  monetary
history. Interest rates have been very low and even negative in some countries. Central banks
have  greatly  expanded  their  balance  sheets  in  order  to  buy  assets  from  the  private  sector
(Graph 7). This period of monetary expansion is now drawing to a close.
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some normalisation of monetary conditions globally should be seen as a positive development,
although it does carry risks. It is a sign that economic growth in the advanced economies has
become self-sustaining, rather than just being dependent on monetary stimulus. It would also lift
the return to many savers who have been receiving very low returns on interest-bearing assets
for a decade now.
On the other side of the ledger, periods of rising interest rates globally have, historically, exposed
over-borrowing  somewhere  in  the  global  system.  Investment  strategies  that  looked  sensible
when interest rates were very low tend not to look so good when interest rates are higher.
We can take some comfort from the major efforts over the past decade to improve the resilience
of the global financial system. But at the same time, investors have increasingly been prepared
to take more risk in the search for yield. Many continue to expect a continuation of low rates of
inflation and low interest rates, despite quite low unemployment rates in a number of countries.
So  this  is  an  area  that  is  worth  watching.  If  higher  interest  rates  are  the  result  of  a  surprise
increase in inflation, financial markets could be in for a difficult adjustment.
A  rise  in  global  interest  rates  has  no  automatic  implications  for  us  here  in  Australia.
Notwithstanding this, an increase in global interest rates would, over time, be expected to flow
through to us, just as the lower interest rates have. Our flexible exchange rate though gives us
considerable independence regarding the timing as to when this might happen.
Higher levels of debt
This brings me to a third plot line: that is, how we deal with the higher level of household debt and
higher housing prices, especially in a world of more normal interest rates.
It  is  likely  that  higher  levels  of  household  debt  change  household  spending  patterns.  Having
increased their borrowing, households are less inclined to let consumption growth run ahead of
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth in incomes for too long. Higher levels of debt also mean that household spending could
be quite sensitive to increases in interest rates, something the Reserve Bank will be paying close
attention to.
To  date,  households  have  been  coping  reasonably  well  with  the  higher  debt  levels.  The
aggregate debt-to-income ratio has trended higher, but the ratio of interest payments to income
is  not  particularly  high,  given  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  (Graph  8).  Housing  loan  arrears
remain low, although they have increased a little recently, especially here in Western Australia.
Over recent times, one issue that the Reserve Bank has focused on is the build-up of medium-
term risks from growth in household debt persistently outpacing that in household income. Our
concern  has  been  that,  in  this  environment,  a  small  shock  could  turn  into  a  more  serious
correction as households seek to repair their balance sheets. We have been working with APRA
through  the  Council  of  Financial  Regulators  to  address  this  risk.  The  various  measures  are
having a positive impact in improving the resilience of household balance sheets.
A broadening of the drivers of growth
The fourth likely plot line is a broadening of the drivers of growth in the Australian economy. How
the next chapter in our economic history turns out depends partly on our ability to lift productivity
growth across a wide range of industries. The resources sector will, no doubt, continue to make
an important contribution to the Australian economy, but it is unlikely that it will shape the next
chapter in our economic history as it did the current chapter. With another major upswing in the
terms  of  trade  unlikely  and  the  working-age  share  of  our  population  having  peaked  as  the
population ages, improving productivity will be key to growth in our national income.
The drivers of growth are changing: they increasingly depend on our ability to produce innovative
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
goods  and  services  in  a  rapidly  changing  world.  In  this  world,  it  is  difficult  to  make  precise
predictions  about  where  the  jobs  and  growth  in  our  economy  are  going  to  come  from  in  the
future. But it seems clear that we will be best placed to take advantage of whatever possibilities
arise if businesses and our workforce are innovative and adaptable.
Australia  is  fortunate  to  have  a  natural  resource  base  that  provides  an  important  source  of
national income, and this will remain the case. But in this next chapter we will need to look more
directly to the skills of our workers and our businesses to drive economic growth. If we are to
take advantage of the opportunities that are offered by technology and growth in Asia, we need a
flexible  workforce  with  strong  skills  in  the  areas  of  problem  solving,  critical  thinking  and
communication. Investment in human capital will be one of the keys to success. We also need a
competitive business environment that encourages innovation. How well the next chapter turns
out will depend on how we do in these areas.
So, in summary these are some of the themes we might expect to see in the next chapter – the
impact  of  technology  and  the  growth  of  Asia;  the  normalisation  of  monetary  conditions;  the
effects of higher levels of household debt; and the capability of our workforce and businesses to
be flexible, innovative and adaptable.
This is, obviously, not a complete list. There are clearly other factors that could have a major
influence on the storyline, including how geopolitical tensions are resolved and how we adjust to
climate change. And no doubt there will be surprises as well.
But  overall,  I  remain  optimistic  about  how  this  next  chapter  might  unfold.  While  we  have  our
challenges,  some  of  which  I  have  talked  about,  we  also  have  some  advantages.  We  have  a
strong institutional and policy framework, a skilled, growing and diverse population and a wealth
of mineral and agricultural resources. We have strong links to Asia, the fastest growing part of
the global economy. We also have a flexible economy with a demonstrated capacity to adjust to
a changing world.
These factors should give us confidence about our future. But we can’t rest on this and there are
a  number  of  significant  risks.  The  world  is  a  competitive  place  and  the  global  economy  is
continuing to go through some challenging adjustments. If we are to do well in this world, we
need to keep investing in both physical and human capital. We also need to keep investing in
policy reform.
Finally, I have said relatively little about monetary policy today. This is partly because there are
other forces that are likely to be more important in shaping the next chapter of the Australian
economy. Monetary policy has an important role to play in supporting the economy as it goes
through the current period of adjustment. It can also help stabilise the economy when it is hit by
future shocks. Monetary policy can make for a more predictable investment climate by keeping
inflation  low  and  stable.  Having  a  competent,  analytical,  transparent  and  independent  central
bank  can  also  be  a  source  of  confidence  in  the  country.  But  beyond  these  effects,  monetary
policy has little influence on the economy’s potential growth rate.
Over recent times, the Reserve Bank Board has not sought to overly fine-tune things. We have
provided support and allowed time for the economy to adjust to the new circumstances. In its
decisions, the Board has been careful to balance the benefit of providing this support with the
risks  that  can  come  from  rising  household  debt. As  things  currently  stand,  we  look  to  be  on
course to make further progress in reducing unemployment and moving towards the midpoint of
the medium-term inflation target. This would be a good outcome.
Thank you for listening and I look forward to answering your questions.
  11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
