Benoît Cœuré: Setting standards for granular data
Opening remarks by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  Third  OFR-ECB-Bank  of  England  workshop  on  “Setting  Global  Standards  for
Granular Data: Sharing the Challenge”, Frankfurt am Main, 28 March 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to welcome you to this joint workshop on “Setting Global Standards
for  Granular  Data”,  organised  by  the  US  Office  of  Financial  Research  (OFR),  the  Bank  of
England and the ECB.
The event is subtitled “Sharing the Challenge”. This is not mere rhetoric.
It  rather  reflects  a  strong  belief  that  data  standardisation  requires  a  well-coordinated  effort  by
authorities – as key end-users of data – and by the industry. Only if both parties work closely
together can we be sure that efforts are channelled in the right direction and that desired and
actual outcomes are in sync.
In my remarks today, I will first give a short overview of why authorities and the industry need
high-quality granular data and why data should be based on global standards. I will then focus my
remarks on a few areas where progress has been achieved and discuss the challenges we still
face. And I will try to sum up some of the lessons we learnt along the way.
Why do we need (high-quality) data?
Let me start with the obvious: data are crucial for policymakers.
Every  day  countless  decisions  are  made  based  on  the  analysis  of  data.  Some  of  them  are
important, some of them are less so.
But the truth is that without reliable data policymakers would be “flying blind”.
This was a challenge particularly in the early days of the euro area when a lack of aggregated
standardised data, tailored to the new currency union, made it difficult for policymakers to draw
the correct lessons. The efforts undertaken over the past two decades or so to fill this gap are
truly tremendous.
And although there are still pockets in parts of the economic and financial landscape where we
lack data, the challenge has clearly shifted: the focus today is on managing high volumes of data
and  in  producing high-quality  and granular  data.  In  other  words,  to  refine  the  data  we  have,
expand it in its micro-dimension where needed and to make it more reliable, timelier and easier
to access.
The need for high-quality granular data is particularly acute in the financial sector.
Authorities  –  including  central  banks  –  need  high-quality  financial  data  at  a  granular  and
aggregate  level  to  perform  several  of  their  functions,  including:  conducting  monetary  policy,
assessing systemic risks, supervising banks, performing market surveillance and enforcing and
conducting resolution activities.
The private sector too is in need of high-quality data: for their regulatory reporting obligations, for
example,  and  to  underpin  risk  management  and  operational  efficiency  and  –  ultimately  –  to
support successful decision-making.
And the need for high-quality data does not end at our borders.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  interconnectedness  of  financial  markets  establishes  an  obvious  need  to  improve
our global  ability  to  collect,  aggregate,  disseminate  and  share  data.  This  is  a  prerequisite  for
developing a coherent view of the global financial system so that emerging vulnerabilities can be
dealt with promptly and effectively. Good data are essential for global systemic risk assessment
and for global financial stability.
Standards for granular data should therefore be agreed on and implemented at a global level –
the international dimension of this conference is therefore no coincidence. It rather is a reflection
of our experience that global standardisation results in large efficiency gains for both users and
providers of data.
And it’s about much more than efficiency. Often external observers question the appropriateness
of policy decisions because they do not trust the underlying data. Global standards can foster
trust across borders by removing one important source of uncertainty.
There  is  thus  a  shared  interest  in  promoting  the  efficient  production  and  processing  of  data
through the use of globally accepted open standards applied by all relevant stakeholders.
But setting global standards is of course not enough. Coordinated and consistent implementation
of agreed standards is an equally important determinant of success – as is the management and
dissemination of data.
What progress has been made and what challenges do we face?
Now, where do we currently stand in terms of setting and implementing standards?
As you are well aware, there are a number of ongoing international initiatives aimed at improving
the information frameworks on which policy decisions are based.
I would like to focus on two sets of initiatives, both of which aim to make financial transactions
easier  to  track  and  more  transparent:  the  launch  of  the  Legal  Entity  Identifier  (LEI)  and  the
ongoing reforms to improve the transparency of the over-the counter (OTC) derivatives markets.
LEI
The  LEI  initiative,  as  you  might  know,  dates  back  to  November  2011,  when  the  G20  leaders
supported the establishment of a global legal entity identifier that would uniquely identify parties to
financial transactions. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) helped to coordinate work within the
regulatory  community  on  the  governance  framework  for  the  Global  LEI  System.  It  thereby
complemented private sector efforts to develop a technical solution, some via the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO).
The  fruits  of  this  important  initiative  are  clearly  visible:  thanks  to  the  efficient  public/private
collaboration, the LEI is live and in use. And it is also being extended. About 470,000 LEIs had
been issued by end-2016. And those jurisdictions which host the largest shares of derivatives
activity already require that all counterparties to reportable derivatives transactions have LEIs.
The benefits of adopting LEIs for financial stability are clear. For example, the use of the LEI in
regulatory  reporting  facilitates  the  consistent  identification  of  reporting  entities  and  their
counterparties.  LEIs  also  put  regulators  in  a  position  to  more  effectively  evaluate  and  assess
counterparty exposure and financial risks.
LEIs  also  serve  the  industry  in  a  number  of  important  ways:  for  instance,  they  help  banks  to
manage  risk,  identify  their  customers,  and  counter  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of
terrorism (AML/CFT).
Indeed,  in  its  July  2016  report  on  Correspondent  banking,  the  Committee  on  Payments  and
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI)  recommends  the  use  of  LEIs  for  all  banks  involved  in
correspondent  banking  and  as  additional  information  in  payment  messages  to  ensure
unambiguous  identification  of  parties  to  payment  transactions  and  help  alleviate  some  of  the
1
costs associated with complying with AML/CFT regulations.
As I mentioned earlier, the LEI framework is still being improved. This year, implementation of the
so-called relationship data will be an important milestone.
Relationship  data  will  provide  additional  reference  data  on  the  direct  and  ultimate  parent(s)  of
legal entities, which will give users consolidated information at group level and not just at legal
entity  level.  Such  information  is  essential  for  risk  aggregation  for  banking  supervision  and
securities regulation.
Relationship data are also important for any analysis of interconnectedness within the financial
system. Today, it is still extremely difficult and time-consuming to carry out interconnectedness
studies  in  a  cross-border  context  –  not  only  because  of  remaining  legal  impediments  to  data
access, but also because the data are not easily comparable in the absence of commonly used
identifiers with relationship information on counterparties.
More therefore remains to be done to transform the LEI into a richer tool for policy analysis, e.g.
by  also  including sector classification as part of the information set that characterises a legal
entity.
And although improving the richness of the LEI is important, it is arguably even more important to
sponsor a more widespread use of the LEI across jurisdictions. In that respect, the EU is setting
a good example, representing around 60% of LEIs that have been issued so far, with several
regulations referencing the LEI and stipulating its use. Other jurisdictions too should make more
use of the LEI, possibly through mandatory adoption in new regulations.
Transparency of the OTC derivatives markets
Let me now turn to the derivatives market.
G20  leaders  agreed  in  2009  that  all  OTC  derivatives  contracts  should  be  reported  to  trade
repositories as part of their commitment to reform OTC derivatives markets. The aim was and
remains to improve transparency, mitigate systemic risk and prevent market abuse.
Today, rules for trade reporting (TR) are in place in most jurisdictions and, worldwide, more than
90%  of  trades  are  reported  to  trade  repositories.  Trade  reporting  has  therefore  increased  the
transparency  of  OTC  derivatives  markets  for  authorities  with  access  to  TR  data. And  it  has
enhanced authorities’ ability to identify and monitor systemic risk.
But despite this progress, very significant challenges remain for authorities to be able to compile
and  fully  use  TR  data  for  their  regulatory  or  supervisory  mandates.  These  challenges  include
legal  barriers  to  access  data,  lack  of  data  format  harmonisation  and  data  quality  issues.
Important efforts are under way in these areas to increase the use of TR data.
I would like to spend a few more words on one of these challenges: data harmonisation.
The CPMI and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have set up a
group to take charge of developing global guidance for harmonising key OTC derivatives data
elements.  This  move  followed  the  publication  of  the  FSB’s  Aggregation  Feasibility  Study   in
September 2014, which described the steps to be taken so that data reported across TRs can
be aggregated and authorities can obtain a comprehensive view of the OTC derivatives market
and activity.
2
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The report noted that it is critical for any aggregation option that the work on standardisation and
harmonisation of important data elements be completed, in particular through the adoption of the
LEI worldwide and the establishment of a unique transaction identifier (UTI) and unique product
identifier (UPI).
The CPMI and IOSCO have recently published technical guidance on the harmonisation of the
UTI, and they plan to do so for the UPI too within the next couple of months.
The  UTI,  by  uniquely  identifying  each  transaction,  is  essential  to  avoid  double-counting  und
under-counting of transactions when aggregating data. The UTI structure will be based on the LEI
of  the  generating  entity,  thus  ensuring  the  uniqueness  of  each  issued  UTI  while  allowing  a
plurality of generating entities.
The UPI – meanwhile – will allow flexible aggregation of different types of derivatives products by
grouping various reference data elements, which are important for a specific analysis.
Consistent  with  the  global  dimension  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks,  the  CPMI-
IOSCO guidance refers to international standards, in particular ISO, when applicable, in order to
ensure international standardisation and a process for adapting the standard if needed. And the
CPMI and IOSCO will also harmonise definitions and formats for a wide range of other critical
data elements in the coming months.
Of course, this work is highly relevant to the global OTC derivatives data aggregation effort, and
for achieving the outcomes initially expected from TR reporting. Yet, it could also serve purposes
additional  to  the  regulatory  ones  by,  for  example,  simplifying  pre-  and  post-trade  processes
performed by market participants and financial market infrastructures.
Additionally, the industry could easily leverage the UPI by including more granular information on
products, as needed for confirmation, risk management or other purposes. Of course, globally
harmonised data are of great interest to global market players, which would then have just one
rule for all the jurisdictions in which they operate.
The  harmonisation  approach  followed  by  the  CPMI  and  IOSCO  is  intended  to  be  flexible  and
scalable  to  accommodate  the  evolution  of  markets,  such  as  new  products  being  traded,
regulatory  regimes  and  messaging  standards.  Some  jurisdictions  such  as  the  EU  have
introduced data harmonisation in contexts other than trade reporting – MIFID II for example – to
support pre- and post-trade transparency. This reflects the fact that the same harmonised data
may  be  used  in  different  regulatory  contexts  and  that  such  an  approach  simplifies  data
management by both authorities and the industry.
Consistent implementation of these standards should now be our priority. The FSB has set up a
working group in charge of the governance for the UTI and the UPI, working in close collaboration
with  CPMI  and  IOSCO,  so  that  implementation  is  achieved  as  swiftly  and  as  consistently  as
possible  across  jurisdictions.  The  FSB  has  just  started  to  publically  consult  on  governance
arrangements for a global UTI.  In the case of the UPI, a governance arrangement might involve
some public/private interaction and collaboration, as seen with the LEI.
3
Full implementation also requires removing legal barriers. In 2015, an FSB trade reporting peer
review highlighted the need for FSB jurisdictions to remove legal barriers to the reporting of OTC
derivatives transactions to TRs and to have legal frameworks in place to permit both domestic
and foreign authorities’ access to data held in a domestic TR by 2018. Authorities announced last
year  their  plans  to  remove  such  barriers.  Progress  in  that  area  is  vital  if  we  want  the
harmonisation efforts to bear fruit so that authorities are able to compile and make full use of TR
data for their regulatory and/or supervisory mandates.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The benefits of data harmonisation and standardisation are clear: it will help authorities better
monitor risks and give the private sector the basis for a deeper understanding of the financial
markets, sounder decision-making, and increased process efficiency for industry participants.
A lot has been done, but a lot more remains to be done.
4
For example, more than three years since the start of EMIR data reporting, users and producers
continue to face challenges.  These challenges include data quality aspects such as missing or
misreported values, the double-reporting regime and the multiplicity of TRs as well as the lack of
standardisation and harmonisation across trade repositories and counterparties.  Other issues
relate to the reporting framework. For example, although some derivatives contracts, such as
swaptions, have two maturity dates, there is only a single field for a maturity date.
5
While work is ongoing to address some specific issues, a close, timely and effective interaction
between users and drafters of statistical regulation will continue to be important.
In  my  view,  public/private  collaboration  remains  the  best  approach  for  data  harmonisation
because both authorities and the financial industry alike are interested in achieving efficiency and
quality. The use of international standards, where they exist or can be introduced, is likewise a
good approach. This is particularly the case with a view to achieving worldwide recognition and
adoption.
For example, as a private sector mechanism, the ISO has proven to be very effective, thanks to
its strong governance and consultation process, involving most jurisdictions. Such a mechanism
could  be  one  possible  answer  to  the  challenge  of  maintaining  standardised  data  elements,
provided that authorities are strongly and continuously involved.
And, finally, there are still many implementation gaps to fill if the intended benefits of the data
harmonisation  reforms  are  to  be  fully  achieved.  As  I  said  earlier,  appropriate  governance
arrangements for key identifiers will need to be set up. Commitments by authorities to remove
legal  barriers  to  reporting  and  accessing  data  on  a  cross-border  basis  will  need  to  be
strengthened. And  efforts  to  set  up  an  efficient  mechanism  for  sharing  and  aggregating  data
globally will need to be supported over time.
This is a long journey. Today and tomorrow you will take one step further in this journey: you will
discuss  the  benefits,  challenges  and  priorities  related  to  setting  global  standards  for  granular
data.
I wish you all a stimulating exchange of views and experience.
1
2
3
4
5
CPMI, Correspondent banking, July 2016.
FSB, Feasibility study on aggregation of OTC derivatives data, September 2014.
FSB, Proposed  governance  arrangements  for  the  Unique  Transaction  Identifier  (UTI)  –  Consultation
document, March 2017.
See also ECB, Article - Looking back at OTC derivative reforms – objectives, progress and gaps, 20 December
2016, Economic Bulletin Issue 8, 2016.
See, for instance, Final Report, Review of the Regulatory and Implementing Technical Standards on reporting
under Article 9 of EMIR, ESMA, November 2015.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
