 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation of 
the Inflation Report – August 2017  
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 16 August 2017 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the August Inflation Report. As always, we will give you an overview 
of  monetary  and  macroeconomic  trends  for  the  period  since  the  previous  Report  and  set  out  our 
expectations for 2017 and 2018.  However,  before we move on to this,  allow me to briefly venture 
outside the usual timeframe covered by this Report and look back at the results which the National 
Bank  of  Serbia  achieved  in  the  past  five  years,  that  is,  in  the  period  since  my  appointment  as 
Governor. This period is long enough to allow us to take stock of what we have accomplished and of 
the challenges that are still ahead of us. 
The presence of strong challenges emanating from the international environment, which heightened 
uncertainties in all markets, did not work in our favour, but also did not prevent us  from achieving 
and maintaining price and financial stability in the five years behind us.  
I  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  highlight  some  of  our  key  achievements  as  well  as  their 
significance for all of us.  
Inflation has been low, stable and predictable for four years in a row. 
From nearly 13%  in autumn  2012,  inflation was  brought  down to 2.2%  in less than one year. After 
that,  we  have  kept  it  at  a  low  level.  Low  inflationary  pressures  from  2013  onwards  were  partly 
attributable  to  low  cost-push  pressures  from  the  international  environment;  however,  they  are 
mostly  a  result  of  the  effects  of  domestic  factors  –  relative  stability  of  the  exchange  rate,  more 
anchored inflation expectations and the effects of fiscal consolidation. With the price stability it has 
achieved,  Serbia  is  now  comparable  to  other  European  countries  –  since  the  start  of  the  year, 
inflation has moved within the new, lower target tolerance band and measured 3.2% y-o-y in July. 
Core  inflation  moved  at  around  2%  during  the  year  and  equalled  1.7%  y-o-y  in  July.  This  is  also  a 
confirmation of the adequacy of the monetary policy that we conducted in the prior period, as well 
as  of  the  legitimacy of  our  decision to  lower  the  inflation  target  by 1  percentage  point  to  3±1.5%. 
According  to  our  latest  projection,  we  expect  inflation  to  remain  within  the  new,  lower  target 
tolerance band for the following two years.  
    1 
Over the past four years, interest rates on corporate, household and government borrowing have 
decreased  considerably.  This  is  reflected  in  higher  disposable  income,  a  rise  in  lending  and 
economic activity and more successful fiscal consolidation.  
Inflation was first lowered and then maintained at a low level, thereby enabling significant monetary 
policy easing through the key policy rate, which we initiated in May 2013. By July 2016, through 17 
iterations, the key policy rate was lowered by a total of 7.75 percentage points to 4%. Owing to this, 
interest rates on new dinar loans to corporates and households were lowered during the past four 
years by more than 10 percentage points. 
Within  four  years,  interest  rates  on  euro-indexed  loans  were  also  decreased  –  by  3.5  percentage 
points  for  corporates  and 3.8  percentage  points  for households. The  decline  was  partly  a  result of 
lower  interest  rates  in  the  euro  money  market  and  partly  attributable  to  the  country’s  lower  risk 
premium and interbank  competition. Our efforts to create  a more stable business  environment, as 
well as the significant fall in the country’s risk premium and Serbia’s improved credit rating, were the 
dominant  factors  leading  to  the  lowering  of  interest  rates  on  euro-indexed  loans  and  the  greater 
availability of cross-border borrowing at lower costs.  
The fall in rates on private sector borrowing provided an impetus to the rise in disposable income on 
account of lower  interest rates on current and new loans, with the possibility of refinancing under 
more favourable terms.  
  Fiscal policy was also immensely helpful in preserving price and financial stability, however, it caused 
some  feedback  effect  as  well.  As  monetary  policy  was  eased,  interest  rates  on  dinar  government 
bonds  were  lowered  by  more  than  7  percentage  points,  depending  on  maturity.  This  significantly 
lowered the costs of dinar government borrowing, which, together with a more favourable economic 
environment and in conditions of low inflation and a relatively stable exchange rate of the dinar to 
the euro, rendered fiscal consolidation more successful.  
Lower  interest  rates  meant  lower  costs  for  everyone  –  the  corporate  sector,  citizens  and  the 
government. 
Significantly lower interest rates, accelerated economic activity and labour market recovery led to a 
rise in loan demand. On this account, lending recorded positive y-o-y growth rates since the second 
half of 2015, despite the maturing of considerable amounts of subsidised loans and increased efforts 
of banks to resolve the issue of non-performing loans. Since the start of 2015, new investment loans 
2 
 were approved at a significantly faster pace, their total volume over the past two years equalling the 
level of total new investment loans in the four years before that. Investment loans were one of the 
sources  for  funding  investment  in  the  new  investment  cycle,  thereby  contributing  to  a  pick-up  in 
economic  growth.  During  2017,  the  y-o-y  rise  in  loans  accelerated  and  arrived  at  4.5%  in  June,  or 
6.7% excluding the effect of NPL write-offs. 
In the prior period, financial stability has been preserved, the share of NPLs in total loans dropped 
significantly and the regulatory framework has been improved. 
Owing to the appropriate combination of measures of monetary and fiscal policies, Serbia arrived at 
a  more  favourable  macroeconomic  position  which,  coupled  with  the  NBS’s  regulatory  policy,  also 
contributed to the stability of the financial system – our system is more stable than before! 
One of the key results in this area is the resolution of NPLs, an issue that accompanied Serbia into the 
financial crisis, after which it only deepened further. To resolve the NPL issue in a systemic way, in 
cooperation  with  the  Government,  the  NBS  prepared  the  NPL  Resolution  Strategy  and  the 
accompanying Action Plans, and adopted them in August 2015. The NBS carried out all the activities 
within the deadline set by its Action Plan and, as a result, since the adoption of the Strategy – which 
means  within  a  period  of  less  than  two  years  –  the  NPL  share  has  decreased  by  close  to  7 
percentage points. Moreover, corporate NPLs are now at their lowest level in nine years.  
  As  a  result  of  numerous  measures  and  activities  that  were  undertaken  in  the  area  of  macro  and 
microprudential  policy,  the  Serbian  banking  sector  features  a  high  degree  of  capitalisation  and 
liquidity, which are above regulatory requirements, and resilience to various macroeconomic shocks. 
High capital adequacy has been confirmed by special diagnostic studies of the quality of banks’ assets 
which,  until  then,  had  never  been  conducted  in  the  domestic  banking  system.  The  stability  of  the 
sector  is  further  substantiated  by  the  fact  that  banks  operating  in  Serbia  mostly  rely  on  domestic 
sources  of  funding,  which  increased  in  the  previous  period.  This  reduces  banks’  exposure  to  risks 
stemming from the international environment, as well as to the risk of sudden withdrawal of funds 
by the parent bank, which was one of the challenges countries in the region faced during the crisis. 
Additional contribution to the sector’s stability came from our strategic commitment to continuously 
improve the legal framework, in accordance with international standards and EU regulations, taking 
into account the specificities of the domestic market. Let me remind you that we have composed and 
adopted a set of secondary legislation introducing Basel III in Serbia as one of the important reforms 
3 
 aligning Serbia’s regulatory framework in this area almost entirely with the applicable framework in 
EU countries. 
Since August 2012, we have ensured the relative stability of the exchange rate, which is one of the 
factors of overall stability. 
The  international  environment  in  the  prior  period  was  marked  by  uncertainty  arising  from  the 
diverging  monetary  policies  of  leading  central  banks,  but  also  from  the  so-called  Greek  crisis,  the 
Asian  stock  market  crisis,  shifting  outlooks  for  global  and  Chinese  growth,  the  effects  of  Brexit, 
geopolitical  tensions,  etc.  To  these  challenges  we  responded  adequately,  owing  to  greater 
resilience of  the Serbian  economy  and  the  financial system,  cautious  monetary  policy,  as well  as 
interventions in the foreign exchange market which were timely, fine-tuned and well-balanced in 
terms  of  the  reaction  to  short-term  pressures  towards both the  depreciation and appreciation  of 
the dinar. Expressed in numbers, in the last five years until July, the NBS intervened in the foreign 
exchange market by net selling EUR 765 million, with the nominal depreciation of the dinar against 
the euro of 1.5%. This is significantly less than the net sale of EUR 5.7 billion in the five years before 
that, when the nominal depreciation of the dinar was 33.2%. 
Bracing for the coming pressures by preparing a defence system at peaceful times and investing in 
stability  during  turmoil,  the  country’s  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  were  preserved  at  an 
adequate level, measured by  all criteria, while  in net terms, they increased  from EUR 6.6  billion  at 
end-2012 to EUR 8.4 billion at end-2016. 
  Confidence in the dinar is also returning slowly, as evidenced by the rising degree of dinarisation.  
Macroeconomic stabilisation, significantly lower dinar loan rates and measures promoting saving and 
borrowing  in  dinars  provided  a  contribution  to  the  increase  in  the  degree  of  dinarisation. 
Consequently, the share of dinar loans  of  households rose from  35%  at end-2012  to almost  50%, 
where it now stands, while at the same time the share of dinar deposits in total deposits also rose 
from less than 20% to around 30%. As of last year, banks introduced dinar housing loans approved at 
interest  rates  below  5%  and  for  the  period  of  up  to  30  years.  Last  year,  a  top-rated  international 
financial organisation issued the first dinar securities and the proceeds were used for dinar lending.  
Bearing  in  mind  how  deep  the  roots  of  euroisation  go,  we  are  aware  that  dinarisation  will  be  a 
gradual  process,  but  the  important  thing  is  that  it  has  begun  and  that  it  will  remain  one  of  our 
strategic priorities. 
4 
   The business and investment environment is more stable. 
Over  the  past  five  years,  the  NBS  managed  to  achieve  and  maintain  price  and  financial  stability, 
thereby  meeting  its  statutory  objectives  and  contributing  to  the  creation  of  a  more  encouraging 
business environment, a fall in the risk premium to its lowest level and improvement in the country’s 
credit rating, progress on the Doing Business list and prospects for the coming period. The practical 
  importance of this is substantiated by the inflow of foreign direct investment, which measured 5.5% 
of  GDP  in  each  of  the  past  two  years,  and  was  more  than  sufficient  to  cover  the  current  account 
deficit.  Moreover,  better  business  results,  supported  by  lower  costs  of  corporate  borrowing  and 
relative stability of the dinar, provided the funds that pushed investment growth up. Owing to this, 
private investment – directed mainly to export projects – has become one of the pillars of economic 
growth and we expect it to remain so in the coming years.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
I would like to reiterate that these are only some of the key results we have achieved over the past 
five years. I must point out that this is a pleasant though rare opportunity to look back into the past 
in  order  to  learn  lessons  for  the  future  –  the  future  which  we  create  by  overcoming  challenges, 
5 
 armed  with  knowledge  and  a  sense  of  responsibility  about  the  importance  of  what  we  do.  In  the 
period ahead, you may count on the National Bank of Serbia to use all of its available instruments to 
maintain the achieved price and financial stability and give its contribution to economic growth and 
the preservation of the standard of living. 
 Thank you for your attention. I now give the floor to my colleagues. 
  6 
