Mario Draghi: Cavour Prize 2016 - commemoration
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  the
awarding of the Premio Camillo Cavour 2016, Santena, 23 January 2017.
 It may be true that “history is not the judge of anything that concerns us" , as Montale reminds
us. But, in thanking you for this prestigious award, made even more distinguished by those who
received  this  prize  before  me,  if  I  may  recall  some  features  of  Cavour’s  actions,  there  are
obvious similarities between what happened all that time ago and the circumstances that have
continued to repeat themselves throughout Italy’s history, right up to today.
Difficulties in adopting a majority government
1
Just a few years after his sudden death, in June 1861, Cavour became a reference point in the
debate taking place in the country at that time, either in a spirit of nostalgia for an Italy that could
have been, but without him was not, or in a spirit of criticism, as one of the causes of the birth of
an Italy that was unified on the ashes of a possible democratic revolution. Just a few years ago
the Cavourian “connubio”  was identified as one of the origins of the country’s structural problem
of  having  to  live  with  political  competition  between  opposing  sides  in  a  context  of  alternating
governments,  if  not  precisely the  starting  point  of  trasformismo,  which  has  been  recurrent
throughout Italian history.
2
Especially  when  there  is  widespread  instability,  be  it  at  national  or  international  level,  it  is
necessary  to  have  leadership  which  holds  firmly  onto  the  power  of  political  initiative.  But  this
views the involvement of other political groups and other governments as actions of strength and
not as unproductive power-sharing.
Cavour  was  active  in  a  period  of  sudden  destabilisation  in  Europe  as  a  result  of  the  1848
revolutions that had overturned the balance of powers determined by the Congress of Vienna
following the fall of the Napoleonic Empire. It was a period of turbulent transition, in which great
opportunities,  which  came  with  great  risk,  were  opening  up  for  the  main  players  in  European
politics. Today, we are again in a period of history in which Europe is changing, following the
dissolution  of  the  Soviet  bloc,  the  reunification  of  Germany,  the  effects  of  the  sovereign  debt
crisis  in  the  euro  area,  the  United  Kingdom’s  exit  from  the  European  Union  and  geopolitical
tensions in eastern Europe. In other words, today like then, it could be said that we are looking for
a new stability.
Cavour’s mastery at using the ties and influences he had to take into account to the country’s
advantage  is  striking  to  everyone,  not  just  historians;  and  not  only  international  ties  and
influences, which were extremely important for a leader of a second-tier European power, but
also ones inside the diverse Risorgimento movement. In fact, he also had difficult relations with
Italian democrats, who were supporters of the republic and of universal suffrage, distrustful and
hostile  towards  him,  and  above  all  enjoyed  more  public  support  than  him,  but  with  whom  he
could not do without. He was able to make precise calculations, conscious of how important their
support was, and struck essential compromises, while, for all intents and purposes, holding onto
control of the political initiative.
The necessity of a non-provincial culture
For this strategy to be successful, it needed to be supported by a non-provincial culture. His was
a European one, to an extent that was extremely uncommon for an Italian politician of his day.
This was also for family reasons: it is well known his mother was originally from Geneva and,
during his formative years, Cavour would look beyond the Alps, particularly at the political unrest
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
in France under Louis Philippe I and at British industry. Through Cavour’s actions, Europe found
an important channel for influencing the culture of the ruling class in Piedmont under the Savoy
and then of unified Italy.
Political progress is never separate from economic progress
identical.” 
For Cavour, progress in Europe meant progress with the liberal agenda, in terms of both politics
and economics. Thus “the political regeneration of a nation is never separate from its economic
regeneration. When a people governed by a benevolent prince progresses in the way of civility, it
must of necessity progress in wealth and material power. The conditions for the two kinds of
progress  are 
(Cavour, Influenza  delle  riforme  sulle  condizioni  economiche
dell’Italia, Risorgimento, 15 December 1847). From a more specifically political perspective, the
freedoms of individuals and national unity were considered binding for liberals of Cavour’s ilk; it is
from this that we get, among other things, the phrase “civium libertati patriae unitati” (freedom of
the citizens, unity of the land), which was inscribed 50 years after unification at the top of the
monument  to  Victor  Emmanuel  II  in  Rome.  Central  to  his  economic  agenda  was  a  tireless
commitment  to  reducing  customs  barriers  (achieved  via  a  series  of  bilateral  treaties)  and
integrating markets, in the belief ( not only in principle but also based on his extensive experience
as  a  farmer  (  that  competition  was  the  key  driver  of  greater  production  efficiency  and
technological progress.
Pragmatism and ideology
He was above all a man of action in the highest sense, seeking concrete results and intent on
aims that were ambitious but attainable. Impervious to all forms of doctrinal fundamentalism, as
a liberal he assigned the State the task of making a crucial contribution to the creation of the
communication infrastructures necessary for development, above all the railways, which at the
time  were  at  the  frontier,  if  not  the  very  symbol,  of  technical  progress.  In  the  same  vein,  he
defended the principle of State-funded support for the poor, to the extent that this did not reduce
the  incentives  for  workers  to  take  up  employment.  In  the  field  of  credit,  he  strengthened  the
Banca nazionale (from which origins the Banca d’Italia later emerged), with the aim of forming
the  basis  of  the  credit  system  and  the  state  bank.  He  was  only  partly  successful,  owing  to
opposition from proponents of the principle of pure liberalism who favoured competition between
banks of issue, and whose ranks included the leading Italian economist of the time, the Sicilian
Francesco Ferrara.
In this context, his main objective was to bring about reform of the economic system, or, as we
would call it today, structural reform.
In  the  underdeveloped  conditions  prevailing  in  the  Kingdom  of  Sardinia  in  the  mid-nineteenth
century, this was no easy task, not least given the opposition from a strong conservative front.
He  was  greatly  helped  by  the  classical  English  culture  of  economics  and  his  interest  in
administration, both of which he grasped to a degree virtually unheard of in Italian intellectuals of
the day, almost all of whom were of a literary and humanist vocation. His political language is
also to be remembered: he countered the “madmen of the rally” with words extolling preparation
and good administration as features essential to the achievement of desired results. In 1852 he
brought about a radical reform of the State’s financial administration and accounts, which would
subsequently form the basis of the legislation in this area in unified Italy.
Europe
His  goal  was  for  Italy  to  be  united  and  independent,  mainly  because  he  saw  unity  and
independence as essential features of progress and civilisation, but also because only a united
and independent Italy would be able to assert its values in Europe and thus to derive impetus for
growth.  A  century  later,  after  the  end  of  the  Second  World  War,  this  idea  took  on  a  more
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
complete  and  ambitious  form,  developing  with  the  aim  of  an  economic  union  followed  by  a
political  union  as  a  necessary  achievement  of  European  civilisation.  This  was  then  pursued
through Italy’s decision to take part in the process of integration, through ever closer steps: the
European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, the Common Market in 1957, the Single Market in
1985,  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  begun  in  Maastricht  in  1992,  membership  of  the  single
currency in 1998.
During  a  period  of  instability  on  the  European  continent,  Cavour  saw  Europe  itself,  and  the
associated idea of progress towards a superior form of civilisation as understood by the liberal
vision,  as  an  anchor  of  his  actions  to  modernise  the  Kingdom  of  Sardinia  and  unify  Italy.
Precisely  because,  as  a  true  patriot,  his  love  for  Italy  was  so  strong  and  illuminated  by
intelligence,  it  never  clouded  his  judgement:  Italy  needed  Europe  in  order  to  grow,  to  make
progress and to “be better”. A country that needs Europe to gain the independence and unity it
craved  for  centuries  without  success  will  continue  to  need  it  in  order  to  face  the  challenges
posed in the course of its existence. But it was always clear to Cavour that the relationship with
Europe would be a fruitful one if the country also learned to make progress and grow by itself.
Otherwise that same independence would be compromised. So, just as today, the relationship
with Europe was based on solidarity resulting from mutual benefit and on the responsibility of
independent nation states. Even in a context as different as the current one, his inspiration, his
skill in considering with ambitious realism the interests of the forces at play, his ability to hold
together the domestic and external forces necessary for the achievement of his plan, in short his
extraordinary success, these things are – particularly in these times full of references to dark
pasts – a compelling source of inspiration for anyone, not just in Italy, who sees international
cooperation as the only method of managing problems that the nation states have for some time
not been able to resolve on their own.
1
2
Translation of “La storia non è magistra di niente che ci riguardi", quote from Eugenio Montale, “La Storia – in
Satura", in Tutte le poesie, Mondadori, 1984 Meridiani, p. 1,245
Translator’s note: The connubio (or “marriage”) refers to the coalition made by Cavour between the centre right
and the centre left.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
