Paris FinTech Forum – 25 January 2017 
Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France and Chairman of the Autorité de contrôle 
prudentiel et de résolution  
France: a European powerhouse for financial service innovation 
Good morning to all of you. I am delighted to be here today. Who could have imagined just a 
few  years  ago  that  a  central  banker  would  be  making  an  appearance  at  a  forum  on 
innovation? I remember when we first met up, about a year ago, with the developers from the 
start-up  Labo  Blockchain  to  work  on  a  Proof  of  Concept,  everyone  from  the  Banque  de 
France  had  made  an  effort:  they’d  dressed  casually  for  the  occasion…  except  that  all  the 
developers  had  decided  to  turn  up  in  a  suit  and  tie.  It  was  a  complete  role  reversal!  But 
things  change  very  rapidly.  Today,  our  dealings  with  innovators  go  far  beyond  any  of  the 
assumptions  we  might  have  had  about  each  other:  the  Banque  de  France  is  testing 
blockchain  technology  and  is  opening  a  LAB  to  work  with  start-ups;  the  ACPR  (the 
supervisory  body  which  I  chair)  has  welcomed  more  than  100  key  innovators  since  the 
creation  of  its  FinTech  Innovation  Unit,  and  has  set  up  a  FinTech  Forum  with  the  AMF  to 
increase our  interaction with  innovators. For all actors in the financial  industry,  including for 
the  Banque  de  France  and  the  ACPR,  the  digital  revolution  is  creating  challenges  but  also 
incredible opportunities that are just waiting to be seized, whether by FinTechs themselves, 
by  the  entire  financial  system  –  banks  and  insurers  –  or  by  the  French  and  European 
economy as a whole.  
1 
1.  What are the challenges for FinTechs?  
It’s  hard  to  imagine  how  we  would  get  by  today  without  cash-gifting  sites  to  fund  events, 
aggregators to draw together our  different bank accounts, or peer-to-peer payments to split 
restaurant bills or rents for flat-shares. Steve Jobs coined the well-known mantra: “simplicity 
is  the  ultimate  sophistication”,  and  I  think  all  of  these  innovations  have managed  to  offer  a 
simple,  often  cheaper  solution  to  new  user  habits  and  needs.  They  combine  cutting-edge 
technology  with  user-friendly  interfaces.  And,  in  many  cases,  they’ve  been  developed  by 
nimble start-ups that are in tune with the market and  have the freedom to think outside the 
box.  Today,  France  is  Europe’s  second  biggest  crowd-funding  market,  after  Great  Britain, 
and one of the most dynamic markets in Europe for payment innovations. 
Today, what I want to say is this: we are learning from you. Through your technology, you too 
can  contribute  towards  making  the  financial  system  more  secure.  The  artificial  intelligence 
and chatbots you are developing will help us respond more effectively to the public’s needs; 
big  data,  machine  learning  and  biometrics  will  help  us  to  better  prevent  fraud;  blockchain 
technology and smart contracts will help to optimise transactions; and your APIs (Application 
Programming  Interfaces)  and  open  source  technologies  will  help  to  make  financial 
technologies more interoperable. 
When I think, in turn, of what the Banque de France and ACPR can contribute, I’d say this: 
stable, reliable and agile regulation. Stable because we have a strong anchoring in European 
regulation:  this  means  that  FinTechs  established  in  France  can  offer  their  services  in  all 
countries  in  the  European  Union  –  it’s  what  we  call  “the  European  passport”.  Reliable, 
because  we  strive  to  limit  potential  risks,  so  that  innovation  is  always  synonymous  with 
customer  protection,  payment  security,  IT  security  and  financial  stability.  But  also  agile, 
because  innovation  must  not  be  stifled  by  administrative  red  tape;  that’s  why  we  are 
developing regulations that are based on objectives and principles rather than  on rules, and 
that  are  proportionate  to  the  scale  of  the  risks.  New  FinTech  players  also  help  to  stimulate 
competition with digital incumbents, and in particular with the initiatives launched by the US 
web giants. The industrial stakes are high: we need to foster this active competition, which is 
by  far  preferable  to  monopolies,  even  technological  ones.  Stable,  reliable  and  agile 
regulation is a basis for confidence. And confidence is a basis for success in innovation. We 
want to build this regulation with your active participation. We need your answers in order to 
transpose  PSD2  quickly  and  efficiently;  we  also  need  your  active  involvement  in  order  to 
build the best possible RegTech. 
   2 
2.  What are the challenges for the French financial industry? 
 Innovation does not just concern new entrants, of course. For banks as well as insurers, the 
digital  revolution  is  disrupting  traditional  customer  relationship  models.  One  figure  is 
particularly  revealing:  the  level  of  footfall  in  high  street  bank  branches.  In  2007,  62%  of 
French  people  visited  their  branch  several  times  a  month.  In  2016,  the  figure  had  fallen  to 
just a third of that: 20% – and to as low as 13% for the 18-34 age group.1 Customer journeys 
are becoming increasingly digitalised: France currently has the highest rate of usage among 
large  European  countries  for  internet  banking  services  (69%  of  customers).2  But,  beyond 
customer relationships, financial companies need to take a more comprehensive approach if 
they are to succeed in the digital transition - placing innovation at the heart of their strategic 
management,  as  well  as  rethinking  their  business  models.  These  are  difficult  choices  that 
naturally  need  to  be  taken  by  the  companies  themselves;  the  answers  are  not  easy  or 
uniform, but I would like to share with you a few avenues for thought.  
In the case of banks, it is important that they rethink their sources of  income: one response 
could be to diversify the range of services – both proprietary and via partnerships – that they 
offer  to  customers,  and  possibly  change  existing  pricing  policies,  with  fewer  flat-rate  prices 
and more pricing by use. The digital transition will also involve preparing for shifts in jobs and 
in skills, through dialogue with social partners. It will also require adopting an open approach, 
with  the  creation  of  partnerships  with  FinTechs  and  the  scientific  community.  Finally,  it  will 
call  for  major  IT  investment  to  provide  services  that  are  increasingly  aligned  with  customer 
needs, to reduce structural costs and improve regulatory compliance. IT systems will need to 
be  –  and  this  is  the  crux  of  the  challenge  –  more  secure  so  that  they  provide  strong 
protection  against  cyber-risks,  but  at 
the  same 
time  more 
flexible  and  open 
to 
interconnectivity.  
In  the  case  of  insurers,  the  digital  revolution  is  also  starting  with  a  complete  overhaul  of 
customer relationships and user habits. But it goes further than that. I’d just like to underline 
two  topics  that  I  think  are  essential.  First,  with  the  help  of  reinsurers,  insurers  need  to  be 
capable  of  meeting  demand  for  coverage  against  cyber-risk,  a  concern  that  affects  all 
companies – both small and large. Yet in 2015, fewer than 5% of French companies and 6% 
of  individuals  had  some  form  of  cyber-insurance.3  Insurers  can  and  should  take  inspiration 
from  their  own  experiences  in  tackling  cyber-risk,  and  use  it  to  develop  a  more  mature 
                                                             
1 Sources: Fédération Bancaire Française; Observatoire 2016 de l’image des banques, published by BVA and 
based on a survey conducted in May 2016, and Observatoire 2015.  
2 Source: European Commission’s Digital Economy and Society Index. 
3 Source: Le marché de la cyber-assurance : la révolution commence maintenant, PwC, January 2016. 
  3 
French and European cyber-insurance offering. Second subject: data and big data, with the 
spread  of  connected  objects  that  is  triggering  an  exponential  rise  in  the  amount  of  data 
available on insurance policyholders. Naturally this represents an opportunity: the traditional 
business of insurance consists precisely in collecting and exploiting data in order to quantify 
and put a price on risk. Nonetheless, I would urge insurers to take a responsible approach: 
we  need  to strike  the  right  balance  between segmentation  and  the  sharing  of  risk  between 
policyholders – the basic principles of solidarity and risk-pooling that are intrinsic to insurance 
are at stake. And we must not lose sight of our collective values regarding individuals’ right to 
privacy.  
 3.  What are the challenges for the French and European economy? 
 Let me just remind you of two basic economic facts: there can be no lasting growth without a 
rise  in  productivity;  and  there  can  be  no  productivity  without  innovation  and  its  diffusion. 
There  has  been  a  lot  of  discussion  among  economists  about  the  current  slowdown  in 
productivity and the threat, as some see it, of a “secular stagnation”. Personally, I think that 
expression  is  going  too  far,  and  you  here  stand  in  proof.  But  for  an  economy  to  be 
competitive and to grow,  it needs to  increase innovation and  its diffusion, not slow  it down. 
The  digitalisation  of  the  financial  sector  can  accelerate  this  positive  process:  it  helps  to 
disseminate  technological  advances  such  as  electronic  signatures,  solutions  to  defend 
against  cyber-attacks  or  distributed  ledger  technologies.  Innovative  and  secure  payment 
solutions, such as tomorrow’s blockchains, are also helping to speed up the development of 
e-commerce and modernise physical trade.  
Achieving this will require greater harmonisation at European level: in the precise application 
of the texts governing the financial  industry  (definition and security of payment services), in 
more recent fields (crowd-funding) or in the search for greater interoperability of technologies 
and  standards.  But,  above  all,  it  is  vital  that  we  define  an  overall  strategy  for  European 
innovation  in  financial  services.  This  strategy  must  cover  all  the  issues  raised  by  digital 
finance:  from  data  protection  to  the  fight  against  money  laundering;  from  IT  security  to 
consumer  protection;  from  financial  stability  to  the  social  challenges  of  banking  inclusion; 
from financial literacy to changes in jobs in the financial sector. It is a project currently being 
conducted  by  the  European  Commission.  And  the  Banque  de  France  and  ACPR  are  both 
playing  a  part.  Europe  depends  on  it;  its  independence  from  the  other  big  global  regions 
depends on it; and so too does the strength of its economy.   
 4 
My message is clear: we, as regulators, regard innovation as key. Within Europe, France has 
many strengths that can make it a leader in the digital transition. You are the driving force in 
this, with your audacity and your successes; it is up to us  – the Banque de France  and the 
ACPR – to ensure that we are capable partners - vigilant when necessary and always open-
minded. Rest assured we are fully mobilised towards this goal. Thank you for your attention.  
  5 
