Andreas  Dombret:  On 
proportionality?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  strategy  conference  of  the  Rhineland  Savings  Banks  and  Giro  Association,  Bonn,  29
August 2017.
to  greater 
regulatory
road 
the 
1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
 Some of you may perhaps recall that I have been a guest at the Rhineland Savings Banks and
Giro Association’s  strategy  conference  once  before  –  two  years  ago,  to  be  precise.  On  that
particular occasion, I shared my views on a variety of topics including the precarious situation in
Greece and the slump in China’s equity market. Fast forward to the present day, and there are
other,  not  entirely  new  challenges  we  are  looking  at:  digitalisation,  regulatory  matters,  interest
rate levels.
We are here today to discuss strategies which you can use to counter the current challenges. I
would like to make a practical contribution to today’s proceedings by talking about the challenge
of regulation. My speech here will focus particularly on small banks and savings banks with a
regional footprint and show how the regulatory landscape might evolve for them.
2. Regulation – a challenge
Let  me  begin  by  asking  you  this:  what  do  you,  personally,  associate  with  regulation  and
supervision? I trust you will all now be thinking of your competent analysts at the Bundesbank.
But for many of you, I would imagine, your thoughts will also be turning to paperwork, constraints,
costs. And  let  me  tell  you:  you  wouldn’t  be  wrong.  Regulation  and  supervision  are  indeed  a
challenge – they do create constraints, they do run up costs.
Yet it is no less true that regulation is necessary, and it is useful. The paperwork, the constraints,
the costs – there are good reasons for all these things.
After all, the services provided by banks and savings banks are crucial for a stable economic
cycle,  for  growth  and  prosperity.  Banks  and  savings  banks  fund  investments,  they  manage
savings and deliver important services, such as processing payments.
But taking risks is also part of the banking business. And when you take risks, there’s a chance
you might fail. But when a financial institution fails, the implications are far-reaching – and I don’t
just mean for the institution itself, but also for its investors, for the real economy, and for us all.
The financial crisis, which marks its tenth anniversary over the next few weeks, taught us that the
failure of a single institution is enough to trigger a chain reaction throughout the entire sector.
Smart regulation ensures that banks and savings banks can still go about their business, but that
they are appropriately protected against the biggest risks. It shields the economy, consumers
and the financial system itself against turbulence. The reason we can’t give financial institutions
full rein is because of the important part they play in the economic cycle.
That’s a point that often goes unnoticed in the debate surrounding regulation. Please don’t get me
wrong: regulation and supervision are not sacrosanct; criticism is certainly not out of bounds. In
the days when I myself was being supervised, I voiced criticism when I felt it was right to do so.
But criticism, whatever form it may take, needs to be constructive and honest and it shouldn’t be
unduly sweeping. Regrettably, that cannot be said of all the utterances in the public debate on
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
this topic.
3. Regulatory proportionality is lacking
Regulation and supervision are crucial, and it’s right that they should be something of a burden.
But it is also clear that needlessly heavy demands should be avoided. Regulation needs to cost
as much as necessary but also as little as possible.
And I fear this is a mark we’ve been falling short of in some respects lately. Because regulation
has grown ever more complex over time. The years since the onset of the financial crisis, in
particular, have seen the Basel Committee adopt wide-reaching global reforms. The idea behind
these initiatives was to learn the right lessons from the financial crisis and to be better equipped
going forward to fend off disruptions of that magnitude. The increased complexity of regulations,
then, is merely a reflection of the mounting complexity of global banking business. So you could
say it is warranted – and the sector’s global players are mostly certainly in a position to get to
grips with the new rules.
But in actual fact, the bulk of these complex rules, especially in Europe, apply not only to major
multinational institutions but to every single bank and savings bank as well. And that’s quite a
problem. Because when small and medium-sized institutions comply with the rules, they do not
benefit from the same economies of scale which their larger rivals can harness. For one thing,
small  institutions  face  much  heavier  costs,  relatively  speaking,  when  they  invest  in  IT
infrastructure or hire an additional employee for their Compliance department. That’s a downside
they can only partly offset by cooperating with other institutions from their network. As such, the
single  rule  book  runs  counter  to  the  idea  of  a  level  playing  field  and  creates  problematic
incentives in terms of uniformity and size in the banking sector.
Regulation today already takes account of proportionality to a degree. Tiered standards exist in
areas  such  as  reporting,  where  large  institutions  are  required  to  meet  more  frequent  and
comprehensive  reporting  standards,  and  supervisors  largely  exercise  proportionality  when
applying the minimum requirements for risk management. Proportionality is also embedded, in
principle, in the EBA guidelines on the supervisory review and evaluation process. But in practice
I repeatedly encounter situations where the existing gradations are inadequate in my eyes. The
proportionality principle is nothing new, then, but it still has not been anchored deeply enough.
4. The road to greater proportionality: a chronology
That’s why we took action and explored ways in which the principle of proportionality could be
embedded  more  deeply  within  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks.  Let  me  start  by
running you briefly though the events of the past one-and-a-half years.
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
German  Finance  Minister  Wolfgang  Schäuble  and  his  then  UK  counterpart  George  Osborne
moved the ongoing debate forward substantially in April last year by noting, in a joint paper, the
increasing  complexity  of  banking  regulation  and  pointing  to  the  excessive  burden  on  small
institutions running straightforward business models. It is a topic we at the Bundesbank also feel
very strongly about. Hence my decision to go public with the first set of specific proposals a little
while later.
That  November  then  saw  the  European  Commission  likewise  table  its  proposals  for
strengthening proportionality as part of the general overhaul of EU banking regulation, which is
still an ongoing process. These proposals would make major changes to the small print, and I
am certain that we will be able to roll out a number of meaningful initial improvements.
That  said,  the  proposals  don’t  go  far  enough  –  which  is  why  we  thought  ahead.  The
establishment  of  a  German  Specialist  Working  Group  was  followed  by  the  drafting  of  a
Bundesbank  paper  setting  out  concrete  measures  as  well  as  several  consultations  with  the
German central associations. The outcome of this process is a German “non-paper” – that is, a
discussion paper – which the Federal Ministry of Finance put before the competent expert group
of the European Commission in June this year.
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. Which way?
 When working out this common German proposal, there were essentially two paths we could
take to move towards greater proportionality. Should we look into specific adjustments, or should
we go straight into creating a separate regulatory framework for small institutions?
The  first  path  has  a  clear  practical  advantage:  it  would  be  quick  and  relatively  simple  to
implement, especially since European legislation on banking regulation is currently being revised
anyway. It does have its disadvantages, however: realistically speaking, smaller institutions will
not gain any substantial relief from their burdens on account of a few specific improvements to
regulation. There is also the risk of ending up with a patchwork of exceptions that are difficult to
interpret.
The second path would be more radical. The creation of a separate regulatory framework for
small institutions – also known as the “small banking box” – would mean more fundamental relief
for  these  institutions.  A  clear  and  consistent  definition  would  also  prevent  any  difficulties  in
interpretation.  Though  the  implementation  and  maintenance  of  this  would  be  somewhat  more
complicated, in future the regulations for small and large banks would be developed in parallel
and in alignment with each other. Depending on how the threshold values for the small banking
box are set, there is also the risk of cliff effects.
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
We have carefully weighed up these and many other arguments in the Specialist Working Group
on  Proportionality.  The  group’s  purpose  was  to  facilitate  the  exchange  of  views  between
politicians,  supervisors  and  the  banking  industry.  The  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance,  BaFin,  the
Bundesbank  and  the  five  central  associations  of  the  German  banking  industry  were  all
represented in this group.
These members agreed that it would be expedient to bolster proportionality in regulation. The aim
of the working group was therefore to work out specific proposals on how to alleviate the burden
of regulation on small institutions with simple business models. And it delivered on that aim: the
non-paper that I mentioned earlier, which was written with the group’s help, is now in Brussels,
where it is being used as the basis for further discussion at the European level.
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
5.1 The question of “Who?": a three-tier approach
So what does the German proposal look like? First, let me address the “Who?", namely who are
the relief measures intended for. The proposal takes a three-tier approach in this regard.
At the very top are the systemically important and potentially systemically risky institutions – the
smallest group in terms of numbers but extremely important in terms of risk. Because of this, it is
also the most intensely regulated. Generally speaking, this group includes institutions with total
assets  of  over  €20  billion.  Nothing  will  change  for  these  institutions:  all  of  the  Basel  III
requirements will still apply, as will the additional capital buffer, the total loss absorbing capacity,
and so on.
A second group would include institutions which are not large and systemically important, but
which  are  also  not  small  and  low-risk,  which  is  why  it  is  not  possible  to  make  any  extensive
simplifications  for  them.  Nonetheless,  the  proposal  does  include  for  this  middle  group  some
targeted relief measures which could be achieved by making specific amendments to the current
regulations.
Finally, the third group is made up of small and non-complex institutions – the banks that are
most affected by the fixed costs of regulation without their systemic importance being considered
individually. This group – the largest in numerical terms – is to have its cost burden alleviated
radically by means of a separate regulation: the small banking box.
The  burning  question  now,  of  course,  is  which  institutions  belong  in  which  group  –  and
particularly, which banks could be included in the small banking box. I will say right off that I am
not able to conclusively answer this important question today. These classifications have to be
balanced carefully, and we will do this as part of European-level discussions.
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
I would, however, like to give you an initial idea of how this classification might look. By talking of
small institutions, this suggests that a qualification criterion for the small banking box would be
relatively  modest  total  assets.  For  example,  in  Germany,  a  total  assets  threshold  value  of  €3
billion could put more than 80% of institutions into this category.
What constitutes large and small in other member states is completely different, however. To
account for this heterogeneity, absolute size would have to be supplemented with relative size.
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
This could be the ratio of the bank’s total assets to its home country’s economic power or the
size of the domestic banking sector, though in this case, too, size isn’t everything. I’ve already
said that not only do institutions in the small banking box have to be relatively small, they also
must not be too complex. This is why we need additional criteria.
First,  only  institutions  that  we  believe  would  be  subject  to  insolvency  proceedings  in  the
event of resolution may be part of the box.
Second, candidates for the small banking box must not engage in any notable capital market
or cross-border business.
Third, they should have, at most, a small trading book and a small derivatives book.
Fourth, instead of internal models, they may only use the standardised approach.
This list of requirements prevents institutions with riskier business models from being part of the
simplified regime.
Experience has taught us, however, that there will almost never be a perfect list of criteria that
covers every eventuality. This is why the final decision should always rest with the supervisors.
Should they have serious misgivings, they can opt not to subject an institution to the simplified
rules.  They  can  also  take  into  account  the  systemic  risks  arising  from  the  connectedness  of
several small institutions – that is to say, small banks which are “too many to fail".
Incidentally, this possibility to choose should not be a one-way street. I believe that institutions
that would be considered eligible for the small banking box should also nevertheless be given the
option of being supervised pursuant to the more complex rules.
But coming back to the figures: if we were just to apply a threshold value of €3 billion, around
1,300 banks and savings banks in Germany could fall under the simplified rules, or just over 80%
of all institutions, as mentioned earlier. This would be equivalent to 14% of the German banking
sector’s  total  assets.  Of  course,  this  is  just  an  initial  calculation  and  it  doesn’t  include  the
additional criteria I listed.
If you look at the banks and savings banks in North Rhine-Westphalia alone, the picture is largely
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
the same: here, too, around 80% of the institutions could come under the simplified rules. This
would be equivalent to 24% of total assets in this state.
Some  of  you  will  no  doubt  be  wondering  what  happens  when  institutions  are  close  to  the
threshold value. This is a good question, because alone around 50 German savings banks have
total assets between €2.5 and 3.5 billion, some of which are in the Rhineland – perhaps some of
you even run one of these institutions.
The  question  of  potential  cliff  effects  always  comes  up  when  quantitative  thresholds  are  set.
Nonetheless, we regulators cannot do without thresholds. I believe two things are important to
prevent institutions from moving in and out of categories or, worse still, basing their business
strategy  on  attempts  to  stay  within  a  certain  threshold.  First,  quantitative  thresholds  must  be
flanked by qualitative criteria and supervisors must also take decisions on a case-by-case basis.
In  other  words,  just  because  a  bank’s  total  assets  fall  below  a  specified  threshold,  that  is
nowhere near enough for it to be included in the small banking box. Second, we are discussing
introducing  transitional  arrangements  to  help  make  it  easier  to  switch  between  regimes  –
something that we want to be an option.
Ladies and gentlemen, a sensible and workable definition of institutions whose burden could be
relieved is perfectly feasible. And while it may appear that way at first glance, creating the small
banking box does not necessarily require a whole new set of rules. All that is needed is a short
section in the CRR dedicated to the issue.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
5.2 The question of “what?": reducing the paperwork
That leaves the second key question: what exactly might the box look like? Let us start at the
heart of the problem, namely, the paperwork which the complex requirements create in various
areas.
Some of these requirements could be completely eliminated for institutions in the small banking
box. I could, for instance, imagine largely exempting small banks from disclosure requirements
and abolishing remuneration rules for them. In addition, they could be absolved from recovery
and resolution planning.
Full exemption from other requirements would be a step too far. But that should not prevent us
from trying to make things easier for small banks. For example, reporting could be reduced to a
core reporting process – a standardised reporting approach, if you like. A simplified form of the
net stable funding ratio (NSFR ) is also up for debate.
When  designing  the  small  banking  box  we  must  weigh  up  the  benefits  for  supervisors,  ie
ensuring financial stability, against the burden it creates for banks. As a rule of thumb, we can
say that any rules that are dispensable for effective supervision are up for negotiation.
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Limits of the small banking box
Conversely, however, that also means that a lot of rules are not up for debate. And that brings
me  to  the  limits  of  the  small  banking  box.  I  will  not  beat  about  the  bush:  there  can  be  no
concessions in terms of  risk-based  capital  ratios,  the  leverage  ratio  or  the  short-term  liquidity
ratio.  And  the  list  goes  on.  Small  banks’  business  models  are  neither per  se  simple  nor
automatically low-risk – and that is particularly true when looking at them as a whole. The new
regime  must  therefore  be  simple  yet  robust.  Whatever  happens,  financial  stability  must  be
guaranteed.
And,  of  course,  we  also  want  to  avoid  unintended  consequences.  Simplifications  in  one  area
must  not  create  additional  work  in  another  area.  That  also  means  that  a  sensible  division  of
labour and cooperation within banking associations should not be made needlessly complicated.
However,  I  am  not  overly  concerned  about  this  issue  either. As  I  said  earlier,  the  principle  of
proportionality is not new and is already well-established in our risk-oriented supervisory practice.
So far, the banking associations have managed well in organisational terms. And I would like to
remind you that the very purpose of our joint proposal is to avoid unnecessarily high amounts of
paperwork.
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
7. What happens next?
The  objective  of  reducing  the  regulatory  burden  for  small  and  medium-sized  institutions  is
attracting more and more supporters. Speaking in Jackson Hole at the weekend, Chair of the
United States Federal Reserve Janet Yellen spoke in favour of reducing the burden on smaller
1
institutions.
Achieving this goal will be no stroll in the park, however. In drawing up a concept for the small
banking box, we have taken the first important steps. The aim now is to gain a European majority
for our idea.
For a reminder of how difficult that could be, we have to bear in mind just how different European
countries and their banking sectors are. A lot of our European neighbours have only a relatively
small number of banks, virtually all of them medium-sized to large. Others have a lot of small
banks, but have experienced serious problems with them in the recent past. And in some other
countries,  the  banking  system  is  currently  undergoing  a  far-reaching  transformation  process,
which means that the structure of the banking system will experience sweeping change.
The question we encounter is always the same: why should we agree to a small banking box?
That is the situation within Europe, and that is where we must provide information, explain the
situation and convince people.
For that to succeed, we must present a united German front. If we in Germany do not manage to
all  stand  behind  the  small  banking  box  concept,  we  will  have  a  hard  job  convincing  other
European countries.
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  motto  of  your  strategy  conference  today  and  tomorrow  roughly
translates as “Building a successful future. Together". Let us make that the motto for the small
banking box project.
Thank you for your attention.
1
Janet  Yellen,  “Financial  Stability  a  Decade  after 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20170825a.htm
the  Onset  of 
the  Crisis",  25  August  2017,
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
