Juyeol Lee: Prospects and Challenges for Sustained Growth in Asia 
 
Welcoming Remarks by Mr Juyeol Lee, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the 2017 MOSF-BOK-
IMF-PIIF  International  Conference  “Prospects  and  Challenges  for  Sustained  Growth  in  Asia”, 
Seoul, September 7, 2017 
 
  
Ladies and gentlemen, honored guests! 
 
I am delighted to bid you all a sincere welcome to this conference, hosted jointly by the Ministry 
of  Strategy  and  Finance,  the  IMF,  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics  and  the 
Bank of Korea. Let me first express my special gratitude to Managing Director Christine Lagarde, 
who  is  here  to  represent  the  IMF  directly  despite  her  tight  schedule.  I  wish  to  thank  as  well 
President  Adam  Posen  of  the  Peterson  Institute  for  International  Economics,  and  Director 
Changyong Rhee of the Asia and Pacific Department of the IMF, who have worked so hard to 
arrange the joint hosting of this conference starting from the initial planning stage. Appreciation 
also  goes  to  all  of  our  moderators,  presenters  and  discussants,  including  First  Vice  Minister 
Hyoung-kwon  Go,  who  delivered  the  welcome  address  just  before,  and  IMF  Economic 
Counsellor Maurice Obstfeld, who will deliver the dinner speech tonight.   
 
As we are all well aware, the Asian economy has sustained a rapid rate of growth over the past 
50  to  60  years,  and  in  doing  so  served  as  a  locomotive  driving  growth  in  the  world  economy 
overall. We can look at this as a result of success in the export-led growth strategy, centering 
around  the  manufacturing  industry  and  based  on  surplus  labor  as  well  as  late-comers’ 
advantages.  During  this  time,  the  economic  growth  pattern  in  Asia  has  been  that  when  the 
economies in the countries leading growth have entered their mature stages, the later-developing 
countries have moved into their places and Asia as a whole has sustained its high growth. Japan 
came first, to be followed in turn by the so-called four dragons, and then China. Now it is India 
and the ASEAN countries that are emerging as new runners. In light of this, we expect going 
forward that the Asian economy will sustain its role as the engine of world economic growth for 
some time, while showing dynamism centering around later-developing countries.   
 
But  there  are  also  not  a  few  claims  that  this  growth  strategy  has  reached  its  limits.  As  Asian 
economies have gradually entered their mature stages, it has become difficult for them to sustain 
extensive growth strategies based on increasing their production factor inputs. Moreover, in the 
course  of  export-led  growth  centering  around  the  manufacturing  industry,  sectoral  imbalances 
have built up - between the manufacturing and the service industries, and between exports and 
domestic demand  - and these are becoming obstacles to sustainable growth. For this reason, 
skeptical views about the Asian economy’s future are also emerging in some corners.   
 
Given this mix of expectations and concerns for the Asian economy’s future, I think we can see 
the conference here this week as a very timely and meaningful one, in having brought together 
many great scholars and policy authorities from around the world, to consider the possibility of 
sustainable  economic  growth  in  Asia  and  soberly  discuss  the  future  challenges  and  policy 
responses. 
1 / 3 
  
Before  discussions  begin  here  today,  I  would  like  to  say  just  a  few  words  about  some  of  the 
challenging tasks now confronting the Asian economy. 
 
The first task is to change our growth paradigm. Going forward we will have to break out of the 
paradigm of extensive growth based on the expansion of production factor inputs, and move to 
one of intensive growth driven by innovation. Productivity in major Asian countries has already 
clearly slowed since the global financial crisis. And in response, we need to design a scheme of 
social and economic incentives to modernize the old systems and practices now blocking higher 
productivity  growth,  and  to  stimulate  innovation.  It  will  also  be  very  important  to  promote  fair 
competition and revitalize R&D investment, through the restraint of rent seeking and the easing 
of regulations, and to discover thereby new technologies and new engines of growth. 
 
The second task is to push ahead with economic rebalancing. We need to move from export-led 
growth to growth characterized by a balance between exports and domestic demand. To boost 
domestic demand, we need to build a virtuous cycle between growth, employment, and domestic 
demand by actively nurturing SMEs and service businesses that contribute greatly to job creation. 
Macroeconomic policy can also be utilized to support the domestic demand expansion. But we 
should bear in mind that, if expansionary fiscal and monetary policy stances become even a bit 
prolonged or excessive, this can undermine fiscal soundness and cause a buildup of financial 
imbalances. It will thus be necessary, while focusing on sustainability from the medium- to long-
term perspective, to implement our monetary, fiscal and macroprudential policies harmoniously, 
along with our micro-structural reform policies. 
 
The third challenging task facing the Asian economy is our response to population aging. Even if 
we  succeed  in  shifting  the  growth  paradigm,  and  in  rebalancing  the  economy,  a  failure  in 
responding to population aging will make the escape from possible structural low growth difficult. 
Negative  effects  due  to  population  aging  are  already  appearing  in  first  moving  countries  like 
Japan.  And  in  a  considerable  number  of  later-developing  countries,  their  so-called  population 
bonus effects are expected to disappear before long. Population aging is progressing rapidly in 
Asia,  while  preparations  for  it  are  insufficient.  In  response  we  will  have  to  reform  our  labor 
markets to ensure vigorous participation in economic activities by not only the aged but by youth 
and  women,  while  on  the  other  hand  implementing  social  and  education  support  policies  to 
increase birth rate. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
 
It  is  said  that  our  greatest  enemy  is  not  something  that  is  external  to  us,  but  rather  our  own 
internal vanity and inattention. We cannot be content with the remarkable results that our Asian 
economy has achieved over the past half-century. The challenges that the Asian economy now 
faces  are  new  ones,  ones  never  previously  experienced,  but  if  we  remain  ever  alert  to  this 
situation, and make provisions, and in particular if our regional countries cooperate closely, then 
we can welcome this as an opportunity for one further takeoff. 
 
I look forward to many meaningful measures being presented here today and tomorrow, through 
active expression of views and enthusiastic debates among participants, which can enable the 
2 / 3 
 Asian economy to overcome the challenges confronting it. Given the difficulty of the challenges 
before us, your deep and wide-ranging wisdom and insights are very much needed.   
 
I would like to express one more time my profound gratitude to IMF Managing Director Christine 
Lagarde and all of our other esteemed participants attending this conference. 
 
Thank you. 
3 / 3 
 