Hiroshi  Nakaso:  Future  of  central  bank  payment  and  settlement
systems  under  economic  globalization  and 
technological
innovation
Remarks by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Forum Towards
Making Effective Use of the BOJ-NET, Tokyo, 21 April 2017.
Introduction
 I would like to express my deepest gratitude and appreciation to all delegates for coming to the
Forum Towards Making Effective Use of the BOJ-NET today.
Central  bank  payment  and  settlement  systems  are  facing  big  changes  amid  the  wave  of
economic globalization and innovation in information technology. Today, I would like to introduce
these topics.
I. Payment and settlement systems as a core of central banking
History of central banking and payment and settlement infrastructures
Looking  back  at  history,  many  central  banks  were  established  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  or
restoring stability in payments and settlements after the creation of nation states and during the
transition from the modern era to the postmodern era. On the other hand, monetary policy as a
macroeconomic policy to influence aggregate demand attracted broad attention from the public
only after the Great Depression in the 1930s. The effectiveness of monetary policy and “lender of
last  resort”  (LLR)  functions  are  based  on  the  fact  that  the  liabilities  of  central  banks  –  Yen  in
Japan – are used for payments by the people.
The history of many central banks only goes back 100 years or so, which is not very long. Today
in most countries, however, the central banks have the sole authority to issue banknotes and
operate central bank payment and settlement systems such as high value payment systems and
securities  settlement  systems.  These  facts  imply  that  there  is  a  strong  economic  rationale,
which is common in countries worldwide, for central banks to provide these infrastructures.
In  each  country,  the  central  bank  is  the  only  entity  able  to  provide  central  bank  money  with
“finality,” which is free of credit risks and “unwinding” of settlements. The settlements through
central bank money play a critical role in the economy, since they relieve economic entities from
the  risks  regarding  payments  and  settlements  stemming  from  past  transactions  and  thereby
enable them to allocate their resources to promising economic activities for the future.
Banknotes and central bank payment and settlement systems
There  are  some  differences  between  banknotes  and  central  bank  payment  and  settlement
systems such as the BOJ-NET, although both are settlement infrastructures with finality provided
by central banks.
Banknotes are payment instruments that can be used by anyone 24/7. Banknotes do not carry
any  information  other  than  “value,”  and  so  information  attached  to  payment  activities  such  as
“who pays whom and when” is not grasped by the central bank, which is the issuer of banknotes.
From the perspective of  information  sharing,  banknotes  can  be  regarded  as  a  “distributed”  or
“de-centralized” infrastructure. On the other hand, central bank payment and settlement systems
such  as  RTGS  systems  can  be  deemed  as  a  “centralized”  framework  in  the  sense  that  the
information is likely to be concentrated to central banks, which manage the centralized ledgers
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
as  trusted  third  parties.  In  most  central  bank  payment  and  settlement  systems,  the  operating
hours of these systems are limited and the participants are restricted to commercial banks and
other particular types of entities.
It may be an interesting topic to point out that there are such differences between banknotes and
central  bank  payment  and  settlement  systems.  Banknotes  have  conventionally  depended  on
paper,  although  there  has  been  technological  progress  such  as  printing  technologies  for
preventing counterfeiting. On the contrary, central bank payment and settlement systems have
changed  continuously  and  substantially  incorporating  the  latest  available  technologies  and
reflecting changes in economic and financial environments. In the early days, central banks used
paper-based  ledgers  to  manage  their  accounts.  Then,  central  banks  replaced  paper-based
ledgers  with  digital  systems. Also  in  terms  of  settlement  methods,  central  bank  payment  and
settlement  systems,  which  used  to  be  based  on  “designated-time  net  settlement,”  recently
adopted  “real-time  gross  settlement”  (RTGS).  Such  developments  suggest  that  central  bank
payment and settlement systems will continue to change in the future.
II.  Globalization,  innovation  in  information  technology  and  central  bank  payment  and
settlement systems
Globalization and central bank payment and settlement systems
Central bank payment and settlement systems are once again facing significant environmental
changes stemming from recent economic globalization and innovation in information technology.
Central banks now need to deal with challenging policy issues: To what extent in terms of both
“space”  and  “time”  should  central  banks  facilitate  settlement  with  finality  through  central  bank
money in economic society?
Reflecting economic globalization, cross-border economic activities are increasing,  and  some
companies  operating  in  multiple  countries  try  to  manage  liquidity  in  a  centralized  way.  These
activities may lead to new demand for cross-border remittance services that can also be used at
night.
Also, as financial institutions inject more resources into cross-border activities, funding liquidity in
foreign currencies is becoming very important for the operation of Japanese banks. Moreover,
under financial globalization, the Global Financial Crisis showed that liquidity crises can spill over
to other jurisdictions. It is therefore important to ensure liquidity sources through collateralized
transactions such as repos, also from the viewpoints of controlling moral hazard, deterring over-
dependence on central bank LLR and maintaining global financial stability. Financial institutions,
including Japanese banks, typically hold large amounts of government securities issued by their
home countries. Accordingly, it is becoming important to establish a facility by which banks can
raise  foreign-currency  liquidity  in  host  countries  through  collateralizing  government  securities
issued by home countries. Under such circumstances, central banks need to consider how and
to what extent they provide their own infrastructures including high-value payment systems and
securities settlement systems in order to support such collateralized transactions. For example,
in terms of the “space” dimension, central banks will have to consider whether and to what extent
they should respond further to facilitate settlements with finality also on a cross-border basis.
In  retail  payments,  increased  economic  activities  at  night  and  on  weekends  are  requiring
initiatives called “24/7 instant payments” that enable real-time payments to be made 24 hours a
day, 365 days a year. Retail payments made at night and on weekends may cause an increase
in unsettled amounts among commercial banks and other entities. There are risk-management
methodologies to deal with such unsettled amounts through collateral and credit limits. As an
ultimate measure to reduce such unsettled amounts, however, a central bank might be able to
take decisive action in terms of time and provide settlements with finality also at night and on
weekends. Indeed, such action is now being considered in Europe and Australia.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Innovation in information technology and central bank payment and settlement systems
Meanwhile, innovation in information technology is making the cost of handling cash more visible.
In addition, while virtual currencies such as Bitcoin have emerged under the trend of FinTech,
some people argue that central banks should consider issuing digital currencies, which could
partially  replace  banknotes.  Such  arguments  would  mean  applying  digital  technology  even  to
banknotes,  which  have  always  been  based  on  paper-based  technology.  This  could  have  a
substantial impact on the traditional concept of banknotes.
At the same time, central bank digital currency (CBDC) is one of the issues in considering the
role of banknotes and central bank payment and settlement systems. If CBDC is directly issued
to  the  general  public,  it  would  allow  wider  access  to  central  bank  payment  and  settlement
systems  both  in  time  and  space.  In  an  extreme  case  in  which  CBDC  provides  the  same
functionality as banknotes as an alternate measure, it could enable everyone to access central
bank  accounts  24/7,  year-round.  Some  overseas  central  banks  have  started  to  consider  the
rationale for or to conduct researches and analyses on CBDC.
Also, amid the global trend of FinTech, some non-bank companies and their services, such as
PayPal in the United States and WeChatPay in China, have built up a large presence in payment
and settlement services, and the structure and composition of payment service providers are
now changing rapidly. Accordingly, some overseas central banks have started to reconsider to
whom  they  should  allow  access  to  their  payment  and  settlement  systems.  As  economic
globalization  and  technological  innovation  advance,  the  environment  surrounding  central  bank
payment and settlement systems is entering a new phase.
III. Initiatives taken by the Bank of Japan
The Bank of Japan has been continuously improving its infrastructure. We established the BOJ-
NET in the 1980s, and then introduced RTGS and liquidity-saving features. In 2015, we started
full-scale  operation  of  the  new  BOJ-NET.  Although  economic  globalization  and  technological
innovation  are  causing  dramatic  changes  in  payment  and  settlement  infrastructures,  we  are
confident  that  the  BOJ-NET  can  keep  up  with  such  changes  and  continue  serving  as  a  core
infrastructure in the new era.
At  the  same  time,  regarding  how  central  banks  should  provide  their  infrastructures  under  the
changing environment, we need to consider various issues.
First, there is the issue of how to strike an appropriate balance between central bank money and
private-based money in the economy, and between the stability in settlements and private-led
innovation. These are classical issues. Nonetheless, as new FinTech players have increased
their  presence  in  payments  and  settlements,  big-data  attached  to  payment  and  settlement
transactions is becoming more important as a source of added-value in various businesses. We
will  need  to  focus  not  only  on  the  classical  issue  of  “desirable  sharing  between  central  bank
money and commercial bank money,” but also on new payment instruments carrying additional
information provided by new players such as “non-bank FinTech firms.” The emergence of these
new payment instruments will make things far more complicated.
Second,  it  is  crucial  for  central  banks  to  ensure  the  security  of  central  bank  payment  and
settlement systems, which are the core infrastructure of the economy. We may also need to
consider  how  to  manage  the  information  attached  to  payment  and  settlement  activities,
especially if such information is concentrated to central banks. Moreover, we should try to grasp
the possible impacts of new technologies, such as blockchain and distributed ledger technology,
on  payment  and  settlement  infrastructures  including  central  bank  payment  and  settlement
systems.
We need to bear in mind that central bank payment and settlement infrastructures are operated
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
by using the nation’s resources. Therefore, when central banks consider how and to what extent
they should provide their infrastructures, they must examine whether doing so would contribute
to the economy. In order for central banks to make appropriate decisions on such matters, it is
extremely important to engage in sincere and constructive communication with a wide range of
users.
The Bank of Japan highly respects the opinions of users. Bearing these opinions in mind, the
Bank  has  considered  very  carefully  how  and  to  what  extent  it  should  provide  its  settlement
infrastructures to the economy, and has taken decisive action. In terms of the time dimension,
since February 2016, the Bank has extended the operating hours of the BOJ-NET until 9 o’clock
in  the  evening,  and  will  continue  to  consider  appropriate  operating  hours  through  discussions
with users. In terms of the space dimension, the Bank announced today that it will permit the
BOJ-NET to be accessed from terminals overseas, which is called “global access."
The  Bank  will  continue  to  make  utmost  efforts  to  advance  our  payment  and  settlement
infrastructures  with  the  changes  in  economic  environments  in  order  to  provide  the  optimum
functions. To help us achieve this, we always appreciate constructive dialogue with all of you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
