Amando  Tetangco:  Philippine 
environment
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Annual Convention of the Chamber of Thrift Banks, Makati
City, 14 March 2017.
in  a  changing
thrift  banks 
 The  officers  and  members  of  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks  under  the  leadership  of  President
Gregorio Anonas III, distinguished colleagues from the banking industry, special guests, ladies
and  gentlemen,  good  morning!    It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  be  with  the  CTB  for  your  annual
convention. 
Today, I will discuss macroeconomic developments, the state of the thrift banking industry and
how CTB members can redefine themselves in this constantly changing environment.
Macroeconomic conditions and prospects
The  good  news  is  that  in  the  midst  of  uncertain  global  economic  conditions,  our  own
macroeconomic  fundamentals  remain  solid  and  intact.    The  Philippine  economy  continued  its
growth story in 2016 with a full-year GDP  growth of 6.8 percent, higher than the 5.8 percent
growth achieved in 2015. This is also at the high end of the National Government’s growth target
of 6.0-7.0 percent for 2016. At this rate, the Philippines has one of the fastest-growing economies
2
in Asia .
1
Our  growth  was  generally  broad-based,  fuelled  by  investments  and  consumption.  Strong
domestic  demand  was  underpinned  by  low  inflation,  a  stable  interest  rate  environment,  and
improving  labor  market  conditions.  Over  the  policy  horizon,  we  see  inflation  remaining
manageable and within the government’s target range of 2 to 4 pct.
Meanwhile, our flexible exchange rate policy and adequate reserves  continue to provide buffers
against potential external shocks that can affect the domestic economy.  
Sound and stable banking system
3
The Philippine banking system has remained a source of strength for our economy. Resources
of  the  banking  system  continue  to  grow  at  a  steady  pace  and  fund  economic  activities,  with
deposits rising to record levels. This affirms sustained public confidence in our banking system.
In particular, the thrift banking sector continues to support the growth of the Philippine banking
system.  Consolidated  assets  expanded  by  8.3  percent  and  reached  P1.1  trillion  as  of  end-
December  2016.  Industry  assets  breached  the  one  trillion-peso  mark  for  the  first  time  in  last
year. At the same time, capitalization moved up by 6.1% while deposits increased by a robust 9.7
percent.    Ladies and gentlemen, you will agree these are good numbers.
4
Asset quality is satisfactory with gross NPL ratio at 4.7 percent as of end-December 2016 (better
than the average in the last five years) while capital adequacy ratio (CAR), as a measure of risk-
based capital, remains well above the minimum BSP and international standards. For instance,
5
the CAR of stand-alone thrift banks was at 19.7 percent as of June 2016
In  terms  of  profitability,  industry  figures  were  also  better.  Net  income  for  2016  reached  P13.9
billion, higher by 17.8 percent than in 2015. Return on Equity (ROE) improved to 10.5 percent. 
The Role of Thrift Banks in Countryside Development
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
  In  other  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  thrift  banking  industry  is  well-placed  to  support
countryside  development  moving  forward  as  reflected  in  your  convention  theme  “Maximizing
Opportunities in Countryside Development.”
 That you have aligned your program with the Government’s 10-point socio-economic agenda of
promoting  countryside  development  is  both  commendable  and  timely.  Just  recently,  the
Government approved the Philippine Development Plan (PDP) 2017–2022 . The objective is to
reduce overall poverty rate to 14 percent and poverty incidence in the rural areas to 20 percent by
year 2022   by promoting inclusive growth.
6
7
I am glad therefore that you have a special forum on the Philippine Development Plan later today.
This will help you determine your roadmap moving forward. 
Meeting the challenges/pushing MSMEs
There are many opportunities to help develop the countryside, particularly within your targeted
niche of catering to the MSMEs.  The MSME sector is a cornerstone of economic growth. We
have seen how successful MSMEs liberate people from poverty by creating jobs and serving as
catalysts for growth in their communities. 
This is the rationale behind BSP’s continuing collaboration with the industry and other agencies
of  government  to  create  an  enabling  regulatory  environment  for  increased  access  to  finance,
particularly for MSMEs.
Among  the  challenges  that  we  have  helped    address  include:  1)  the  use  of  collateral  and
developing product lines; 2) the difficulty to expand reach, given our archipelagic configuration; 3)
the  competition  from  the  “big  boys”  and  now  the  advent  of  ASEAN  integration;  and  4)  the
changing external macroeconomic environment.
Addressing collateral
On the issue of collateral, the BSP initiated in 2008, the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) Program. This
enabled  cooperatives,  without  sufficient  collateral,  to  access  bank  loans  on  the  strength  of  a
credit  guarantee.  The  Program  was  institutionalized  through  the  passage  of  Republic Act  No.
10744  also  known  as  the  “Credit  Surety  Fund  Cooperative Act  of  2015.”  This  should  further
enhance MSMEs’ access to credit.
Parallel  to  this,  the  BSP  strengthened  credit  risk  management  guidelines  for  banks.    This
emphasizes cash flows and the “ability to pay” of a borrower in determining creditworthiness. 
Through  this  regulation,  the  BSP  is  signalling  that  collaterals  should  play  a  secondary  role  in
credit decisions.  The same regulation exempts start-up enterprises from submitting documents
evidencing  financial  capacity  and  business  plans;  these  documents  are  usually  required  from
regular borrowers in the first three years of their banking relationship.
Moreover, to help channel funds to the agricultural and fisheries sector, the BSP approved the
Agricultural Value Chain Financing (VCF) Framework. By encouraging linkages among various
players in an agricultural value chain, the credit risk of participating farmers can be reduced and
thereby  facilitate  their  access  to  credit.    A  study  is  now  being  conducted  to  expand  this
framework to cover the MSME value chain. In particular, we are looking into potential regulatory
incentives to further encourage MSME financing.
Ladies  and  gentlemen. All  these  are  being  laid  down,  so  that  thrift  banks  can  help  meet  the
financing  needs  of  MSMEs  and  the  agriculture  sector,  in  support  of  countryside  development.
This could be for investments, for working capital and for business expansion.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Expanding physical and virtual reach
On the issue of reach. Currently, of the 1,634 cities/municipalities in the country, 35.6 percent are
still  considered  unbanked.     Establishing  bank  branches  in  less  urbanized  areas  remains  a
challenge  due  to  generally  low  population  density,  geographic  inaccessibility,  and  prevailing
socio-economic situations.
8
These barriers pose a huge challenge to financial access. This is the reason why the BSP has
set its sights on digital innovation as the primary catalyst to reaching greater scale. Part of these
initiatives is the approval by the BSP of the setting up of micro-banking offices (MBOs), which as
you know are low-cost banking infrastructure that can be established where it is not feasible to
set up a regular branch. We have also put out regulations on e-money and mobile banking.
Recently, the BSP issued regulations allowing banks to use third party cash agents as a cost-
effective service delivery channel. With cash agents, banks will be able to strategically leverage
on innovative digital banking solutions and expand markets, even in the low-income and far-flung
areas. 
While  financial  innovation  is  revolutionizing  the  manner  of  delivering  banking  products  and
services, it has pluses and minuses. The opportunities FinTech brings come with heightened
market  competition  and  threats  from  cyber-attacks.  These  have  significant  implications  on
banks’ risk management and consumer protection frameworks.
 Being ready for competition
Thrift  banks  should  also  be  ready  for  competition.  Internally,  from  the  larger  banks  that  are
expanding their networks into TBs’ traditional market of consumer finance. And, also from the
entry of foreign banks. If you recall, the local banking industry has been opened up to foreign
competition  with  the  enactment  of  RA  10641  in  2014 .  So  far,  two  foreign  banks
  acquired
existing domestic thrift banks following the passage of the said Law.
10
9
 While these forces may put pressure on thrift banks, competition creates more options for the
consumer, in particular, and raises economic welfare, in general. Thrift banks would therefore be
served well if they would view competition such as this — as the impetus for “raising their game”.
It certainly cannot be business as usual for the industry.
Indeed, there are many opportunities to better serve your chosen markets.  In pursuing these
opportunities,  we  enjoin  you  to  remain  prudent.    In  this  increasingly  integrated  and  globalized
financial environment, it is important for thrift banks to always be guided by the tenets of effective
risk management and sound governance standards.
A changing global environment
Thrift banks should fully prepare to address the risks and challenges that will come with growth
opportunities in this rapidly changing business environment.
11
 In addition, the industry should be mindful that loan exposures to particular market segments —
such as consumers, MSMEs   and agriculture — are vulnerable to market shocks. This is very
relevant  during  this  period  when  the  Fed  is  broadly  expected  to  proceed  with  its  next  steps
toward  interest  rate  normalization.  While  you  have  heard  me  say  that  the  BSP  will  not
necessarily move in sync with the Fed and that our courses of action remain data dependent, we
must  be  mindful  of  heightened  volatility  in  the  FX  market  during  this  transition  to  Fed
normalization. We also need to be watchful of changes in global growth and inflation dynamics.  
All  of  these,  in  addition  to  our  own  domestic  concerns  that  include  exposures  to  natural
calamities.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Careful  and  constant  monitoring  therefore  of  possible  risk  escalation  from  these  exposures
requires vigilance.
Final thoughts
Ladies and gentlemen.  The CTB’s role as the unifying voice among thrift banks makes you a key
partner  of  the  BSP  and  the  National  Government  in  achieving  our  medium-term  development
goals.  Indeed, thrift banks play a crucial positive role in the transformation of our countryside as
areas of growth and development.
For this reason, the BSP will continue to collaborate with the CTB to make sure that our reform
initiatives will lead to a robust thrift banking sector, a dynamic countryside and a strong economy
that fosters inclusive growth.
Ladies  and  gentlemen.    Friends.  This  is  the  last  time  I  will  be  addressing  the  CTB’s  annual
convention  in  my  capacity  as  BSP  Governor.    I  take  this  opportunity  therefore  to  thank  CTB
members, officers and trustees — past and present – for your steadfast support and cooperation
in keeping the thrift banking industry responsive, productive and inclusive.  Congratulations and
thank you CTB!
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Refers to gross domestic product in real terms
Compared  to  Indonesia’s  5.0  percent,  Malaysia’s  4.3  percent  (Q3’16),  Thailand’s  3.2  percent  (Q3’16),  and
Singapore’s  1.1  percent  (Q3’16)  (Source:  Central  Bank  websites,  Bloomberg,  CEIC  Data  Limited,  and
International Financial Statistics)
As of end-February 2017, gross international reserves (GIR) reached USD81.1 billion. This is sufficient to cover
9.2 months worth of imports (Source: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas).
Source: www.bsp.gov.ph/statistics/statbskrtb.asp
As of end-September 2016, the capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of subsidiary TBs registered at 15.9 percent on
solo basis.  On the other hand, the CAR of stand-alone TBs recorded at 19.7 percent as of end-June 2016.
The PDP was approved on 20 February 2017 during the third NEDA board meeting at the Malacañang.
Source: National Economic and Development Authority 
It  include  the  provinces  in  Northern  Luzon,  Central  and  Eastern  Visayas,  Northern  Mindanao,  Zamboanga
Peninsula and the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM).
Refers to the Act Allowing the Full Entry of Foreign Banks in the Philippines on 15 July 2014
Refers to Yuanta Commercial Bank Co., Ltd. of Taiwan which acquired Tong Yang Savings Bank and Woori
Bank of South Korea which acquired 51 percent of the voting stock of Wealthbank.
Refers to micro, small and medium enterprises.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
