Grant Spencer: Review of bank capital requirements
Speech by Mr Grant Spencer, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the New
Zealand Bankers’ Association, Auckland, 7 March 2017.
Introduction
 Since the traumatic experience of the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) in 2007–2009, banks and
regulators have been revising their assessment of appropriate levels of capital. Bank capital is an
important  cushion  for  the  financial  system.  It  is  the  form  of  funding  that  stands  first  in  line  to
absorb any losses that banks may incur. Having sufficient capital promotes financial stability by
reducing the likelihood of bank insolvency and moderating the effect of credit cycles.
The main international regulatory response to the GFC went under the broad banner of ‘Basel III’.
This has involved a higher minimum quantity of capital and also a better quality of capital, for
example,  in  terms  of  loss  absorbency.    While  the  new  Basel  III  requirements  are  still  being
phased  in,  many  national  regulators,  including  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority
(APRA) in Australia and ourselves in New Zealand, have moved ahead of the Basel timetable. 
Several countries have also chosen to adopt more conservative capital rules than Basel III.
The  Final  Report  of  the  Financial  System  Inquiry  (FSI)  in Australia,  recommended  bolstering
Australian banks’ capital ratios so that they are “unquestionably strong”, with the top quartile of
internationally active banks given as a guide.   APRA is implementing the FSI recommendations
and this has resulted in a number of capital raisings by the Australian banks over the past year.
APRA have indicated that their final position on “unquestionably strong” is not far away.
1
In New Zealand, our broad approach has been to adopt the Basel standards, where appropriate,
and implement them with a conservative bias.  For example, the Reserve Bank has imposed
restrictions on components of banks’ internal risk models.  New Zealand has chosen not to adopt
some aspects of Basel III, such as the internal modelling approach for market risk, where we
2
have felt that a policy is overly complex or inappropriate for New Zealand conditions.
This conservative approach to bank capital has been warranted by New Zealand’s relatively high
risk profile and the Reserve Bank’s non-interventionist approach to banking supervision. Both of
these factors are likely to be present going forward. 
In  the  changing  international  regulatory  environment,  it  is  becoming  less  clear  whether  New
Zealand’s historical position on bank capital is being maintained relative to Australia and other
peers. We believe it is time to review New Zealand’s position and review more broadly our capital
framework  in  light  of  international  and  domestic  developments  and  our  experience  with  the
current regime. 
Today I want to set the scene for the review of bank capital that the Reserve Bank will undertake
over  the  coming  year.  I  will  explain  the  high  level  objective  of  the  review,  elaborate  on  the
international and domestic context and set out principles that will guide the review. 
Objective of the review
The aim of the Capital Review is to identify the most appropriate regulatory framework for setting
capital  requirements  for  New  Zealand  banks.  Consistent  with  the  Reserve  Bank’s  legislative
purposes,  minimum  capital  requirements  should  promote  the  maintenance  of  a  sound  and
efficient financial system.  In broad terms, higher levels of capital will improve the soundness of
the financial system as the likelihood of bank failures is reduced and the potential impact of credit
cycles is moderated.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  the  capital  regime  may  reduce  the  efficiency  of  financial  intermediation  if  ratios  are
pushed too high or standards are made overly complex. Capital is a more expensive form of
funding  for  the  banks  and  so  higher  capital  ratios  can  potentially  increase  the  overall  cost  of
funding the system as well as improving its soundness.
Our aim is to agree a capital regime that ensures a very high level of confidence in the solvency
of the banking system, while avoiding unnecessary economic inefficiency.
In  pursuing  this  objective,  the  Capital  Review  will  look  at  the  three  key  components  of  the
regulatory capital regime:
The definition of eligible capital instruments
The measurement of risk, in particular the risk weights attached to credit exposures
The minimum capital ratios and buffers
These  three  factors  are  interdependent  and  the  links  between  them  must  be  carefully
considered. The calibration of the capital ratios needs to be set in the context of the risk weights
applying to exposures as well as the capacity of eligible capital instruments to absorb losses.
Also, the role of capital buffers versus hard minimum requirements needs to be considered.
The Capital Review will examine how well the Reserve Bank’s current framework operates and
consider potential improvements. The Reserve Bank will consult the banks and the public on its
findings and on any proposed changes to the capital framework.
Outcomes of the Review will be heavily influenced by the international regulatory context, the risk
characteristics of the New Zealand system and the Reserve Bank’s regulatory approach. I will
start with the international context.
How do our banks compare to international peers?
This  is  not  a  straightforward  question  to  answer,  but  we  need  to  understand  how  the
idiosyncrasies  and  relative  conservatism  of  New  Zealand’s  approach  to  the  Basel  framework
affects the headline capital ratios of New Zealand banks compared to peer country banks.
The  Basel  Committee  regularly  publishes  reports  that  compare  banks’  capital  levels  on  an
unadjusted basis. The most recent report  has the large internationally active banks reporting a
median Common Equity Tier 1(CET1) ratio of 12.1%, with 25th and 75th percentiles of 10.9%
and 13.8%. At the same date, our four largest banks reported a weighted average CET1 ratio of
10.5%, putting them, on an unadjusted basis, in the bottom quartile. For the entire New Zealand
banking  system,  Tier  1  capital  ratios  have  also  been  at  the  lower  end  of  international
comparisons.
3
However,  such  comparisons  can  be  misleading  as  countries  have  implemented  the  Basel
Framework in different ways. The Reserve Bank has made a number of amendments to better
reflect  New  Zealand  risks,  for  instance  our  farm  lending  adjustments  raise  the  average  risk
weight  on  banks’  exposures  by  around  20–30  percentage  points  compared  to  a  usual
implementation of the IRB framework.   Risk weights on residential mortgages are also higher
than for a range of peer countries, as seen in Table 1. The relatively cautious approach adopted
in  New  Zealand  with  regard  to  risk  measurement  means  that,  on  a  like-for  like  basis,  New
Zealand’s relative capital position should be higher than the headline ratios suggest. The question
is by how much.
4
Table 1. Housing risk weights for selected countries (large banks)
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Country
Australia
Canada
Denmark
New Zealand
Sweden
United Kingdom
Weighted average risk weight
5
23.5%
7.2%
13.9%
28.3%
6.8%
11.7%
Source: Pillar 3 reports
6
APRA  has  also  applied  the  Basel  Framework  on  a  relatively  conservative  basis.   Taking  into
account differences in the calculation of capital and risk-weighted exposures, APRA estimated
that  the  Australian  major  banks’  CET1  capital  ratios,  as  at  December  2015,  would  be  3.5
percentage points higher if calculated on a more internationally comparable basis.
7
Running a similar analysis on the New Zealand framework, we estimate that CET1 ratios are
roughly equivalent to at least an additional 1 to 2 percentage points of CET1 capital under an
internationally  normalised  regime.  This  adjustment  would  place  our  four  largest  banks  in  the
second or third quartile of the banks included in the Basel III monitoring studies.
Alternative  approaches  to  comparing  capital  adequacy  also  suggest  that  New  Zealand  banks
may effectively be around the median of international comparators.
Looking  at  simple  leverage  ratios,  as  of  June  2016,  the  median  leverage  ratio  of  large
internationally active banks was 5.6%. By comparison, we estimate that our four largest banks
would have reported a weighted average leverage ratio of around 6.3%, placing them in the third
quartile.
Another  basis  for  comparison  is  Standard  &  Poor’s  “Risk-adjusted  capital”  (RAC)  framework.
S&P’s  methodology  uses  risk  weights  based  on  their  view  of  each  country’s  economic  and
banking  industry  risks.  Relative  to  the  world’s  top  100  banks  by  Tier  1  capital,  S&P’s
methodology suggests that the weighted average of the four largest New Zealand banks’ RAC
ratios is around the 56th percentile, although their position would fall to the 32nd percentile once
adjusted for concentration risk.  These scores are influenced by S&P’s view that New Zealand’s
9
underlying economic imbalances are “very high” compared to peers.
8
These  initial  comparisons  point  to  New  Zealand  banks  being  “in  the  pack”  in  terms  of  capital
ratios relative to international peers. Further work will be done as part of the Review to further
clarify New Zealand’s current relative position.
Basel Committee developments
Over  the  past  few  years  the  Basel  Committee  has  finalised  aspects  of  the  Basel  III  Capital
Framework.  The most recent reforms addressed aspects of the measurement of risk-weighted
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
exposures. Most of the changes to market risk measurement have been finalised but proposed
changes to the credit risk and operational risk frameworks are still being discussed.
The proposed credit risk reforms include restricting the scope of the IRB approach to a smaller
range of portfolios, imposing constraints on parameters used by internal models and developing
a more risk-sensitive standardised approach. The Basel Committee has proposed a floor linking
the  revised  IRB  approach  to  the  revised  Standardised  approach.  European  regulators  want  a
relatively low floor, while US regulators have been arguing for a higher floor.
The proposal for operational risk would see internally modelled approaches removed from the
framework, to be replaced with a single standardised approach.
The different state of banking systems between countries and the potentially significant impact of
the  reforms  has  seen  on-going  differences  between  members  and  a  delay  in  concluding  a
framework.  We  hope  that  the  Basel  Committee  will  be  able  to  finalise  and  publish  these
standards  in  the  coming  months,  particularly  those  related  to  the  use  of  internal  modelling
approaches. However, if this becomes a drawn out process we may need to conclude some
aspects of the Review without the benefit of a fully agreed Basel framework.
Australian FSI and increased capital requirements
The  Australian  Financial  System  Inquiry  (FSI)  made  three  key  recommendations  on  capital
standards for Authorised Deposit-taking Institutions (ADIs):
Set capital standards so that ADIs’ capital ratios are ‘unquestionably strong’.
Raise internally modelled risk weights on residential mortgages to narrow the difference in risk
weights between IRB and Standardised ADIs.
Implement  a  framework  for  minimum  loss-absorbing  capacity  in  line  with  international
practice, to facilitate orderly resolution and minimise taxpayer support.
In  accepting  the  recommendations,  APRA  has  taken  as  a  guide  for  ‘unquestionably  strong’
capital,  the  top  quartile  of  capital  levels  of  internationally-active  banks.  To  help  fulfil  the
recommendations, APRA has over the past year increased residential mortgage risk weights for
IRB banks to an average level of 25%.
 In response, the major banks raised around $23 billion
in common equity over late 2015 and early 2016, as well as significant quantities of Additional
Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital.
10
11
These capital raisings have bolstered the resilience of the Australian parents of New Zealand’s
four  largest  banks.  While  this  contributes  to  the  ultimate  soundness  of  the  New  Zealand
subsidiaries, it does not directly strengthen their balance sheets. The increase in risk weights on
Australian  exposures  means  that  most  of  the  new  capital  is  being  absorbed  by  the  need  to
maintain existing capital ratios in the Australian businesses.
APRA  has  indicated  that  their  final  position  on  ‘unquestionably  strong’  is  not  far  off,  although
detailed capital standards may not be finalised until later in the year. APRA had been waiting for
finalisation of the Basel Committee revisions but does not wish to be held up by the current Basel
impasse. Recent comments by the APRA chair 
 indicate that the banks should be able to meet
any new requirements in an orderly manner.
New Zealand domestic context
12
The Capital Review will assess how our future capital framework might be shaped by domestic
considerations. These relate to New Zealand’s risk profile, the shape of our financial system and
also our regulatory approach.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
New Zealand’s exports are concentrated in a small number of commodity-based sectors which
can be subject to considerable price volatility. Bank exposures to commodity export industries
are a key risk in the domestic system. Residential mortgage exposures are also a major source
of  risk  given  the  system’s  heavy  exposure  to  housing  and  the  capacity  for  house  prices  to
become very stretched – as at present.
New Zealand is a net debtor country, having run current account deficits continuously over the
past  40  years. About  half  of  the  country’s  gross  external  debt  is  issued  by  the  New  Zealand
banking system which then on-lends to businesses and households.  This reliance on external
funding is an important vulnerability of the New Zealand system, as starkly demonstrated during
the  GFC.  While  liquidity  buffers  must  be  the  first  line  of  defence  against  funding  market
disruptions,  a  strongly  capitalised  system  also  helps  to  mitigate  the  risk  of  reduced  market
access.
 New  Zealand’s  financial  system  is  less  diversified  relative  to  peer  countries.  Financial
intermediation  is  concentrated  in  a  few  large  institutions  and  capital  markets  play  a  relatively
minor role.
Rating  agency  risk  assessments  of  the  large  New  Zealand  banks  is  heavily  influenced  by
expectations of support from the Australian parent banks. Under the S&P regime, this factor lifts
the  ratings  of  the  large  New  Zealand  banks  by  an  average  of  4  notches  from  BBB+  on  a
standalone basis, to AA- , the rating applied to the Australian parents. While the implicit support
of the parent banks is valuable for the New Zealand system, it is also a vulnerability. For example,
in recent times the Australian parent banks have been on negative outlook and, separately, APRA
has  placed  restrictions  on  the  ability  of  the  parent  banks  to  give  credit  support  to  their
international  subsidiaries.  Should  implicit  parental  support  be  eroded,  it  is  important  that  our
banks be seen as strong on a standalone basis in order to maintain their international standing.
The  Capital  Review  will  draw  on  the  emerging  international  literature  on  optimal  capital  and
include  an  assessment  of  optimal  capital  that  takes  account  of  New  Zealand-specific
characteristics. The final calibration of capital requirements will also take account of the results
and insights from bank stress-testing and other analytical work we are undertaking in support of
the Capital Review.
Capital review principles
Consistent with the objective of the Review, the Reserve Bank will adopt principles that reflect
the  international  and  domestic  context  as  well  as  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  prudential
supervision.
1. Capital must readily absorb bank losses ahead of creditors and depositors
 The Bank will have regard to six high-level principles:
13
‘Capital’ is the portion of a bank’s funding that can absorb losses ahead of creditors, allowing the
bank to continue operating as a going concern or reduce losses to creditors and depositors in
the event of failure. A key word in this principle is readily. To be useful in supporting a distressed
bank, capital instruments must be able to absorb losses as and when they arise.
Capital  instruments  can  be  ranked  based  on  their  subordination,  permanence  and  loss
absorbency,  with  Common  Equity  Tier  1  (CET1)  capital  being  the  highest  quality  capital
instrument. The Reserve Bank will consider the roles of the different tiers of capital and whether
more emphasis should be placed on simpler and higher quality forms of capital.
We are particularly interested in reviewing the role of convertible capital instruments and will give
this some priority in the Review.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The principle of loss absorbency is also relevant for our assessment of buffers that are required
in addition to minimum capital ratios. The current regime includes a conservation buffer of 2.5%
and  the  potential  for  a  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  under  our  macro-prudential  framework.
Such buffers enhance the ability of banks to readily absorb losses while remaining compliant with
minimum  ratios. An  appropriate  structure  for  capital  buffers  will  be  an  important  issue  for  the
Review.
2. Capital requirements should be set in relation to the risk of bank exposures
Regulatory capital requirements must reflect the underlying risk of exposures in order to avoid
distorting banks’ risk-return decisions.
14
Critics of the Basel framework maintain that ever-increasing risk granularity has led to a spurious
sense  of  sophistication  and  that  the  pendulum  should  swing  back  to  simpler,  more  objective
measures of risk.
 In particular, the use of internal models to determine capital requirements
has been shown in practice to lead to excessively wide estimates of risk for what is the same
underlying exposure.
  The Basel Committee has agreed that a simplification of the framework
and a reduction in model-based variation in capital requirements is desirable. However, as noted,
we are yet to see the final shape of these reforms.
15
We  believe  that  model-based  variations  in  risk  measurement  are  less  pronounced  in  New
Zealand, due in part to our restrictions on internal model parameters and our relatively simple
approach  to  market  risk  measurement.  However,  we  agree  that  excessive  complexity  is
undesirable  and  that  risk  differentiation  should  only  occur  when  it  is  based  on  objective  and
credible  measurement.  In  the  Review,  we  will  examine  whether  some  simplification  of  the
framework might produce more transparent and relevant outcomes.
3.  Where  there  are  multiple  methods  for  determining  capital  requirements,  outcomes
should not vary substantially between methods
Related to the previous principle, the Reserve Bank considers that if internal models are used to
determine  capital  requirements  alongside  Standardised  approaches,  the  calibration  of  the  two
should not result in unduly different outcomes.
Standardised approaches can be seen as a default treatment for risk measurement. If Internal
Model banks are able to use relevant data and risk management systems to better understand
and measure the risks in their business, capital requirements might vary from the Standardised
approach.  However,  the  degree  of  difference  should  depend  on  the  value  added  by  Internal
models over and above that achieved under the Standardised approach. For example, it may be
difficult to justify large differences between Modelled and Standardised approaches where banks’
private  information  adds  little  to  what  is  publicly  available,  say  in  the  case  of  exposures  to
sovereign and local governments, or to publicly listed companies.
4.  Reflecting  the  risks  inherent  in  the  New  Zealand  financial  system  and  the  Reserve
Bank’s  regulatory  approach,  New  Zealand  bank  capital  requirements  should  be
conservative relative to international peers
As discussed, New Zealand’s economy and financial system have risk characteristics that set us
apart,  including:  our  exposure  to  export  markets;  our  dependence  on  international  capital
markets; our high degree of banking industry concentration; and the low diversification in banks’
lending  portfolios.  Further,  New  Zealand’s  regulatory  approach  puts  less  weight  on  active
supervision and relatively more on high level safety buffers such as regulatory capital.
When calibrating capital requirements we need to be mindful that the Basel standards are based
on the experiences and needs of large and diversified G10 and G20 financial systems. This may
not be an appropriate starting point for New Zealand.
  Certainly in our current framework we
16
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
have modified the Basel standards to take account of New Zealand-specific risks, including in
relation to residential mortgage and farm lending that were not adequately captured in the Basel
standards.
17
Based on New Zealand’s risk profile and our approach to banking supervision, we would expect
the Review to deliver an outcome where capital standards are seen as conservative relative to
the Basel standards and to the standards of peer countries.
5.  The  capital  framework  should  be  practical  to  administer,  minimise  unnecessary
complexity and compliance costs, and take into consideration relationships with home
country regulators
By international standards our banks are small with relatively straightforward business models.
Similarly, the Reserve Bank is a relatively small prudential regulator. The full Basel framework is
complex and voluminous as it aims to identify and measure the risks faced by the world’s largest
and most complicated banks. We have chosen not to adopt some of the more complex features
of the Basel framework, particularly in the area of market risk. In other areas where we have
allowed the use of internal models, such as for operational risk, we have imposed overlays to
provide a degree of comfort that capital will not fall below prescribed levels.
Prudential regulators always face trade-offs between the level of simplicity and complexity in their
requirements, the resourcing and monitoring of the framework, and the demands of the regulated
entities.  For  example,  adopting  a  full-service  approach  to  implementing  the  Basel  framework
would  impose  higher  resource  and  compliance  costs  on  the  regulator  and  the  banks  than  a
simpler framework. There would need to be clear and proven net benefits from the full-service
model  over  the  simpler  but  conservative  approach  that  we  currently  prefer.  However,  we  are
mindful that our largest banks operate as subsidiaries of foreign banks and that some degree of
alignment with international standards can help to reduce banks’ compliance costs.
As we undertake the Capital Review, we will be consulting on the Reserve Bank’s preference to
move towards a simpler capital regime, not a more complex one.
6. The capital framework should be transparent to enable effective market discipline
18
Market discipline has been at the heart of the Reserve Bank’s approach to prudential supervision
for  over  two  decades.
  Effective  market  discipline  requires  banks  to  disclose  prudential
information that can be readily understood by creditors and is comparable across banks.  This
principle reinforces principles 3 and 5: avoiding large differences in outcomes between capital
methodologies; and avoiding unnecessary complexity.
Timetable for the Capital Review
We will release a high level Issues Paper in April, outlining the areas of the capital framework that
the Reserve Bank intends to examine, followed by more detailed consultation papers. As I noted
at the outset, we will be seeking stakeholders’ views in three broad areas: what sorts of capital
instruments  should  qualify  (the  numerator);  how  risk  exposures  should  be  measured  (the
denominator); and the minimum capital ratios and buffers.
The Issues Paper will request stakeholders’ initial views on the areas we intend to cover and
issues that might warrant particular attention. Further consultation documents with options for
changes  to  the  framework  and  recommended  policy  positions  will  be  targeted  for  the  third
quarter. We plan to conclude the Review by the first quarter of 2018.
Conclusion
Today I have discussed the context for the upcoming Capital Review and outlined a number of
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
key issues that the Reserve Bank will be considering over the coming year. Capital policy has
multiple dimensions and trade-offs and we will welcome your views as we consult on the various
aspects.
We  will  assess  the  current  framework  and  recommend  policy  changes  in  the  context  of
international  developments,  New  Zealand’s  risk  profile  and  the  Reserve  Bank’s  regulatory
approach. In doing so, we will be guided by principles that broadly promote conservatism and
simplicity. We will ensure that the quantity and quality of banks’ capital remain consistent with
promoting a sound and efficient financial system.
Thank you for the opportunity to share these ideas with you today.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
‘Financial System Inquiry – Final Report’ (2014).
For further discussion of the Reserve Bank’s adoption of the Basel III standards, and the rationale for minimum
capital requirements more generally, see the Bulletin  article ‘The Reserve Bank’s application of the Basel III
capital requirements for banks’ (2015).
Basel III Monitoring Report (February 2017)’. 
These figures are for the 100 “Group 1” banks under the Basel Quantitative Impact Study definition, i.e. banks
with Tier 1 capital in excess of €3bn, who are well diversified and are internationally active. “Group 2” banks,
which are the 110 other banks that participate in the QIS, reported a median CET1 ratio of 13.9%, with a 25th
and 75th percentile of 11.4% and 18.3%.
See, for instance, the Bulletin article ‘Bank farm capital: does it cost the earth?’ (2011).
The Australian housing risk weight is in the process of being increased to an average of 25%.
Data as at most recent Pillar 3 regulatory disclosure. Sample includes ANZ, CBA, NAB, WBC (Australia), BMO,
CIBC, RBC, Scotiabank, TD (Canada), Danske, Nordea DK, Jyske, Nykredit, Sydbank (Denmark), ANZ, ASB,
BNZ, WNZL (New Zealand), Handelsbanken, Nordea Group, SEB, Swedbank (Sweden), Barclays, Co-operative,
HSBC, LBG, NBS, RBS, Standard Chartered (UK).
Se e APRA  Information  Paper:  International  capital  comparison  study  (2015),  and International  capital
comparison update (2016)..
See Standard & Poor’s ‘Top 100 Banks: Risk-Adjusted Capital Ratios Have Improved For Most Banks In 2015’,
August 2016, and the December 2016 Standard & Poor’s Global Ratings reports for ANZ New Zealand, ASB
Bank, Bank of New Zealand, and Westpac New Zealand. Concentration and diversification adjustments take
into account Standard & Poor’s views of banks’ single-name, industry sector, geographic, and business line
concentration or diversification.
See, for instance, Standard & Poor’s Banking Industry Country Risk Assessment, January 2017.
See ‘APRA reaffirms revised mortgage risk weight target’ (2016).
See the Reserve Bank of Australia Financial Stability Review, October 2015 and March 2016, for more details on
ADIs’ recent capital raisings.
See 10 February comments by Wayne Byres.
See ‘New Zealand’s evolving approach to prudential supervision’ (2016) for a recent discussion of the Reserve
Bank’s supervisory philosophy.
See for instance, ‘The dog and the frisbee’ (2012) by Andrew Haldane.
See the Basel Committee’s ‘Analysis of risk-weighted assets for credit risk in the banking book’ (2013, 2016) for
their reports into the causes of variation in risk-weighted assets under the Internal-Ratings Based approach.  A
hypothetical  portfolio  exercise  showed  that,  for  the  sample,  practice-based  variation  in  risk  estimation  for
sovereign, bank and large corporate exposures could lead to a ±22% difference in reported capital ratios, for the
same underlying risk.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
17
18
To give an example of why this might be the case, the asset correlations used in the internal-ratings based
supervisory formulae are based on either G10 supervisory data or were ‘reverse-engineered’ from the outputs of
internal  capital  models  developed  by  internationally  active  banks  in  the  1990s  and  early  2000s.  These
calibrations may not be appropriate in New Zealand. See ‘An explanatory note on the Basel II IRB risk weight
functions’ (2005).
These include higher minimum loss-given-default parameters and higher asset correlations.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
