Stanley Fischer: Government policy and labor productivity
Speech  by  Mr  Stanley  Fischer,  Vice  Chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, at the "Washington Transformation? Politics, Policies, Prospects", a forum sponsored
by the Summer Institute of Martha's Vineyard Hebrew Center, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts, 6
July 2017.
 I am grateful to David Byrne of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance. Views expressed
in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the
Federal Open Market Committee.
I want to talk tonight about labor productivity growth. Labor productivity is the amount of goods
and services produced per hour spent on the job. Increases in labor productivity—again, that’s
the amount of goods and services produced per hour on the job—are a fundamental factor in
determining how fast the economy grows, and how fast the average standard of living grows.
And productivity growth can be influenced by government policy, about which I also want to say a
few words.
Labor  productivity  growth  varies  a  lot  from  year  to  year,  but  it  is  possible  to  discern  longer
historical periods with high or low productivity growth, as shown in figure 1. For example, labor
productivity rose at an average annual rate of 3-1/4 percent from 1948 to 1973, whereas in the
period 1974 to 2016, the average growth rate of productivity was about 1.7 percent. That is to say
that, with the important exception of the information technology (IT) boom beginning in the mid-
1990s, the U.S. economy has been in a low-productivity growth period since 1974. The record for
the past five years has been particularly dismal.
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
How much does productivity growth matter? A great deal. The person who made that clear, in an
article  published  in  1957,  60  years  ago,  Professor  Robert  Solow,  is  here  tonight.  That  is  a
pleasure,  an  honor,  a  joy,  and  something  of  a  difficulty  for  anyone  wanting  to  talk  about
productivity and its growth in the presence of the master.
1
The reason the rate of productivity growth matters so much is that it is a basic determinant of the
rate of growth of average income per capita over long periods.  To understand that one needs to
know only the trick of calculating how long it takes for a growing economy to double. A good rule
of thumb for calculating the time it takes labor productivity (or anything else that is growing) to
double can be calculated by dividing 70 by the growth rate. When labor productivity was growing
at  3-1/4  percent  per  year—during  the  25  years  from  1948  to  1973—it  took  22  years  for  labor
productivity to double. Looking again at Figure 1, in the 42 years from 1974 to 2016, when labor
productivity was growing on average at a rate of 1-3/4 percent, it would have taken approximately
41 years for labor productivity to double. There is a vast difference between the prospects facing
the  young  in  an  economy  where  incomes  per  capita  are  doubling  every  22  years  and  an
economy in which incomes are on average doubling only every 41 years.
Now, productivity statistics are imperfect in many respects—for example, capturing the value of
the seemingly free apps we use on our smartphones is challenging. And many of us who live in
the modern age cannot believe that the iPhone has not fundamentally changed our lives. It has
certainly  changed  our  lives  to  some  extent,  and  there  is  likely  some  underestimation  of
productivity growth in the official data. But to figure out whether the current degree of data bias
has reduced estimated growth, we have to ask not whether there is bias, but whether the bias
has increased. To a first approximation, one could assume that the rate of bias is constant, and
does not account for the estimated decline in productivity growth and that we should not dismiss
the  slowdown  as  an  artifact  of  measurement  difficulties.   That  is  the  conclusion  most
researchers reach, but the data issue is not settled. As Bob Solow famously said, just before the
increase in productivity growth of 1996–2003, “the computer is everywhere except in the growth
data.” And there are serious researchers who have made serious arguments that we will soon
be seeing more rapid growth in the productivity data.
Factors determining productivity growth
2
Clearly, a key question for economic forecasters, and even more so for U.S. citizens, and indeed
for  the  entire  global  economy,  is  whether  we  should  anticipate  a  return  of  the  more  rapid
productivity gains experienced in the IT boom and for the quarter century after the end of World
War II, or should instead resign ourselves to tepid economic growth in future years. And a central
policy  issue  is  whether  government  policies  can  help  push  the  economy  toward  a  higher-
productivity regime.
In this context, it is useful to think of labor productivity growth as coming from three sources, as
shown in figure 2. First, greater investment by firms in tangible equipment and structures, as well
as  “intangible”  investments  such  as  software  and  product  designs,  raise  labor  productivity.
Second, improvements in labor quality, or the capabilities of the workforce, contribute as well—
through education, training, and experience. Finally, innovations yield more or better output from
the same inputs—the same capital and labor—such as the introduction of the assembly line and
computer-aided product design. I will consider the role that policy may play through each of these
channels.  It  is  noteworthy  that  most  of  the  recent  drop  in  productivity  is  due  to  a  lower
contribution  from  innovation,  although  weaker  investment  has  played  a  role  as  well.  The
contribution to labor productivity from labor quality has changed very little.
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Innovation
Our  prospects  for  further  significant  technological  innovations  are  hotly  debated.  Some
observers believe that we have exhausted the low-hanging fruit on the productivity tree and, in
particular, that efficiency gains from the use of IT have run their course.  Other observers argue
that we can reach fruit higher on the tree with each passing year. These observers believe that
innovation  yields  better  tools,  such  as  3-D  printers  and  genetic  sequencing  equipment,  which
themselves enable further technological advances.  For what it is worth, I believe the early signs
of  self-driving  cars,  the  emergence  of  disease  treatments  based  on  genetics,  and  the  falling
costs  for  conventional  and  alternative  energy  production  suggest  that  we  are  continuing  to
innovate, both in IT as well as in other parts of the economy. One possibility is that we are in a
productivity lull while firms reorganize to exploit the latest innovations; it took decades before the
5
full benefits of the steam engine, electrification, and computers were seen.
3
4
One way to ensure the vigor of innovation is to support research and development (R&D), and
here  the  recent  record  is  mixed.  As  shown  in  figure  3,  R&D  spending  in  the  United  States
softened  during  the  Great  Recession.  R&D  funded  by  U.S.  businesses  has  since  recovered.
However, government-funded R&D as a share of gross domestic product is at the lowest level in
recent history. A great deal of the “R” in overall R&D is government funded and  not  tied  to  a
specific  commercial  goal.  The  applied  research  built  on  this  basic  research  ultimately  yields
productivity gains far into the future.  Consequently, the decline in government-funded R&D is
disturbing.
6
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
To raise productivity and economic well-being, firms must adopt innovations that emerge from
R&D as quickly as possible. This adjustment may occur as start-ups introduce innovation to the
market, as existing innovative firms expand, or as competing firms imitate the innovators. Recent
research  suggests  that  all  three  of  these  channels,  which  reflect  the  economic  dynamism  of
businesses, have been operating sluggishly of late: New firms are not created as often as in the
past,  innovative  firms  are  not  hiring  or  investing  as  aggressively  as  they  once  did,  and  the
7
diffusion of innovations is weak from frontier firms to trailing firms.
It  is  difficult  to  pinpoint  specific  policy  actions  that  would  address  this  decline  in  dynamism.
Broadly  speaking,  however,  government  policymakers  should  carefully  consider  the  effects  of
regulations and tax policy on the free flow of workers, capital, and ideas.
Investment
In  recent  years,  the  contribution  to  labor  productivity  growth  from  investment  has  declined.
Business fixed investment rose roughly 2-1/2 percent per year, on average, from 2004 to 2016,
compared  with  about  5  percent  from  1996  to  2003.   Some  bright  spots  do  exist:  Capital
expenditure by leading IT companies—Google, Amazon, and the like—has soared since 2010,
and investment in the energy sector has returned to life. Nevertheless, firms as a whole seem
reluctant to invest.
8
This  cautious  approach  to  investment  may  in  part  reflect  uncertainty  about  the  policy
environment. By one measure, U.S. policy uncertainty was elevated for much of the recovery,
subsided in 2013, and then rose again late last year, underpinned by uncertainty about policies
associated  with  health  care,  regulation,  taxes,  and  trade.   Reasonable  people  can  disagree
about  the  right  way  forward  on  each  of  those  issues,  but  mitigating  the  damping  effect  of
uncertainty  by  providing  more  clarity  on  the  future  direction  of  government  policy  is  highly
desirable—particularly if the direction of policy itself is desirable.
9
Government investment can be an important source of productivity growth as well. For example,
the  interstate  highway  system  is  credited  with  boosting  productivity  in  the  1950s  and
10
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
1960s.
 That highway system and many other federally supported roadways, waterways, and
structures  have  been  neglected  in  recent  years.  Indeed,  real  infrastructure  spending  (that  is,
adjusting for inflation) has fallen nearly 1 percent per year since 2005.
 This area of government
investment deserves more attention.
Labor quality
11
Also important to raising labor productivity is investment in human capital—workers’ knowledge
and skills. Such investment is a particular issue because most forecasts anticipate that the long
rise in educational attainment—both  for  college  and  high  school—may  soon  come  to  an  end.
One  area  where  policy  may  play  a  role  is  promoting  educational  access  and  readiness  for
groups for whom educational attainment is relatively low.
Recent  research  has  shown  a  substantial  return  to  public  investment  in  early  childhood
education  for  economically  disadvantaged  groups.  Such  programs  increase  high  school
graduation,  promote  income  over  the  life  cycle  for  both  participants  and  their  parents,  and
produce other socially beneficial outcomes, such as greater health.
12
At  the  other  end  of  the  education  process,  a  college  degree  has  long  been  considered  a
worthwhile investment, and thus our society should promote access to and readiness for college
among  a  broad  range  of  individuals—in  particular  through  federal  support  for  need-based
financial aid.
13
Lastly, I will note that ultimately the return on the human capital embodied in our workforce is
closely tied to public health. A rise in morbidity or fall in longevity in the U.S. population is not a
concern only for humanitarian reasons. Workers too ill to perform at their potential represent lost
productivity and welfare for society as a whole. Research has shown just such a trend among
prime-age  non-Hispanic  Americans  without  a  college  degree.
  More  study  is  needed  to
determine what policies would help reverse this trend, and government funding could likely assist
the effort. More broadly, programs to promote clean air and drinking water are examples of public
health  policies  that  bolster  the  health  and  longevity  of  the  present  and  future  workforce  as  a
whole.
Concluding remarks
14
To conclude, we return to the basic question: How much does productivity growth matter? The
basic answer: simple arithmetic says it matters a lot. If labor productivity grows an average of 2
percent per year, average living standards for our children’s generation will be twice what we
experienced.  If  labor  productivity  grows  an  average  of  1  percent  per  year,  the  difference  is
dramatic: Living standards will take two generations to double.
15
But fortunately, when it comes to productivity, we are not simply consigned to luck or to fate.
Governments  can  take  sensible  actions  to  promote  more  rapid  productivity  growth.  Broadly
speaking,  government  policy  works  best  when  it  can  address  a  need  that  the  private  sector
neglects,  including  investment  in  basic  research,  infrastructure,  early  childhood  education,
schooling, and public health. Reasonable people can disagree about the right way forward, but if
we  as  a  society  are  to  succeed,  we  need  to  follow  policies  that  will  support  and  advance
productivity growth. That is easier said than done. But it can be done.
References
Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter Gal (2015). Frontier firms, technology diffusion and
public policy: Micro evidence from OECD countries, No. 2. OECD Publishing, 2015.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2012). “Has Economic Policy Uncertainty
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  Recovery?” 
Ian  J.  Wright,
Hampered 
eds., Government  Policies  and  the  Delayed  Economic  Recovery.  Stanford,  Calif.:  Hoover
Institution Press, pp. 39–56.
in  Lee  E.  Ohanian,  John  B.  Taylor,  and 
Bosler, Canyon, Mary C. Daly, John G. Fernald, and Bart Hobijn (2016). “The Outlook for U.S.
Labor-Quality Growth,” NBER Working Paper Series 22555. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau
of Economic Research, August.
Brynjolfsson,  Erik,  and  Lorin  M.  Hitt  (2000).  “Beyond  Computation:  Information  Technology,
Organizational  Transformation, 
and  Business  Performance," Journal  of  Economic
Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 23–48.
Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016). “Does  the  United  States
Have  a  Productivity  Slowdown  or  a  Measurement  Problem?  (PDF)"  Brookings  Papers  on
Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 109–57.
Byrne,  David,  Stephen  Oliner,  and  Daniel  Sichel  (2017).  “Prices  of  High-Tech  Products,
Mismeasurement,  and  Pace  of  Innovation,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  23369.  Cambridge,
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
Case,  Anne,  and  Angus  Deaton  (2017).  “Mortality  and  Morbidity  in  the  21st  Century
(PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-63.
Congressional  Budget  Office 
Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014. Washington: CBO, March.
(2015). Public  Spending  on  Transportation  and  Water
David, Paul A. (1990). “The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern
Productivity Paradox," American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355–61.
Decker,  Ryan  A.,  John  Haltiwanger,  Ron  S.  Jarmin,  and  Javier  Miranda  (2016).  “Declining
Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward," American Economic Review, vol.
106 (May), pp. 203–07.
Dynarski,  Susan,  and  Judith  Scott-Clayton  (2013).  “Financial  Aid  Policy:  Lessons  from
Research,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  18710.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of
Economic Research, January.
Elango,  Sneha,  Jorge  Luis  García,  James  J.  Heckman,  and  Andrés  Hojman  (2015).  “Early
Childhood Education,” NBER Working Paper Series 21766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau
of Economic Research, November.
Fernald, John G. (1999). “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and
Productivity," American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 619 38.
Fernald,  John  G.  (2012).  “A  Quarterly,  Utilization-Adjusted  Series  on  Total  Factor  Productivity
(PDF),”  Working  Paper  2012–19.  San  Francisco:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,
September (revised April, 2014).
Fernald, John G. (2015). “Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great
Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol. 29 (1), pp. 1-51.
Fernald,  John  G.,  Robert  E.  Hall,  James  H.  Stock,  and  Mark  W.  Watson  (2017).  “The
Disappointing  Recovery  of  Output  after  2009  (PDF), " Brookings  Papers  on  Economic
Activity, Spring, 1-82.
García,  Jorge  Luis,  James  J.  Heckman,  Duncan  Ermini  Leaf,  and  María  José  Prados  (2017).
“Quantifying the Life-Cycle Benefits of a Prototypical Early Childhood Program,” NBER Working
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
Paper Series 23479. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June.
Gordon,  Robert  (2014).  “The  demise  of  US  economic  growth:  Restatement,  rebuttal,  and
reflections,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  19895.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of
Economic Research, November.
Mohnen, Pierre, and Bronwyn H. Hall (2013). “Innovation and Productivity: An Update," Eurasian
Business Review, vol. 3 (Spring), pp. 47–65.
Mokyr,  Joel  (2014).  “Secular  Stagnation?  Not  in  Your  Life,”  in  Coen  Teulings  and  Richard
Baldwin, eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes, and Cures. London: CEPR Press, pp. 83–89.
Pinto,  Eugenio  P.,  and  Stacey  Tevlin  (2014).  “Perspectives  on  the  Recent  Weakness  in
Investment," FEDS Notes, No. 2014–05-21.
Solow, Robert M. (1957). “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function,"  Review of
Economics and Statistics, vol. 39 (August), pp. 312–20.
United States. Bureau of the Census (1975). Historical statistics of the United States, colonial
times to 1970. Washington: US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, September, .
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
One needs also to recognize that changes in either the average workweek or the employment to population ratio
may damp or augment the effect of labor productivity on GDP per capita.
Byrne,  Fernald,  and  Reinsdorf  (2016)  discuss  known  measurement  challenges  and  conclude  they  cannot
explain the deceleration of productivity.
Gordon (2014, p. 25) enumerates the inventions of the information age—the personal computer, the Internet,
mobile phones, and so on—and notes that for innovation to continue at such a pace, “the achievements of the
past 40 years set a hurdle that is dauntingly high."
Mokyr (2014, p. 83) considers advances in research methods and tools and concludes that “the indirect effects
of science on productivity through the tools it provides scientific research may dwarf the direct effects in the long
run."
David  (1990)  cautions  that  the  effect  of  general-purpose  technologies,  such  as  electricity  and  electronic
computing, can take decades to fully unfold. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) consider the process followed by firms
in leveraging innovations in IT equipment and emphasize the role of complementary investment in intangible
assets like business reorganization.
Mohnen and Hall (2013) survey the empirical literature pointing to a link between R&D and productivity.
Decker and others (2016) highlight the decline in entrepreneurship and worker mobility; Andrews, Criscuolo,
and Gal (2015) emphasizes that productivity for firms at the global frontier continues to advance rapidly even as
global aggregate productivity growth has slowed.
Pinto and Tevlin (2014) note that in the context of a long-run growth model, a slow pace of investment is not
surprising in light of the slow growth in effective labor inputs—which equals the sum of labor quality and total
factor productivity growth. Fernald and others (2017) raise a related point—the ratio of capital to output has
returned to its apparent long-run trend. That said, Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel (2017) argue that the recent rapid
declines in the price of IT capital may presage an uptick in investment in response.
As discussed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index, available on the
EPU website at www.policyuncertainty.com, is constructed from component measures for references to policy
uncertainty  in  major  newspapers,  the  number  of  tax  code  provisions  set  to  expire  in  future  years,  and
disagreement among economic forecasters.
See Fernald (1999).
Although the share of nominal public spending devoted to infrastructure in recent years has been similar to the
share dating back to the 1980s, Congressional Budget Office (2015) notes that real spending has been held
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
13
14
15
down by the relatively rapid increase in the price of inputs used for construction.
Research on the effect of early childhood education is surveyed in Elango and others (2015). Garcia and others
(2017) consider the effect over the full life cycle of an early childhood program targeting disadvantaged families
and estimate an internal rate of return of nearly 14 percent.
Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2013) review the evidence that college enrollment rates are positively affected by
student aid.
See Case and Deaton (2017).
To  be  precise,  this  illustrative  calculation  assumes  that  the  average  workweek  and  the  employment-to-
population ratio are unchanged. 
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
