Benoît Cœuré: Greece - progress, challenges and the way forward
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at a
conference  organised  by  The  Economist  "Greece:  a  comeback  to  the  financial  markets?  A
glimpse into Europe's financial landscape", Frankfurt am Main, 31 May 2017.
Thank you for inviting me to speak here today.
 The topic of this conference is very timely. As you know, in recent weeks the Greek authorities
have made significant progress in adopting measures to finalise the second review of the ESM
programme.  Discussions  on  medium-term  debt  measures  and  a  new  IMF  programme  are
ongoing and expected to be concluded in the weeks ahead.
In my short remarks this morning, I will explain why timely clarity on debt measures and debt
sustainability is important – not only to restore trust in public finances but also to help rebuild
confidence in the Greek economy more generally, and the financial sector in particular.
But I would first like to focus on one element of the Greek adjustment programme where I believe
the ECB’s advice is of particular relevance – the financial sector strategy.
Financial sector reforms are a key element of macroeconomic adjustment programmes, for one
simple  reason:  any  sustainable  economic  recovery  needs  to  be  supported  by  an  adequate
supply of credit. Without credit, firms may not be able to invest in productive capital, create new
employment or cover ongoing expenses.
A healthy credit supply is also important for our monetary policy to filter through to households
and  firms:  it  is  one  of  the  main  ways  in  which  we  can  affect  bank  lending  conditions  and,
ultimately,  price  developments.  Indeed,  the  broad-based  and  solid  recovery  we  are  currently
observing in the euro area economy owes much to our policy measures having been effective in
repairing  the  bank  lending  channel  –  that  is,  in  overcoming  credit  supply  restrictions  and  in
bringing bank lending rates down to levels consistent with our monetary policy stance.
Greece is a sad exception, unfortunately. Bank loans to the domestic non-financial private sector
have contracted in every quarter since end-2008 and by a cumulative 28% up until the end of last
year. And although the level of loans to the private sector has stabilised recently, rates on loans
to firms are still some 250 basis points above the current euro area average.
Main challenges for the Greek financial sector
This means, of course, that there is still important work to do to allow credit to become a net
contributor – rather than an impediment – to growth in Greece and to allow the Greek economy to
reap the full benefits of the firming and broadening euro area recovery.
But still, we have seen progress.
The situation of Greek banks has improved in several ways since the summer of 2015 when the
third programme was negotiated. Capital adequacy, for example, has been strengthened from
CET1 ratios of around 11% in the third quarter of 2015 to around 16–17% at the end of last year,
following the successful recapitalisation of the four main banks in late 2015. Bank governance
has  also  improved,  as  shown  by  the  significant  changes  in  the  composition  of  Greek  bank
boards over the past year. And, importantly, bank profitability recovered in 2016 after years of
substantial losses. The average return on assets improved from –1.9% in 2015 to 0.1% in 2016,
based on continued operations.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
What, then, are the main obstacles that still need to be overcome?
I would argue that they are mainly related to the fragile state of banks’ balance sheets – on both
the asset and liability sides.
Let me start with the asset side.
As you know, non-performing loans (NPLs) are a problem in many euro area countries. But in
Greece  45%  of  all  bank  loans  are  non-performing.  They  severely  depress  the  profitability  of
banks and their ability to extend new, productive loans to firms and households.
Decisive and rapid action is therefore needed. The roadmap was drawn up last year when ECB
Banking Supervision agreed with the four main Greek banks on a 50% reduction in their NPL
stock by the end of 2019.
Progress so far has been broadly in line with agreed targets, but NPL objectives for this year and
the next two years are ambitious. A step change in NPL resolution activities will be needed – in
particular after the weak performance in the first months of 2017 that was, in part, also due to the
uncertainties related to the delay in the second review.
But I am happy to see that the Greek authorities recently passed several important pieces of
legislation  to  support  NPL  resolution.  Full  and  timely  implementation  of  these  reforms  in  the
months ahead will be crucial to support the required step change in NPL resolution efforts.
Let me highlight three elements that are of particular importance:
First,  the  overhaul  of  the  out-of-court  workout  framework.  This  element  is  of  particular
importance in Greece, where many firms are heavily indebted both to banks and the state.
Second, legal provisions to facilitate debt restructuring agreements by reducing the liability of
the individuals involved.
And third, after many delays, a framework for electronic auctions for the recovery of claims.
An electronic auction platform has become increasingly important as physical auctions have
essentially come to a standstill, which has caused significant losses for creditors, debtors
and the economy as a whole.
Let me now briefly turn to the liability side of banks’ balance sheets.
Deposits are the cornerstone of any sound banking system. A stable deposit base allows banks
to engage in maturity transformation and to extend credit to the real economy.
So far, however, there is no evidence of a sustained return of private deposits in Greece. Since
the  summer  of  2015,  when  capital  controls  were  imposed,  private  sector  deposits  have  only
recorded a modest 2.5% increase. They remain some 25% below their levels at the end of 2014
before deposit outflows accelerated noticeably.
The upshot is that Greek banks still rely to a significant extent on central bank funding. Although
recourse to our facilities, including emergency liquidity assistance, has fallen from 41% of total
assets in June 2015 to around 21% of assets today, total central bank funding still amounts to
more than 35% of Greek GDP.
Part  of  the  reduction  in  central  bank  funding  is  attributable  to  improved  access  to  wholesale
financing.  This  is  certainly  good  news.  Greek  banks  have  gradually  returned  to  the  interbank
market  and  were  able  to  perform  repo  transactions  with  a  wide  range  of  mostly  international
counterparties – also thanks to the ECB, in June last year, reinstating the waiver affecting the
eligibility of Greek government-related assets for Eurosystem monetary policy operations.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
But for credit to become a vital source of economic growth in Greece again, a lot will depend on
banks  being  able  to  regain  the  trust  of  private  depositors  and  rebuild  stable  funding  lines  in
wholesale funding markets.
Of  course,  this  is  not  only  in  the  hands  of  banks.  Broader  macroeconomic  stabilisation  is
essential, as I will explain in a second. But banks need to contribute actively to this process by
making further progress in repairing the asset side of their balance sheets – that is, by reducing
the amount of non-performing loans.
Debt sustainability and the public sector purchase programme
Restoring  confidence,  of  course,  also  means  dispelling  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of
Greek government debt – and this brings me back to my opening remarks. I think we all agree
that uncertainty about high public debt levels has undermined confidence in the Greek economy
in general, and the financial system in particular.
In this respect, we regret that no clear definition of debt relief measures was reached at the last
Eurogroup meeting. Discussions are ongoing, but in my view it is important that an agreement is
reached at the Eurogroup meeting on 15 June.
According to the framework agreed in May last year, debt measures would be implemented in
mid-2018, at the end of the programme. But being sufficiently clear on the measures today would
help frontload many of the beneficial effects, in particular the rebuilding of confidence of both the
international and domestic community in the ability of the Greek economy to return to a path of
normality and stability.
Clarity about debt measures is also a necessary condition for Greek government bonds to be
potentially eligible under the ECB’s public sector purchase programme (PSPP).
In June last year, the Governing Council clarified that it would examine possible purchases of
Greek government bonds under the PSPP, taking into account the progress made in the analysis
and  reinforcement  of  Greece’s  debt  sustainability,  as  well  as  other  risk  management
considerations. Any decision by the Eurosystem will be taken independently and autonomously.
This  means  that  one  important  element  in  our  deliberations  is  our  assessment  of  the
sustainability of Greece’s public debt. But we can only make an informed assessment if we have
a clear view of the nature and extent of the envisaged debt measures. Then we can assess how
much  they  would  contribute  to  the  sustainability  of  Greek  debt.  In  other  words,  we  need  a
sufficient  degree  of  specificity. And  as  for  any  other  decisions,  we  will  look  at  all  the  relevant
information. The IMF’s debt sustainability analysis will be an important input in this respect.
Concluding remarks
Let me conclude.
To  bring  the  Greek  programme  to  a  successful  conclusion  it  is  essential  that  the  Greek
authorities continue to show a serious commitment to the goals set and measures taken in the
context of the programme. Only with such a commitment can all stakeholders be confident that
reforms will be strengthened in the aftermath of the programme and not reversed.
At the same time, other stakeholders have to do their part to put in place the conditions that will
ultimately allow the Greek banking system to fully recover and to enable the country to return to
the financial market.
These efforts are not only about Greece – they are also about the euro area as a whole. Based
on  currently  available  information,  Greece  is  the  only  euro  area  country  whose  economy
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
contracted,  albeit  marginally,  at  the  start  of  this  year,  despite  the  cyclical  recovery  becoming
increasingly  solid  and  broad-based  –  thanks  in  large  part  to  our  monetary  policy  measures,
which have led to a pronounced easing of financing conditions and a convergence of funding
costs  across  countries.  But  convergence  will  only  be  achieved  if  all  euro  area  countries  are
involved.
I therefore encourage all parties to continue working hard on making the programme a complete
success.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
