REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO DE MÉXICO, ON “THE RENMINBI AS A GLOBAL RESERVE CURRENCY: 
A  CENTRAL  BANK’S  PERSPECTIVE”,  AT  THE  CENTRAL  BANKING 
PUBLICATIONS’ 6TH RENMINBI ROUNDTABLE. Mexico City, May 10, 2017.1 
 
I am very glad to have the opportunity to participate in this event. My gratitude 
to the organizers for their kind invitation. 
 In  recent  years,  central  banks  around  the  world  have  displayed  a  growing 
interest  to include  assets  denominated  in currencies from  emerging  market 
economies  (EMEs)  as  part  of  their  international  reserves.  In  addition  to  the 
continuous search by reserve managers of an adequate balance between risks 
and returns on their portfolios, this has also been influenced by the improved 
economic  fundamentals  and  the  resilience  shown  by  several  of  these 
economies  to  the  difficulties  arising  from  a  complicated  and,  at  times, 
turbulent global environment. 
 The  case  of  the  Chinese  renminbi  is  of  particular  note.  Indeed,  its  rapid 
internationalization of recent may well be regarded as a natural development 
following  China’s  increased  significance  within  the  global  economic  and 
financial  systems.  However,  there  are  clearly  other  explanatory  factors. 
Particularly  important  among  these  are  the  measures  implemented  by  that 
country’s authorities towards this outcome. 
                                                            
1  The  opinions and  views  expressed  in  this document  are the  sole  responsibility  of  the  author  and do  not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a whole. 
 1 
Although a currency’s degree of acceptance beyond its issuer’s borders varies 
across a wide array of dimensions, there are a number of attributes it must 
possess  to  achieve  a  significant  international  role  and,  ultimately,  global 
reserve status. At one level, a currency’s qualification as an efficient  unit of 
account and medium of exchange allows it to be amply used for the pricing 
and settlement of cross-border transactions, both commercial and financial. In 
addition, and perhaps more relevant for its role as a reserve asset, a global 
currency must be widely regarded as a reliable store of value, meaning that 
foreign investors, including official reserve managers, are willing to hold assets 
denominated in that currency. 
 Of course, the fulfillment of these conditions entails a rather lengthy process 
and achievement of this goal, as well as the speed at which it takes place, is 
closely linked to both prevailing and expected conditions in the issuer country. 
Paramount among these is the strength of the economy’s fundamentals, and 
especially domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. Further to this, the 
issuer country’s economic size and centrality in regional or global production 
and trade networks is an important driver of demand for its currency at the 
international  level,  while  capital  account  openness  and  the  consequent 
currency’s convertibility, as well as the depth of domestic financial markets, 
provide further assurance to global investors. 
 Considerable progress has been made in several relevant fronts towards the 
internationalization of China’s renminbi over the last years. Its growing use as 
a  medium  of  exchange  and  unit  of  account  is  evident.  The  renminbi’s 
 2 
participation  in  global  payments  has  increased  from  virtually  nil  in  2010  to 
slightly less than 2 percent in early 2017, and a similar pattern is observed in 
the  share  of  China’s  total  international  trade  that  is  settled  in  its  own 
currency.2  Also,  the  most  recent  BIS  triennial  survey  on  foreign  exchange 
turnover,3  shows  that  the  renminbi  was  last  year  the  world’s  eighth  most 
actively  traded  currency  and  the  first  among  emerging  market  economies, 
after having nearly doubled its share in all foreign exchange transactions over 
the course of three years.4 
 Significant progress has also been achieved in enhancing the renminbi’s use as 
a store of value by central banks and monetary authorities. The latest release 
of  the  IMF’s  Currency  Composition  of  Official  Foreign  Exchange  Reserves 
(COFER) survey includes specific data for this currency for the first time since 
records exist. According to this information, albeit low at levels slightly over 1 
percent  as  of  the  end  of  2016,  the  renminbi’s  share  in  the  world’s  total 
allocated international reserves is not far from other, more established reserve 
currencies  such  as  the  Australian  and  Canadian  dollars  (1.9  and  2  percent, 
respectively), and far above that of the Swiss franc (0.2 percent).5  
 As noted above, these developments respond to a significant extent to China’s 
increased  importance  in  the  global  economy.  In  2014,  China  overtook  the 
                                                           
2 Hongbin, Q. et al. (2017): “The Rise of the Redback VI”, HSBC Global Research, April. 
3  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2016): “Triennial Central  Bank Survey:  Foreign Exchange  Turnover  in 
April 2016”, September. 
4  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  this  development  came  atop  a  relatively  low  base,  as  the  renminbi’s 
participation in all foreign exchange transactions increased from 2.2% in 2013 to 4% in 2016 (note that the 
sum of shares across currencies adds to 200%, since two are involved in each trade).   
5 International Monetary Fund (2017): Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER), 
as of the fourth quarter of 2016, March. 
 3 
United  States  as  the  world’s  largest  economy,  as  measured  by  GDP  on  a 
purchasing  power  parity-adjusted  basis,  representing  around  one  sixth  of 
global output. Since then, the differential between these two economies has 
continued  to  widen  and,  according  to  the  latest  projections  by  the  IMF,6 
China’s participation in the global economy is expected to increase to over one 
fifth  of  total  output  by  2022,  nearly  a  tenfold  increase  since  1980.  China’s 
participation in global merchandise trade has followed a similar, even more 
dramatic, pattern, as its share of global imports and exports has climbed from 
around 1 percent in the early 1980s to over 11 percent currently. 
 However,  there  are  other  factors,  beyond  China’s  significance  in  the  global 
economy, that explain the rise of the renminbi as an international currency. In 
particular,  the  Chinese  authorities  have  been  implementing  a  number  of 
measures specifically aimed at this goal. 
 To promote the use of the renminbi as an investment currency, a first set of 
efforts included the creation and development of offshore markets in which 
foreign institutional investors were allowed, although on a selective basis and 
subject to limits, to perform banking operations as well as to trade and even 
issue financial securities denominated in renminbi. More recently, the removal 
of important roadblocks to renminbi internationalization has been observed, 
as a gradual relaxation of restrictions on foreign access to onshore markets has 
begun to take place. In this respect, it is worth to highlight, due to its particular 
relevance  for  central  banks,  measures  allowing  them  to  have  largely 
                                                           
6 International Monetary Fund (2017): World Economic Outlook Database, April. 
 4 
unimpeded  access  to  the  domestic  fixed-income  and  foreign  exchange 
markets, further aided by enhanced data transparency and a greater role of 
market  mechanisms  in  the  determination  of  interest  and  exchange  rates. 
Recent  measures  connecting  the  Stock  Exchange  of  Hong  Kong  with  its 
counterparts  in  the  mainland,  thereby  facilitating  foreign  access  to  onshore 
equity markets, are also worth mentioning. 
 After the accession by China to the World Trade Organization in 2001, strategic 
trade agreements with other emerging markets, particularly in Asia, have been 
enacted. In addition, a number of mechanisms facilitating the flows of outward 
direct  investment  and  either  direct  or  indirect  lending  from  China  have 
encouraged  the  wider  use  of  the  renminbi  for  the  measurement  and 
settlement  of  cross-border  flows  and,  through  this  channel,  as  a  reserve 
currency.7 The latter includes the so-called “Belt and Road Initiative”, the China 
Development  Bank,  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  China,  and  recently  created 
multilateral organizations such as the New Development Bank and the Asian 
Infrastructure  Investment  Bank,  in  combination  with  the  growing  global 
network of foreign exchange swap lines between the People’s Bank of China 
and central banks abroad. 
 Notwithstanding the remarkable advances of recent years, progress towards a 
deeper  and  more  extended  internationalization  of  the  renminbi  remains 
                                                           
7 Once a currency’s international use for transactional purposes has been established, incentives for trading 
partners to stabilize exchange rates against it lead them to accumulate reserves denominated in that currency, 
as well as to seek contingent liquidity provision from the part of its issuer, thus resulting in its use also as a 
means to store value. 
 5 
limited  and  with  important  geographical  differences  in  both  outcomes  and 
perspectives.8  
 On the one hand, China’s greater significance and influence in Asia compared 
to that at the global scale, certainly add to the renminbi’s other advantages in 
explaining the important role of this currency at the regional level. The latter 
is explained partly by the numerous official measures and initiatives purposely 
aiming  at  greater  economic  interaction  between  China  and  other  Asian 
countries.  However,  trade  is  undoubtedly  the  main  force  driving  the  wider 
cross-border use of the renminbi in the region.  Indeed, recent trade figures 
show that around one half of Chinese imports originate in Asia, a development 
that is in turn reflected in the renminbi’s dominant role as reference for the 
determination of the value of other currencies in the region, above and beyond 
those  of  the  dollar  or  the  euro,9  while  also  featuring  prominently  as  the 
currency  of  choice  for  payments  with  China.  Going  forward,  the  current 
prospects of continued growth of the Chinese economy, albeit at lower rates 
than in the past, in conjunction with likely deeper and more extensive linkages 
between  China  and  other  economies  in  the  region,  as  well  as  anticipated 
reforms in the former allowing a freer use of its currency externally, support 
the  expectation  of  a  further  strengthening  of  these  trends  over  the  next 
several years. The importance of trade in enhancing the international role of 
the renminbi is also illustrated by the fact that this currency has become the 
                                                           
8 See Eichengreen, B. and D. Lombardi (2017): “RMBI or RMBR? Is the Renminbi Destined to Become a Global 
or Regional Currency?”, Asian Economic Papers 16:1. 
9 See Subramanian, A. and M. Kessler (2013): “The Renminbi Bloc Is Here: Asia Down, Rest of the World to 
Go?”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper No. 12-19, August. 
 6 
dominant  reference  in  other  emerging  market  economies  outside  Asia  with 
strong trade ties with China. 
 On the other hand, it is undeniable that the renminbi’s role as a major reserve 
currency at the global level is still relatively modest. This is clearly illustrated 
by the fact that China’s global economic significance, as measured for instance 
by its 18 and 11 percent shares in total (PPP-adjusted) output and merchandise 
trade, respectively, is still far from being matched by the renminbi’s 1 percent 
participation in global international reserves. 
 To some extent, this may be explained by the significant network-increasing 
returns (that is, the increased likelihood of a currency being used as either a 
means of payment, unit of account or store of value deriving from its use for 
such purposes by other parties) backing the persistence of the US dollar as the 
main global currency and reserve asset. However, it must be kept in mind that 
given China’s trade and financial linkages worldwide, network effects could in 
fact rapidly move in favor of underpinning a much wider use of the renminbi 
globally. 
 Therefore,  the  main  challenge  the  Chinese  authorities  face  in  allowing  the 
renminbi  to  achieve  a  more  relevant  global  currency  status,  seems  to  be 
related to the implementation of additional efforts in a number of areas. In my 
view, action is particularly important in connection with the following: 
  7 
1. The further liberalization of the capital account. I fully agree that the best 
approach here is one emphasizing gradualism and prudence, as a movement 
in this direction must be accompanied by reforms in a number of other, key 
areas, to avoid adverse implications for macroeconomic and financial stability. 
Given  China’s  economic  size,  this  is  important  not  only  from  a  national  but 
from  a  worldwide  perspective.  My  impression  here  is  that  the  room  of 
maneuver for the Chinese authorities is not very wide. While a more ambitious 
pace for the internationalization of the renminbi requires a speedier and more 
comprehensive liberalization of the capital account, to be successful the latter 
in turn needs a stronger financial system, as well as further efforts to upgrade 
governance  of  the  corporate  sector  and  to  allow  more  flexibility  of  the 
exchange rate. Furthermore, capital account liberalization efforts have been 
affected  by  some  actions  implemented  recently  to  tackle  pressures  on  the 
renminbi, particularly those derived from tighter capital flow regulations and 
enforcement,  such  as  restrictions  on  the  purchase  of  foreign  currency  by 
individuals and more strict limits on outbound foreign direct investment flows. 
 2.  The  domestic  authorities  have  taken  important  steps  towards  the 
liberalization of the onshore renminbi’s exchange rate over the last few years. 
However, the overall framework still falls short of a fully supply and demand-
driven renminbi market, and failing to effectively fill this void may continue to 
raise concerns about the possibility of government control over the currency’s 
valuation,  particularly  vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar,  for  either  stabilization  or 
stimulative purposes. It is also important to consider that the transition to a 
more market-oriented foreign exchange regime may be difficult and subject to 
 8 
wide  swings.  Indeed,  the  challenges  deriving  from  a  complex  external 
environment  are  accentuated  by  domestic  developments  as  the  Chinese 
authorities  attempt  to  simultaneously  achieve  multiple  relevant  tasks, 
including a diminished role of the state in the allocation of resources in the 
economy, a shift in the growth strategy towards consumption and services and 
away from investment and manufacturing, as well as the tackling of a number 
of outstanding vulnerabilities. Against such a backdrop, global investors may 
remain wary of trades in the renminbi. 
 3.  While  significantly  developed  over  the  last  years,  the  domestic  financial 
markets still need further depth, transparency, and sophistication, while the 
insufficient degree of connectivity with the global financial system continues 
to be reflected in low levels of foreign participation. This is observed across 
virtually  all  relevant  markets.  China’s  stock  exchanges  figure  among  the 
world’s largest in terms of market capitalization, but foreign ownership at only 
slightly  above  1  percent  pales  in  comparison  to  those  in  other  emerging 
markets such as Brazil (30 percent) and Russia (23 percent). Likewise, China’s 
bond market, the world’s third largest, as attractive as it may be in terms of 
returns  and  risk, 
is  dominated  by  domestic  participants,  as  foreign 
participation remains low at around 2 percent.10 Of course, this is explained to 
a large extent by outstanding restrictions to foreign participation in domestic 
financial  markets  but,  in  light  of  their  current  features,  it  is  reasonable  to 
assume that demand factors may also be present. 
                                                           
10 See Zhang, Z. et al. (2017): “China’s Bond Market: Deeper, Broader, More Complex”, HSBC Global Research, 
March. 
 9 
4. As in other areas, important efforts towards greater transparency have been 
made by the Chinese authorities recently. In this respect, it is worth to note 
the progress made in monetary, financial and external statistics, as well as the 
decision  to  subscribe  to  the  IMF’s  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standard  and 
Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey, and to report for the first time the 
currency  composition  of  a  representative  portion  of  China’s  reserves  and 
international  banking  liabilities.11  However,  important  data  gaps  remain. 
According  to  the  IMF,  the  latter  are  inconsistent  with  China’s  systemic 
importance,  with  the  most  pressing  issues  relating  to  national  accounts, 
government  finance  statistics  and  bank/shadow  bank  linkages  and  foreign 
exchange  exposures.12  Indeed,  enhanced  transparency  of  official  statistics 
would help alleviate potential concerns about the state and prospects of the 
economy  and  domestic  financial  markets,  and  underpin  the  renminmbi’s 
international role. 
 5. Although it is true that official reserve managers enjoy special benefits and 
facilities  to  trade  in  renminbi  in  Chinese  domestic  financial  markets  in 
comparison  to  their  private  counterparts,  significant  operational  challenges 
remain. Among these, a complex legal framework, rigid and frequently non-
negotiable 
rules  mandated  by 
the  authorities, 
the  potential 
for 
misunderstandings  arising 
from 
language 
issues,  weak  channels  of 
communication  to  overcome  these  difficulties,  and  frequent  regulatory 
changes, are limiting factors. The latter may force official investors to rely on 
                                                           
11 See International Monetary Fund (2015): “Review of the Method of Valuation of the SDR”, IMF Policy Paper, 
November. 
12  See  International  Monetary  Fund  (2016):  “Article  IV  Consultation  with  the  People’s  Republic  of  China”, 
August. 
 10 
either  private  or  official  intermediaries  to  participate  in  onshore  trading 
activities,  thus  increasing  the  overall  costs  associated  to  holding  renminbi-
denominated  assets.  But  even  some  of  these 
institutions  find  the 
corresponding procedures challenging, and frequently use disclaimers  when 
providing advice on the interpretation of regulations, leaving responsibility for 
compliance to the corresponding central bank. 
 To  conclude,  I  only  want  to  stress  that  the  renminbi’s  footing  in  the 
international  monetary  system  should  continue  strengthening  as  a 
consequence  of  China’s  growing  economic  importance  at  the  global  scale, 
along  a  path  leading  to  its  further  use  as  a  reserve  currency  to  levels 
significantly beyond those observed at present. However, there are a couple 
of considerations that need to be kept in mind in order to be able to make a 
realistic assessment in this regard. First, it should be noted that such a process 
is inherently slow and lengthy, not necessarily linear and subject to important, 
and perhaps frequent, setbacks. Thus, whatever perspectives there may be, 
they  should  be  viewed  from  a  long-term  standpoint  and  paying  particular 
attention  to  the  overall  trend  as  separated  from  specific,  often  one-off, 
developments. Second,  and  closely  tied  to  the  previous  point,  the  speed  at 
which  this  process  proceeds  will  be  determined  by  the  commitment  and 
capacity of the authorities to implement the measures required to consolidate 
the renminbi’s role as an international currency commensurate with China’s 
importance in the world economy. 
 11 
