Jens Weidmann: Prospects for the economy
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Jahresempfang  der
Wirtschaft, Mainz, 7 February 2017.
 1 Welcome
Mr Friese
Dr Bennecker
Dr Günster
Ladies and gentlemen
Many thanks for your kind welcome. Seeing as we are well into the fifth season of the year, as
the Carnival period is known here in this part of Germany, and unmistakably so when I see the
festive decorations festooning this venue, one or two of you might be expecting a traditional, witty
Carnival speech, or at least be hoping, deep down, to hear something equally entertaining.
Well, I’ll have to disappoint you on that score, I’m afraid. Central bankers are widely regarded as
somewhat dreary speakers, especially so because of the dry topics they drone on about. They
ramble  on  about  monetary  policy 
financial  pro-cyclicality  and
macroprudential 
acronyms
like  PSPP,  TLTRO  or  SSM  –  terms  which,  for  the  uninitiated,  often  mingle  to  produce  an
indigestible alphabet soup.
transmission  channels, 
instruments.  Worse 
they 
love 
still, 
use 
to 
And  wasn’t  it  former  Bank  of  England  governor  Mervyn  King  who  once  posited  that  "few  are
braver than those who choose to listen to a central banker"? It’s all the more cheering, then, to
see that there are so many brave souls in and around Mainz ...
Perhaps that’s because central banks have been credited with a political role that extends far
beyond the narrow field of monetary policy. After all, in the midst of the crisis, central banks were
repeatedly described as the only institutions capable of taking action and had new tasks outside
the remit of monetary policy thrust upon them.
Or maybe it’s also because the current monetary policy stance is directly affecting you, ladies
and gentlemen, in one way or another. You will have felt the impact of the low-interest-rate policy
at close quarters, no matter whether you are an entrepreneur, a taxpayer, a property buyer, or a
saver  or  member  of  an  occupational  pension  scheme  whose  concerns  Dr  Bennecker  has
already outlined.
And  the  entrepreneurs  among  you,  especially,  will  naturally  also  be  wondering  which  way  the
economy will go in the foreseeable future and what the future holds for the single currency.
These points pretty much cover the range of topics my speech today will address. But unlike
Martin Luther, who you, Mr Friese, mentioned earlier on, I would like to stick to just three theses:
1.  For all the intense political uncertainty worldwide, the German economy is in good shape.
But these halcyon days give us no grounds for complacency. German is not leveraging all its
growth potential, and demographic developments hold major challenges in store.
2.  If we intend to preserve monetary union as a lasting union of stability, more joint liability is the
wrong path to take as long as political union is not on the cards. Instead, the principle of
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
independent national responsibility needs to be bolstered.
3.  It  is  incontrovertible  that  the  ultra-accommodative  monetary  policy  has  contributed  to  the
economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  and  in  Germany.  But  it  cannot  resolve  the  deeper-
seated  problems  weighing  on  Europe  and  needs  to  be  brought  to  an  end  as  soon  the
objective of price stability permits – even if that monetary policy “cold turkey” causes many a
finance minister to break out in a cold sweat or gives financial markets the shakes.
2 German economy in good shape
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  your  own  business  results  will  probably  have  told  you  that  Germany’s
economy is on a sound upward trajectory. It is chiefly being driven by brisk domestic consumer
demand on the back of the upbeat labour market situation and increasing incomes.
However, the German economy looks set to lose a little momentum in the short run, especially
as mounting energy prices are eating away at consumer purchasing power. So consumers will
have to pay more again at the pump and to keep warm. Still, that doesn’t change the fact that the
German economy will continue to post decent growth rates in the region of 1½% over the next
two to three years.
A more vibrant global economy should also boost export growth again, despite the fact that the
international environment is fraught with political uncertainty at the same time.
But  at  least  we  now  have  a  slightly  clearer  picture  of  how  the  UK  government  sees  Britain’s
future relationship with the European Union. That is, the UK will leave not only the EU but the
single  market  as  well.  Trade  with  the  EU,  so  the  thinking  goes,  will  then  be  governed  by  a
comprehensive free trade agreement.
That would put the UK further away from us, economically speaking, than Switzerland, say, or
Norway, which both, it is worth noting, have access to the EU single market. And that’s without
knowing for sure whether the UK and EU will even be capable of hammering out the broad thrust
of a free trade agreement within the space of two years.
Yet what already seems clear is that this move, this “hard Brexit", will mainly leave the UK worse
off  at  the  end  of  the  day.  But  that  is  not  to  say  that  Brexit  won’t  leave  the  German  economy
unscathed  –  the  UK  is,  after  all,  the  third  most  important  export  destination  for  the  German
economy.
Uncertainty is more intense still over the shape and possible repercussions of future economic
policy in the United States.
It was mainly the invigorating effects of the prospect of higher government spending and lower
taxes  which  won  plaudits  in  the  markets,  but  traders  have  so  far  turned  a  blind  eye  to  the
economic  damage  that  would  be  wrought  by  looming  trade  barriers  and  an  increasingly
interventionist economic policy.
And yet open markets and a competitive economic system are the very qualities that underpin
our prosperity. And the notion that as many people as possible should benefit as a result is the
core idea of the social market economy, which Ludwig Erhard so neatly encapsulated with the
phrase  “Prosperity  for  all!".  Instead,  we  are  seeing  mounting  scepticism  over  globalisation,  a
sentiment by no means confined to the United States. In Europe, too, the fear of globalisation is
on the rise and people are increasingly shunning open markets.
Public  concerns  like  these  need  to  be  taken  seriously.  But  it’s  safe  to  say  that  barriers  and
exclusion would be the  wrong  response.  That’s  because  open  markets  boost  prosperity  as  a
whole, but not necessarily for each of us all the time. If the social market economy is to live up to
its  promise  of  delivering  inclusive  prosperity,  we  will  need  to  prime  enterprises  and  their
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
employees to harness the opportunities presented by globalisation and technological progress.
Wherever social hardship arises, a target-driven and transparent tax and transfer system like the
one we have in Germany should step in and act as a cushion.
In any case, I find the protectionist rhetoric coming out of Washington very worrying, especially
as Germany is increasingly in the sights of the US.
Accusations that Germany is taking advantage of the United States and other countries with an
undervalued currency are more than absurd.
While there is a kernel of truth in the argument that the US dollar is strong, the United States has,
up until recently, enjoyed a very favourable competitive position for almost a decade. These ups
and downs in exchange rates, and thus also in terms of price competitiveness, are entirely within
the realm of normal fluctuations.
In  any  case,  the  thesis  that  foreign  currency  manipulation  is  to  blame  for  the  strength  of
the US dollar at the moment is definitely not backed up by the facts. I might also add that the
most  recent  increase  in  the  value  of  the  dollar  will  probably  be  a  home-grown  phenomenon,
having been triggered by the new administration’s policy announcements.
The  fact  that  Germany’s  economy  is  highly  competitive  certainly  isn’t  the  outcome  of
manipulative  policy,  either.  Its  competitiveness  does,  however,  have  something  to  do  with  the
external  value  of  the  euro,  which,  besides  other  factors,  is  being  depressed  by  the  ECB’s
monetary policy, which has not been undisputed in Germany.
It’s a fact of life that the single monetary policy is geared not to the above-average economic
situation in Germany, but to the weaker euro-area average.
The German economy’s price competitiveness at the moment is roughly 6½% higher than its
long-term average, as measured since 1975. But German enterprises are above all competitive
because they are excellently positioned in global markets and boast innovative products.
And it’s not just businesses like BASF, Boehringer Ingelheim or Schott we should be thinking
about here. Germany is also home to hidden champions, remember – small and medium-sized
enterprises which, outside the public eye, have risen to become global leaders in their respective
markets – many of which are based here in the state of Rhineland-Palatinate.
Now, you don’t need me to tell you that Germany doesn’t just export a great deal – we also export
far more than we import. This means that we have a very high current account surplus, which
has been held against us in the European and global arena on repeated occasions, not just of
late by the new US administration.
But what should we make of it?
Let’s begin by saying that a current account surplus indicates that a country is saving more than
it invests domestically. Of course, it does not make sense for a national economy to produce
more than it consumes and invests.
Because of the foreseeable demographic change, current account surpluses for Germany are,
however,  quite  appropriate  at  the  present  time,  as  this  is  how  Germans  provide  for  old  age,
amongst  other  things.  The  assets  held  abroad  will  later  be  depleted  as  more  and  more
employees retire and run down their savings.
This way, German investors harness the higher returns on offer in regions with faster-growing
economies. Non-residents – and that also includes the United States, incidentally – benefit from
this  German  funding  and  the  investment  and  jobs  it  creates  locally:  German  foreign  direct
investment  in  the  United  States  comes  to  around  €270  billion,  covering  more  than
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
4,700  US  businesses  with  more  than  800,000  employees.  If  I  may  use  a  piece  of  business
jargon, that looks to me like a win-win situation.
That said, a surplus of well above 8% of GDP, which is the level we are seeing today, cannot be
put down to demographics alone. And the low oil price, which has diminished the cost of imports,
explains only part of the high surplus.
It would nonetheless be wrong in my eyes to scale back this surplus by adopting economic policy
measures that deliberately erode the competitiveness of German enterprises or by embracing
debt-fuelled  government  spending,  as  some  have  been  calling  for.  With  capacity  utilisation
currently running at above-average levels, a government expenditure programme would not only
be pointless; it would also be of little benefit to other countries. The ripple effects would be too
small for that.
Instead, it would be a good idea to create an investment-friendly climate in order to encourage
greater private investment here in Germany, too, as elsewhere, as this would kill two birds with
one stone, by damping the current account surplus and improving long-term growth prospects.
Amidst the swirl of optimism about business activity, one thing must not be forgotten: Germany’s
long-term economic outlook isn’t all that rosy; Germany is currently underperforming. According
to  a  long-term  projection  by  the  OECD,  no  major  industrial  country  will  grow  as  slowly  as
Germany up until 2060.
One of the primary reasons is demographic change, which will hit Germany particularly hard.
Even  today,  every  year  200,000  more  people  are  retiring  than  young  people  entering  the  job
market.
Though the massive influx of refugees is currently shielding the labour market from the impacts
of  demographic  trends,  the  adverse  effects  of  demographic  change  will  even  amplify  in  the
future. The only way to make up for the age-related decline in the labour force is for more people
to take up employment and for us, with life expectancy growing, to work longer as well.
However,  even  in  terms  of  per  capita  growth,  most  OECD  countries  and  emerging  market
economies are outpacing Germany. It is now up to politicians to set the proper gears in motion in
economic, labour market and social policy in order to create higher, sustainable growth.
Alongside  demographic  change,  the  integration  of  refugees  into  the  labour  market  and  weak
trend growth, we face a raft of additional economic policy challenges. I am thinking, in particular,
of  digitalisation,  which  will  disrupt  entire  sectors  of  the  economy,  and  the  energy  U-turn,  the
specific design of which will determine whether energy remains affordable.
3 Strengthen national responsibility in monetary union
A further challenge is to find a long-term solution to overcome the euro-area crisis. It would, at
any rate, be illusory to believe that, just because the situation has calmed down and other topics
are currently at the centre of attention, the crisis has been banished for good. This brings me to
my second thesis.
The Maastricht Treaty was signed 25 years ago to the day. This treaty pretty much created the
regulatory framework of European monetary union.
Maastricht  was  founded  on  the  idea  of  creating  a  single  currency  for  Europe  but  allowing
member states to continue setting their own economic and fiscal policy independently.
However,  its  founding  fathers  probably  assumed  that  monetary  union  would  sooner  or  later
evolve  into  a  political  union.  Speaking  before  the  Bundestag  in  November  1991,  Chancellor
Helmut  Kohl  remarked  that  “the  idea  of  sustaining  economic  and  monetary  union  over  time
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
without political union is a fallacy” – incidentally, a view shared by the Bundesbank at the time.
The  expectation  that  the  euro  will  be  no  more  than  a  stepping  stone  towards  deeper  political
integration  has  not  yet  become  reality,  however.  18  years  have  passed  since  the  creation  of
monetary union, and there is still no sign of a political union.
I believe, however, that monetary union can also function without political union. But for this to
work, the security precautions envisaged by the founding fathers to protect the stability of the
single currency need to actually function: member states committed to keep their finances on a
sound footing and prohibited central banks from resorting to the printing presses to help out ailing
governments.  In  addition,  the  member  states  inserted  contractual  clauses  ruling  out  the
possibility of mutual bailouts.
A set of convergence criteria was created to ensure that only those countries whose economies
were ready could join monetary union. In other words, they were supposed to be economically
and fiscally healthy.
Most member states wanted to join the single currency area as quickly as possible and therefore
sought to comply with the catalogue of criteria – by hook or by crook. Once this objective had
been  achieved  –  in  some  cases  also  thanks  to  a  generous  interpretation  of  the  criteria  –
convergence efforts flagged again, however.
Historian Harold James compared this vividly to the aftermath of a wedding: “It was like what
happens to couples who, once married, abandon some of their romantic and utopian intentions in
day-to-day married life. At the most trivial level, men now leave unwashed socks lying around and
women drop towels on the floor. This spiral often continues to turn – culminating in divorce."
To stay within this metaphor, a serious marital crisis actually did occur a few years back. The
euro rescue packages and Eurosystem measures were the only way to ultimately prevent the
crisis from escalating.
These measures, however, did not make monetary union crisis-proof once and for all. On the
contrary:  by  introducing  elements  of  mutual  liability,  they  have  softened  the  principle  of
independent responsibility. The relationship between actions and liability for their consequences
has got out of kilter.
You already mentioned it, Mr Friese: actions and liability for their consequences go hand in hand.
For an entrepreneur, especially in a market economy, this goes without saying. Walter Eucken,
founder of the Freiburg school and a pioneer of the social market economy, even declared this to
be  a  constitutive  principle  of  our  economic  order  and  condensed  it  into  a  simple  formula:
“Whoever reaps the benefits must also bear the liability."
In terms of monetary union, this gives us two options. Either all member states give up decision-
making powers to the community – which in and of itself does not guarantee that decisions will
be made in a stability-oriented manner – or each country is responsible for the consequences of
its  own  decisions. And  if  you  ask  me,  only  one  of  those  options  is  realistic  –  at  least  for  the
foreseeable future.
The  will  to  cede  sovereignty  to  Brussels  is  currently  just  as  low  as  it  was  back  when  the
Maastricht  Treaty  was  signed.  The  way  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  being
treated shows that even powers that have already been granted to the European level are being
called into question time and again – especially where there are calls for more joint liability.
And this is why I say: if we want to preserve monetary union as a union of stability, we have to
strengthen the principle of independent national responsibility. We have to return to the original
ideas of the Maastricht Treaty and eliminate the flaws in this regulatory framework.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The first step in doing that must be to strengthen the binding force of the debt rules. Admittedly,
that was precisely the objective of the last reform of the Stability and Growth Pact. However, it
ended up creating considerable discretionary scope, mainly for the European Commission.
Torn in two directions in its dual role as a political institution and guardian of the treaties, the
Commission is frequently inclined to compromise at the expense of budgetary discipline.
In  the  area  of  fiscal  surveillance,  the  Commission  is  echoing  Marx.  Not  Karl  Marx,
but US comedian Groucho Marx, who is supposed to have said of himself that “These are my
principles. If you don’t like them ... I have others."
The binding force of the debt rules is ultimately weaker now than ever. France has breached the
deficit rules for the ninth time in succession – and always with the Commission’s blessing. Ditto
for  Spain.  Italy’s  mountain  of  debt  has  risen  by  one-third  since  the  financial  crisis,  and  the
promised debt reduction is nowhere to be seen.
A more rigorous interpretation of the rules could be achieved by giving responsibility for fiscal
surveillance to an independent authority instead of the Commission. At the very least, that would
clearly show where unbiased analysis ends and political concessions begin.
Past developments have made it abundantly clear, however, that political agreements alone are
not enough to ensure sound public finances. For, in the end, the decision on possible sanctions
rests with European finance ministers, which would ultimately mean, as German journalist Hans
Barbier put it succinctly 20 years ago, “sinners passing judgement on fellow sinners".
The founding fathers did not want to rely on this alone. This is why they adopted the no-bailout
principle: so that the financial markets could exert disciplinary force.
However,  this  hasn’t  worked  all  that  well  in  the  past,  either.  The  financial  markets  apparently
didn’t expect the no-bailout principle to be etched in stone, as seems to have been evidenced, at
least, by the fact that, for a long time, the interest rates paid by poor-quality sovereigns were
hardly above those of good-quality sovereigns – and, in the end, investors’ assessments were
not entirely off the mark.
For investors to be able to take responsible decisions and to demand different interest rates for
different types of risks, they have to be told in a more credible manner in future that they could
lose their money if they buy bonds issued by sovereigns whose fiscal policies are not sound.
And  this  is  why,  for  quite  a  long  time  already,  the  Bundesbank  has  been  proposing  that  an
automatic  extension  of  the  maturity  of  government  bonds  be  triggered  whenever  a  sovereign
applies  for  ESM  assistance. As  things  now  stand,  a  large  share  of  the  assistance  loans  are
being used to pay off the original creditors. This means that the original creditors, such as banks,
are  then  off  the  hook. Automatically  extending  maturities,  however,  would  leave  them  on  the
hook, and they could be held liable in the event of a debt restructuring later on.
Admittedly, it has to be assured that the default of a sovereign does not immediately rattle the
entire euro-area financial system. Doing this means, in particular, severing the nexus between
banks  and  sovereigns.  It  is  precisely  in  times  of  crisis  that  banks  have  a  huge  appetite  for
government bonds, preferably domestic ones. And we have to curb this appetite.
It would already help if banks needed to hold capital against government bonds the same way
they  do  against  loans  to  the  private  sector,  ie  if  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  of
government bonds were discontinued. If it wasn’t already clear beforehand, the financial crisis
has told us this: government bonds are not a risk-free investment.
There’s no question about it: establishing a stable monetary union is no simple task. But I am
convinced  that  a  monetary  union  in  which  the  principle  of  individual  national  responsibility  is
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
consistently implemented can enjoy enduring stability – provided the political will for it exists.
I  don’t  buy  the  argument  that  the  only  option  open  to  a  Europe  faced  with  uncertainty  in  the
foreign policy sphere is to close ranks by increasing mutual liability. A strong and united Europe
is a goal worth striving for. However, this objective most certainly cannot be achieved if what is
agreed is treated with contempt and what was once a union of stability evolves into a transfer
union.
There would be reason to fear that central banks would be forced to pick up the pieces over and
over again, even if that came at the cost of price stability.
4 Bring a timely end to ultra-accommodative monetary policy
And that brings me to monetary policy and my third thesis: ultra-accommodative monetary policy
cannot resolve the deeper-seated problems weighing on Europe and needs to be stopped as
soon  the  objective  of  price  stability  permits  –  even  if  the  higher  interest  rates  cause  the
sustainability of public finances in individual countries to go downhill or trigger price volatility in
financial markets.
The  aim  of  monetary  policy  is  well  known:  to  maintain  price  stability.  The  Maastricht  Treaty
mandates this as the Eurosystem’s primary objective. However, the Treaty is silent on the issue
of what exactly is meant by price stability.
That’s why the ECB Governing Council  issued its own definition: to keep the inflation rate in the
euro area at a level below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. While this target rate may
seem  somewhat  arbitrary  to  you,  there  are  thoroughly  reasonable  grounds  for  promoting
moderate inflation and avoiding zero inflation.
Hans-Werner Sinn once colourfully described it in the following words: "Inflation is an economic
lubricant.  Too  much  oil  in  the  engine  soots  up  the  spark  plugs;  not  enough  causes  piston
seizure." Excessively high inflation comes at a high economic – not to mention social – cost,
which is why the oil should be used sparingly. On the flip side, however, the oil cannot be allowed
to  run  out.  Targeting  zero  inflation  is  not  a  viable  option,  however  tempting  it  may  sound  to
consumers.
That’s because an inflation rate of zero would mean that individual industries or entire economies
that need to claw back a loss of competitiveness would face the daunting prospect of having to
push through nominal, rather than merely real, wage cuts. That’s a tall order, though, because
people tend to think more in nominal terms than in real dimensions.
But  there’s  something  else  besides  that:  if  monetary  policymakers  strive  for  slightly  positive
inflation rates, the overall interest rate level will be somewhat higher, creating a certain safety
margin to the lower bound on interest rates. As we now know, this bound is not exactly at zero,
nor is it significantly below that level. If the inflation target is too low, a central bank’s scope for
stimulating the economy by means of its interest rate policy may be exhausted too quickly.
Headlines reading “Inflation is back” have spiked in recent weeks, and inflation rates really are
soaring once again – particularly in Germany. In January 2017, goods and services in Germany
were 1.9% more expensive than one year earlier. In the euro area as a whole, too, the rate of
inflation jumped to 1.8%.
However, this is primarily due to higher oil prices and the fact that prices bottomed out one year
ago. The effect of this rise will wash out of the inflation rate over the course of the year, provided
oil prices do not continue to climb and there are no second-round effects.
Leaving  the  oil  price  effect  to  one  side  for  a  moment,  domestic  price  pressures  are  still
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
comparatively low right now. Core inflation, which excludes energy and unprocessed food, last
stood at around 1%.
However,  the  Eurosystem’s  projections  suggest  that  domestic  price  pressures  –  boosted  by
monetary policy – will also pick up gradually, pushing the inflation rate into the target range of
below, but close to, 2%, on a lasting basis in 2019.
In my view, recent price developments clearly show that deflation – that is to say, a downward
spiral of falling wages and prices, which was conjured up by some in the past and used to justify
the purchase of government bonds – is now a mere blip on the distant horizon. Even prior to this,
I viewed the risk of a downward price-wage spiral as rather remote.
Against this backdrop, an expansionary monetary policy stance is appropriate for now. That said,
one can certainly wrangle over whether we should be keeping the monetary policy gas pedal to
the floor.
The recent rise in inflation caused the real interest rate, ie the price-adjusted interest rate level, to
further contract, which has made the monetary policy stance even more expansionary. What’s
more,  the  only  means  of  pursuing  such  a  highly  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  is  by
implementing non-standard measures, most notably government bond purchases.
However, the cost-benefit calculation of non-standard measures, in particular, is quite different
from that of our standard monetary policy instruments. This is why I have always cast a critical
eye  on  government  bond  purchases  and  said  that,  to  my  mind,  such  large-scale  purchases
serve purely as an instrument of last resort to be used, for instance, to avert deflation.
Quite apart from the fact that I neither see nor saw the risk of such a downward spiral arising, the
major drawback of such purchases is that they blur the boundaries between monetary and fiscal
policy.
The extensive purchases have made the euro area’s central banks the largest creditors of its
member states. This has thrust monetary policymakers deep into the realm of fiscal policy – in
my view, too deep.
Because, in the end, it is the Eurosystem that decides how much interest euro-area countries
pay on large swaths of general government debt. And this interest rate is broadly the same for all
countries,  irrespective  of  their  credit  rating.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  also  ultimately
neutralises the second stability anchor for public finances. This is because a large part of general
government debt is no longer subject to the disciplining effect of the capital markets.
The Eurosystem’s low-interest-rate policy also runs the risk of finance ministers being taken in
by an illusion of sustainability. They see the debt burden as being lighter than it would be in a
“normal” interest rate environment. Compared with the interest rate level back in 2007, euro-area
countries  have  altogether  saved  almost  €1,000  billion  in  interest  from  that  time  on,  which  is
virtually on a par with Spain’s annual GDP.
Even in this setting, some countries lack either the ability or the inclination to comply with the
deficit ceilings set out under the Maastricht framework. Especially the large euro-area countries
such as France, Italy and Spain, which will only just hit the 3% ceiling, if at all, have channelled all
of the interest they’ve saved into higher general government expenditure rather than, for example,
paying off debt.
That’s  why  I’ve  been  saying  for  some  time  now  that  this  could  ultimately  lead  to
the ECB Governing Council being subjected to political pressure to postpone any normalisation
of monetary policy out of concern for public finances. And one thing should be clear to us: the
longer we stay in ultra-accommodative monetary policy mode, the more its positive effects will
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
diminish and the more visible its undesired side-effects will become.
And those don’t just include the risk of unsound public finances – low interest rates also pose a
risk to financial stability. The crisis made it crystal clear that bouts of financial market turbulence
can  also  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  price  stability.  That’s  why  it  would  be  wrong  of  us  to
disregard such risks.
Or, to put it another way, if monetary policymakers only have non-standard instruments in their
arsenal, they can also make do with waiting a little longer for inflation to return to a path that is
consistent with the definition of price stability.
After all, the ECB Governing Council stipulated quite intentionally its inflation target of below, but
close to, 2% is its medium-term objective that need not be achieved at all times, whatever the
cost. Particularly in the aftermath of a severe crisis, there’s a good case for seeing patience as a
virtue.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like to bring my speech to a close by saying that you have truly been brave souls for
staying with me this far.
Given the colourful range of professions gathered here at this reception, the occasionally gloomy
topics covered by my speech and, above all, the festive Carnival-themed decorations here at this
venue, I think I will round things off with an entertaining anecdote after all.
A doctor, an architect and an economist meet and start arguing over who out of the three has the
most honourable profession.
Says  the  doctor,  "It’s  obvious.  God  used Adam’s  rib  to  create  Eve  –  he  must  have  been  a
surgeon."
Says the architect, "Well, before Adam and Eve, order had to be brought out of chaos to create
the universe. Who other than an architect would have been capable of doing such a thing?"
Says the economist, "That’s all well and good, but who do you think created all that chaos?"  
I do hope that my speech has helped to bring a little order to the chaos, and I thank you for being
such an attentive audience.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
