Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy
Introductory statement by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway),
before  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  and  Economic Affairs  of  the  Storting  (Norwegian
parliament), Oslo, 15 May 2017.
Accompanying slides
 Thank you for the opportunity to report on the conduct of monetary policy. My introduction here
today is based on Norges Bank’s Annual Report for 2016 and our monetary policy assessments
up to the monetary policy meeting earlier this month.
Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards keeping inflation low and stable. The operational
target  is  consumer  price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  percent  over  time.  Monetary  policy  is  at  the
same  time  flexible  in  that  our  interest  rate  setting  also  takes  developments  in  output  and
employment into consideration.
The  key  policy  rate  was  lowered  to  0.5  percent  in  March  2016  and  has  since  been  kept
unchanged.  The  key  policy  rate  is  low  because  interest  rates  abroad  are  low,  while  capacity
utilisation in the Norwegian economy is below a normal level and the forces driving inflation are
moderate. Low growth and the risk of deflation in the global economy have brought down interest
rates among Norway’s trading partners to a very low level.
Chart: Global and trading partner GDP
Growth in the global economy has gradually slowed in recent years and was in 2016 at its lowest
since the financial crisis. The slowdown reflects more moderate growth in China and stagnation
in  some  other  important  emerging  economies.  Among  Norway’s  trading  partners,  which  are
dominated by advanced European economies and the US, growth has picked up from the very
low post-crisis levels. Unemployment has decreased considerably in a number of countries. In
the April issue of the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) semi-annual report, a moderate pickup
in global growth is projected for the years ahead.
At the same time, there is considerable uncertainty about international developments. Signals of
rising protectionism and global political unrest may reduce economic growth.
Inflation among Norway’s trading partners is still low, but has recently edged up, partly as a result
of higher energy prices. Inflation can be expected to gain further momentum ahead as activity in
trading partner economies picks up.
While  inflation  is  rising  and  growth  prospects  are  improving,  global  interest  rates  may  have
passed their lowest point. Expected money market rates indicate that short-term interest rates
among trading partners will rise in the years ahead. However, interest rates will probably remain
low, compared with pre-crisis levels, for an extended period of time.
Chart: US, euro area and Swedish interest rates
Short-term  interest  rates  have  been  on  the  rise  in  the  US  for  some  time,  after  the  Federal
Reserve began to raise the policy rate towards the end of 2015. In the euro area, the policy rate
has  been  negative  since  2014,  with  the  latest  reduction  made  by  the  European  Central  Bank
(ECB) in March 2016. Market participants expect the first policy rate rise in the euro area to occur
in the course of next year. The ECB is purchasing bonds in the market to stimulate activity and
boost  inflation,  but  has  now  begun  to  reduce  the  pace  of  its  purchases.  The  policy  rate  in
Sweden  is  also  negative,  with  the  latest  reduction  made  in  February  2016.  The  Swedish
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Riksbank’s forecast indicates that the first policy rate increase will occur next year.
Chart: Oil prices
Oil prices gradually rose through 2016 and have in recent months hovered around USD 50 per
barrel. Futures prices indicate that oil prices will remain close to today’s level in the years ahead.
Oil  prices  have  almost  doubled  since  reaching  their  lowest  level  in  early  2016,  but  are
nonetheless less than half the level recorded before the steep fall in oil prices in summer 2014.
Petroleum investment has declined markedly compared with the 2013 level. Lower oil industry
demand has affected the wider economy. Last year, growth in mainland GDP was at its lowest
since the financial crisis.
Chart: Unemployment
Unemployment increased through 2015 and to some extent in 2016, particularly in southern and
western Norway. So far this year, the labour market has improved and unemployment has fallen.
Monetary policy supports the necessary restructuring of the Norwegian economy. The key policy
rate is low and the krone depreciated in pace with the fall in oil prices. Combined with moderate
wage settlements, the krone depreciation has contributed to a marked decline in relative labour
costs, strengthening the position of Norwegian firms exposed to international competition.
Chart: Relative labour costs
Improved cost-competitiveness is an important factor in enabling new exports to emerge as the
production of oil and gas dwindles. Tourism in Norway has risen markedly in recent years, and
exports  of  traditional  manufactured  finished  products  have  shown  an  appreciable  increase.
However,  the  increase  is  not  sufficient  to  compensate  for  a  decrease  in  exports  from  other
sectors of the mainland economy. Total mainland exports were lower last year than in 2014. The
most important reason for this is the marked decrease in oil service industry exports in the wake
of the fall in oil prices. But even excluding this part of the export industry, growth in mainland
exports since 2014 has been lower than growth in trading partner imports.
Chart: Mainland exports
Weak  export  growth  partly  reflects  supply-side  constraints  in  some  sectors.  Production
stoppages  at  several  large  companies  led  to  a  decrease  in  industrial  commodity  exports  last
year, while salmon lice infestations contributed to a decline in seafood exports. Other service
sector  segments  in  addition  to  the  oil  service  industry  also  appear  to  have  been  adversely
affected by the downturn in the global petroleum industry.
A weaker krone is also an advantage for Norwegian firms competing in the domestic market.
Competitiveness  in  the  oil  service  industry  has  improved  considerably,  particularly  after  the
substantial cost-cutting measures introduced by companies in this industry in recent years. We
have recently seen that a larger share of contracts on the Norwegian continental shelf is being
awarded to Norwegian companies. 
Fiscal policy has had a significant impact as a countercyclical tool. Since 2013, the increase in
oil revenue spending has roughly matched the fall in oil investment.
Chart: Investment
Low interest rates and high public demand have resulted in robust growth in the public sector
and the construction industry.
With high house price inflation, housing investment has increased substantially. Investment in
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
housing is now higher than investment in oil activity.
Chart: Growth in mainland GDP
The  economy  is  now  turning  the  corner.  Contacts  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  have
reported gradually rising growth. The upturn seems to be broadly based across industries and
regions.
There are clear signs that unemployment is falling both in oil-dependent regions and in the rest of
the country. At the same time, employment growth has been modest, and some of the decline in
unemployment is the result of labour market withdrawal. Looking ahead, there are prospects that
employment will increase as growth in the mainland economy picks up, partly driven by mainland
corporate investment, which seems to be picking up. Oil investment is also expected to show a
moderate upswing as from next year. Export growth is also likely to pick up, supported by growth
among Norway’s trading partners.
At the same time, there is reason to expect less fiscal stimulus ahead. The Government has
adjusted the fiscal rule for oil revenue spending. Oil revenue spending over time is required to
correspond to the expected real return on the Government Pension Fund Global, which has been
revised down from four to three percent. In our analyses published in March this year, we have
assumed  that  oil  revenue  spending  as  a  share  of  the  economy  will  remain  approximately
unchanged  in  the  years  ahead.  This  will  entail  lower  growth  in  public  demand  than  in  recent
years.
At the same time, monetary policy continues to be expansionary. According to Norges Bank’s
March 2017 forecast, the key policy rate will remain close to today’s level in the years ahead,
followed by a gradual rise from 2019.
Chart: Key policy rate and inflation ahead
In 2016, the pace of consumer price inflation was at its highest for many years, driven to a great
extent by the considerable depreciation of the krone up to the beginning of last year. Inflation has
slowed since last summer and our projections in the March Monetary Policy Report indicate that
inflation will slow further in the years ahead. At the same time, inflation expectations seem to be
firmly anchored. The upturn in the real economy appears to have taken hold and unemployment
has declined. With a key policy rate close to today’s level, there are prospects that inflation will
pick up again further ahead.
The Ministry of Finance is currently assessing the need to modernise the regulation on monetary
policy. After more than fifteen years, this is a natural step. Based on our experience over this
period, it is Norges Bank’s assessment that the monetary policy framework has worked well.
Inflation has been predominantly low and stable since inflation targeting was introduced in 2001.
Average annual consumer price inflation has been close to, albeit somewhat below, 2.5 percent.
At the same time, employment has consistently been more stable since 2001 than in previous
periods,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  exposed  to  substantial
shocks.
Chart: Inflation
The  inflation  target  has  anchored  inflation  expectations.  At  the  same  time,  there  has  been
sufficient room for flexibility and the exercise of judgement to enable monetary policy to dampen
the impact on output and employment when the economy has been exposed to shocks.
Our experience has shown us the crucial importance of flexibility in inflation targeting to enable
us  to  make  the  appropriate  trade-offs  in  response  to  these  shocks.  The  time  horizon  for
achieving the target must be sufficiently long, and the balance of risks, including risks related to
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial stability, must be taken into account. We have also experienced the important role the
exchange  rate  has  played  as  shock  absorber,  particularly  during  the  financial  crisis  and  in
periods of falling oil prices. At the same time, the interest rate level abroad places limitations on
the room for manoeuvre in monetary policy in a small open economy such as Norway.
Monetary policy’s main task is to provide the economy with a nominal anchor. As long as inflation
is firmly anchored, monetary policy can also address other concerns. We can seek to counteract
the  build-up  of  financial  imbalances  by  keeping  the  interest  rate  a  little  higher  than  would
otherwise be the case. But Norges Bank cannot take the main responsibility for developments in
house  prices  and  debt.  Nor  can  monetary  policy  influence  the  economy’s  long-term  growth
capacity.
The  past  couple  of  years  have  been  demanding  for  the  Norwegian  economy.  Growth  is  now
picking up, but the pace of growth is not expected to rise to the levels prevailing before the fall in
oil prices. The Norwegian economy is undergoing restructuring. Monetary policy can facilitate this
process, but the necessary adjustments must come from the business sector.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
