Claudia Buch: Evaluating financial sector reforms - a joint task for
academia and policymakers
Statement by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, for the panel
discussion  "Improving  Financial  Resilience";  at  the  T20  Summit  "Global  Solutions",  Berlin,  30
May 2017.
 Since  the global financial crisis, major reforms have been launched which  aim to enhance the
stability of the financial system, making future systemic crises less likely and reducing collateral
damage  in  the  real  economy.  Evaluating  the  effects  of  these  reforms  needs  to  be  part  of  a
structured  process  that  answers  three  questions:  Did  the  reform  cause  an  outcome?  Have
reforms had similar effects across markets and jurisdictions? Has the reform achieved its overall
objective? Economic research has advanced significantly over the past decades and provides a
rich  infrastructure  that  can  be  used  to  answer  these  questions.    Based  on  transparency,
international coordination and independent assessments, academia and policymakers can join
forces to conduct good policy evaluations.
 
I. The long shadows of financial crises
Ten  years  after  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  its  legacies  still  weigh  heavily  on  the
financial sector and the real economy. The crisis emerged from the core of the global financial
system, but it has had significant economic and social costs globally. Output losses occurred,
wealth decreased, unemployment went up – with all its social consequences – and public debt
increased (Figure 1).
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) estimates that the cumulative output loss since the global
financial crisis is in the order of 25 % of one year’s world GDP (FSB 2016). Taking a longer-term
perspective for the years 1970–2011 shows that financial crises were followed by output losses
relative to GDP of 26 % for emerging economies and 33 % for advanced economies (Laeven and
Valencia 2012). While the exact magnitude of the decline depends on country characteristics and
1
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  way  the  crisis  is  measured,   these  numbers  confirm  that  costs  of  financial  crises  are
immense and long-lasting.
1
Since the global financial crisis, major reforms have thus been launched that aim to enhance the
resilience of the financial system, making future systemic crises less likely and reducing damage
done to the real economy. Financial market participants should only take risks if they are able to
bear the potential losses without taking recourse to public funds.
Regulations have been amended to strengthen the private sector’s capacity to buffer shocks, to
reduce implicit public subsidies for the financial sector, and to promote strong, sustainable, and
inclusive  growth.  G20  leaders  have  identified  four  main  reform  areas:  making  banks  more
resilient,  ending  too-big-to-fail,  transforming  shadow  banking  into  market  based  finance,  and
making derivative markets safer.
Many financial sector reforms have entered uncharted territory and their impact still needs to be
assessed. Because the implementation of many core reforms is well underway (FSB 2016), an
initial analysis is now becoming possible. The FSB thus developed a Framework for the Post-
Implementation  Evaluation  of  the  Effects  of  the  G20  Financial  Regulatory  Reforms.  At  their
meeting in Baden-Baden, Germany, in March 2017, the G20 reaffirmed their commitment to a
structured evaluation of these reforms and the FSB published the draft framework for a public
consultation  (FSB  2017).  The  framework  will  be  submitted  to  the  G20  Leaders’  Summit  in
Hamburg for endorsement and will subsequently be published.
 
II. Embedding evaluation in a structured policy process
Policy evaluation needs to be part of a structured policy process, which involves four steps:
Step 1: Specify the objectives of reforms
The objectives of reforms need to be defined as a benchmark against which progress can be
measured. The paramount goal of financial sector reforms has been to realign private incentives,
whereby private actors are to bear the costs of financial distress in the same way they might
reap the economic benefits. At least two dimensions must be considered. According to a narrow
view, goals of specific reform areas can be defined, such as the ability of individual banks to
absorb shocks arising from financial and economic stress or to improve risk management and
governance.  From  a  broader  perspective  that  looks  at  financial  stability,  the  objectives  might
target  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  orderly  functioning  of  markets,  the
cost/availability of financing, and economic growth.
Step 2: Define intermediate targets
It is only possible to ascertain whether reforms are effective over a longer period of time. In the
interim, one has to rely on a range of intermediate variables for monitoring. For more narrowly
defined policy objectives, this includes measures of risk-based capital, liquidity and leverage as
well  as  evidence  of  improved  bank  governance,  risk  management,  or  reporting  practices.  For
broader objectives, one can use standard indicators of financial system resilience, the cost/level
of financing, or market liquidity.
Step 3: Calibration of instruments and ex ante impact assessment
Once the policy objectives and intermediate targets have been established, instruments need to
be calibrated accordingly. This requires an ex ante impact assessment.
Step 4: Ex post impact assessment
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a final step, once instruments have been applied and the effects have been observed over a
sufficiently long period of time, the impact of reforms can be assessed ex post.
Currently, such a framework for the evaluation of post-crisis financial sector reforms is lacking at
the global level. This is the gap that the FSB framework is about to close. It is about answering
the question of whether the reforms have achieved their intended outcomes, whether they work
together as intended, and whether they have had material unintended consequences. Such side
effects may have to be addressed, but without compromising on the objectives of the reforms or
by  reducing  resilience.  The  framework  provides  a  common  understanding  of  the  elements
required  for a “good” policy evaluation, and it will provide a basis for an informed and evidence-
based discussion on regulatory policies.
Policy  evaluation  need  not  be  designed  from  the  ground  up.  In  many  policy  areas,  structured
evaluations  are  routinely  applied.  Labor  market  policies  and  educational  programs  are  often
implemented  following  a  testing  phase,  and  evaluations  are  commonly  applied  in  the  area  of
development policies.  Like clinical drug trials in medicine, policy evaluation can help to analyze
whether a policy, or “treatment", is effective, whether it works on the causes of the “disease” or
whether it merely relieves its symptoms. It can also help to  identify any potential side effects.
“How do regulations affect the stability of financial institutions?” is similar to asking “How does
this drug affect the health of the patient?".
2
 
III. Addressing challenges of policy evaluation
Policy evaluation is challenging, as it requires dealing with attribution, heterogeneity, and general
equilibrium  effects.  Embedding  evaluation  into  a  structured  policy  process  makes  these
challenges  explicit  and  makes  it  possible  to  address  them.  Transparency,  international
cooperation, and independent assessments are key elements of such a process.
a) Did the reform cause an outcome (attribution)?
Disentangling  the  costs  and  benefits  of  regulation  is  the  key  challenge  of  any  evaluation.
Financial reforms generate direct compliance costs for market participants, such as the costs of
reporting requirements, and these costs tend to be recognized immediately. The benefits of a
more stable and resilient financial system, by contrast, can be reaped only over the longer term
and are more difficult to quantify.
The  direct  compliance  costs  need  to  be  distinguished  from  costs  of  crises  that  are  borne  by
market participants. The bailout of banks during the crisis shifted private costs to taxpayers and
raised  levels  of  public  debt  worldwide.  Many  reforms  thus  seek  to  realign  incentives  by
withdrawing implicit public guarantees. As a result, risk-taking on the part of banks may decline,
allocation of credit may change, and costs of debt may increase because creditors cannot rely
on bailouts and thus demand higher risk premia. Profits in the financial sector may decline as a
consequence of reforms.
Taken  together,  costs  are  shifted  from  the  public  sector  to  the  (private)  financial  sector. An
example from environmental policy may serve to illustrate the point. A Pigovian tax on chemical
producers that pollute a river internalises the externalities of polluting the river by aligning private
and social costs, thereby realigning the incentives to pollute. The direct result of this policy is
lower production of chemicals, as pollution of the river is now part of the private sector’s costs,
and  lower  sectoral  profits.  However,  these  are  not  the  costs  of  the  reform  but  the  intended
consequence.  
Practical  implementation  of  reform  assessments  needs  to  address  the  issue  of  a  missing
counterfactual.  How  should  the  benefits  of  the  reforms  that  have  been  implemented  be
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
measured ex post? Is it possible to measure the benefits of reforms if no crises have occurred?
Wouldn’t  the  lack  of  a  counterfactual  render  an  assessment  of  the  benefits  of  reforms
impossible? These questions are not new, and they are in fact similar to cost-benefit analysis in
other  policy  areas.  It  is  in  the  very  nature  of  counterfactuals  that  they  cannot  be  observed.  If
monetary policy keeps the inflation rate at or below a target of, say, 2 %, how does one quantify
the macroeconomic benefits of having avoided an acceleration of inflation? If educational policies
increase  school  enrolment  rates,  how  does  one  quantify  the  benefits  of  reduced  youth
unemployment and perhaps even reduced youth crime rates?
The need to quantify benefits of (economic) policies without knowing the counterfactual is not
unique to financial sector reforms. There are two – complementary – approaches of dealing with
them:
First,  assessing  the  benefits  of  reforms  can  be  done  without  directly  measuring  the  broad
objectives  of  reforms  in  terms  of  enhanced  stability  of  (global)  financial  markets  or  a  lower
probability of financial crises. Indeed, the benefits of reforms can be assessed by looking at the
channels  through  which  excessive  risk-taking  in  the  financial  sector  materializes  and  through
which  risks  to  financial  stability  can  build  up.  The  focus  can  be  on  indicators  that  are  closely
related to factors contributing to financial sector stress. In the same vein, indicators might include
the soundness of the financial sector and the contribution of the financial sector to real economic
activity.
This then leads to the second question, namely the question of establishing a causal impact of
reforms  on  these  indicators  and  the  construction  of  counterfactuals:  How  would  the  financial
system have developed without the reforms having been implemented?
Constructing macroeconomic counterfactuals is difficult and not desirable. We do not wish to
see a financial crisis in a country that has not undertaken financial sector reforms just so we can
improve  our  understanding  of  the  benefits  of  reforms  in  a  country  that  has  undertaken  such
reforms.  So,  while  the  “real”  counterfactual  is  neither  possible  nor  desirable,  there  are
nevertheless many ways to construct synthetic counterfactuals that can serve a similar purpose
and many ways to use econometric methods that make it possible to establish causality. There
are many possibilities of dealing with the challenge of causal identification, even in the area of
macroeconomics  (Fuchs-Schündeln  and  Hassan  2015).  But  empirical  methods  alone  are  not
enough; good conceptual and theoretical frameworks are also needed to decide what to look for
in the data.        
b) Have reforms had similar effects across markets and jurisdictions (heterogeneity)?
Reform effects differ across countries, banks, and sectors of the financial services industry. This
heterogeneity  facilitates  rather  than  prevents  reform  evaluation.  Essentially,  heterogeneity  and
institutional  knowledge  are  important  for  good  (causal)  impact  assessments.  Comparing
countries  that  enacted  different  types  of  reforms  at  different  points  in  time,  comparing
developments  before  and  after  reforms  have  been  initiated,  comparing  banks  for  which  new
regulations  are  more  or  less  binding  can  help  to  establish  causal  effects.  Understanding
differential  effects  across  markets  or  jurisdictions  delivers  valuable  lessons  for  policy
development that would be missed by looking only at averages.
Take, for example, the increase in capital requirements for banks after the crisis. Higher capital
requirements increase the resilience of banks with regard to shocks and provide the basis for
sustainable lending to the real economy. Trends in post-crisis bank lending have differed across
countries and individual banks. A decline in lending can, for instance, be due to a decline in credit
demand, more prudent lending behavior of banks in response to higher risks, or it can result from
a  decline  in  banks’  credit  supply.  Such  a  decline  in  credit  supply,  in  turn,  can  be  caused  by
structural  changes  in  the  banking  sector  and  the  reallocation  of  market  shares  to  non-bank
lenders,  it  can  be  due  to  a  re-orientation  of  banks’  internal  strategies,  or  it  can  be  the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
consequence of tighter regulations. Experience shows that all of these factors play a role and
that their relative importance differs.
What  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  observing  trends  in  bank  lending  over  time?  Is  direct
inference possible with regard to the intended and unintended consequences of reforms? Prima
facie, aggregate time trends and averages provide only limited answers to these questions. In the
extreme,  basing  policy  decisions  on  such  statistics  alone  can  aggravate  the  situation.  For
example, regulations may be relaxed because of their alleged impact on credit supply, even if
they did not play a major role in the contraction of credit in the first place. Banks may then be
encouraged to lend excessively in risky markets – with potentially negative effects for financial
stability.
c) Has the reform achieved its overall objective (general equilibrium)?
In  order  to  assess  the  effects  of  reforms,  it  is  ultimately  necessary  to  conduct  a  general
equilibrium  analysis.  Which  markets  are  affected,  what  are  the  interactions  between  different
reforms, how does the allocation of risk and credit change in an economy? These are questions
which  cannot  be  answered  directly  by  microeconomic  models  that  carefully  identify  causal
effects.
At the same time, general equilibrium analysis is even more challenging than partial equilibrium
modelling, in particular in situations in which markets dynamically adjust and many shocks hit the
system simultaneously. Most of the time, financial markets are not “in equilibrium” but in a state
of transition.
Rather  than  promising  to  deliver  a  comprehensive  view  of  all  market  adjustments,  general
equilibrium  analysis  serves  the  purpose  of  identifying  the  relevant  shocks,  transmission
channels,  and  market  interactions.  Rather  than  broadening  the  perspective  even  further,  a
general equilibrium perspective should help to focus on the relevant issues under consideration. 
 
IV. A joint task for academics and policymakers
Academics and policymakers can join forces to conduct good policy evaluations. Post crisis, the
academic profession and economists in particular have been criticized for their inability to predict
crises, for using the wrong models, and for applying the wrong concepts.  Large parts of this
criticism ignore the significant progress that has been made with regard to economic analysis in
performing  meaningful  causal  evaluations,  modeling  heterogeneity,  and  exploiting
microeconomic  data.  Enhancing  the  use  of  existing  data,  methodologies,  and  the  skilled
personnel that are employed both inside and outside policy institutions should thus be a priority.
3
Both  academics  and  policymakers  would  benefit  from  engaging  in  better  policy  evaluations.
Academia could engage in developing methodologies and in studying designs that contribute to
societal welfare without compromising on academic rigor. Policymakers could draw on the rich
expertise that is available and make better use of existing infrastructures. Moreover, some of the
mechanisms  that  have  been  developed  in  academia  to  mitigate  misaligned  incentives  and
ensure transparency are readily applicable to policy evaluations.
Good policy evaluation needs to take incentives of the different stakeholders into account. For
example,  regulators  have  an  incentive  to  overstate  the  “success”  of  reforms,  industry  has  an
incentive to focus on private costs, while academia has an incentive to focus on “novel” aspects.
Policy  institutions  may  lack  resources  to  govern  the  process.  Incentives  can  be  managed
according to the following three basic principles:
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1. Transparency
Transparency is a precondition for a credible regulatory process. Goals and concepts need to be
well-defined.  Policy  evaluation  means  being  transparent  about  the  goals  of  regulatory  policies
and what these policies have actually achieved.
Transparency  can  be  accomplished  by  making  information  on  evaluation  studies,  data  (data
confidentiality permitting), and codes available to relevant stakeholders. A centralized collection
of evaluation studies can reduce the costs of obtaining relevant information for everybody. Such
a  repository  can  improve  transparency  by  making  it  easier  and  less  costly  for  (internal)
evaluators  and  external  stakeholder  to  keep  track  of  evaluation  work.  Technical  solutions  can
range  from  a  website  to  more  structured  repositories.  Other  fields,  such  as  development
4
economics or medicine often rely on repositories in order to structure available evidence.
Replicability is an important element of transparency. Replicability ensures that policy decisions
are  based  on  robust  evidence  and  on  results  which  survive  changes  in  the  set-up  of  the
empirical model. This requires transparency about the models being used, access to data so
that  results  can  be  replicated,  and  good  documentation  of  the  set-up  of  studies.  Many  of  the
required protocols have been developed in academia and can be applied to policy work. At the
same time, policy evaluation would benefit from a greater appreciation of replication studies in
academic work.
In order to ensure replicability, democratic data access is important. Robust evaluations have to
rely on a wide range of methods and good data. Whenever possible, data used in the analysis
should be made public. This facilitates the replication of results and can, thereby, help to ensure
high quality standards.
2. International coordination
Regulatory  reforms  have  a  global  dimension  and  have  been  decided  at  an  international  level.
Also, prudential policies have international spillover effects.   Speaking  a  common  language  is
thus important when looking at the effects of reforms. Setting  standards, learning from good
practices,  and  international  coordination  are  vital.  The  FSB,  in  coordination  with  international
standard setting bodies, can play an important role in this regard. Its proposal for a framework for
policy evaluation comes at the right time and addresses the right issues.
3. Independence
5
Independent, objective assessments are needed to obtain an unbiased picture on the effects of
reforms. There are several avenues towards independence. External experts might be involved
that have a mandate for independent evaluations and do not have a stake in the formulation of
policies. These can be existing institutions such as research institutes or policy advisory bodies.
Internal experts might also provide independent assessments, in particular in cases where data
cannot  be  shared  with  externals.  Internal  evaluations,  however,  are  at  greater  risk  of  being
subject to implicit or explicit biases. Therefore, appropriate institutional arrangements such as
peer reviews, independence from policy groups, and direct reporting lines need to be in place.
 
V. References
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010),  An  assessment  of  the  long-term
economic  impact  of  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  Bank  for  International
Settlements, August 2010.
Buch, Claudia M., and Oliver Holtemöller (2014), Do We Need New Modelling Approaches in
Macroeconomics?, IWH Discussion Papers 8/2014.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
in:  Taylor,  John  B.,  and  Harald  Uhlig 
Buch,  Claudia  M.,  Matthieau  Bussiere,  and  Linda  Goldberg  (2017).  Prudential  policies
crossing  borders:  Evidence  from  the  International  Banking  Research  Network.  Vox  EU.
voxeu.org/article/prudential-policies-crossing-borders
Financial Stability Board (2016). 2nd Annual Report on the Implementation and Effects of the
G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms. August. Basel.
Financial Stability Board (2017). Proposed Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of
the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms. April. Basel.
Fuchs-Schündeln,  Nicola,  and  Tarek  Hassan 
Macroeconomics, 
Macroeconomics, Elsevier, Vol. 2a: 923–1012.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabián Valencia (2012). Systemic Banking Crisis: An Update. IMF Working
Paper 12/163, Washington DC.
Rey, Helene (2013). Dilemma not Trilemma: The global financial cycle and monetary policy
independence. voxeu.org/article/dilemma-not-trilemma-global-financial-cycle-and-monetary-
policy-independence
Verein für Socialpolitik (2015). Leitlinien und Empfehlungen des Vereins für Socialpolitik für
Ex  post  Wirkungsanalysen.  September.  www.socialpolitik.de/docs/VfS-Leitlinien_Ex_post-
Wirkungsanalysen.pdf
Wissenschaftlicher  Beirat  beim  Bundesministerium  für  Wirtschaft  und  Energie  (2013).
Evaluierung  wirtschaftspolitischer  Fördermaßnahmen  als  Element  einer  evidenzbasierten
Wirtschaftspolitik. Berlin.
in
(eds.):  Handbook  of
(2016).  Natural  Experiments 
See, e.g., Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010).
e
For  an  evaluation  framework  applicable  to  a  range  of  regulatory  policies  in  the  European  Union,
s
e ec.europa.eu/smart-regulation/guidelines/toc_guide_en.htmec.europa.eu/smart-
regulation/guidelines/toc_guide_en.htmec.europa.eu/smart-regulation/guidelines/toc_guide_en.htm. 
The
German Economic Association (Verein für Socialpolitik 2015) and the academic advisory council to the German
Ministry of Economics (Wissenschaftlicher Beirat 2013) have likewise developed criteria for good, evidence-
based policymaking.
For a review of this discussion, see Buch and Holtemöller (2014).
include 
the  Health  Systems  Evidence 
Examples 
the  McMaster  Health  Forum
(www.healthsystemsevidence.org),  the  Cochrane  Library  (www.cochranelibrary.com),  or,  for  development
economics,  J-PAL  (www.povertyactionlab.org/)  or 
Impact  Evaluation
(www.3ieimpact.org).
International 
Initiative 
from 
the 
for 
 Buch, Busssiere, and Goldberg (2017) summarize the results of a cross-country research project on prudential
spillovers  through  international  bank  lending.  Rey  (2013)  discusses  the  importance  of  prudential  policy  for
global financial cycles.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
