Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian:  Promoting  the  use  of  and  access  to
remittances
Remarks by Ms Jessica Chew Cheng Lian, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Appreciation  Dinner,  Project  Greenback  2.0,  Johor  Bahru,  6
December 2016.
 It is my pleasure to be here this evening in this beautiful city of Johor Bahru to commemorate the
first anniversary of Project Greenback 2.0. Time certainly does pass by quickly and it doesn’t
seem  that  long  ago  that  this  Project  was  launched  on  29  November  2015  by  Governor
Muhammad  Ibrahim.  Yet  so  much  has  already  been  achieved  in  this  short  time.  Significant
strides have been made to reach out to the migrant communities and SMEs to promote the use
of  authorised  remittance  services,  to  improve  access  and  reduce  costs. All  of  this  would  not
have  been  possible  without  the  critical  support  of  the  Johor  Bahru  City  Council  and  our  key
partners, including the World Bank, who are present here today.
Malaysia’s story: Why we embarked on Greenback 2.0 Initiative
Many of you in this room have worked hard over the last year to make this project a success. We
are still only halfway through our journey, but there is much to be optimistic about based on what
we have already been able to achieve together. But let me take a moment this evening to remind
us of why we embarked on this project.
Remittances  have  an  important  role  in  a  country’s  development.  They  are  a  key  source  of
external development finance for many developing countries, contribute to poverty reduction and
improve social welfare. Total global remittance inflows have now reached levels upwards of 580
billion USD. This is a result of globalization that has made it easier for people to move, to find
better jobs and to secure a better future.
ASEAN as a region has more than 21 million nationals living abroad, and is home to more than
10 million migrants. More than 2 million of these migrants live and work in Malaysia. Their families
– mostly in Indonesia, Bangladesh, Nepal, India and the Philippines – depend on the money that
they send home to school their children, pay for medical care, build homes and generate other
sources of income. Many of these families live in abject poverty. When we open up opportunities
for them to make a living in our country, we also take on a responsibility to help ensure that the
money they travel long distances and work so hard to earn can be sent home safely, affordably
and conveniently. This is the first reason for our involvement in the Greenback initiative.
Globalization  has  also  enabled  economies  and  businesses  around  the  world  to  be  more
connected. When we embarked on the Greenback Project, we saw an opportunity to reduce the
costs  of  making  and  receiving  payments  for  domestic  businesses,  in  particular  small  and
medium-sized enterprises. This in turn helps them to be more competitive.
This is the second reason for our involvement in the Greenback initiative and also a key reason
that Johor Bahru was selected as the champion city for Malaysia. Johor Bahru has a vibrant SME
sector,  spanning  a  broad  range  of  activities.  This  provides  a  rich  environment  to  better
understand the needs of small businesses for remittance services and to support those needs in
specific and practical ways. It is also worth noting that Johor Bahru is the first champion city in
Asia and the first to include SMEs as a target group within the project’s scope. We hope to gain
valuable  insights  from  this  experience  to  help  make  business  remittance  which  support  trade
more efficient and inclusive.
Another important goal of the Greenback project is to reduce remittances that are transferred
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
through unauthorized channels. This is important to prevent the abuse of informal channels for
the  purpose  of  money  laundering,  tax  evasion  and  terrorist  financing.  The  ability  to  capture  a
larger  share  of  remittances  through  formal  channels  is  also  important  to  enhance  the
development impact of remittances.
Developing  the  non-bank  remittance  sector  has  been  an  important  strategy  for  Malaysia  to
increase remittances through formal channels. It is a strategy that has worked with considerable
success,  with  almost  60%  of  worker  remittances  sent  via  authorized  non-bank  remittance
service providers, exceeding the use of remittance services provided by the banks.
But more still needs to be done to bring informal remittances into the formal system. We are
committed to ensuring that the formal remittance market remains competitive, and to removing
the frictions that discourage legitimate transactions from flowing through formal channels.
I mention these points because I want us all to be reminded tonight of why we are working on this
project together. It is about making a real difference in the lives of individuals and their families,
helping raise the competitiveness of our economy, and safeguarding the integrity of our financial
system.
Achievement to date
This evening, one year into our journey on this project, there is much to be encouraged about,
and to motivate us to do even better in the coming year. As a result of the initiatives under this
project, the average cost of remitting funds in Johor Bahru is now below 3%, compared to around
5%  before  we  started  the  project.  To  put  things  in  perspective,  a  1%  reduction  in  the  cost  of
remittance means that migrant workers save an extra RM24 million equivalent that can be sent to
their home countries. This is additional money that can make a significant difference for many
low income households in receiving countries.
Secondly, the project has drawn participation of more than 11,000 migrant workers and 1,100
SMEs  who  have  benefitted  from  greater  awareness  of  the  availability  and  the  advantages  of
using formal remittance channels. As a result of the outreach programmes, outward remittances
by  both  migrants  and  SMEs  in  Johor  Bahru  grew  by  13%  and  77.3%  respectively  in  2016,
surpassing the average industry growth rates.
Thirdly, we have seen an encouraging take up in the use of the Pick Remit mobile application,
particularly  among  migrant  workers.  The  application  has  increased  the  transparency  of
remittance access points and comparative costs, helping direct consumers to use authorized
remittance  service  providers  and  empowering  them  to  make  informed  choices  by  comparing
prices  and  services.  This  will  have  an  important  long  term  positive  impact  on  encouraging  a
more competitive and efficient remittance market in Malaysia, going forward.
Key success factors and strategies moving forward
These achievements have been possible as a result of several factors.
First  is  the  close  and  effective  collaboration  between  the  Greenback  Project  team  and  the
remittance  service  providers  in  the  outreach  programmes.  We  have  been  particularly
encouraged  by  the  energy  and  enthusiasm  that  the  industry  has  shown  in  supporting  the
programmes. They have made their services available to the target segments in circumstances
that at times have been less than ideal. Despite such circumstances, the industry has provided a
positive  experience  for  first-time  users  of  formal  remittance  channels.  Employers,  the  SME
associations and consulates have also been instrumental in connecting us with migrant workers
and  members,  and  providing  support  and  resources  during  the  education  and  awareness
programmes. It is only with their help that we have been able to achieve the penetration levels
and gain momentum as quickly as we have.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The second key factor has been a comprehensive and creative programme design. In coming up
with  the  educational  and  awareness  strategies,  the  project  team  has  carefully  studied  and
considered  factors  that  influence  the  remittance  behaviors  of  migrants  and  SMEs.  This  has
enabled us to tailor our approach to the specific barriers and facilitators that we observed. One
good  example  is  the  use  of  program  ambassadors,  who  are  trained  to  deliver  the  project’s
education and awareness content to the migrant communities in their own native language. This
has been particularly effective in breaking down language and cultural barriers, and encouraging
migrants to be much more receptive to the messages that we want to deliver. This experience
has  taught  us  that  the  communities  we  are  reaching  out  to  are  not  just  beneficiaries  of  the
project, but they can and should be an important part of the process.
Moving forward, we will continue to pursue multi-faceted and creative strategies to amplify the
impact  of  the  Project.  As  an  example,  a  recent  survey  conducted  under  this  project  on
remittance  behaviors  revealed  that  more  than  74%  of  migrant  workers  in  Johor  Bahru  own  a
smartphone. More innovative means for conducting remittances can be introduced by remittance
service providers working with the telecommunications industry to serve this market. This will
also be important to overcome geographical barriers to providing remittance services in more
remote areas. The survey also tells us that SMEs prefer cashless transactions as they present
lower  risks  of  theft  compared  to  cash-based  remittances.  Initiatives  by  the  industry  to  offer
cashless remittance services should be accelerated to meet this need, in turn contributing not
only to increased business efficiency but also to broader agenda to reduce the use of cash in the
economy. A further area that we should examine more closely is working with large employers of
migrant workers to address documentation requirements for individual migrant remittances and
encourage the use of lower cost e-payment channels.
With the recent launch of Project Greenback in Lombok, Indonesia, by the World Bank-the first to
be implemented in a remittance-receiving country – we also look forward to the opportunity to
enhance linkages between Johor Bahru and Lombok, given that a majority of the migrant workers
in Johor Bahru, in particular those working in plantations, are from Lombok. We believe there is
great  potential  for  the  two  projects  that  directly  link  sending  and  receiving  countries  together
under  the  Greenback  initiative  to  significantly  increase  their  impact  through  a  coordinated
approach. I am delighted that central banks from a few countries are here with us today and can
explore expanding similar opportunities to other countries in the region.
Let me conclude by expressing Bank Negara Malaysia’s appreciation to all of you, the Project
Greenback 2.0 partners, for your support and exceptional commitment to this initiative and its
important goals. We count on your continued vision, ideas and practical contributions to take us
through the next leg of our journey, and thereafter replicate the success of the model developed
here in Johor Bahru across the country at large.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
