Ravi Menon: Financial regulation - the forward agenda
Keynote address by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) Annual Forum 2017, Singapore,
20 March 2017.
 Mr Greg Medcraft, Chairman of the Australian Securities & Investments Commission,
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
I am happy to join you for this ASIC Annual Forum on “Future Focus”, and congratulate ASIC for
the choice of a timely topic.
The global financial system experienced nine years ago a most devastating crisis.
In response, we saw the implementation of perhaps the most wide-ranging set of regulatory
reforms ever.
We are now at an inflection point. I see three key areas of focus in the regulatory agenda going
forward:
First, take stock of the reforms to-date, with a focus on evaluating their effectiveness and
effects.
Second,  go  beyond  rule-setting  to  foster  a  culture  of  trust  and  risk  governance  in  our
financial institutions and markets.
Third, position regulation for the technological changes sweeping the financial industry, to
harness the opportunities they present while managing their risks.
Evaluating the effects of regulatory reforms
Let me start with a stocktake of the regulatory reforms. Basically, the reforms set out to address
the fault-lines that caused or exacerbated the global financial crisis of 2008. There are four key
thrusts:
Build resilient financial institutions. This is being done chiefly through the Basel III reforms,
strengthening capital and liquidity buffers in banks.
End  too-big-to-fail.  Frameworks  are  being  established  to  identify  and  address  the  risks
posed by global systemically important financial institutions.
Make  derivatives  markets  safer.  Requirements  are  being  put  in  place  to  foster  central
clearing, margin requirements, and mandatory reporting of OTC derivative trades.
Transform  shadow  banking  into  resilient  market-based  finance.  Oversight  of  shadow
banking entities is being strengthened.
The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  been  working  to  ensure  that  these  internationally  agreed
regulatory  reforms  are  implemented  in  a  timely  and  consistent  manner  across  the  major
jurisdictions.
While gaps remain in some areas, implementation is generally proceeding well.
It is time now to begin the important task of evaluating the impact of the reforms.
In fact, the FSB is developing a conceptual framework for doing this.
The framework aims to answer two questions:
have the regulatory reforms been effective – are they achieving their intended outcomes?
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
what are the cumulative effects of the reforms – how have the various reforms interacted
with one another, are they coherent, what are their larger social benefits and costs?
This work is especially important in the current context:
As memories of the crisis fade and the burden of regulatory reforms comes into sharper
focus, the pressure to unwind the reforms will grow. It is important for the credibility of the
reforms that their impact be objectively evaluated.
It is also incumbent on us as regulators to be accountable for the substantial changes that
we have put in place over the last eight years.
Fostering a culture of trust in the financial industry
A second growing focus in the supervisory agenda is to help foster a culture that motivates the
right ethical behaviour and responsible risk-taking in our financial institutions and markets. But it
will require different and novel approaches because there are limits to what externally imposed
rules can do to promote the right values in financial firms.
The financial industry continues to be plagued by egregious misconduct, nine years on from the
global financial crisis.
In the US and UK, major retail banks are still settling charges against them for mis-selling
investment and insurance products in the run-up to the financial crisis.
Across  financial  centres,  traders  at  several  banks  were  found  to  be  involved  in  flagrant
manipulation of key financial benchmarks.
Internationally, regulators have been cracking down on illicit fund flows, with several financial
institutions being penalised for lapses in money laundering controls.
In Singapore, we have taken decisive actions against financial institutions that fell short
of our anti-money laundering standards.
MAS shut down two banks and fined several others, and culpable individuals have been
charged in court and sentenced.
Reform  of  the  financial  industry  will  not  be  complete  until  this  issue  of  trust  and  ethics  is
addressed. We need to “get the culture right”. This will require collective effort by regulators, the
industry, and financial institutions.
The FSB and IOSCO have been driving international efforts to reduce misconduct risk, focusing
on  governance  and  incentive  structures,  conduct  standards  in  wholesale  markets,  and  the
reform of financial benchmarks.
National regulators have been stepping up engagement with financial institutions on issues
pertaining to culture and conduct.
The  industry  must  itself  take  collective  responsibility  to  promote  good  practices  and  develop
codes of conduct, and hold institutions accountable to their peers.
Here in Australia, you have set a good example.
The Australian  Bankers’ Association  has  commissioned  an  independent  review  of  sales
commissions and product-based payments in retail banking that is now in its final stages.
Banks have also agreed to share information among themselves on financial advisers with a
history of poor conduct.
But ultimately it is the financial institution itself that must bear responsibility for getting the culture
right. There are a couple of things they can focus on.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, set a clear tone from the top that is supported by concrete policies and leaders that
walk the talk. Management decisions must consistently reflect the firm’s espoused values.
Second, align human resource (HR) policies with the desired culture. From recruitment and
training to rewards and penalties, compensation to career development, HR policies send
the clearest signal to staff on the values that the firm regards as important.
This  is  difficult  but  important  work.  We  must  move  the  financial  industry  to  look  beyond  the
question “is this legal” to the larger question “is this right”.
Positioning regulation for technological innovation
Let me now move to the third key thrust of financial regulation going forward – how to position for
technological innovation.
Financial technology or FinTech is transforming financial services.
Digital  payments  are  becoming  more  widespread,  propelled  by  advances  in  near-field
communications, identity authentication, digital IDs, and biometrics.
Blockchains  or  distributed  ledger  systems  are  being  tested  for  a  wide  variety  of  financial
operations  –  to  settle  interbank  payments,  reconcile  trade  finance  invoices,  execute
performance contracts.
Big  data  is  being  used  in  many  areas  of  finance  -  to  gain  richer  insights  into  customer
behaviour  and  needs,  to  detect  fraud  or  anomalies  in  financial  transactions,  to  sharpen
surveillance of market trends.
How should regulation respond?
First,  we  need  to  develop  a  deep  understanding  of  these  emerging  technologies  and  the
risks as well as opportunities they present.
Second,  we  need  to  develop  novel  approaches  in  regulation  and  supervision  that  will
promote  the  safe  and  responsible  application  of  these  technologies  without  stifling
innovation.
In some ways, FinTech helps to reduce existing risks; in other ways, they may accentuate these
risks or even create new ones. Let me illustrate using robo-advisors.
Robo-advisors, as you know, are software algorithms that recommend a portfolio based on
a set of investor preferences and rebalance the portfolio automatically.
The financial  risks  presented  by  robo-advisers  are  similar  to  traditional  fund  management,
depending on the underlying instruments used.
A common question is whether robo-advisers present prudential risks and should therefore
be subject to capital requirements.
The operational risks posed by robo-advisers are more interesting.
AML/CFT risks may well be reduced through transaction monitoring enhanced by big data
and pattern recognition algorithms. 
But technology risks may be higher, such as runaway algorithms or cyber criminals stealing
customer information.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Then  there  is  the  question  of systemic or macro-financial risks. Here we simply do  not  know
enough. But here are a couple of points to ponder:
The failure of a robo-advisor could potentially lead to contagion among other algorithm-driven
service  providers.  This  could  present  systemic  risk  if  investors  seek  to  withdraw  their
investments in securities through fire sales. 
The pro-cyclicality arising from algorithms is another unknown, as the interaction between
algorithms could exacerbate market trends.
Often,  with  these  risk  assessments  of  FinTech,  there  is  a  certain“fear  of  the  unknown”  or
tendency  to “imagine  the  worst”.  A  degree  of  conservatism  and  caution  are  indeed  laudable
virtues  for  regulators,  but  we  should  guard  against  taking  too  pre-emptive  an  approach  when
dealing with the uncertainties of FinTech.
Regulators need to keep pace with innovation but regulation itself must not front-run innovation.
Introducing regulation prematurely may stifle innovation and potentially derail the adoption of
useful technology.
MAS’ approach is to apply a materiality or proportionality test.
This means regulation kicks in only when the risk posed by the new technology becomes
material or crosses a certain threshold.
And the weight of regulation must be proportionate to the risk posed.
In 2015, MAS laid out a vision for a Smart Financial Centre, where innovation is pervasive and
technology is used widely. And a Smart Financial Centre needs smart regulation – that promotes
innovation while safeguarding public confidence and financial stability.
We are still learning and our approaches still evolving, but let me share with you three aspects of
our regulatory response to FinTech.
First, using a regulatory sandbox to test new ideas in a confined environment.
Second,  harnessing supervisory  technology,  or  SupTech  as  we  call  it,  to  carry  out
supervision in a more efficient and effective manner.
Third, strengthening cyber security across the financial industry to make it safer to use new
technologies and instil confidence in consumers.
Regulatory sandbox
MAS launched a regulatory sandbox in June last year, to enable financial institutions and FinTech
start-ups to conduct live experiments with innovative financial products or services.
These firms do not need to fully meet the relevant regulatory requirements at the onset.
To  ensure  that  the  consequences  of  any  failure  are  contained,  the  experiments  are
conducted within agreed boundaries, such as the number of clients, scope of the activity,
etc.
The experiment is time-bound.
If  successful,  the  entity  must  exit  the  sandbox  and  fully  comply  with  all  relevant
regulations if it wants to roll out the innovative product to the broader market.
If the experiment fails, well we all learn something.
Regulatory  sandboxes  not  only  encourage  FinTech  innovation  by  providing  a  safe  space  for
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
experimentation. They also give regulators an opportunity to learn the risks associated with new
technologies and right-size regulation accordingly.
Several regulators have introduced variants of the regulatory sandbox over the past year. In fact, I
would say the sandbox is itself an experiment for regulators. There is much we can learn by
sharing experiences and lessons from our different approaches. And ASIC is one regulator that
we admire and watch closely on this front.
Take registration  requirements.  Most  sandboxes  require  applicants  to  register  prior  to
experimentation.
The UK FCA has two fixed cohorts of applicants a year, while the MAS sandbox is always
open for application.
ASIC has an interesting approach. 
It has a class-exemption for firms testing a specific set of services for 12 months and
up to 100 clients.
Interested firms are required to notify ASIC before commencing business, provided they
also meet certain consumer protection conditions.
MAS opted for an application-based approach because we wanted to closely engage each
applicant,  understand  the  innovation,  business  model,  and  risks  so  as  to  customise  the
sandbox conditions.
But each application is turning out to be quite time-consuming and we are mindful that
our process does not get in the way of speed-to-market.
So,  we  are  keen  to  study ASIC’s  experience  with  the  class-exemption  approach  and
see how our own approach can be improved.
There are also interesting differences in the qualifying entities.
HKMA’s sandbox is restricted to authorised institutions, while ASIC’s sandbox is restricted to
FinTech start-ups. 
The MAS and UK FCA are open to both regulated entities and FinTech start-ups.
Supervisory technology or SupTech
The second aspect of our approach that I want to highlight is SupTech.
Many of you are familiar with RegTech – the use of technology to enhance risk management
and regulatory compliance in financial institutions. 
Well, why should regulated entities have a monopoly over the use of technology? Regulators
too can harness technology to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of supervision and
surveillance.
There is clearly greater scope for the use of analytics for financial surveillance and supervision:
big data, machine learning, and perhaps even natural language processing. I believe securities
regulators will increasingly harness big data to detect, enforce and prosecute misconduct.
In  a  recent  case,  US  SEC  obtained  a  settlement  against  a  broker-dealer  for  its  failure  to
adequately  train  its  representatives,  when  they  were  selling  certain  complex  debt
instruments.
Custom  analytics  tools,  instead  of  traditional  investigative  techniques,  were  used  to  sift
through millions of trading records, which identified over 8,000 retail customers for whom the
investment in the debt instruments was inappropriate.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  MAS,  we  have  started  using  techniques  such  as  clustering  and  network  analysis  in  our
supervision of the financial markets and monitoring of AML/CFT risks.
We are developing algorithms to scan suspicious transaction reports (STRs) and identify
those that warrant further attention, allowing supervisors to focus their resources on higher-
risk transactions.
We  are  working  to  develop  algorithms  that  can  detect  and  identify  trading  accounts
suspected of syndicated activities.
We will soon be setting up a dedicated unit on SupTech, to synergise and strengthen these
efforts and help sharpen our supervisory practices.
Cyber security
And  last  but  not  least,  cyber  security.  Cyber-attacks  are  a  growing  threat  to  the  financial
ecosystem, and FinTech could potentially accentuate this risk.
As more financial services are delivered over the internet, there will be growing security and
privacy concerns from cyber threats.
And maybe even systemic concerns. It is not inconceivable that the next financial crisis is
triggered by a cyber-attack.
We need to develop the regulatory and supervisory capabilities to address these emerging
threats.
Cyber risk management will be the new frontier for global regulatory efforts and supervisory co-
operation.
The  BIS  has  set  up  a  taskforce  to  develop  international  guidelines  on  cyber-security
responsibilities  for  banks  and  fund-transfer  providers,  with  the  aim  of  making  global
payments safer.
More such initiatives are likely in the years ahead.
Another  area  that  will  be  a  growing  focus  is  information  sharing.  Unlike  other  traditional  risks
facing financial institutions, cyber risks are less visible and yet often afflict multiple firms at the
same time given the interconnectedness of the financial sector.
The  sharing  of  timely  and  actionable  cyber  information  among  financial  institutions  is
therefore key to building resilient cyber defences within the financial ecosystem.
MAS has collaborated with the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Centre (FS-
ISAC) to establish an Asia Pacific (APAC) Regional Intelligence and Analysis Centre.
The Centre will encourage regional sharing and analysis of cybersecurity information within
the financial services sector.
It is expected to begin operations soon.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. Financial regulation remains work-in-progress.
We  must  press  on  with  the  reform  agenda  and  see  it  through  to  full,  timely,  and  consistent
implementation. At the same time, we must evaluate the effects of the reforms put in place and
make adjustments where appropriate, to maximise their effectiveness and minimise their costs.
We must strengthen the foundations for sound risk management and good conduct by working
with the industry to embed deeply a culture of responsible risk-taking and ethical conduct.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  must  prepare  our  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  for  the  technological  changes
sweeping the industry - addressing new risks while promoting innovation, harnessing the benefits
of technology, and promoting growth and opportunity in our societies.
Thank you.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
