Keynote address by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at SAICA’s Courageous Conversation Session 
Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory, Johannesburg 
26 September 2017 
    Sovereign rating downgrades and their impact on the poor 
 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  
 
The  sovereign  ratings  of South  Africa,  which  are the key  theme  of  my 
speech  this  evening, have  been  a prominent  concern for  policymakers 
and investors alike in recent years, and will again feature heavily in policy 
discussions  as  the  year-end  approaches.  Following  the  gradual  and 
regular improvement in our country’s sovereign ratings from the advent of 
democracy to the mid-2000s, which saw South Africa regain investment-
grade  status,  South  Africa’s  credit  standing  has  again  deteriorated  in 
recent years.  
 
Both Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s rating agencies started downgrading 
South Africa in 2012; this process culminated in the loss of investment-
grade status (for foreign-currency debt) in 2016 with two of the three major 
rating agencies. Further reviews of South Africa’s ratings are due before 
year-end. Our growth and fiscal performance, in particular, are therefore 
under a high degree of international scrutiny at present. 
 
 Page 1 of 10 
The financial market and policy implications of rating downgrades are well 
documented, ranging from difficulties in getting non-resident investors to 
finance the current account deficit, through a greater volatility of financial 
markets,  to  higher  costs  of  borrowing  for  the  sovereign.  What  many 
people are less familiar with are the implications for the public at large, for 
incomes and inequality, and in particular for the lower-income segment of 
the  population.  These  are  the  points  that  I  would  like  to  discuss  this 
evening.  
 
The general public, in particular the poorer households, may wonder how 
a  rating  downgrade  can  directly  affect  their  daily  lives.  After  all,  poor 
people  do  not  borrow  overseas;  they  do  not  run  businesses  that  are 
dependent on financing by foreign investors; they rarely travel overseas; 
they do not directly hold shares in listed companies.  
 
Some  voices,  indeed,  may  go  further  and  say  that  South  Africa’s 
government should not pay excessive attention to the decisions of foreign-
based  rating  agencies.  These  voices  may  argue  that  the  decisions  of 
rating  agencies  mostly  affect  wealthy  individuals  and  have  limited 
bearings  on  the  economic  well-being  of  the  poorer  majority.  Let  me 
explain why such thoughts are misguided. 
 
Irrespective of its direct implications, a sovereign rating downgrade does 
have indirect impacts on all the citizens of the country. These can be felt 
harder by the poorer households who, unlike the wealthier ones, do not 
have the possibility of ‘hedging themselves’ from the consequences of a 
downgrade  by  diversifying  their  assets.  There  are  five  major  channels 
through which the recent rating downgrades can undermine the well-being 
of poorer households, which I will discuss more in detail. 
 Page 2 of 10 
 
The  ratings  of  a  listed entity  (be  it  a government  or a corporation) are 
meant to reflect its ‘credit quality’. Hence, they are used by international 
investors to gauge the risk of buying the bonds issued by that entity. In 
theory,  therefore,  these  investors  will  –  subsequent  to  a  downgrade  – 
require a premium in the form of a higher interest rate, or they will shun 
these bonds altogether. South Africa requires foreign investors to finance 
its external deficit (as its imports regularly exceed its exports). A rating 
downgrade  therefore  means  that  financial  markets  will  move  to  a  new 
equilibrium where the interest rates on bonds are higher and the exchange 
rate of the rand is weaker than before the downgrade.  
 
Obviously, the recent empirical evidence is clouded by the fact that many 
other factors, bar sovereign ratings, influence the price of South African 
financial assets. Nonetheless, a standard measure of sovereign credit risk 
for  South  Africa,  namely  the  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  spread,  has 
underperformed compared to its emerging-market peers in recent years, 
and  is  now  trading  at  similar  levels  to  non-investment-grade  countries. 
This is clear evidence that investors are requiring a higher risk premium, 
if only in relative terms, on South African government debt. The increase 
in the yield on inflation-linked bonds issued by National Treasury, over the 
past two to three years, is another such indication. Even after being fully 
protected against inflation, bond investors require a higher return – even 
as  global  economic  factors  have  continued  to  depress  risk-free,  real 
interest rates all over the world.  
 
These  higher  yields  on  South  African  bonds  will,  over  time,  negatively 
affect the poor. As the South African government faces a higher cost of 
borrowing, it will have to devote a larger share of its (finite) resources to 
 Page 3 of 10 
servicing  debt.  Already,  estimates  by  National  Treasury  indicate  that 
government debt-servicing costs are expected to represent 10.4% of total 
budget spending (and 3.5% of GDP1) in 2017/18, up from a low of 7.0% 
in 2009/10. This stands in contrast to the years prior to the global financial 
crisis, when the improvement to South Africa’s credit rating coincided with 
a  gradual  decline  in  the  share  of  public  spending  devoted  to  servicing 
debt.  
 
In turn, when debt-servicing costs rise faster than the overall budget, the 
amount of money available for other missions – especially those of utmost 
importance to the poor, like public health, education, infrastructure, and 
social services – is reduced. Across the world, countries with the lowest 
creditworthiness and with the most difficult access to international market 
financing  are  generally  those  with  the  poorest  Human  Development 
Indices. To a large extent, poor households ‘pay’ for the low credit quality 
of their sovereign.  
 
Some may argue that, faced with higher debt-servicing costs, there are 
policy alternatives to curbing redistributive government expenditure, such 
as  increasing  public  borrowing  or  raising  taxes  on  higher-income 
households. However, these alternatives are probably not sustainable in 
the  long run. Simply  adding  to  borrowing  would  most  likely,  over  time, 
prompt further downgrades, raise interest rates, and threaten a financial 
crisis.  From  26%  of  GDP  just  before  the  global  financial  crisis,  South 
Africa’s  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is  expected  to  rise  to  52%  in  the  current 
financial  year,  even  without  including  contingent  liabilities.  (This  is, 
effectively, a doubling of the ratio in less than 10 years.) From what was 
                                                           
1 gross domestic product 
 Page 4 of 10 
a relatively low level by emerging-market standards in the 2000s, South 
Africa’s debt-to-GDP ratio has moved to a relatively high position, which 
could – if continued – reduce our country’s relative attractiveness to global 
investors. 
 
Equally, raising taxes on higher-income households and corporations, in 
a country where the tax system is already fairly progressive (and the tax 
burden,  at  least  by  emerging-market  standards,  relatively  high),  could 
undermine the already anaemic pace of economic growth or trigger capital 
outflows. For the state to effectively help the poor, it needs maximum fiscal 
space,  and  that  means  (among  other  things)  well-managed  public 
finances and sustainable debt burdens. This also has key repercussions 
for  monetary  policy’s  ability  to  best  contribute  to  sustainable  long-term 
economic growth. In the event that public finances keep deteriorating, a 
country  can  experience  ‘fiscal  dominance’  –  when  the  central  bank’s 
interest rate policy is primarily dictated by the need to ensure adequate 
financing  of  the  budget  deficit  at  the  expense  of  other,  real,  economic 
considerations. It is easy to see how this can be a suboptimal outcome 
from the point of view of economic development. 
 
Fortunately,  these  difficult  trade-offs  have  to  be  made  by  duly  elected 
representatives  of  the  people  of  South  Africa.  As  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank,  we  only  look  at  what  the  implications  of  these  are  for 
monetary policy. 
 
Furthermore,  a  rating  downgrade  will  not  only  affect  the  price  of 
government  debt;  it  will  also  affect  what  is  paid  by  all  the  other  bond 
issuers  in  the  country  –  raising,  for  instance,  the  cost  of  issuing  and 
servicing debt for banks and state-owned utilities. To maintain profitability, 
 Page 5 of 10 
it is likely that banks will pass on these higher costs to their customers, in 
the form of higher rates on loans or higher bank fees or lower interest 
rates paid on deposits. In fact, higher funding costs for banks may be one 
of  the  reasons  why  the  spreads  between  bank  lending  rates  and  the 
repurchase rate as well as deposit rates have widened since the global 
financial crisis. With many low-income households relying on cash loans 
for meeting their subsistence needs (often at already-high rates) or using 
bank deposits as a major form of savings, one can easily see how higher 
borrowing  costs of  banks  can  penalise them. Equally,  if a state-owned 
utility like Eskom is forced to pay higher interest rates on its debt, such 
costs are likely to ultimately be passed through to their customers – in the 
form of higher electricity tariffs, including for poorer households. 
 
Separately, South Africa’s domestic savings are insufficient to meet its 
investment needs. Offshore borrowing is therefore required to fund growth 
and  development.  So,  any  downgrade  in  sovereign  ratings  is  bound, 
sooner or later, to have negative consequences for the exchange rate of 
the rand. This, too, can potentially harm the poorer households.  
 
Historically, because of the openness of the South African economy, a 
depreciation of the exchange rate has tended to raise inflation. In turn, a 
higher rate of inflation hits the most vulnerable harder, especially people 
who depend on basic grants which only get adjusted once a year at most. 
In particular, food prices and transportation costs rise on the back of rand 
depreciation.  This  reflects  one  of  two  things:  either  the  need  to  import 
some of these goods (for instance petrol, which will over time affect the 
prices of public and collective transport) or linkages between the prices of 
foodstuffs  and  those  of  agricultural  commodities  on  the  global  market. 
These  items  account  for  a  larger  part  of  total  expenses  for  the  poorer 
 Page 6 of 10 
households. For example, according to calculations by Statistics South 
Africa, food and non-alcoholic beverages account for 48% of consumption 
expenses for the 10% poorest households, compared with a weight of only 
17% for the whole population. 
 
The impact of a rating downgrade on financial markets may also have 
more  direct  implications  for  the  poor  than  generally  assumed.  As 
mentioned earlier, poor households do not directly hold share portfolios, 
but some – in particular, older people who worked for a while in the public 
or private sector – rely on payments from pension or provident funds as 
their main, if not sole, source of income. If the value of financial assets 
declines, the money available in these pension and provident pools will 
shrink accordingly. Separately, research shows that some of the savings 
vehicles typically used by poor people, such as stokvels, are gradually 
being invested in financial assets to create wealth rather than being used 
solely  for  short-term  purposes  (such  as,  for  instance,  to  cover  funeral 
costs).2  Again,  any  drop  in  the  value  of  these  financial  assets  would 
undermine  the  efforts  aimed  at  creating  wealth  through  such  savings 
vehicles. 
 
Finally, rating downgrades cast general doubts on the long-term economic 
and financial health of a country. This is because downgrades typically 
weigh  on  business  confidence,  undermining  companies’  willingness  to 
invest in new productive capacities and boost the size of their workforce. 
At worst, businesses fearing a worsening economic future may shed jobs, 
resulting in an overall decline in the number of employment opportunities 
throughout the country. In South Africa, unemployment exceeds 27% of 
                                                           
2 See ‘Investments in stokvels gaining ground’ published on the Fin24 website on 9 July 2014. 
 Page 7 of 10 
the workforce, while the ability to find a job often provides the main chance 
to escape poverty for an individual and his or her family. Declining job 
opportunities  would  therefore  risk  aggravating  the  incidence  of  such 
poverty. 
 
Arguably, many of the channels described above operate through investor 
sentiment and financial asset prices, including the exchange rate of the 
rand. One can therefore argue that so far, in particular since the latest 
rating  downgrades,  the  reaction  of  financial  markets  has  been  rather 
benign. For instance, the yield on the 10-year South African government 
bond is still close to the average of the past five years, and the 5-year 
CDS spread on South African sovereign debt is around its lowest since 
late 2014. As for the rand, it has recovered by about 20% on a trade-
weighted basis from the lows it had reached in early 2016. 
 
Yet this relative stability is fragile, dependent on developments that may 
reverse in the not-too-distant future. The lack of a strong sell-off in either 
the rand or local bonds has more to do with a conjunction of favourable 
international  factors  than  with  investors  downplaying  the  possible 
negative consequences of a downgrade. In particular, the factors referred 
to are the improvements in global economic developments, the absence 
of  inflationary  pressures  in  the  advanced  economies,  and  a  still-
accommodative stance by the world’s major central banks. These factors 
have ensured that capital continues to flow to the emerging world, even 
to  countries  which  have  experienced  a  deterioration 
their 
creditworthiness. But these flows could easily reverse. And amid tighter 
global financial conditions, investors would be more likely to differentiate 
between stronger and weaker sovereign credits. Should South Africa face 
another global shock, like it did during the 2008-09 global recession, its 
in 
 Page 8 of 10 
increase 
the  climate  of  uncertainty 
recent  rating  downgrades  could  well  make  it  more  vulnerable  to  that 
shock.  
 
Admittedly, some commentators claim that further downgrades to South 
Africa’s sovereign ratings would not starve the country of foreign capital, 
as  other  investors  –  specifically,  funds  of  a  more  speculative  nature  – 
would still buy domestic financial assets. However, apart from the fact that 
these investors would require a higher return on South African assets than 
recent  historical  norms,  their  investments  would  be  more  short-term  in 
nature, most likely resulting in a higher volatility of market prices. This, in 
turn,  would 
facing  domestic 
businesses,  with  negative  consequences  for  fixed  investment,  job 
creation, and therefore poverty and inequality. 
 
In conclusion, let me say that a sovereign rating is not a policy goal per 
se.  Rather,  it  is  a reflection  of  a  broad  range  of  economic, social,  and 
political  factors  that  constitute  the  creditworthiness  of  a  country.  Key 
among  these  factors  is  the  strength  of  our  institutions,  including  the 
Chapter 9 institutions, the judiciary, and the South African Reserve Bank. 
These institutions underpin our democracy and our creditworthiness. It is 
this creditworthiness that policymakers should strive to improve, for goals 
that  include  development  and  poverty  reduction.  As  international 
experience shows, it is failure to generate sufficient economic growth and 
to maintain healthy fiscal and external balances that keeps large portions 
of  a  country’s  population  in  poverty.  For  South  Africa’s  economy  to 
become stronger and more resilient, and to make inroads into poverty, we 
need not only to avoid further downgrades; we should also ensure that the 
recent downgrades are eventually reversed. 
 
 Page 9 of 10 
Thank you. 
 Page 10 of 10 
