Ong  Chong  Tee:  Observations  and  thoughts  from  a  financial
regulator’s perspective
Keynote address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of the
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Association  of  Certified  Anti-Money  Laundering
Specialists  (ACAMS)  9th  Annual  Anti-Money  Laundering  &  Financial  Crime  Conference,
Singapore, 24 April 2017.
 1. Good morning. Mr Timothy McClinton, President and CEO of the Association of Certified Anti-
Money Laundering Specialists (ACAMS); Ms Hue Dang, CAMS-Audit Head of Asia; Distinguished
Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  I  am  delighted  to  join  you  in  this  9th  Annual  Anti-Money
Laundering & Financial Crime Conference in Asia Pacific.
2.  I  like  to  commend  ACAMS’s  leadership  and  your  membership  for  the  extensive  work  on
training and various outreach programmes relating to financial crime detection and prevention. 
Many of you are specialists and experts in this area.  But as Malcolm Forbes once said: one
definition of an expert would be someone who knows enough of a subject to know that he does
not know how much he does not know. Fora such as this are therefore beneficial for collective
learning and sharing, to plug knowledge gaps and to exchange perspectives.
3. Allow me to share some observations and thoughts this morning from a financial regulator’s
perspective.
4. For some years now, the global community has been stepping up our efforts to combat money
laundering and terrorist financing. The integrity and stability of the international financial system
must not be exploited by those who engage in criminal activities.
5. An ongoing challenge is that the threats are ever evolving.  The nature of illicit fund flows are
varied and often cut across jurisdictions and economic sectors. In the case of money laundering
(ML),  the  intention  is  to  camouflage  the  origin  of  ill-gotten  proceeds  or  property.    Terrorist
financing  (TF)  can  be  different  in  that  the  sources  of  such  funding  may  be  of  proper  or  legal
origins. The motivation is often to disguise the use of the funds. 
6.  Criminals  can  and  will  try  to  use  increasingly  sophisticated  ways  to  “beat  the  system”  to
launder money or finance terrorism. It is very difficult to estimate the size of this problem given its
opaque nature. There have been various estimates that the amount of money laundered each
year is far in excess of US$1 trillion. In truth, no one really knows. What is more important is that
globally,  it  is  recognised  that  this  is  an  important  issue  that  affects  us  all.  ML  and  TF  threats
undermine  the  confidence  and  stability  of  financial  systems.  There  are  also  high  social  and
political costs.
7.  This  is  why  at  national  levels,  many  countries  including  Singapore  have  taken  holistic
measures to address ML/TF risks. Besides a multitude of actions relating to laws, regulations,
penalties  and  public  awareness,  specific  tools  also  include  the  ability  of  regulators  and  law
enforcement authorities to carry out risk surveillance, investigation and information exchanges. A
number of international organisations and groupings, including the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), IMF, G20, OECD’s Global Forum on Tax, the Egmont Group etc. have also co-ordinated
international efforts to tackle the problem in a comprehensive manner. This is essential given the
trans-national nature of the threats.
8. The FATF – which is the international standard setting body – has also sought to develop more
guidance  relating  to  various  sectors  and  entities.  Many  of  you  will  be  familiar  with  the  FATF
Recommendations on money laundering, terrorism financing and proliferation financing. In 2012,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  FATF  enhanced  its  Recommendations  to  put  emphasis  on  effectiveness.  That  is,  merely
having rules in place is not enough. FATF also developed a more systematic framework for peer
reviews.
9. Let me turn to developments in Singapore.
10.   We have a comprehensive legal and regulatory framework, in line with global standards. We
will  continue  to  enhance  our  Anti-Money  Laundering  (AML)  and  Countering  the  Financing  of
Terrorism (CFT) regime.
11.  Last year, the MAS decided to consolidate some of our supervisory resources into a single
AML department so that we can further deepen our technical expertise and focus in this area.
This will allow us to better streamline supervisory efforts across various sectors of finance such
as  banking,  insurance  and  capital  markets.  At  the  national  level,  the  AML  Department  co-
ordinates  AML/CFT  strategies  across  all  economic  sectors,  together  with  other  government
agencies.
12.    The  financial  sector  is  a  critical  component  of  our  national  AML/CFT  defences.  MAS’
framework involves four key elements:
    (a) Progressive Regulations
    (b) Intensive Supervision
    (c) Rigorous Enforcement
    (d) International Co-operation and Industry Partnerships
13.  Firstly, on Regulations. MAS regulations for the financial sector are benchmarked to global
standards.  Over  the  years,  we  have  updated  our  requirements  to  keep  them  current  and
relevant.
14.  But regulations are defined sets of rules and requirements. They cannot possibly cover all
situations  and  every  manner  of  activity  or  behaviour;  to  try  to  do  so  would  require  ominous
amounts of prescriptive and narrow rules that are neither feasible nor practical. So regulators
worldwide  including  ourselves  have  to  consider  carefully  how  to  put  in  place  workable  rules:
having the appropriate regulations that cover the requirements under the FATF standards while
taking  into  account  any  practical  challenges  of  implementation,  operational  inefficiencies  and
unintended consequences.
15.  This leads me to the second element of our framework – Supervision. It is one thing to have
a  set  of  workable  rules  and  regulations.  It  is  another  thing  to  have  the  requirements  clearly
understood  and  complied  with.  No  amount  of  regulations  will  be  effective  if  the  quality  of
implementation is poor or if financial institutions (FIs) are not vigilant.
16.  The MAS has in recent years stepped up our AML offsite reviews and onsite supervision of
financial  institutions.  Our  supervisory  intensity  is  necessarily  risk-based  given  that  both
regulators  and  the  regulated  entities  work  within  finite  constraints  of  resources  and  time.
Therefore, we have adopted various risk bucketing metrics so that we can be targeted on more
vulnerable  areas.  This  has  resulted  in  the  intensification  of  our  supervision  on  areas  or
businesses that are more prone to ML/TF risks, or where controls have been found to be lacking
from past inspections.
17.    We  have  organised  and  will  organise  more  industry  engagements  to  share  supervisory
findings on common lapses and good practices at the end of each series of inspections. This is
intended to help level up controls over time.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
18.    Our  inspections  go  beyond  rules-based  compliance.    We  focus  on  whether  financial
institutions  demonstrate  a  good  understanding  of  risks,  and  a  good  risk  culture  within  the
organisations. We much prefer that FIs adopt a proactive approach in meeting their regulatory
obligations than a passive rule-based attitude. Let me elaborate on this.
19.  One area relates to governance. You are all familiar with the common thinking of having
three  lines  of  defence.  Recently,  there  are  suggestions  to  augment  this  with  a  “four  lines  of
defence” model for better governance in financial institutions. The first line involves frontline and
management controls within business units; then compliance and risk management functions as
the second line; and the audit function as the third line. A newer fourth line involves interactions of
the FI with its external auditors and regulators. An FI’s senior management and board should
monitor and be satisfied that these lines are effective.  Senior managers should never “look the
other  way”  on  suspicious  transactions,  even  if  they  involve  major  clients  who  are  significant
revenue sources. After all, reputation and legal risks can be costly too.
20. The MAS expects boards and senior management to have ownership and oversight of ML/TF
risk  control  issues.    FIs  therefore  must  put  in  place  an  effective  reporting  framework  to  keep
board  and  senior  management  well  apprised.  In  turn,  Board  and  senior  management  must
oversee proper resolution of ML/TF risk control concerns as flagged out internally by your staff,
by auditors or regulators. 
21. The next area relates to risk culture. Clearly, culture is not easy to prescribe as a practical
matter.  Every  staff  in  the  FI,  not  just  its  management,  contributes  to  its  culture.  However,
management usually has decisive influence on a firm’s overall culture by setting the right “tone
from the top” which must be reinforced through supporting actions to secure the commensurate
“echo  from  the  bottom”.  Those  in  the  various  lines  of  defences  must  be  empowered  and
recognised for doing their jobs well.
22.  My remarks so far have discussed the MAS’ approach to Regulations and Supervision. Let
me now touch on the next element of our framework – Enforcement. No matter the amount of
regulations  and  notwithstanding  the  heightened  intensity  of  our  risk-based  AML  supervision,
those bent on breaking our ML/TF laws will always try to find ways to exploit any weaknesses in
control systems or practices. This can happen especially if an FI’s governance and culture fall
short  and  appropriate  due  diligence  is  overlooked  in  lieu  of  business  motivations.  Should  this
happen,  the  MAS  will  take  tough  enforcement  actions  for  breaches  of  our  regulatory
requirements.  Where  laws  are  broken,  we  will  also  not  hesitate  to  refer  these  to  the  law
enforcement agencies for investigation and prosecution.
23.    Last  year,  we  announced  the  centralization  of  our  enforcement  function  into  a  single
department.  The  team  in  our  Enforcement  Department  will  deepen  our  capabilities  in
investigative  work  that  were  previously  undertaken  by  prudential  supervisors.  A  centralised
enforcement function in MAS will also allow us to take a holistic approach to “follow the funds”
should these cut across different types of entities in our financial sector.
24.  Let me now highlight the fourth key element of our AML/CFT framework: International Co-
operation and Partnerships.
25.  I have mentioned Singapore’s commitment to the international efforts to combat ML/TF risks.
We fully support the important work of various international organisations including the FATF. In
addition, it is important to have close supervisory co-operation between financial regulators and
we  hope  to  expand  on  our  supervisory  cooperation  network.  Another  area  which  we  will
strengthen is our partnership with the financial industry.
26.  While law enforcement and regulatory authorities have wide powers, the financial industry
has  an  “on  the  ground”  vantage  point  with  front-line  knowledge  of  business  and  clients.  It  is
hence  advantageous  to  adopt  a  collaborative  “eco-system”  approach  to  holistically  deal  with
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ML/TF  risks.  Such  a  partnership  should  be  as  inclusive  as  practicable  –  involving  law
enforcement agencies, regulator and the industry. Through collaborative partnership platforms,
we can expand our understanding of emerging risks and the typologies criminals use to launder
money.  This  will  allow  us  to  work  together  to  design  better  tools  to  detect  and  deter  ML/TF
activities.  With  this  in  mind,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  the  launch  of  the AML/CFT  Industry
Partnership, or ACIP.
27.  Industry engagement is not new. The MAS greatly values its many existing co-operation with
the industry such as with the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS). Such partnerships are
also  not  new  in  the  world.  Other  jurisdictions,  for  example  the  UK  and  Australia,  have  also
launched similar initiatives.
28.  What the ACIP will do in addition, is to institutionalise a collaborative partnership between the
law enforcers, regulator and industry. The ACIP will comprise a Steering Group which will be
jointly chaired by the CAD and MAS with senior representatives from the ABS and a pilot group of
eight banks.  It will provide a dedicated forum to more effectively exchange ideas and information
to mitigate ML/TF risks based on the national threat assessment.
29.  The Steering Group will set up various Working Groups to do targeted work on priority topics.
These  Working  Groups  will  deliver  tangible,  relevant  and  targeted  products  which  will  be
disseminated to the broader industry. The Working Groups will also share best practices and
typology alerts. Senior industry participants from within and outside the financial sector will be
invited to contribute to these Working Groups. I trust that all relevant stakeholders will step up to
the call.
30.  Last but not least, let me say something about capability and capacity building in combating
ML/TF.  Private  sector  bodies  such  as  ACAMS  are  important  in  the  training  of  AML/CFT
specialists, and will certainly complement the internal programmes of financial institutions. The
need to deepen capabilities and enhance capacity applies equally to us as a regulator and to law
enforcement agencies.
31.  One newer development is the greater use of technology tools and solutions including in the
area  of  data  analytics.  I  know  many  of  you,  in  your  respective  firms,  are  already  tapping  on
technology tools to improve your ability to detect fraud or unusual activities. Some of you are
aware  of  the  ongoing  discussions  in  Singapore  to  develop  utilities  that  can  streamline  “KYC”
processes  and  uplift  the  overall  quality  and  consistency  of  such  checks  and  customer  on-
boarding.  We can expect the increased use of technology especially in the areas of AML/CFT
screening and risk monitoring.
32.  As a financial regulator, the MAS is able to look for linkages and patterns across financial
institutions.  These  may  include  emerging  risks  or  irregular  relationships,  or  networks  and
linkages between entities or actors. MAS is therefore also investing in the use of technology and
analytics. Recently, we announced the formation of a dedicated Data Analytics Group which will
complement  and  support  the  analytics  units  in  our  supervisory  teams.  This  internal  analytics
“hub-and-spoke” model will deepen our “SupTech” capability, in turn allowing MAS supervisors to
better  tap  the  “RegTech”  capability  that  many  FIs  have  embarked  on.  This  SupTech-Regtech
linkage  is  targeted  at  driving  adoption  of  technology  for  compliance  and  supervision  efficiency
and effectiveness.
33.  A greater use of analytics to support our AML/CFT risk monitoring and supervision work will
hence be a key priority in MAS. To illustrate, we expect to tap Hadoop-based Big Data system to
build complex network models that are better able to identify and pick up subtle patterns in entity
behaviours. In the future, we hope to rely more recent technologies such as Machine Learning,
Deep  Learning  and  Graphics  Processing  Unit  (GPU)  based  computing,  to  deepen  MAS’s
financial surveillance and supervisory insights. I know that some of the major FIs are doing the
same.  Our  Data  Analytics  Group  will  also  look  to  establish  a  community  of  senior  data
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
practitioners with the industry to support an exchange of views for mutual learning.
34.  Let me conclude by reiterating why we take ML/TF threats so seriously. Singapore is an
important global financial hub. Our financial centre is home to many FIs including a number of
international firms. Many of them serve the region including in global business lines or in regional
corporate functions. Our reputation is one of being a clean, trusted and efficient financial centre
supported by a talented workforce and strong rule of law. This reputation has been built over the
years and must be protected diligently.
35.    With  the  rise  in  ML/TF  risks  globally,  Singapore  must  be  proactive  in  playing  our  part  to
combat  these  threats.  To  be  effective,  we  need  to  forge  a  strong  collective  effort  with  every
stakeholder doing its part. In this regard, a good regulator-industry partnership is one essential
thrust of our AML/CFT strategy.
36.  On this note, I wish you a successful and fruitful conference.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
