  M a y   2 7 ,   2 0 1 7 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 Theory on Financial Markets and Central Banks 
Speech at the 2017 Spring Annual Meeting of the Japan 
Society of Monetary Economics 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
  Introduction 
It is a great honor to be invited to the 2017 Spring Annual Meeting of the Japan Society of 
Monetary Economics. 
 Today  I  would  like  to  speak  about  financial  markets.  What  immediately  comes  to  mind 
when hearing the term financial markets are stock prices and foreign exchange rates, which 
are  discussed  on  a  daily  basis  in  newspaper  articles  and  news  reports,  and  firms  and 
individual investors are very familiar with the markets. At the same time, however, it can be 
said  that  once  the  discussion  touches  on  the  specific  structures  of  transactions  and  pricing 
mechanisms,  as  well  as  interest  rates,  securities,  and  derivatives  transactions,  topics  on 
financial markets turn out to be increasingly technical and require more expertise. 
 Over  the  years,  I  have  been  involved  with  financial  markets  in  various  positions.  At  the 
Ministry  of  Finance,  I  had  daily  contact  with  the  foreign  exchange  markets  as  Japan's 
foreign  exchange  authority.  At  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB),  it  raised  funds 
necessary for development finance by issuing bonds in global financial markets. Currently 
at  the  Bank  of  Japan,  I  am  deeply  involved  with  financial  markets  as  the  Bank  conducts 
monetary  policy  with  a  mission  of  ensuring  price  stability.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decides 
the  guideline  for  market  operations  at  Monetary  Policy  Meetings,  which  are  held  eight 
times  a  year,  taking  account  of  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as 
financial  conditions,  with  a  view  to  achieving  price  stability.  Based  on  this  guideline,  the 
Bank  conducts  daily  market  operations,  such  as  purchases  of  financial  assets  including 
Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  in  the  financial  market.  Apart  from  that,  the  Bank  is 
involved  in  many  facets  of  financial  markets,  including  enhancing  market  infrastructures, 
collecting and releasing market-related data, and operating settlement infrastructure. 
 Through  those  experiences,  I  have  always  felt  that  financial  markets  are  a  place  where 
theory and reality interact. For example, the pricing mechanisms of stock prices and foreign 
exchange rates are relatively suited to theoretical analyses, reflecting the characteristics that 
a great deal of data are continuously produced in financial markets. In fact, all of you here 
today  and  those  in  academia  have  brought  about  developments  in  theory  on  financial 
markets  and  have  facilitated  a  better  understanding  of  the  markets.  On  the  other  hand, 
 1 
market prices are determined through the activities of a broad variety of participants such as 
those  with  financing  needs,  fund  managers,  and  policy  makers.  There  are  cases  where 
financial markets move in line with theory, but it is not uncommon that they do not. Filling 
in  the  divergence  between  theory  and  reality  might  lead  to  the  formation  of  new  theory 
which enables market participants' behavior to be explained rationally. 
 In  this  way,  financial  markets  have  continued  to  develop  with  theory  and  practice 
stimulating each other. Today, bearing this point in mind, I will attempt to provide a bridge 
between theory and practice, in discussing theory on financial markets and touching on the 
reality of the markets from the perspective of central banks. 
 I. Traditional Theory on Financial Markets 
I would like to commence by talking about traditional theory on financial markets. Prices in 
financial  markets  are  determined  as  a  result  of  a  diverse  range  of  participants  trading 
various  assets  and  instruments.  Two  fundamental  theories  are  widely  shared  regarding 
valuation and pricing in financial markets. 
 Intrinsic Values 
First is that prices are formed in the markets based on the intrinsic economic value of assets 
and  instruments  that  are  traded,  so  they  are  theoretically  explicable.  For  asset  pricing,  the 
present  value  of  expected  future  cash  flow  of  financial  assets  is  believed  to  be  a  starting 
point.  For  example,  in  the  stock  markets,  it  is  typically  considered  that  "share  prices  are 
determined  by  the  present  value  of  the  firms'  future  profits."  Long-term  interest  rates 
formed in the bond markets are, in principle, considered to be "averages of expected future 
short-term rates," and theory has been formed where term premiums are taken into account. 
It  is  believed  that  in  the  foreign  exchange  markets,  the  so-called  purchasing  power  parity, 
with  which  "fluctuations  in  foreign  exchange  rates  in  the  long  term  reflect  differences  in 
inflation rates at home and abroad," provides a reference value. 
 Nevertheless,  actual  financial  markets  are  affected  by  many  other  factors;  therefore, 
short-term market developments cannot be completely explained based on the theory I have 
just  described,  and  even  taking  into  account  developments  during  a  longer  period,  the 
 2 
degree  of  applicability  and  explanatory  power  differ.  That  being  said,  I  think  that  the 
significance  of  the  theory  based  on  intrinsic  economic  values  is  recognized  as  being  the 
foundation or the starting point of valuations and analyses of market prices. Furthermore, if 
divergences  between  theoretical  value  and  market  prices  continue  over  a  long  period, 
analyses on the cause of those divergences are thought to have important meaning  in both 
theory and practice. 
 Efficient Markets 
The second understanding is that prices formed in fair and transparent financial markets do 
not  leave  opportunities  for  arbitrage  between instruments  and  between  markets.  If  a  clear 
arbitrage  opportunity  is  left  unexploited,  someone  is  most  likely  to  take  advantage  of  that 
opportunity  to  gain  profits,  thereby  bringing  about  a  price  correction.  Assuming  the 
presence  of  private  economic  agents  in  pursuit  of  profits,  this  understanding  is  quite 
reasonable. 
 Of  course,  this  understanding  is  based  on  the  following  strong  premises:  (1)  investors 
behave rationally, and (2) information that would affect prices becomes available instantly 
and  there  is  no  information  disparity  in  the  markets.  Therefore,  it  is  not  difficult  to  find 
cases where this understanding is not applicable in reality. However, I feel that this theory is 
significant in that it provides the basic perspectives for the functioning of financial markets. 
Supposing that an arbitrage opportunity is apparently present, the theory would be the basis 
for discussions on issues such as why that occurred, whether the market is just taking time 
to  adapt  and  adjust  and  an  autonomous  adjustment  can  be  expected,  and  whether  the 
situation should be artificially corrected by implementing some sort of measures. 
 II. Mutual Feedback with the Actual Markets 
The significance of traditional theory on financial markets is generally accepted not only in 
academia, but also among many market participants.  However, as  I have mentioned, there 
are  quite  a  few  phenomena  in  actual  financial  markets  for  which  such  theory  might  not 
provide a satisfactory explanation. It is believed these difficulties are attributable to various 
factors; three of which I will explain now. 
  3 
Difficulties in Utilization of Market Data 
Practical hurdles are one of the factors that make it difficult for traditional theory to be fully 
adopted. In relation to asset prices, there often are constraints in utilizing data  in practice. 
Specifically, expected inflation rates and term premiums included in long-term interest rates 
are  not  directly  observable,  even  though  they  are  widely  accepted  concepts.  Estimated 
figures should be seen with a considerable margin as there is no consensus on modeling and 
formulation. 
 In addition, there are cases  where data availability is a high hurdle in practice. Apart from 
data  that  are  not  observable,  which  I  have  just  described,  there  are  those  that  are  not 
collected,  those  that  are  regarded  as  private  information  and  are  not  for  general  use,  and 
those that are hidden and therefore their usefulness is not known. 
 On  this  point,  it  should  be  noted  that,  against  the  background  of  the  evolution  of 
information processing technology such as natural language processing, image recognition, 
and  machine  learning,  as  well  as  improvements  in  the  performance  of  computers,  a  trend 
towards  utilizing  types  of  information  that  was  not  expected  and  vast  data  for  investment 
decisions and market analyses has started to become widespread.1  It is expected that in the 
future  more  information  will  become  available  for  utilization  and  will  facilitate 
enhancements  in  market  efficiency,  accompanied  by  initiatives  for  ensuing  privacy  and 
information security. 
 Anomalies in the Markets 
It has been well known that, as long as it can be assumed there are efficient markets that do 
not  leave  arbitrage  opportunities  unexploited  and  there  are  rational  investors,  phenomena 
referred  to  as  anomalies  that  are  not  rationally  explainable  can  be  observed  in  financial 
markets.  Some  of  them  are  market  development  matters:  the  calendar  effect  that  finds 
regularity in market developments according  to the specific month or the day of the week, 
and  the  small-firm  effect  that  indicates  a  tendency  of  difference  in  expected  returns  by 
market value. There are also other anomalies that are to a certain extent understandable as 
                                                   
1  Haruhiko Kuroda (2017), "AI and the Frontiers of Finance," Remarks at the Conference on AI and 
Financial Services/Financial Markets, Bank of Japan. 
 4 
investor  psychology,  such  as  "investors'  expectations  tend  to  be  biased  by  their  past 
experiences"  and  "investors'  risk  appetite  could  vary  significantly  depending  on  their 
performances  up  to  that  point."  There  are  some  fields  where  instead  of  being  simply 
regarded  as  irrational  phenomena,  an  interdisciplinary  approach  using,  for  example, 
psychology, has led to the creation of new theory, such as behavioral economics. 
 Changes in Market Structure 
Apart  from  daily  price  movements  in  the  markets,  how  to  identify  structural  changes 
including  market  infrastructures  and  to  incorporate  them  into  analyses  has  long  been  an 
issue.  On  this  point,  from  the  perspective  of  a  practitioner,  I  feel  that  there  are  fields  in 
which,  even  with  an  evident  structural  change,  it  is  difficult  to  receive  support  from  a 
systematic  theoretical  approach,  in  part  due  to  the  high  level  of  expertise  required  to 
correctly recognize the relevant facts. 
 For  example,  as  trading  through  electronic  platforms  has  become  mainstream,  along  with 
the  significant  decrease  in  trading  through  human  brokers  such  as  floor  and  telephone 
trading,  the  time  required  for  the  execution  of  each  market  transaction  has  shortened 
dramatically. Under these circumstances, the execution of transactions based on  algorithms 
has  become  widespread  and  the  weight  of  high-frequency  trading  has  been  increasing  in 
some  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  some  institutional  investors  such  as  sovereign  wealth 
funds  and  pension  funds,  in  addition to traditional  financial  intermediaries and  investment 
trusts, have increased their presence as market participants; as a result, there is a possibility 
that investment styles have become diversified and the time span for returns has lengthened. 
 Although there is no question that these structural changes are exerting some sort of effects 
on  pricing  mechanisms  in  the  markets,  it  is  not  easy  to  gain  a  quantitative  grasp  of  the 
degree of those effects, even if it is possible to give a qualitative explanation. Furthermore, 
even if the existence of those effects is recognized,  there are often diverging  views on the 
degree of their significance including regarding assessments of their sustainability. Be that 
as it may, such a viewpoint on changes in market structure often serves as important clues 
for  analyzing  phenomena  that are  difficult  to  explain,  such  as  when  prices  follow  unusual 
patterns. Moreover, from the perspective of policy makers, it is considered highly important 
 5 
to foster a better understanding of changes in market structure not only for market analyses 
in  normal  times,  but  also  for  assessing  the  situation  in  times  of  crises  and  considering 
countermeasures. 
 III. Recent Characteristic Events 
I have described three factors behind the clear division between theory on financial markets 
and reality. Next, I will give two examples related to that gap between theory and reality. 
 Flash Events 
First  are  so-called  flash  events,  or  sharp  fluctuations  in  prices  in  major  markets  that 
occurred in a short period of time in recent years. A  few of the widely known flash events 
that  have  been  observed are  the  flash  events  in  the  U.S.  stock  markets  in  May  2010,2  the 
U.S.  Treasury  market  in  October  2014,3  and  the  British  pound  sterling  foreign  exchange 
market  in  October  2016.4  These  cases  share  the  characteristics  where  prices  or  yields 
plunged  and  then  recovered  relatively  rapidly  in  a  very  short  period  of  time.  All  of  those 
cases  attracted  significant  interest,  mainly  as  they  occurred  in  major  markets  that  are 
thought to have considerable liquidity. Although the full breadth of the events with regard to 
what actually took place has not been uncovered, analyses by staff of related authorities and 
other organizations suggest that a confluence of factors is likely to explain the events, rather 
than  any  single  cause.  Specifically,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  reduced  presence  of 
traditional  financial  intermediaries  that  engage  in  market  making  and  the  increase  in 
machine  trading  such  as  algorithmic  trading  and  high-frequency  trading  could  have 
exacerbated those sharp fluctuations in the markets. 
 Fortunately,  those  flash  events  did  not  cause  a  broad  impact  on  global  financial  markets, 
which  would  have  led  to  disruptions  in  funding  by  firms  and  governments  and  in  asset 
management  by  investors.  However,  if  similar  phenomena  occur  frequently  in  major 
markets,  we  cannot  completely  deny  the  possibility  that  they  would  adversely  affect 
                                                   
2  U.S.  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  and  U.S.  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission 
(2010), "Findings regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010." 
3  U.S.  Department  of  the  Treasury,  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  U.S.  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  U.S.  Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission (2015), "The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014." 
4  Bank for International Settlements (2017), "The sterling 'flash event' of 7 October 2016." 
 6 
financial systems and real economies. Existing theory does not seem to provide a sufficient 
explanation  of  how  flash  events  occur;  therefore  additional  research  based  on  broader 
viewpoints,  including  on  detailed  market  structures  and  behavioral  patterns  of  market 
participants, and theoretical research are awaited. 
 Effects of Financial Regulations 
The  second  example  is  the  effects  of  global  financial  regulatory  reforms  following  the 
financial  crisis.  It  is  necessary  to  strengthen  financial  regulations  to  restrain  excess  risk 
taking by financial institutions and investors and the accumulation of financial imbalances, 
both  of  which  were  causes  of  the  financial  crisis.  However,  there  is  a  possibility  that, 
depending  on  the  content  of  the  regulations  and  the  implementation  processes,  market 
making and various arbitrage activity by financial institutions would be affected more than 
expected. 
 Recently,  the  introduction  of  regulatory  reform  aiming  to  enhance  the  soundness  of  U.S. 
money market funds (MMFs) brought about a large-scale shift of funds to funds that limit 
their investments to sovereign assets such as government debts. As a result, it was pointed 
out  that  the  supply  of  U.S.  dollars  to  overseas  financial  institutions  --  in  which  MMFs 
previously  played  an  active  role  --  has  been  constrained,  thereby  exerting  effects  on  U.S. 
dollar funding costs. Since the total volume of funds before and after the regulatory reform 
has not changed, it is possible to claim that such costs will return to their previous levels at 
some  point,  as  long  as  arbitrage  functions  and  U.S.  dollars  can  be  supplied  through  other 
channels.  Indeed,  some  new  suppliers  of  U.S.  dollars  have  started  to  emerge.  However,  it 
seems  that  it  would  take  a  considerable  amount  of  time  for  both  market  participants 
supplying  and  funding  U.S.  dollars  to  adapt  to  the  new  environment  and  change  their 
behavior. 
 Similarly, in the U.S. money markets, it has been reported that, in view of stronger balance 
sheet constraints stemming from regulations on leverage ratios and other factors, U.S. banks 
have  become  less  active  in  interest  rate  arbitrage.  In  this  situation,  the  interest  rate  on 
reserves at the Federal Reserve -- which was expected to function as the floor on the federal 
funds rate upon its introduction -- has changed in nature and now virtually functions as the 
 7 
ceiling rate, reflecting the money market structures in the United States. Taking into account 
the actual role of the interest rate on reserves, the Federal Reserve has proceeded with the 
normalization  of  monetary  policy by  providing  a  new  means  of  absorbing  funds,  namely 
reverse repos, which forms a floor on the federal funds rate. Here, new practices have been 
created  to  raise  interest  rates  with  abundant  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  This  is  an 
example where regulatory and structural factors exerted significant influence on the interest 
rate formation mechanism in the market and on central bank market operations. 
 IV. Relationship between Central Banks and the Markets 
A. Maintaining and Improving Market Functioning 
Mutual feedback between theory on financial markets and reality -- which I have elaborated 
on -- holds an important meaning for central banks. 
 With  regard  to  the  more  practical  aspects  of  business  at  central  banks,  monetary  policy 
produces effects as central banks conduct operations through which they influence prices in 
financial  markets,  and  as  this  spreads  across  the  markets  through  arbitrage.  Therefore, 
maintaining and improving market functioning is a very important issue for central banks. 
 In  relation  to  this  point,  since  September  2016,  the  Bank  has  implemented  yield  curve 
control,  in  which  it  sets  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent,  and 
purchases  JGBs  so  that  10-year  JGB  yields  remain  at  around  0  percent.  Under  this 
framework, it can  be  described  that  market  mechanisms  allow the  entire  yield  curve to  be 
consistent  with  the  levels  of  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates  indicated  as  the  operating 
targets  in  the  guideline  for  market  operations.  Furthermore,  the  Bank's  Securities  Lending 
Facility -- through which it temporarily provides  Japanese government securities (JGSs) it 
holds  depending  on  market  conditions  --  is  conducted  from  the  perspective  of  supporting 
that mechanism in the JGS markets. 
 Aiming to ensure stability and high functionality in financial markets, the Bank has actively 
supported  initiatives  such  as  (1)  the  development  of  market  conventions  including  in  the 
money markets and foreign exchange markets, (2) shortening of the  JGB settlement cycle, 
and (3) the development of a market level business continuity plan. Moreover, the Bank is 
 8 
committed  to  enhancing  market  infrastructures  in  a  broader  sense;  for  example,  it  has 
increased  the  availability  of  valuable  data  through  collecting  market  transaction  rates  and 
releasing them. Although I will not go into the details today, the Bank  administers a robust 
and convenient settlement system and ensures its stable operation with the same objectives. 
The  Bank  will  continue  to  make  those  steady  efforts  towards  maintaining  and  improving 
market functioning. 
 B. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Financial Markets 
The main mechanism of monetary policy conducted by central banks has traditionally been 
to influence short-term interest rates through their operations including purchases and sales 
of  short-term  government  bonds,  thereby  exerting  effects  on  long-term  interest  rates  and 
prices  of  other  financial  assets.  Nevertheless,  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  central 
banks faced with the "zero lower bound" on nominal short-term interest rates implemented 
policies directly influencing long-term interest rates and various risk premiums under which 
they  conducted  purchases  of  long-term  government  bonds  and  riskier  assets  such  as  CPs 
and corporate bonds, in order to respond to the significant deterioration of their economies. 
This is referred to as "unconventional monetary policy." As a result, the presence of central 
banks  in  the  markets  has  become  much  more  significant  and  their  involvement  with 
financial markets has changed. 
 That  "unconventional  monetary  policy"  has  been  highly  effective  in  ensuring  financial 
market stability and supporting economic activity. At the same time, however, it has given 
rise to a new issue in analyses of "market prices" formed by incorporating the actions and 
expectations  of  various  economic  bodies,  that  is,  interactions  with  "the  effects  of  central 
banks' policies." Further research on this issue is necessary. Moreover, there is a possibility 
that  developments  in  financial  markets  would  have  effects  on  the  sentiment  of  consumers 
and businesses as well as on their spending activity, thereby amplifying fluctuations in the 
real economy. Thus, it is important for macro policy makers to gain an appropriate grasp of 
the interactions between financial markets and the real economy. 
 C. Market Intelligence 
In this manner, central banks conduct analyses of information produced in financial markets 
 9 
that  are  the  basis  for  their  policy  making  and  market  operations.  However,  it  is  not  at  all 
easy to understand the causes and background of complex developments in the markets. To 
this  end,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  out  multidimensional  analyses  by,  for  example,  utilizing 
traditional theories on the intrinsic value of financial assets and the markets' efficiency, as 
well  as  findings  obtained  from  new  research  such  as  that  on  pricing  mechanisms  in  the 
markets  under  "unconventional  monetary  policy,"  and  taking  into  account  the  views  of 
market  participants  that  actually  trade.  Furthermore,  it  is  considered  necessary  to 
continuously deepen our understanding of market structures such as in terms of systems and 
regulations, in addition to investors' characteristics and their trading styles, and sharpen our 
awareness of issues on their potential effects. 
 Such  collection  of  information  and  analyses  on  market  developments  are  referred  to  as 
"market intelligence." In this process, exchanging opinions with a diverse range of financial 
market participants is indispensable. It is certainly possible to enhance our understanding of 
the essence of financial markets by obtaining the views of as many market participants as 
possible.  As  a  part  of  those  efforts,  the  Bank's  staff  are  in  contact  with  a  broad  range  of 
market  participants  on  various  levels,  and  conduct  surveys  targeting  participants  in  the 
money markets and bond markets. 
 Concluding Remarks 
As  I  have  explained,  for  central  banks,  financial  markets  are  not  only  a  place  to  conduct 
market  operations  in  implementing  monetary  policy,  but  also  a  place  to  obtain  valuable 
information. In addition, central banks have a significant interest in the sound functioning of 
the markets, as a condition for the effects of their monetary policies to spread smoothly. 
 In  this  context,  as  the  Bank  has  significantly  benefited  from  developments  in  theory  on 
financial  markets,  it  has  made  its  own  efforts  in  theoretical  research,  utilizing  findings 
obtained  through  practices  including  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  daily  market 
operations, and analyses. From this unique position, the Bank will continue playing a role of 
serving as a bridge between theory and practice. 
Today's  meeting  is  a  great  opportunity  for  discussions  among  numerous  experts  from 
academia and practitioners from financial markets.  I would like to close by expressing my 
 10 
sincere hope that this meeting will generate fruitful discussions, and that further progress in 
research on financial markets will foster  a better understanding of the markets and greatly 
contribute to the development of the economic society. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 11 
