Carlos da Silva Costa: Risk management for central banks
Opening remarks by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the Joint
Bank  of  Portugal  and  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  "Risk  Management  for  Central
Banks", Lisbon, 25 September 2017.
 Thank you very much for your presence, I welcome you all and I hope that this conference and
your stay will be very pleasant as summer turns to autumn here in Lisbon.
The first point I would like to make is that Carlos Bernardel, Helena Adegas and I first planned to
organise this conference two years ago. We are now able to say that it was the right decision,
and I think that by the end you will be the first to witness that. 
When we took the decision to go ahead with this conference, risk management was an important
matter. But now it is even more important. There is a lot of thinking available on this matter, but
aside from the available thinking, we have a lot of problems to solve. And this means that we
need new thinking on ways to solve the problems linked to risk management.
My  opening  remarks  will  take  a  different  approach  to  my  closing  remarks  at  the  end  of  the
conference. I would like to speak initially about central banks and the way they face, or are faced
by, risks. Central banks are ‘complex entities’ with broad mandates. Firstly, central banks are
policy-makers and regulators. Secondly, they are also corporations and service providers. And
they  are  asked  to  be  accountable  in  both  these  capacities  that  are  very  important  for  the
economy and society.
As  policy-makers  and  regulators,  central  banks  pursue  a  public  interest  mission  of  delivering
price  stability  and  safeguarding  financial  sustainability. As  corporations  and  service  providers
they  have  to  be  well  managed,  they  need  to  be  efficient  and  they  need  to  care  about
sustainability. 
The  risk  management  framework  within  central  banks  needs  to  take  into  account  these  two
different – and sometimes conflicting – realities. As policy-makers, we need to understand that
the financial crisis, and the context in which the crisis emerged and developed, provide ample
food for thought about the role of central banks, including the issue of risk management.
Indeed, policy-making involves different types of risks and uncertainties.
When we speak about risk management, it is not only about asset management, but also about
risk  associated  with  our  own  decisions,  to  act  or  to  defer  action,  because  we  are  creating
uncertainties for third parties and for the economy. For instance, the central bank may base the
definition of its policies on a faulty representation of reality, either because the models used are
conceptually  wrong  or  incomplete,  or  because  the  coefficients  are  no  longer  right. And  if  you
recall our past history of this crisis you see that these two risks were very present: the quality of
the models and the quality, or the accuracy, of the coefficients.
Under certain circumstances, the central bank may also lack the necessary tools to achieve its
policy objectives; or it may have to cope with deficiencies in the institutional setting – and I have
plenty to say about the institutional setting and the difficulties created for the central bank by a
lack of the right institutional setting – or it may have to cope with failures in coordination with the
other relevant policy-making authorities. 
And when we speak about coordination and risks for central banks, we also have plenty to say.
Materialisation of these risks may lead to a late recognition of accumulating imbalances. This, in
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
turn, results in a failure to prevent imbalances from reaching a point when disruptive adjustment
becomes inevitable and a crisis emerges. 
This means that our main risk as a central bank in terms of policy-making is to act at the right
moment in order to avoid making later action harder, ultimately leading to a crisis.
Once  a  crisis  erupts,  the  nature  of  the  risks  changes,  calling  for  more  action  by  the  policy-
making authorities.
Initially,  the  priority  must  be  to  manage  the  crisis  and  mitigate  its  immediate  impact.  I  am
reminded of the popular Portuguese saying: ‘In times of war there is no time to clean weapons’.
And that is how it was during the crisis. When we are facing problems we need to act, despite
the presence of some risks. That is why initially the priority must be to manage the crisis and to
mitigate its immediate impact.
Unconventional, and often untested, measures are put in place, and the question arises as to,
first: What are the right doses of the medicine and the right duration of the intervention? 
Then one has to worry about the adjustment process towards a new ‘steady state’, and second,
about reducing the probability of similar crises occurring in the future. This means that we are
simultaneously in a situation where we need to ensure that the patient will survive, but the risks
associated  with  the  medicine  will  also  be  under  control.  The  dilemma  here  is  again  on  the
appropriate doses: 
How  to  facilitate  and  speed  up  the  adjustment  while  minimising  the  risk  of  ‘curing  the
disease and killing the patient’? 
And how can we smooth the adjustment without sowing the seeds of the next crisis? 
In other words, how can policy avoid tail risks? And at what cost?
Also, policies designed to avoid tail risks often carry significant risks for central banks’ balance
sheets.  This  is  something  that  has  been  studied  by  Professor  Ricardo  Reis,  who  is  with  us
today. Such policies, and their reversal in the future, may jeopardise central banks’ independence
and  their  ability  to  deliver  on  their  objectives  over  the  medium  run.  This  means  we  need  to
understand  that  central  banks  need  to  act  when  facing  difficulty,  but  at  the  same  time  acting
could be a big threat to the bank itself.
So, when deciding on their policies, central banks need to consider not only the overall economic
impact of those policies, but also the possible implications for their own sustainability. 
These and other difficult questions and trade-offs have been very much present in central banks’
deliberations over the past ten years; and they will not go away in the future because they will be
present in managing the balance sheet.
The second topic that we need to understand is that central banks are corporations and service
providers. And  related  to  that  are  the  risks  associated  with  formulating  monetary  policy  and
ensuring financial stability, as these activities will impact on their capacity to manage the balance
sheet. Central banks also face a variety of other risks emerging from their operational activity,
extending but not limited to those affecting:
Asset management;
Cash issuance;
Payment systems;
Information and communication systems, including cyber risks.
Materialisation of any of these risks may have a severe impact on the central bank’s financial
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
position and reputation. Their prevention needs to be part of the central bank’s daily activities.
On top of that, as banks with a balance sheet, with responsibility for the assets on the balance
sheet and with the needs of a central bank, and also as entities that have supervisory powers,
central banks need to set an example for the banking community and the financial system. This
means that we need to be the first to introduce new approaches, we need to be the first to think
about risks and we need to be the first to spread best practice among the financial community. 
In a nutshell I believe that to be effective, central banks need to be trusted; and in order to be
trusted, they need:
To have the ability to explain their policies and deliver on their mission;
To be accountable for their use of taxpayers’ resources;
And finally to lead by example.
The road is very narrow and failure to deliver can cause serious and long-lasting reputational
damage. Risk is so important because we are facing this risk always as front-runners when the
risk emerges.
A ‘risk-free’ organisation does not exist. This is something that we should emblazon on the front
of the central bank and also of the commercial banks: a risk-free organisation doesn’t exist. And
it  is  important  for  the  central  bank  –  within  the  constraints  of  the  institutional  and  regulatory
environment that embraces its operations – to define the appropriate level of risk appetite and
tolerance, and to monitor this risk in an effective and suitable way.
A properly designed risk management framework in the central bank is a pillar of confidence and
trust in the financial system and in the wider economy. 
This is why conferences such as this are so important. By bringing together academics, policy-
makers,  practitioners  and  market  analysts  to  exchange  views  –  from  very  different,  but
complementary,  angles  –  we  are  contributing  to  more  robust  policy  frameworks  and  to  more
robust institutions.
And I think this is the main takeaway that we need to have at the end of this conference: the idea
that we can do better, but we cannot avoid risk; and the art of the central bank is to deal with the
risk without losing sight of the two main goals, financial stability and monetary stability. To do
that, we may need to accept that some collateral effects are part of the process and are just the
price we pay in order to achieve the two main objectives.
Thank you very much. 
 And thank you very much to those who are making presentations, those who agreed to take part
in the discussions, and those who agreed to participate in this conference.
It is my honour now to present to you Yves Mersch, member of the Executive Board of the ECB.
It is a pleasure for me because I’ve known Yves Mersch for more than 30 years. We have been
together in different roles, together in the same room, discussing the Maastricht Treaty.
Yves Mersch was the chairman of the committee that discussed the Maastricht Treaty during the
critical period of time before its approval. He was instrumental and made a key contribution to the
development of these negotiations. Afterwards we met in different roles, including an important
one  that  I  would  like  to  mention  –  that  of  being  the  first  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Luxembourg. And this means a lot! This means creating a bank from scratch. And creating a
central bank from scratch is not an easy task in terms of the relationship with the political power,
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in operational terms, in terms of creating credibility, in terms of bringing together a team. And I
think that this point needs to be emphasised because it is a very important achievement by Yves
Mersch. 
After that, Yves Mersch joined the Board of the ECB, and he is one of the individuals we count on
heavily  at  the  ECB,  for  three  reasons.  First,  because  he  is  very  important  for  ensuring  the
smooth running of the infrastructure that is critical for the working of the economy, for everything
concerning currency issuance, everything concerning payments, and the major advances that
have  been  achieved.  Second,  he  is  very  important  because  he  is  in  charge  of  the  legal
department, a critical department for ensuring central banks’ independence – in fact more than
just independence – central banks’ obeyance to their ultimate objective. 
And third, as head of the legal department he is an important ally for us in the national central
banks  in  order  to  preserve  our  independence  where  there  are  temptations  to  reduce  this
independence. To be clear, the temptation to reduce the independence of the central banks is not
only a characteristic of, I would say, the Southern countries. There are Nordic countries that have
the same temptation. This means that wherever the treasury is, there is also the temptation to
take  it.  And  it  is  not  only  a  question  for  the  Portuguese  people  or  others:  put  the  money
somewhere and the temptation will arise, it may be sooner, it may be later, but it will arise. 
Yves Mersch is a key man for us, for our activity, because he is in charge of the department that
gives  us  the  sponsorship  that  is  needed  to  continue  with  our  activity  without  any  risks,  i.e.
institutional risks. And institutional risk is a big risk that central banks are now facing: if you look to
the United States or to Europe, you’ll see that the political and monetary centres have different
perspectives. To have someone in the legal department who knows very well which way is best
is very comforting and reassuring. 
So I give the floor to Yves Mersch, thanking him very much for the role that he plays in ensuring
the independence of the Eurosystem and ensuring that central banks at national level are in line
with the commitment that we undertook in the Maastricht Treaty. 
Thank you very much.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
