Nepal Investment Summit 2017 
Special address by 
Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal, Governor, Nepal Rastra Bank 
3 March 2017 
Mr. Chair of the Session, 
Distinguished Panelists, 
Esteemed Guests,  
Media Persons, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It gives me an immense pleasure to be here to address this session on “Financial Institutions/Alternative 
Investments: Creating Value for Money.” We have organized this Summit at a time when the Nepalese 
economy is striving for attaining higher growth and tracing the path for sustainable development. The 
recent data show a rebound in economic activity. All three major sectors of the economy; agriculture, 
industry and services are on the mode of recovery after the lackluster performance last year. The expected 
rebound reflects the resilience of the Nepalese economy to major shocks that it had to bear last year.  
Our macroeconomic fundamentals are sound. This is reflected in a low inflation and balance of payments 
surplus.  The  country  has  adequate  level  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  for  meeting  country's  near  and 
medium-term international obligations.  The current macroeconomic and financial situation is supportive 
for the pursuit of Nepal's huge growth potential going forward. 
Nepal  has  an  immense  potential  in  its  geography  and  location.  It  has  a  wider  scope  in  developing 
hydropower, ICT, irrigation, health, education, industrial estates, urban development, drinking water and 
sanitation, electricity transmission lines and agro-processing as well as herbal industries. The Nepalese 
financial sector has also reached a stage of its potential tapping for major investments in these areas. 
We have national aspiration and international commitment for upgrading our status from the LDC to the 
developing  country  by  2022  and  achieving  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  and  graduating  to  the 
middle  income  country  status  by  2030.  For  this,  the  role  of  financial  institutions  and  alternative 
investments  could  be  vital  for  upgrading  country's  economic  status  and  creating  the  value  for  money 
through investment.   
The resource that the Nepalese financial system has at present is sufficient to meet the working capital 
need  of  the  infrastructure  projects.  However,  we  need  foreign  investments  for  the  execution  and 
completion of the large projects.  
The ongoing Fourteenth Development Plan has accorded higher priority to the private sector in managing 
investment requirement. Of the total investment requirement of Rs. 2425 billion in the Fourteenth Plan 
period, around 55 percent is expected from the private sector. Tapping foreign investors and the Nepalese 
financial system is crucially important for meeting the targeted investment by the private sector.  
Nepal has followed a liberal foreign investment policy, and a need for investment-friendly environment is 
recognized everywhere in Nepal. Recent commitments in the areas of foreign investment show the huge 
attraction among foreign investors. Currently, the stock of FDI stands around Rs. 114 billion (5.1 percent 
of GDP), which is mainly in the areas of energy, manufacturing, service, tourism, minerals, and financial 
services.  
Nepal  has  signed  the  Bilateral  Investment  Promotion  and  Protection  Agreement  (BIPPA)  with  six 
countries  including  France,  Germany,  UK,  Mauritius,  Finland  and  India.  Commitment  from  these 
counties covers more than half of the total foreign investment.  
Legal reforms are underway in the areas of investment and exchange regulations. Amendment in the Acts 
relating to foreign investment and foreign exchange management will pave ways for foreign investors in 
1 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
7. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
8. 
9. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
10. 
Nepal. Public Procurement Act has already been amended. New Labor Act is under discussion. We are 
also in the process of formulating the PPP Act. Further, Nepal Rastra Bank has been facilitating foreign 
investors through flexible approaches in foreign exchange regulations. These reforms will be instrumental 
in promoting investment friendly environment in Nepal.   
The  number  of  financial  institutions  increased  significantly  after  the  adoption  of  the  liberal  economic 
policy in 1980s. Out of 28 commercial banks, we have 7 joint venture banks. This shows the trust among 
foreign investors on Nepal's institutional and policy framework.  
 Nepal's financial system is sound and well regulated. In addition to a low level of nonperforming loans 
and a wider bank-branch network, the planned hike in paid-up capital of banks is geared to supporting 
infrastructure financing. The banking industry, which is in the phase of consolidation, is in its capacity 
building process for large project financing.  
Further,  we  are  in  the  process  of  laying  the  ground  work  for  establishing  specialized  entities  for 
infrastructure development. A legal framework to establish infrastructure development bank has already 
been crafted. This will move ahead once the BAFIA gets the seal of affirmation from the President. The 
provision for infrastructure bank will also encourage private sector to participate in nation building.  
Our  financial  policies  are  directed  towards  creating  real  economic  value,  promoting  sustainable 
development and contributing to long term productivity growth. NRB has made mandatory provisions for 
commercial banks to invest at least one-fifth of their resources in the designated productive sectors. Of 
which, at least 15 percent of the loan should be extended to agriculture and energy sectors. Similarly, a 
provision  of  counting  bank  loans  up  to  Rs.  1  million  to  small  farmers  and  micro-enterprises  towards 
deprived sector lending has been made.  
Nepal has also developed institutional investors to mobilize resources through the channels other than the 
banking  system.  Resource  mobilized  about  Rs.  500  billion  by  the  non-bank  financial  institutions–
Employees Provident Fund, Citizens Investment Trust and Insurance Companies – signals the investment 
capacity  of  the  domestic  institutional  investors.  However,  it  needs  to  be  complemented  by  foreign 
institutional investment. 
Our  capital  market  is  still  in  the  developmental  phase.  However,  an  increased  interest  among  small 
investors shows the sign of the long-run growth prospect. Nevertheless, increased foreign investment will 
be a catalyst in deepening and widening the market through the participation of institutional investors and 
diversification of instruments. 
This  is  not  to  repeat  that  Nepal  needs  to  mobilize  additional  resources  to  develop  much  needed 
infrastructure for higher sustainable economic growth. The institutional framework and policy measures 
that we have designed provide business friendly environment and uphold the interest of the investors. I 
heartily  welcome  private  sector  and  foreign  investors  to  invest  in  Nepal.  This  will  contribute  to  the 
development  of  the  Nepalese  economy  and  help  investors  to  reap  the  maximum  benefit  on  their 
investment.   
Nepal  Rastra  Bank  is  committed  to  promoting  domestic  investment  as  well  as  to  facilitating  foreign 
investors to invest, operate and repatriate through institutional and procedural arrangements.  
Last but not least, I take this opportunity to extend my sincere thanks to the organizers for organizing and 
distinguished guests for attending this event. I would like to thank you all for your participation in the 
summit and wish the foreign participants an enjoyable stay in Kathmandu.  
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
17. 
18. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
16. 
Thank you very much. 
 2 
