Timothy Lane: How Canada's international trade is changing with
the times
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Saskatoon
Regional Economic Development Authority, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 18 September 2017.
Introduction
 My  theme  today  is  international  trade,  which  is  the  lifeblood  of  the  Canadian  economy.
Throughout  our  history,  we  have  successfully  relied  on  our  exports  and  imports,  particularly
during  the  vast  expansion  of  global  trade  in  the  decades  following  the  Second  World  War,  to
support our rising standard of living. Today, exports and imports represent about 65 per cent of
our output, one of the highest ratios among the G7 countries.
Few  places  in  Canada  illustrate  the  importance  of  trade  and  innovation  as  vividly  as
Saskatchewan.  Historically,  people  living  on  the  Prairies  relied  on  exporting  grain—and,  more
recently,  potash  and  oil—to  markets  outside  Canada’s  borders.  They  imported  many  of  the
products they consumed and the tools they used, from T-shirts to tractors. In the first several
decades of Confederation, they often chafed at the trade barriers that were put in place to protect
and nurture the growth of the manufacturing industries of central Canada. What is remarkable is
how nimble businesses in this province have been. They have adapted and innovated not only to
grow market share but also to develop new products and markets for them.
In  recent  years,  the  pattern  and  drivers  of  trade  both  nationally  and  in  Saskatchewan  have
evolved dramatically in response to forces that have been acting at the global level. Innovations in
many  areas,  notably  information  and  communications  technologies  (ICTs)  and  logistics,  have
given rise to the development of new products and new ways of producing and trading them. A
particularly important trend has been the emergence of global value chains (GVCs), with various
stages of production located in different countries.
In this context, the progressive lowering of trade barriers worldwide has had outsized effects.
Trade  agreements  have  enabled  much  closer  economic  integration,  and  trade  flows  have
burgeoned, leading to increases in productivity and living standards.
These trading relationships are now being called into question. Populist movements in some of
our  major  trading  partners  are  demanding  new  trade  barriers.  However,  such  protectionist
measures would undoubtedly mean less trade, which would reduce economic growth. While I
can’t comment on the specifics of any particular agreement, we have certainly been assessing
this  shift  toward  protectionism,  how  it  might  affect  the  outlook  for  growth  in  Canada  and  its
trading partners and ultimately what it would mean for the conduct of our monetary policy.
In my presentation today, I’ll review the changing nature of international trade, the factors, such
as innovation, that are propelling it and the benefits to Canada. I’ll discuss the challenges Canada
faces in its international trade and how they affect our economic outlook. I’ll conclude with what
this means for monetary policy.
The great unbundling
We used to think that the greatest benefits of trade accrued to countries with market dominance
in specific industries. Think of Switzerland and watches or France and wine. Historically, Canada
exported what we had in abundance—raw materials such as fur, fish and timber—and imported
manufactured  goods.  Of  course,  this  is  still  the  case  for  much  of  our  trade.  But  the  biggest
increase in world trade in recent decades has been intra-industry—that is, two-way trade within a
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
given industry (Chart 1). Some of that simply reflects product differentiation: Canada exports rye
whisky  and  imports  scotch  and  bourbon.  But,  even  more  importantly,  the  expansion  of  intra-
1
industry trade has been enabled by the unbundling of different stages of the production process.
Consider the automobile industry: Canada both exports and imports auto parts at different stages
of  production  as  well  as  the  finished  product.  The  potential  for  this  kind  of  unbundling  was
unleashed by technological innovations, particularly advances in ICT, which enabled the logistics
needed  to  manage  a  supply  chain  that  criss-crosses  international  borders.  Bank  of  Canada
research  has  shown  that  the  separation  of  production  into  stages  significantly  increases  the
2
economic gains from trade.
In  a  world  of  GVCs,  easing  trade  restrictions  can  also  have  outsized,  positive  effects  on  the
economy and on trade flows. This has been described as “leveraging” because every unit of the
final product—say, every car—incorporates a great deal of trade in the intermediate products and
any reduction in costs imposed on trade can have cascading effects. Lower trade barriers also
make it less expensive for firms to allocate different stages of production to countries where they
3
are most efficiently produced.
What  are  the  benefits  to  Canada  of  barrier-free,  intra-industry  trade  within  GVCs?  Within  any
given industry, lowering trade barriers enables more efficient producers to expand to supply a
wider market. That further lowers their costs as they move to a larger scale. Other, less efficient
producers or plants may shrink or fail.  
Canada’s experience with the 1965 Auto Pact, the 1988 Free Trade Agreement with the United
States and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) are good examples of the
economic impact of lowering trade barriers.  The North American market opened in the wake of
the  agreements  (Chart  2).  Employment  in  manufacturing  declined  in  the  short  term,  but
productivity rose and, in the longer term, the number of jobs in the economy increased. Efficient
plants were able to expand to a scale that allowed them to capture even greater efficiencies. The
5
improvement in productivity supported the growth in the overall earnings of workers.
4
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Exports  and  imports  are  a  two-way  street—and  both  help  deliver  the  benefits  of  barrier-free
trade.  Canadian  firms  can  compete  in  foreign  markets  partly  by  making  use  of  lower-cost
imported inputs, which raises their productivity.  And their exports of intermediate products are
linked to their trading partner’s trade performance. For example, when we export machinery to
the United States, it is an efficiency-enhancing input into their exports.
6
Benefits from opening trade may also come from increased competition.  This is the result of
both opening one’s home market to imports and gaining access to foreign markets.
Creative destruction
7
More  generally,  innovation  drives  changes  in  trade  patterns.  This  is  economist  Joseph
Schumpeter’s  idea  of  creative  destruction.   The  new  replaces  the  old.  Firms  inventing  new
products  may  expand  their  exports  by  penetrating  new  markets.  They  can  also  develop  new
production processes that enable them to produce at lower cost.
8
There are many such examples throughout the economy—in the high-tech industry as well as in
many other sectors. For example, 45 years ago here in Saskatchewan, pulses such as lentils
and  peas  were  a  small  part  of  the  province’s  farm  economy.   In  the  1970s,  however,
researchers  at  the  University  of  Saskatchewan  began  searching  for  a  protein  crop  to
complement  wheat,  which  was  suffering  from  an  oversupply  and  low  prices.  They  saw  the
opportunities  in  lentils  and  developed  new  varieties  suitable  to  the  climate  and  soils  of
Saskatchewan. Today, the province is the world’s largest exporter of green lentils and the world’s
second largest producer (Chart 3). In 2016, exports of the crop generated more than $2 billion in
sales.
10
9
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Innovations in the production process can also drive export growth. Historically, this has been a
major part of the history of Saskatchewan. New technologies, such as farm machinery and seed
varieties,  drove  the  consolidation  of  Prairie  farms  to  take  advantage  of  the  greater  ability  to
cultivate  and  harvest  crops  on  a  larger  scale.  Saskatchewan’s  farm  production  and  exports
expanded massively, even while its population steadily declined. That freed up workers to move
into job opportunities opening up elsewhere in the economy, while increasing the productivity and
incomes  of  those  who  remained  (Charts  4a  and  b).  This  is  a  story  that  has  a  personal
connection for me: half of my great-grandparents were farmers in the Prairies, but none of their
descendants is still farming.
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 I’ve been talking about how innovation drives trade, but the reverse is also true: trade openness
drives innovation, too. This happens for two reasons. First, access to foreign markets exposes
firms  to  new  technologies  and  provides  incentives  for  them  to  invest  in  producing  more
efficiently.
 And second, competition from trade encourages firms to innovate and invent new
products to maintain market share. Trade is also an important channel for knowledge to spill over
across  borders:  an  operation  in  one  country  can  become  competitive  by  combining  its  home
advantages with the best techniques developed elsewhere.
11
12
trade  and 
interconnected, 
the  nature  of 
innovation  have  always  been 
While 
these
interconnections is changing rapidly with recent advances in digital technology, touching virtually
all sectors of the economy. We are only beginning to appreciate how new fields, such as artificial
intelligence, cloud computing, additive  manufacturing  and  big  data,  may  play  out  in  new  trade
patterns.  Even  calculating  their  economic  impact  is  challenging.  Returns  from  patented
intellectual property (IP), such as software, are an increasing part of value added in electronic
products,  and  these  are  hard  to  measure.  That’s  also  true  of  trade  in  IP  services,  which  is
becoming  increasingly  important.  Google  Chrome  and  Dropbox—distributed  worldwide  across
the  Internet—are  good  examples.  Since  they  do  not  physically  cross  the  border,  there  is  no
customs paper trail, and they are difficult to track. They are also provided free to many users, so
it’s hard to place a value on them.
This whole process of expanding two-way trade and technological advancement is playing out in
myriad industries. It is one of the most important drivers of Canada’s growth potential, which, in
turn,  underpins  rising  living  standards  for  Canadians.  While  these  are  basically  positive
developments, they do pose important challenges for society and for policy-makers.
Both trade expansion and innovation are by their nature disruptive for firms and individuals. They
spur  growth  by  enabling  more  advanced  and  efficient  activities  and  encouraging  producers  to
expand, displacing less efficient activities and producers. This is an integral part of the whole
process.  Improved  productivity  is  essential  to  compete  internationally;  without  increases  in
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
productivity, the business itself and all of the associated jobs can be lost.
Historically, these changes have created many more job opportunities than they have eliminated.
In particular, Canada’s service sector, which has become an increasingly important source of
exports,  has  created  many  new  jobs  paying  above-average  wages.
  But  still,  some  workers
have been left behind. Moreover, the rewards for innovation, particularly in the digital economy,
often accrue to the few who own the related IP.
13
Can public policy help smooth the transition? I should make it clear that this is not part of the
Bank of Canada’s monetary-policy remit, which is to keep inflation low, stable and predictable,
allowing  Canadians  to  make  spending  and  investment  decisions  with  confidence.  But  the
disruptive effects of trade and innovation have been major topics of discussion internationally.
These are very challenging issues that do not offer easy solutions. Clearly, we can’t turn back the
clock  on  technological  innovation;  nor  is  the  answer  to  try  to  limit  its  scope  by  closing  our
borders.  What  we  can  try  to  do  is  focus  on  supporting  workers  as  they  adapt  to  changing
economic realities. That requires investments in retraining and lifelong learning as well as social
safety nets. Another priority is to make sure that profits, including those derived from IP, can’t be
shifted to avoid taxation. This includes stronger international co-operation—an area where the
G20 has made meaningful progress.
Trade and Canada’s current economic situation
Now let me discuss the part international trade plays in Canada’s current economic situation.
The period since the early 2000s has been challenging for Canadian exporters. The commodity
supercycle not only created opportunities for resource exporters but also put upward pressure on
the  Canadian  dollar,  undermining  the  competitiveness  of  Canada’s  non-commodity  exports.
Then, during the Great Recession of 2007–09, foreign demand for our products collapsed, and
our exports plunged by about 20 per cent. They rebounded quickly but then hit a long stretch of
lacklustre growth. This was part of the broader global pattern: before the crisis, global trade had
been expanding by more than 7 per cent a year—about twice as fast as the world economy.
Since  then  it  has  been  growing  at  a  much  more  modest  pace,  closer  to  the  rate  of  GDP
growth.
14
Because  Canada’s  relatively  weak  export  performance  has  been  a  central  aspect  of  our
economic situation, the Bank of Canada has examined it in increasing detail. New measures of
external demand for Canadian exports have been constructed, which better take into account
how  Canadian  industries  are  positioned  in  GVCs.
  Our  staff  have  also  constructed  new
measures of Canada’s effective exchange rate that better capture Canada’s competitiveness,
not just relative to our export markets but also relative to third countries (Chart 5).
 This analysis
contributes to a better diagnosis of Canada’s loss of competitiveness.
15
16
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moreover, in keeping with the new concepts in international trade that I have been describing, our
researchers  have  been  examining  Canada’s  exports  at  an  increasingly  disaggregated  level,
down to the individual  firms  involved.  During  the  recession  and  its  aftermath,  many  Canadian
exporters went out of business. With those firms went many of their supply-chain linkages.
Another complex set of adjustments have been playing out during the past three years, with the
plunge in prices of oil and other commodities. The economic and human costs to the resource-
producing  regions  were  huge.  For  Canada’s  economy  to  continue  growing,  the  non-resource
sectors—manufacturing  and  services—needed  to  grow  faster  and  export  more.  Increasing
foreign  demand  and  the  25  per  cent  decline  in  the  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  were  forces
supporting  this  adjustment.  While  this  expansion  of  non-commodity  exports  did  take  place—
exports of services were especially robust—the expansion was smaller than expected based on
previous experience. Regaining market share was not just a matter of getting foreign customers
to  switch  to  a  Canadian  product.  It  often  depended  on  a  reassessment  of  where  to  locate
production within a GVC—decisions that are typically not made often. To support the continuing
growth of our international trade, many new linkages may need to be constructed as both new
and existing firms emerge with new ideas and expand their activities to a sufficient scale. This
process inevitably takes time and is still not complete.
The prolonged weakness of Canadian exports has meant that Canada’s economy has needed to
rely on other sources of demand to drive its growth. In particular, we have depended heavily on
household spending, supported by very low interest rates.
Now,  economic  data  show  that  growth  in  Canada  is  becoming  more  broadly  based  and  self-
sustaining.  We  are  seeing  widespread  strength  in  business  investment  and  exports,  in
conjunction  with  a  global  economic  expansion  that  is  becoming  more  synchronous  (Chart  6).
Imports are also expanding; the increases we are seeing in imports of machinery and equipment
and of various intermediate products are early signals of rising business investment. It was in
this context that the Bank of Canada decided, in July and again earlier this month, to raise our
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
policy  rate.  We  will  be  paying  close  attention  to  how  the  economy  responds  to  both  higher
interest rates and the stronger Canadian dollar.
Looking  ahead,  Canada’s  openness  to  international  trade  is  an  important  determinant  of
Canada’s  economic  growth  potential—that  is,  of  how  fast  the  Canadian  economy  can  grow
without giving rise to inflationary pressures. That growth potential could be greater than we think
—if businesses find new ways to engage with GVCs and develop new products and processes
to make them more productive and competitive. As in the past, further expanding Canadian firms’
access to markets and to imported inputs could unlock more opportunities. An example is the
Canada–European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, most of which will
be implemented in the next few days.  
But some other developments are more concerning. With the rise in protectionist sentiment in
some parts of the world, we have been entering a time of heightened uncertainty about the rules
of  the  game  on  international  trade.  The  possibility  of  a  material  protectionist  shift—particularly
regarding  the  outcome  of  negotiations  on  possible  changes  to  NAFTA—is  a  key  source  of
uncertainty for Canada’s economic outlook.
Given  the  nature  of  international  trade  in  the  21st  century,  the  stakes  are  very  high.  As  I
discussed, the economic benefits we have experienced from trade liberalization were not only in
expanding the markets for Canadian exports. We also benefit from the greater efficiencies that
can  be  achieved  by  those  exporters  that  do  expand,  the  heightened  competition  and  better
access to imported inputs that come with greater openness to imports, and the resulting spur to
innovation throughout the GVCs. If trading rules are changed in a way that undermines these
benefits, the result would be both lost external demand for exports and lower potential growth for
Canada as well as for the United States and other trading partners.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
As  an  open  economy,  Canada’s  fortunes  will  continue  to  rise  or  fall  with  trade,  as  they  have
throughout our history. Global economic forces—the sharp movement of commodity prices; the
Great Recession and the lacklustre global economy in its aftermath; and, for much of the past
decade, a strong Canadian dollar—battered many of our export industries and splintered their
supply  chains.  Rebuilding  them  requires  the  emergence  of  brand-new  industries  and  the
development of new linkages to international trade networks. While it will take time for many of
these adjustments to play out, we are now seeing encouraging signs that exports and business
investment are broadening and strengthening.    
At the Bank of Canada, we have made a lot of progress in understanding the changing nature of
world  trade  and  especially  why  it  has  taken  so  long  for  our  exports  to  recover.  But  as  the
dynamics of trade continue to evolve with technology and other forces, we will closely monitor
and  analyze  these  developments.  This  is  essential,  given  the  importance  of  trade  to  the
economic well-being of Canadians.  
I would like to thank Patrick Alexander and Karyne Charbonneau for their help in preparing this
speech.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
R. Baldwin, “Trade and Industrialization after Globalization’s Second Unbundling: How Building and Joining a
Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no.
17716, 2011.
P. Alexander, “Vertical Specialization and Gains from Trade,” Bank of Canada Staff Working Paper No. 2017–17
(April 2017). 
K. M. Yi, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
Staff Report no. 96, January 2000. 
D.  Trefler,  “The  Long  and  Short  of  the  Canada–U.S.  Free  Trade Agreement, ” American  Economic  Review,
American Economic Association 94, no. 4 (September 2004): 870–895. 
Ibid. 
P. Goldberg, A. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova, “Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product
Growth: Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, no. 4 (2010): 1727–1767. 
A.  Atkeson  and  A.  T.  Burnstein,  “ Innovation,  Firm  Dynamics,  and  International  Trade, ” Journal  of  Political
Economy 118, no. 3 (2010): 433–484. 
J. Schumpeter, Business Cycles: A Theoretical, Historical and Statistical Analysis of the Capitalist Process (New
York, Toronto, London: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1939). 
University of Saskatchewan, “Leading the world in lentils.” 
Government of Saskatchewan, “Agriculture Fact Sheet. 
P. Bustos, “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on
Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review 101, no. 1 (2011): 304–340. 
R. Piermartini and S. Rubínová, “Knowledge Spillovers Through International Supply Chains,” 
S. S. Poloz, “From Hewers of Wood to Hewers of Code: Canada’s Expanding Service Economy” (speech to the
C.D. Howe Institute, Toronto, Ontario, November 28, 2016). 
S. S. Poloz, “A New Balance Point: Global Trade, Productivity and Economic Growth” (speech to the Investment
Industry Association of Canada and Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, New York,
April 26, 2016). 
A. Binette, T. Chernis and D. de Munnik, “Global Real Activity for Canadian Exports: GRACE,” Bank of Canada
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Staff Discussion Paper No. 2017–2 (January 2017). 
16
R. Barnett, K. Charbonneau and G. Poulin-Bellisle, “A New Measure of the Canadian Effective Exchange Rate,”
Bank  of  Canada  Staff  Discussion  Paper  No.  2016–1  (January  2016).  For  details  on  the  new  measure,
see Canadian Effective Exchange Rates. 
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
