   Remarks by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the 9th Annual Conference organised by the Central Reserve Bank of Peru 
and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee 
Cusco, Peru,  
24 July 2017 
 Emerging market economies in a new global cycle 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon.  
 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  Central  Reserve  Bank  of  Peru  and  the  Reinventing 
Bretton Woods Committee for the opportunity to participate in this conference on the 
highly  relevant  topic  of  how  a  changing  global  economic  cycle  might  impact 
emerging market economies.  
 
it  an 
The  near-decade  since 
unprecedented 
financial 
characteristics of this evolving cycle of globalisation as well as the challenges and 
benefits  it  poses  to  emerging  market  economies  indeed  deserve  our  attention, 
especially  against  the  background  of  an  environment  in  which  the  benefits  of 
multilateralism are being questioned by some, when in fact the role of international 
institutions and regional financial cooperation should be intensified.  
 
 
financial  crisis  has  brought  with 
for  emerging  countries.  The 
the  global 
financial  environment 
 Page 1 of 8 
 2. The financial characteristics of a new global cycle  
 
Policy rates in the United States (US) remained at around zero from late 2008 to late 
2015, and even today they are 1.7 percentage points below their average of the past 
25 years. In Japan, the eurozone and several other European economies, the policy 
rates remain near or below zero. Following several phases of quantitative easing, the 
balance sheets of the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of 
Japan and the Bank of England currently account for almost 38% of their respective 
country’s  gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  versus  10%  in  June  2007.  Such 
accommodative policies have compressed long-term interest rates and financial risk 
premiums, with spillover effects of strong portfolio inflows and downward pressure on 
domestic real yields enjoyed by emerging market economies. South Africa was no 
exception;  in  the  period  between  2009  and  2016,  non-resident  portfolio  inflows 
averaged 3.9% of GDP, versus 2.4% in the previous 20 years, fully funding a wider 
current account deficit and contributing to a compression of average real yields on 
government debt.1  
 
Yet this environment may be about to change. The gradual fading of economic slack 
in  the  advanced  economies  raises  legitimate  questions  about  whether  the  current 
degree  of  global  monetary  stimulus  remains  appropriate,  and  indeed  a  number  of 
central banks in advanced economies have signalled intentions to move from their 
current highly accommodative monetary policy stances. Policy rates in most of the 
advanced  economies  could  eventually  follow  the  US  path  towards  gradual 
normalisation,  and  central  bank  balance  sheets  could  probably  decline  to  levels 
more consistent with ‘normal’ central banking operations. Such steps may well raise 
the real long-term interest rates to levels more in line with economic fundamentals, 
especially as budget austerity has faded in most of these economies.  
 
Should this happen, emerging countries may start finding easy and cheap external 
financing  less  forthcoming.  Currently,  cross-border  bank  flows  from  advanced 
economies  into  the  emerging  world  are  already  experiencing  headwinds  from  a 
                                                           
1 Deflated by CPI inflation, South African 10-year government bond yields in the past five years averaged 2.55%, 
about 35 basis points less than the average of the previous 10 years – this is despite the gradual deterioration in 
South Africa’s sovereign credit rating in recent years. 
 Page 2 of 8 
 tighter  regulatory  environment,  which  has  generally  led  banks  to  reduce  risk 
exposure  and  place  greater  focus  on  the  domestic  business.2    A  situation  where 
emerging countries have to compete harder for international capital could be another 
element in the broader picture of ‘reduced globalisation’.  
 
  3. Another step towards lesser globalisation? 
 
According to the World Bank, trade in goods and services as a share of GDP has 
generally  been  declining  post-crisis.  For  sub-Saharan  Africa,  in  particular,  it  had 
fallen as low as 55% of GDP in 2015 from 74% in 2008. While cyclical weakness in 
import-intensive  fixed  investment  growth  accounts,  to  some  extent,  for  this  partial 
reversal of earlier trends, other – more structural – factors are also at play. These 
include the sharp slowdown in the expansion of global value chains (GVCs) as the 
number  of  trade  protection  measures  put  in  place  across  the  world  now  tends  to 
exceed that of liberalising measures.3 At the same time, current  political trends in 
some  advanced  economies make  the  imposition  of  restrictions  on  migratory  flows 
more likely. 
 
To some extent, the challenges of attracting capital from advanced economies could 
be compared to the slowing growth in GVCs. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the 
growing  development  of  securities  markets  in  emerging  countries,  the  further 
deregulation of the insurance and pension fund industries in advanced economies as 
well as a reduced ‘home bias’ by international investors all contributed to a structural 
rise  in  the  global  portfolio  allocation  to  emerging  market  assets.  The  monetary 
policies implemented after the global financial crisis exacerbated that trend, but this 
structural shift appears to have now run its course. 
 
  4. Potential challenges and benefits  
 
A slower pace of globalisation, let alone the reversal of some of its aspects, will no 
doubt  bring  challenges  to  many  emerging  countries.  In  an  environment  where 
                                                           
2 According to Bank for International Settlements data, cross-border claims of all reporting banks to emerging and 
developing economies rose from US$1.65 trillion (4.9% of world GDP) in 2000 to a peak of US$4.0 trillion (6.3% 
of GDP) at the start of 2008, but then fell back to US$3.7 trillion (4.9% of GDP) at the end of 2016. 
3 See ‘The future of globalisation’, Barclays Economic Research 2 March 2017. 
 Page 3 of 8 
 international  trade  may  no  longer  grow  as  a  share  of  GDP,  countries  which  had 
followed an export-orientated development model are probably most exposed. Also 
exposed are countries which had benefitted from strong integration in GVCs. At the 
same time, countries that run structural current account deficits, and hence rely on 
capital inflows to finance their investment growth, are exposed to reduced financial 
globalisation. 
 
Sub-Saharan  African  countries,  including  South  Africa,  partly  ‘missed  out’  on  the 
inclusion  in  GVCs,  with  their  exports  still  largely  dominated  by  raw  or  less-
transformed commodities. This may leave them relatively sheltered from protectionist 
measures,  especially  as  they  do  not  run  large  external  imbalances  with  advanced 
economies,  the  US  in  particular.  Yet  this  is  no  cause  for  complacency:  growth 
models are also changing in some large emerging economies, potentially reducing 
their relative demand for commodities.  
 
For example, South Africa’s exports to Asia grew by an average of 13% per annum 
in the past 15 years, a move mostly driven by these countries’ surging appetite for 
commodities,  which  is  likely  to  ease  as  they  reach  higher  levels  of  development. 
Against such a challenging global backdrop, many of South Africa’s structural issues 
– notably its poor competitiveness in non-commodity exports, its inability to absorb a 
large part of the workforce, and its dependency on high value-added imports – stress 
the need for an increased focus on implementing structural reforms. 
 
However, it need not all be gloom and doom for emerging economies. A new global 
growth  model  could also  bring  opportunities  to emerging  countries  –  provided  that 
they  are  properly  exploited.  Monetary  policy  normalisation  in advanced economies 
could  end  up  reducing  the  elevated  sensitivity  of  financial  conditions  in  specific 
emerging  economies  to  their  global  counterparts.4  In  market  parlance  this  is  often 
referred to as ‘risk on, risk off’ behaviour – and while this facilitates external financing 
in periods of elevated risk appetite, it can also reduce domestic policy autonomy. In 
fact, in a world where more conventional monetary policies are in place, financial risk 
may be priced more accurately, resulting in proper market rewards for good policies 
                                                           
4 See ‘Are countries losing control of domestic financial conditions?’ in the Global Financial Stability Report, 
published by the International Monetary Fund in April 2017. 
 Page 4 of 8 
 –  an  incentive  for  policymakers  to  implement  prudent  policies.  A  reduced  role  for 
cross-border capital flows, or a lower level of dependency, could also provide more 
protection for emerging markets in periods of a global crisis, as it would reduce the 
risk  that  advanced  economies’  fund  managers  and  banks  would  withdraw  their 
investments or loans in a rush. In fact, this might greatly reduce the risk of financial 
crises,  as  international  financial  exposure  is  managed  in  a  more  risk-conscious 
manner. 
 
At  the  same  time,  a  lesser  degree  of  financial  globalisation  could  help  to  reduce 
global  imbalances.  Sizeable  cross-border  reallocation  of  capital  allowed  the 
persistence  of  large  current  account  deficits  or  surpluses  in  some  countries  which 
posed  threats  to  global  financial  stability.  In  some  countries,  capital  inflows  have 
exceeded  financing  needs,  and  are  either  being  recycled  into  excessive  domestic 
credit  growth  or  forcing  authorities  to  accumulate  sizeable  and  costly  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  In  other  countries,  large  deficits  fuelled  strong  increases  in 
external  liabilities,  endangering  macroeconomic  stability  and  putting  sovereign 
ratings at risk. 
 
   5. Role of international organisations and regional financial cooperation 
 
It  is  important,  however,  to  recognise  that  the  optimal  economic  development  of 
emerging countries is still likely to require access to international financial markets. 
However,  these  countries  may  increasingly  have  to  seek  such opportunities  within 
the emerging region itself. With regard to financial coordination, there are two issues 
that have a strong bearing on vulnerabilities in the international financial architecture 
that require global action from international organisations such as the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) and forums such as the G20.  
 
The first issue relates to the management of capital flows. The gradual liberalisation 
of capital flows in countries with large external surpluses provides additional scope 
for  the  foreign  financing  of  emerging  economies.  However,  excessively  volatile 
capital  flows  and  the  related  spillover  effects  remain  key  concerns  for  many 
emerging  market  economies.  In  instances  where  these  are  accompanied  by 
increased credit extension and posing a threat of increased financial stability risk, a 
 Page 5 of 8 
 sharp  focus  on  the  management  of  systemic  risks  is  of  importance.  In  assisting 
countries to deal with the unintended consequences of these excessive capital flows 
in  a  manner  that  promotes  sound  policies  and  strong  frameworks  –  including 
monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  flexibility  –  as  the  first  line  of  defence  against 
excessive capital flows, the IMF published a guidance paper titled  “The liberalization 
and management of capital flows: An institutional view 5”. South Africa’s approach to 
capital flow management has been broadly in line with the IMF’s institutional view. 
We  have  adopted  a  relatively  hands-off  approach  to  managing  capital  inflows, 
allowing the exchange rate to act at as a shock-absorber, while monetary policy is 
not focused on the exchange rate but rather on the possible inflationary implications 
of exchange rate movements.  
 
As  you  know,  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(OECD)  is  currently  reviewing  its  Code  of  Liberalisation  of  Capital  Movements 
(Code).  The  IMF  is  also  participating  in  the  review  of  the  OECD Code.  Continued 
cooperation  between  the  IMF  and  the  OECD  remains  crucial  for  addressing  any 
perception  that  countries  might  receive  seemingly  conflicting  signals,  or  policy 
advice,  regarding  the  appropriateness  of  capital  flow  measures.  Additionally,  the 
support  from  the  IMF  through  the  establishment  of  the  Data  Gaps  Initiative 
framework,  aimed  at  supporting  enhanced  policy  analysis  of  risk  in  the  financial 
sector  as  well  as  an  analysis  of  vulnerabilities,  interconnections  and  spillovers, 
including cross-border risks, promises to be of great use.  
 
Let  me  now  address  the  second  issue,  which  has  to  do  with  the  adequacy  of  the 
global  financial  safety  net  (GFSN)  at  national,  bilateral,  regional  and  global  level. 
Members of the G20 have agreed to collaborate closely to advance cooperation and 
form consistent policy stances with the aim of advancing structural reforms, fostering 
economic resilience, promoting infrastructure investment, and promoting the stability 
of the international financial architecture – all to enforce stronger, more sustainable, 
more balanced, and more inclusive growth.  
 
                                                           
5 IMF Policy Paper, 14 November 2012. “The liberalization and management of capital flows: An 
institutional view” 
 Page 6 of 8 
 In  this  regard,  the  IMF  could  assist  by  applying  a  consistent  approach  to  the 
monitoring  and  surveillance of  countries  to help  identify  potential risks  and  shocks 
that could emanate from the global financial system. The G20 Hamburg Action plan 
called on “the IMF to further enhance the effectiveness of its lending toolkit in line 
with  its  mandate,  including  considerations on  a  new  short-term  liquidity  instrument 
and  a  new  non-financial  policy  cooperation  instrument”,  and  I  understand  that  this 
work is receiving attention at the highest level in the IMF. An improvement in the IMF 
policy  toolkit  and  financing  instruments  would  assist  in  closing  the  gaps  in  the 
financial system and, in so doing, assist with improving the resilience of economies 
to exogenous shocks. 
 
The  IMF  and  regional  institutions  in  Africa  should further  explore  ways  to  improve 
access  for  African  countries  to  the  GFSN  beyond  what  is  available  at  multilateral 
financial institutions.  
 
The  importance  of  regional  financing  arrangements  (RFAs)  remains  key  to 
strengthening  the  GFSN,  and  they  provide  multilateral  insurance  properties  of  a 
different nature to the safety net. However, there is a need for African countries to 
work together with the IMF in developing RFA facilities in the region.  
 
6. Conclusion 
 
In  conclusion,  the  new  global  cycle,  partly  characterised  by  normalisation  in  the 
global financial markets after a prolonged period of a low interest rate environment 
and  reforms  in  the  banking  sector,  harbours  both  challenges  and opportunities for 
emerging market economies. The interconnectedness and interdependencies of our 
economies makes international cooperation indispensable, and the rhetoric around 
trade protectionism and pushback against multilateralism is occurring at a time when 
we can least afford it. However, any success in international cooperation will only be 
achieved 
is  built  on  maintaining  macroeconomic  policy  discipline  and 
strengthening the depth and regulation of financial markets at individual county level.  
 
Thank you for your attention.  
 
if 
it 
 Page 7 of 8 
      Page 8 of 8 
