Peter Praet: Interview in Trends/Tendances
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Trends/Tendances, conducted by Mr Daan Killemaes and Mr Jasper Vekeman on 4 May 2017
and published on 11 May 2017.
 So  let’s  kick  off  straight  away  with  the  topic  of  the  moment:  the  risk  of  deflation  has
subsided, the economy is recovering, political risk is on the wane… Isn’t it time…?
Peter Praet: (interrupts) “Yes, political risks are diminishing, yet policy uncertainties still persist
– Brexit, for example. We’ve seen how negotiations can swing very fast from one side to the
other. And as far as the economy is concerned, there’s still a wide array of risks. They’re moving
towards a more balanced configuration, but are still tilted to the downside.
For the first time in many years, we’re seeing a synchronised recovery of the world economy.
But two key points deserve mentioning here. The first is that the euro area recovery is not yet
sustainable  without  support  from  our  monetary  policy.  In  addition  to  monetary  support  of  the
recovery, structural reforms are necessary for sustainable growth over the medium to long term.
The second point is that confidence indicators, the soft data, tend to be stronger than the hard
figures. To accurately assess the level of monetary support that is still needed, it’s important to
have a confirmation of confidence indicators in hard data.”
Given this uncertainty, do you think it’s too early to start reducing policy support?
Praet: “Let me start with the good news, and that is that our monetary policy is working. Am I
being too triumphalist? That’s a matter for discussion, but our policy has undeniably played a key
role  in  avoiding  deflation  and  supporting  the  economy. And  for  the  first  time  in  many  years,
growth is now being driven primarily by domestic demand, and in particular private consumption.
So the argument that our policy is leading people to hoard their money is unfounded. And the
argument that people are actually saving more due to negative real interest rates doesn’t hold
either.”
So why the caution about which policy direction to follow?
Praet: “The last time we tightened our policy was 2011. After a long period of accommodative
policy  such  as  the  one  we  have  today,  any  change  in  the  policy  stance  must  be  prepared
carefully  and  implemented  very  gradually.  And  such  a  change  must  also  be  supported  by
sufficient  evidence  that  growth  is  translating  into  a  path  of  sustained  adjustment  in  inflation
towards below, but close to 2%.”
So you’re not yet seeing a sustained rise in inflation?
Praet: “Inflation has recently been quite volatile. We’ve always maintained that we should look
through short-term volatility. That’s why what counts most now is underlying inflation, for example
core inflation (inflation excluding the more volatile elements, such as energy, Ed.). And that’s still
on the weak side. In recent months we’ve seen producer prices rising worldwide, and now even
in Europe somewhat. In the past, the pass-through from producer prices to consumer prices for
non-energy industrial goods, an important component of core inflation, typically took one to two
years. We’ll have to wait and see how fast it will go this time.
We are also looking at prices in the services sector, which are to a large degree determined by
wages. In the past, we have sometimes overestimated wage inflation, as we failed to properly
factor in people who gave up on the job market or those forced to accept part-time rather than
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
full-time  jobs.  But  we  now  have  a  better  picture  of  underutilisation  in  the  economy,  which  is
greater than the official unemployment figures would have us believe.
Recently, the gap between that broadly defined unemployment and the traditional measure has
begun to narrow. That suggests people are returning to the job market. Over the next couple of
years the pressure on wages should start to feed into inflation. Things are evolving in the right
direction. We’re not trapped in a low inflation environment.”
You’re happy that inflation is returning?
Praet: “We currently have increased confidence in the path of inflation that we have outlined in
our forecasts. But before we can start scaling back our policy, even gradually, we’d like to see
further confirmation. We believe that the output gap (the gap between potential production and
real production, Ed.) will have closed by 2019, and that price pressure will follow as a result.
However,  for  the  time  being,  economic  developments  are  still  dependent  on  very  favourable
financing conditions, for which monetary policy plays a very important role. But there are other
factors too. Financial conditions also depend on international factors, in particular on potential
spillovers from the United States.”
You are waiting for greater clarity, but in the meantime there is growing criticism. The
banking sector in particular is grumbling about negative interest rates.
Praet: “That’s true, but their criticism is often excessive. The banks don’t have it easy and their
profits  are  under  pressure,  but  that’s  not  only  due  to  negative  rates.  There  was  too  little
consolidation post crisis, for instance. So there is now a great deal of competition in the banking
sector. However, we observe that this situation does not prevent banks from letting their clients
benefit from easy financing conditions, including access to cheap long-term central bank credit
(TLTROs).  So  right  now  we  are  satisfied  with  the  impact  of  our  policy.  Surveys  of  SMEs  for
example  show  that  they’re  no  longer  particularly  worried  about  access  to  credit.  And  that
suggests that lending is no longer holding back growth.”
As  long  as  interest  rates  are  negative,  this  will  fuel  criticism.  Not  least  because  the
concept of ‘negative rates’ is so difficult to grasp. Could that be an argument for hiking
rates before scaling back your bond-buying programme?
Praet: “The negative deposit rate is part of a complex package of interrelated measures. If one
element changes, this can have an immediate effect on all interest rate levels. Suppose you keep
buying  bonds,  which  pushes  down  long-term  rates,  while  raising  short-term  rates,  which
changes  the  expectations  for  all  future  interest  rates.  You  then  exert  two  opposing  forces  on
long-term rates, ultimately partially negating the effect of the bond-buying programme by raising
short-term rates.
Look, there is a very strong chain of logic behind the decision to first scale back Quantitative
Easing (QE, the bond-buying programme, Ed.), raising the term premium included in long-term
rates,  and  only  then  hiking  short-term  rates.  We  have  to  scale  back  our  policy  in  an  orderly
fashion if we don’t want to undo the benefits of what we’ve been doing for the past few years.”
Why does this sequence cause so much discussion if it’s so obvious?
Praet:  “Some  bankers  assert  that  an  increase  in  the  deposit  rate  would  actually  constitute  a
loosening of our policy, as banks would then give more credit. But as I said, lending levels are
already developing well.
No one likes the current environment. Not even me – I’d love to see higher growth and investment
and more structural reforms. But that’s just not the way things are right now. We will of course
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
re-analyse the situation in June. It’s difficult to pinpoint when to start scaling down our stimulus.
We first need assurance that inflation is on a sustainable path. But we need to be patient. The
economy is normalising.
But it is a slow process and there are still downside risks.”
What  is  your  message  to  savers,  as  they  have  the  feeling  that  they’ve  already  been
paying for the crisis for years?
Praet: “I’m a saver too but we should not forget that the crisis has cost many people their jobs.
Without our monetary policy, we would have been stuck in a deep economic depression. One
also  has  to  consider  that  low  interest  rates  have  made  debt  servicing  easier,  in  particular  on
mortgages.  In  a  number  of  countries  like  Belgium  these  gains  are  larger  than  the  losses  on
savings accounts.”
That’s of little comfort to savers, who are losing purchasing power due to inflation and
zero interest rates.
Praet: “That’s true for a certain category of savers. And in absolute terms, this group is a large
one. I have in mind pensioners who are not especially wealthy but have some savings, and that
have been living partly on the income from their savings. Not everyone is in a position to diversify
into equities. Low interest rates are also an important issue for pension funds and life insurers,
but it doesn’t make a decisive case for pursuing the wrong monetary policy.”
So they’re collateral damage, as it were?
Praet: “Well, all monetary policy entails certain redistribution effects. Had the ECB not acted, the
distributional  effects  would  have  been  much  worse.  We  have  our  mandate  and  that  is  price
stability. And where there are major redistribution effects, we have governments to even that out.
It would be a major mistake to conduct monetary policy based on considerations other than price
stability. Then you might as well place the central bank within the Finance Ministry. And I doubt
that even they would like that idea. It remains essential to keep monetary policy separate from the
government.”
But you might also make a mistake and turn off the money flow too late?
Praet: “I think there is a major difference in the sort of mistake you could make these days. If you
react late, you risk some inflationary pressures, as the economy turns out to be stronger than
you thought. This risk is deemed to be limited given the degree of slack we are still seeing in the
euro  area.  On  the  other  hand,  scaling  back  too  early  could  jeopardise  the  recovery  and  the
convergence of inflation towards our objective”
Is that the discussion that ECB President Mario Draghi referred to in his most recent
press conference?
Praet:  “No,  that  debate  primarily  concerned  upside  and  downside  risks  for  growth. Are  they
balanced  or  not?  The  assessment  of  the  balance  of  risks  plays  a  very  important  signalling
function. The Governing Council signalled that risks are increasingly balanced, but still tilted to
the downside. We will of course be re-evaluating the situation in the following meetings.”
We see that Draghi sometimes changes half a sentence, and on other occasions alludes
to the lower risks. Is he trying to massage the markets?
Praet:  “It’s  not  a  matter  of  massaging  the  markets,  it’s  more  a  question  of  careful
communication.”
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Do you look forward to the day when your every word is no longer dissected?
Praet: “Well, I’ll still have to wait two more years for that, until I retire. A Belgian banker once told
me, when I was working with the Generale Bank: ‘I had a great deal to tell, but nothing to say.
Now I have a lot to say, but may tell little. Once I retire, I guess I’ll have nothing left to say and
nothing left to tell’.”
Text box
Bond-buying has increased the central banks’ balance sheets dramatically. Will they ever
shrink back to pre-crisis levels?
“It’s still too early to say. There are many aspects to this issue, which is a matter of discussion in
the Federal Reserve. This is also uncharted territory. What if you stop reinvesting in bonds when
they reach maturity? What effect would that have on the normalisation of interest rates? Would
that  process  then  speed  up?  It’s  not  a  simple  matter  at  all.  Everything  in  monetary  policy  is
interlinked. Every time you change direction, you set a chain of events in motion.
Another  aspect,  which  relates  more  to  the  functioning  of  financial  markets,  is  the  balance
between  the  supply  and  demand  for safe assets. A  general  trend  has  been  a  decline  in  the
supply of safe assets: corporate bonds with the highest credit scores have almost disappeared;
some countries have lost their AAA-rating. On the other hand, demand remains very high. A lot of
research is being conducted into this matter. Some researchers are suggesting that central bank
balance  sheets  should  remain  permanently  higher,  to  use  their  reserves  to  reduce  the  gap
between supply and demand.”
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
