  Closing Remarks by 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 Launch of the Eighth Edition of the World Bank’s 
Uganda Economic Update: 
 “Step by Step – Let’s Solve the Finance Puzzle to 
Accelerate Growth and Shared Prosperity” 
 Kampala, Serena Hotel 
  February 7, 2017 
  Ms.  Christina  Malmberg  Calvo,  World  Bank  Country 
Manager for Uganda,  
Members of the Diplomatic Corps, 
Distinguished Panelists,  
Staff of the World Bank in Uganda, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  commending  the  World  Bank  for 
publishing  the  eighth  edition  in  the  series  of  Uganda 
Economic  Updates,  which  over  the  last  few  years,  have 
provided  a  valuable  source  of  economic  analysis  for 
everyone with an interest in the Ugandan economy.  
I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  presenters,  discussants  and 
other contributors for all of the important insights they have 
given us this morning.  
Given  the  main  theme  of  this  latest  Economic  Update,  I 
would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  offer  my  own 
perspective  on  the  development  of  the  financial  sector  in 
Uganda, its role in the economy, and the challenges which it 
faces.   
 Page 2 of 8 
To  begin,  I  think  that  it  is  important  to  recognise  the 
progress  which  the  financial  sector,  and  especially  the 
banking sector, has made over the last decade.  
Between  the  2005/06  and  2015/16  fiscal  years,  commercial 
bank  credit  to  the  private  sector  expanded  by  more  than 
threefold in real terms, at an average real rate of 12 percent 
per annum.  
Although bank deposits also grew strongly over this period, 
by  two  and  a  half  times  in  real  terms,  there  was  a  marked 
rise  in  bank  intermediation,  with  the  ratio  of  bank  loans  to 
bank deposits rising from 53 percent to 70 percent. 
Secondly,  there  has  been  a  notable  strengthening  of 
competition in banking markets. The Herfindahl Hirschman 
Index  of  market  concentration  in  the  banking  market  fell 
from  1,508  in  June  2006  to  909  in  June  2016,  denoting  a 
substantial  reduction 
in  market  concentration  and  an 
implicit rise in competition.  
The  fact  that  competitive  pressures  have  intensified  in  the 
banking  market  over  the  last  10  years  is  also  reflected  in  a 
secular fall in the industry’s after tax returns on equity, from 
32 percent in 2005/06 to 14 percent in 2015/16.  
 Page 3 of 8 
It  is  no  longer  tenable  to  argue  that banks in  Uganda  make 
excessive profits.  
Thirdly,  although  there  have  been  occasional  incidents  of 
bank  distress  and  failure  over  the  last  10  years,  prompt 
regulatory  interventions  by  the  Bank  of  Uganda  have 
ensured  that  the  interests  of  depositors  have  been  fully 
protected, as was the case with the resolution of Crane Bank. 
This is in line with the mandate given to the BOU under the 
Financial  Institutions  Act,  which  priorities  the  safety  of 
deposits.  
In  that  regard  I  do  not  understand  why  the  Economic 
Update should have concluded that there are “low levels of 
public  confidence  in  formal  financial  institutions”  which 
discourage  the  public  from  holding  bank  deposits.  This 
conclusion is not borne out by the rapid growth in both the 
number of bank accounts and the real value of bank deposits 
over the last 10 years.  
Notwithstanding the  strides made by the banking industry, 
it  still  faces  major  challenges.  The  cost  of  doing  banking 
business  is  high,  partly  because  the  industry  has  not  yet 
realised optimal economies of scale.  
 Page 4 of 8 
As a result, annual operating costs average approximately 11 
percent of income earning assets, which accounts for a major 
share  of  the  large  interest  rate  spread.  Spreads  will  only  be 
reduced  when  banks can  become  more  efficient and reduce 
their operating costs.  
I  believe  that  automation  and  new  technologies  to  deliver 
financial services will offer avenues for banks to reduce their 
operating costs over the medium to long term, although this 
will also expose banks to new forms of operating risks.  
Banks  may  also  be  able  to  exploit  synergies  with  other 
financial services, such as insurance, to improve efficiency.  
The Economic Update argues that the “high cost and limited 
access  to  credit  has  become  a  binding  constraint  on 
Uganda’s economy”.  
While I  do not dispute that bank lending rates are too high 
and  need  to  be  reduced  in  a  sustainable  manner  over  the 
long  term,  I  do  not  think  that  this  claim  is  really  tenable.  It 
implies  that,  if  only  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
could  lower  their  lending  rates  and  expand  the  volume  of 
their  lending,  substantial  numbers  of  businesses  in  the  real 
sector  of  the  economy  would  be  able  to  borrow  money  for 
 Page 5 of 8 
investment in order to expand their output and thereby both 
service their debt and increase their incomes.  
Unfortunately  the  conclusion  that  access  to  credit  is  the 
binding  constraint  on  economic  growth  is  premised  on  a 
rather  over-optimistic  view  of  the  real  sector  and  its 
borrowing 
capacities. 
Formal 
sector, 
creditworthy 
businesses,  which  are  the  main  business  clients  of  the 
commercial  banks,  comprise  a  small  share  of  the  Ugandan 
economy. There is a much larger pool of informal businesses 
and  micro-enterprises,  but  the  capacity  of  this  sector  to 
utilise credit effectively is constrained by a raft of problems, 
including scarcities of business and technical skills, the high 
costs of inputs, and often volatile market conditions.  
The  ability  of  these  businesses  to  make  profits  consistently 
and thereby service loans is precarious.  
The  problems  are  most  acute  in  small  holder  agriculture 
where  qualitative  changes  in  agricultural  practices  are  a 
prerequisite 
for 
farmers  being  able 
to  utilise  credit 
productively.  
Land reform is also needed to support the transformation of 
agriculture in many parts of Uganda.  
 Page 6 of 8 
The  argument  that  micro-loans  alone  can  transform  the 
fortunes of household enterprises, whether in agriculture or 
other sectors, is not supported by empirical evidence, either 
in Uganda or elsewhere in Africa.  
In  addition,  attitudes 
towards  borrowing  are  poor 
throughout  society;  loans  meant  to  fund  business  expenses 
are sometimes diverted for personal expenses or speculative 
purposes and the culture of loan repayment is weak.  
Until a much stronger private business sector can develop in 
Uganda, 
characterised  by  good,  modern  business 
management,  and  a  clear  separation  of  business  and 
personal  interests  on  the  part  of  business  owners;  it  will  be 
very  difficult  for  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  to 
further raise the level of intermediation in Uganda. 
To conclude, I believe that it is necessary to be realistic about 
what can be expected from the financial sector.  
The  shallowness  of  the  financial  system  in  Uganda  reflects 
the  structure  of  our  economy  much  more  than  the 
deficiencies of the financial sector itself or of the institutional 
and regulatory environment in which it operates.  
 Page 7 of 8 
In  many  respects  –  technology,  productivity,  levels  of 
professionalism, 
the  application  of  modern  business 
practises  –  the  financial  sector  is  one  of  the  most  advanced 
sectors of our economy.  
Most of the other sectors of the economy are not as advanced 
as  the  financial  sector,  and  some  lag  far  behind  it.  It  is  the 
structural problems afflicting the real sectors of our economy 
which provide the largest obstacle to greater use of financial 
services, and especially credit, in Uganda. 
Thank you for listening. 
 Page 8 of 8 
