Luci Ellis: The current global expansion
Speech by Ms Luci Ellis, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the
Australian Business Economists (ABE) Lunchtime Briefing, Sydney, 20 September 2017.
 Thanks to Peter Rickards and Rochelle Guttmann for assistance in preparing this speech.
I’d like to thank the organisers of today’s event, the Australian Business Economists, for giving
me the opportunity to speak to you today. It really is a pleasure.
Today I’d like to talk about an important driver of future prospects for the Australian economy: the
pick-up in global economic activity that began in the second half of last year. How did we pick up
that this was happening? And how might conditions evolve over the period ahead?
An apparently gloomy starting point
During  2015  and  early  2016,  the  tone  of  commentary  about  the  global  economy  was  quite
negative.  Yes,  there  had  been  a  slowing  evident  in  the  data,  particularly  from  China.  Yet  this
alone would not explain it. Things seemed fragile. Growth forecasts were revised down.
that 
Experience  suggested 
the  mood  should  have  been  more  buoyant.  Policy  was
accommodating the recovery from the global and European financial crises. There was a fall in
commodity prices, particularly oil prices (Graph 1). Declines in oil prices are typically seen as
expansionary, because they often imply that supply has increased, and this was precisely what
OPEC was doing. Lower oil prices also often support growth. Most of Australia’s major trading
partners are net oil importers and are better off if the price of oil declines relative to other prices.1
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
But rather than being a catalyst for growth, lower oil prices were an indicator of weakening global
demand. This in turn spurred an unusually large pull-back in energy-related business investment
in some economies and this exacerbated the downturn in global activity.
For commodity-exporting emerging markets, growth was impeded by lower commodity prices,
on top of any domestic factors driving growth (Graph 2). Previously, the negative effects of lower
oil prices on producers would have been outweighed by the positive effects on spending by net
oil-importing  countries.  This  time  around,  the  opposite  occurred:  the  net  effect  was  negative.
Commodity exporters’ demand for traded goods produced elsewhere declined noticeably over
2015  and  early  2016.  This  had  spillover  effects  on  other  economies  highly  exposed  to  global
trade, particularly in Asia. The Asian region was also affected by concerns circulating about risks
in China.
 It’s  worth  contrasting  the  experience  of  these  commodity  exporters  with Australia,  or  with  an
economy more exposed than Australia to oil prices, such as Canada. Falling commodity prices
reduced Australia’s terms of trade, and thus our income. There was a debate about whether the
Australian  dollar  had  depreciated  by  enough  to  offset  that  effect.  But  the  net  effect  of  lower
commodity prices and the exchange rate was smaller than in some other economies. The lower
exchange rate had gone some of the way to cushioning the income effects of the lower terms of
trade. It also contributed to helping some parts of the non-mining economy pick up.
The 2016 turnaround
Late last year, the negative sentiment and rhetoric around the global economy started to turn
around. Clearly there was a recovery in the data, but the recovery in the accompanying rhetoric
was even more marked. To the extent that perception affects people’s expectations, this had the
potential to influence actual outcomes.
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Perhaps one way to show this is to look at the text from reports by key economic agencies. If you
contrast  the  words  most  frequently  used  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  April  2016  IMF World
Economic Outlook, with the same chapter in the issue from a year later, you can see how the
tone has changed.  Another  way  to  characterise  this  change  in  tone  is  that  in  the April  2016
edition, around 6 per cent of the key words coded as positive and 10 per cent as negative. A year
later,  more  than  13  per  cent  of  the  words  were  considered  positive,  compared  with  about
5 per cent negative.
2
At  first,  the  turnaround  seemed  to  be  only  in  ‘soft’  indicators  of  sentiment,  such  as  business
surveys  and  financial  market  prices.  The  global  Purchasing  Managers  Indices  –  a  commonly
used measure of surveyed business conditions – hit bottom and started to turn around in late
2016 (Graph 3). Commodity prices also started to lift.
Over time, however, clearer signals started to emerge that this was more than just people feeling
optimistic. There was something real happening as well. Growth in global merchandise exports
was the next to pick up. Soon afterwards, it became clear that growth in industrial production
was also increasing (Graph 3). It should be noted that throughout this period, the swings in the
actual data were never very large, certainly not relative to the crisis period.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
By the time we reached early 2017, there were further signs that the pick-up in trade and other
high-frequency indicators were flowing through various countries’ national accounts. Particularly
welcome was the recovery in investment growth, which can now be seen in a range of major
economies and regions (Graph 4).
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  well  as  broadening  across  different  measures  of  activity,  the  expansion  also  broadened
across  countries  and  regions.  In  the  latest Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  the  Reserve  Bank
emphasised  the  broad-based  nature  of  the  pick-up,  across  both  sources  of  exports  and
destinations  of  imports.  The  boost  to  incomes  from  rising  commodity  prices  has  also  helped
economic prospects of commodity exporters. Some of them have emerged from recessions and
are now increasing their demand for production from the rest of the world.
How people saw it happening
The sequence of events that I have just described is a turning point. As any economic forecaster
could tell you, a turning point is essentially impossible to predict. But it does seem that many
observers,  including  the  Bank,  managed  to  notice  that  turning  point  in  near  real-time.  In  the
Overview of the November 2016 Statement on Monetary Policy, the first sentence read:
‘Growth  in Australia’s  major  trading  partners  remains  a  bit  below  average  and  is  expected  to
decline a little over the forecast period, reflecting a further moderate easing in growth in China.'
Shortly after its publication, markets rallied following the US election outcome. It wasn’t clear that
the policies of the incoming Administration would be expansionary overall. The expected fiscal
stimulus would have been, but the announced trade policies were rightly seen as likely to harm
global  growth.  Many  observers  thought  the  election  outcome  would  be  negative  for  financial
market pricing. So it was understandable to downplay reactions when markets instead rose.
Then,  over  the  southern  hemisphere  summer,  it  became  clear  that  this  was  more  than  a
financial  market  reaction  to  political  events  in  one  country.  The  outlook  had  become  more
positive. The first sentence of the February 2017 SMP Overview read:
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
‘The global economy entered 2017 with more momentum than earlier expected.’
The facts had changed, and we had changed our minds. The nature and pattern of the pick-up in
the data convinced us.
The  first  aspect  of  the  shift  that  helped  convince  us  was  the  broadening  of  the  pick-up  from
sentiment indicators (including financial market pricing) to measures of physical activity. Growth
in global trade was the first place this became apparent. Industrial production data in a range of
countries followed soon afterwards. The second aspect was the broad-based spread of the pick-
up across countries and regions. If it had just been one country – say, China – demanding all the
extra imports, there would have been less reason to revise the outlook.
To  identify  a  turning  point  as  it  happens,  you  need  to  have  a  sound  analytical  framework  for
thinking about how the economy works, and how all the various indicators fit together.
One thing to bear in mind is that trade is often – though not always – highly leveraged to global
activity (RBA 2017). When global activity picks up, trade picks up by more (Graph 5). This is
partly because demand for traded merchandise tends to be a bit more cyclical than the services
sector, where much output is not traded across borders. It is also a result of the structure of
global supply chains. You can imagine a situation where final-stage production increases by one
unit,  but  almost  all  of  the  value-added  crosses  three  borders  before  reaching  its  destination.
Global exports (or imports) would then pick up by close to three units. It is also reasonable to
expect  that  in  the  first  instance,  an  unexpected  increase  in  demand  for  goods  and  materials
might be met on global markets, because often not every product or input is produced in every
country.
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another point to bear in mind is that in recent upswings, investment has usually come later. This
wasn’t  always  the  way.  But  in  recent  times,  businesses  have  tended  to  wait  until  they  see
evidence of increased demand before they invest in expanding capacity. They are even less likely
to invest to expand when there is plenty of spare capacity, a legacy of the crisis.
We also know that businesses are more likely to invest in things that boost labour productivity
when  the  labour  market  is  tight,  not  when  there  is  considerable  slack.  So  in  the  current
environment, we would not expect business investment to be at the leading edge of a pick-up in
economic  activity. And  we  have  to  be  willing  to  call  the  pick-up  before  we  see  it  in  business
investment.
A third point to be mindful of is that data are noisy and can be revised. So we need to triangulate
multiple data sources against each other. Survey measures of sentiment and other supposed
leading indicators are not the whole story. They tell you something, but shouldn’t be taken as
gospel on their own. But neither should you wait until you see the whites of the national accounts’
eyes before you change your view. All data are noisy, including the national accounts. By the time
you  have  seen  something  in  the  national  accounts  and  are  sure  it  isn’t  just  noise,  several
quarters will have passed. If you wait that long, you will be well behind the curve in catching a
change in economic momentum.
Portents for the future
Now  that  we’ve  seen  this  pick-up  in  global  activity,  we  must  then  ask:  what  next?  Will  the
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
expansion continue at its current rate, pick up further, or peter out? Part of the question here is
whether expansions can continue unabated or whether something forces them to ‘die of old age’.
While one could argue that this is a relatively new upswing, many economies have in fact been
expanding ever since the end of the Global Financial Crisis, and are now quite close to being at
full capacity. Countries such as the United States and Japan are generally regarded as being
already at full employment. Does this mean that they can’t keep going like this for much longer?
The academic literature, at least, seems to suggest that long-lived expansions are no more likely
to end than shorter ones, at least beyond some point (Rudebusch 2016). I think we can take
some comfort from that. We should then ask whether we would expect the current expansion to
be any different from past expansions. A common pattern is that expansions end because they
came together with an unsustainable build-up in leverage. Globally, leverage does not seem to
have increased much this time around. At least, it hasn’t increased to the extent seen in the lead-
up to the Global Financial Crisis. Of course there are some areas where debt has increased
rapidly, in ways that deserve further investigation. Whether credit expansions pose a problem
isn’t always clear-cut, except in hindsight. So we should be cautious when we see them, and
should factor them into our assessments of how long an expansion might last.
In thinking about how long and how strong the global expansion could be, a lot will depend on
productivity growth. This isn’t the place to dwell on the ‘secular stagnation’ debate in detail. But I
will note that productivity itself can be cyclical. Productivity growth has been weak in some major
advanced  economies.  It’s  not  clear  that  this  will  continue  once  spare  capacity  in  these
economies has been fully absorbed.
I also note that some of the pessimism about productivity is happening alongside great optimism
in some quarters about a new Industrial Revolution built on better algorithms. The truth may well
lie  somewhere  in  the  middle.  It  might  also  take  a  while  to  assert  itself.  Those  of  us  who
remember the 1990s would recall that there have been previous episodes where considerable
innovation seemed to be happening, but this took a while to be evident in the productivity data.
This is because firms take a long time to adapt their business models and processes to the new
technologies. And  the  greatest  spur  to  change  is  capacity  constraints.  Tight  economies  spur
process  innovation.  When  there  is  plenty  of  spare  capacity,  not  even  strong  competition
necessarily induces higher rates of adoption of new technologies.
Risks to the outlook
Taking all that into consideration, there seems a reasonable prospect that – as long as nothing
really bad happens – this global expansion could continue for a while. This is especially so if the
technology optimists are right about the implications of recent innovations. But of course there
are risk scenarios that have the potential to derail the current economic momentum.
Foremost of these at present would be geopolitical risks. These are particularly difficult risks to
integrate into a macroeconomic analytical framework. We aren’t political analysts. And I question
whether anyone can truly know what the odds of certain events occurring might be. But we can
at least think about what those risks might be and whether they might be increasing or receding.
I think it is fair to say that geopolitical risks in Europe and specifically the euro area have receded.
While it remains to be seen how Brexit will play out from a practical perspective, an existential
crisis  for  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  more  broadly  no  longer  seems  so  close.  Against  that,
geopolitical risks in Asia have increased. These are the low probability, high-impact events that
can only ever be a risk to one’s forecasts. Until something actually happens, they do not and
should not affect the central scenario. Even if you knew for sure that an event happened, the
economic effects are often difficult to predict.
Financial  risks  will  also  be  ever-present  as  risks  to  a  macroeconomic  outlook,  and  they  are
almost as hard as geopolitical risks to quantify. One that seems to be becoming less pertinent at
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
the moment is the international risk posed by ongoing low interest rates and the resulting search
for yield by investors. Now that policy interest rates globally are starting to rise, if only slowly, the
urgency of the search for yield surely becomes less pressing.
On the domestic front, the Bank has repeatedly pointed to the issues associated with household
sector balance sheets. These are probably best regarded as a potential exacerbating factor. That
is,  if  some  other  shock  should  come  along,  debt  would  make  it  worse.  Of  itself,  the  level  of
indebtedness  is  unlikely  to  be  a  triggering  factor  that  sparks  a  negative  outcome.  But  it  is  an
important consideration in the context of other triggers. The risk profile of recently originated debt
has improved as a result of various actions by the regulators, the evolving risk environment and
the lenders’ responses. The level of debt owed matters most when the borrower is facing a large
negative shock. Strong lending standards mitigate the effects of moderate shocks, and can help
prevent a shock turning into a default event. But in the face of a large, economy-wide shock, even
the best lending standards might not be enough to protect borrowers and lenders. At that point,
the absolute amount of debt owed becomes the binding consideration.
A final risk to mention is the global monetary policy environment, together with the economic and
market reactions to it. Expansionary monetary policy and less contractionary fiscal policy have
supported  economic  recoveries.  Some  economies  are  now  thought  to  be  close  to  full
employment and productive capacity. Yet so far, growth in both prices and wages has remained
quite low.
We  believe  that,  ultimately,  the  forces  of  supply  and  demand  do  assert  themselves.  Wage
growth and inflation should therefore pick up in these economies at some point. However, it could
take a while. If productivity growth is indeed cyclical, it will start to pick up over time in these
economies. So it will take longer to hit the capacity constraints that induce price rises. On the
other hand, stronger potential growth is clearly a positive for economic welfare more broadly. If
this  scenario  happens,  and  inflation  stays  low  despite  reasonable  growth  in  a  range  of
economies,  policymakers  will  face  a  challenge.  In  that  scenario,  policy  still  needs  to  remain
appropriately  expansionary  while  avoiding  further  build-up  of  leverage  and  financial  risk.
Calibrating the pace of withdrawal of stimulus will be no easy task. Policy will therefore need to
adapt to the evolving momentum in national and global economies.
Concluding remarks
To sum up, the global economy is looking better than it did a year ago. The turning point was
around the end of last year. While it doesn’t seem to have picked up further recently, neither is
this expansion a flash in the pan. That is positive news for the Australian economy, too.
Noticing  that  change  in  momentum  required  economic  forecasters  to  be  alert  to  the  right
indicators,  and  have  the  right  framework  for  thinking  about  the  signals  these  indicators  send.
Nothing is ever clear-cut. There are always uncertainties about the data. There are times when
you have to be willing to make a call, because waiting until you are 100 per cent sure things have
changed means waiting too long. And that means taking a view and being willing to evolve that
view as new data come in, just as we always have done.
Thank you for your time.
Bibliography
RBA (2015), ‘Box C: The Effects of the Fall in Oil Prices
February, pp 46–48.
’, Statement on Monetary Policy,
RBA  (2017),  ‘The  Recent  Pick-up  in  Global  Merchandise  Trade
Policy, August, pp 13–14.
’ , Statement  on  Monetary
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Rudebusch G (2016), ‘Will the Economic Recovery Die of Old Age’, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco.
1
2
A sentence along these lines was included in several of the Bank’s Statements on Monetary Policy over this
period. See also RBA (2015).
The colouring of the words as red for negative and blue for positive has been done manually, based on the
consensus of a number of colleagues. Standard packages for sentiment analysis do not handle the nuanced
communications of central banks and international agencies particularly well. It should also be noted that some
nouns that are coded as positive (such as ‘growth’ or ‘investment’) can sometimes be mentioned in negative
contexts, for example with verbs such as ‘slowed’ or ‘declined’. That is certainly the case in the April 2016 issue.
The cited proportions of words coded positive or negative does not include common ‘stop words’ such as ‘the’,
‘and’ and ‘with’.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
