Kevin  Stiroh: A  perspective  on  supervisory  objectives  and  trade-
offs
Keynote  remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution
Supervision  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Columbia  University’s
School  of  International  and  Public Affairs  and  the  Clearing  House Association  Conference  on
“Optimal Bank Capital Regulation,” Columbia University, New York City, 23 February 2017.
 Accompanying charts
Introduction
Good afternoon. Thank you very much for the kind introduction.
Since the financial crisis, the topic of today’s conference—Optimal Bank Capital Regulation—
has  been  of  considerable  interest  to  academics,  the  official  sector,  and  market  participants.
Some have argued for dramatically higher capital requirements, while others have argued with
equal conviction for substantially lower capital requirements.
I am happy to be here today to offer some thoughts about potential trade-offs across supervisory
tools and objectives, and how one might consider those trade-offs within the current supervisory
framework.  I  conclude  that  the  U.S.  banking  system  has  become  considerably  more  resilient
since the financial crisis, which is a necessary condition for the sustainable provision of financial
services  to  households  and  businesses  that  supports  the  growth  and  stability  of  the  U.S.
economy.
My comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Supervisory Objectives and Trade-Offs
A  well-functioning  financial  system  intermediates  between  savers  and  borrowers,  supports  a
robust payments system, and facilitates risk transfer and the efficient allocation of capital. This
occurs through a wide range of institutions including bank holding companies, banks, and other
firms supervised by the Federal Reserve System.   In that context, a healthy bank maintains a
strong balance sheet, measured by conventional metrics like capital, liquidity and asset quality;
has a durable business model that generates a sustainable stream of earnings commensurate
with a properly-defined risk profile; and has the appropriate controls in place that include, among
other  things,  a  robust  risk  management  framework,  a  strong  audit  function,  and  effective
oversight by the board of directors.
1
All of these factors make a financial institution stronger and lower the chance that a shock such
as  an  unexpected  deterioration  of  credit  quality  or  operational  loss  would  drive  the  firm  into
insolvency,  result  in  a  loss  of  confidence  by  the  firm’s  creditors,  counterparties,  investors  or
customers, or force the firm to curtail its core activities. That is, a healthy firm is more resilient.
This is true for financial institutions of all sizes and represents a baseline supervisory goal.
I should emphasize that resiliency is not the ultimate aim, but rather a means to broader policy
objectives. A resilient firm, for example, is more likely to provide a sustainable flow of financial
services—broadly defined to include credit intermediation, payments, and risk transfer—through
the cycle and across a range of possible macroeconomic outcomes; a resilient firm is less likely
to harm the economy or consumers through excessive risk-taking; and a resilient firm is less
likely to put taxpayer funds at risk. That is why resilience of financial institutions is valued.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The supervisory program for the largest banks implemented since the financial crisis builds on
that  foundation  and  explicitly  acknowledges  the  potential  impact  that  distress  at  a  large  bank
could have on financial markets or the economy. This approach to large bank supervision has
2
been codified in Supervision and Regulation Letter 12–17, or SR 12–17.
This  framework  expresses  two  complementary  goals  for  the  Federal  Reserve’s  program  for
large bank supervision: (1) Enhanced resiliency of the firm to lower the probability of failure or
inability to serve as an intermediary and (2) Reduced impact on the financial system or economy
in the event failure or material weakness does in fact occur.
To analysts of credit, this will sound familiar because it is essentially a probability of default/loss
given default or PD/LGD framework. The key elements of enhanced resiliency, or lower PD, in
this framework include capital, liquidity, corporate governance, management of core businesses,
and  recovery  planning.  A  reduced  impact  of  distress,  or  lower  LGD,  depends  on  effective
management of critical operations, support for banking offices, and strong resolution planning.
As  an  aside,  the  implementation  of  enhanced  standards  for  the  largest,  most  systemically
important  financial  firms  reflects  a  core  tenet  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  supervisory  program,
namely  that  supervisory  expectations  should  be  tailored  to  the  risks  that  individual  institutions
face  and  the  potential  impact  that  distress  might  have  on  the  broader  financial  markets  or
economy.  Chair  Yellen  recently  discussed  this  topic   and  the  recent  rule  that  removes  large,
non-complex firms from the qualitative assessment of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and
4
Review (CCAR) is a recent example.
3
This tailoring principle drives efforts to mitigate risks to financial stability, while minimizing the
collective burden on financial institutions, particularly for community and mid-sized banks, and
allocating  supervisory  resources  most  efficiently. As  a  result,  the  standards  and  expectations
from supervision become more stringent as a firm becomes larger and more complex in ways
that pose risks to the broader financial system.
With that background in mind, I’ll turn to the question of “optimal” bank capital that is the topic of
this conference. To me, the question of optimal capital implies some type of a trade-off. This
thinking is not limited to bank capital, but reflects all of the potential supervisory and regulatory
tools such as capital and liquidity standards or a resolution framework.
One can frame this trade-off simply in terms of two objectives often attributed to supervision:
ensuring  the  safety  and  soundness  of  financial  institutions  and  promoting  efficient  financial
intermediation that supports the growth and stability of the U.S. economy. Other objectives could
include,  for  example,  reducing  the  potential  spillover  costs  associated  with  distress  and
promoting fair and transparent financial services for consumers.
In many cases, the objectives of enhanced resilience and efficient financial intermediation are
mutually  reinforcing.  For  example,  a  firm  with  a  strong  traditional  lending  franchise  with
appropriate  risk  management  can  both  build  capital  organically  through  retained  earnings  and
serve  its  customers  through  the  efficient  provision  of  financial  services.  Similarly,  a  firm  that
diversifies into a broader portfolio of financial products may reap the benefits of economies of
scope  and  diversification,  while  better  serving  its  clients’  needs.  This  would  support  both
enhanced safety and soundness and the broader objective of effective financial intermediation.
There may be times, however, when these two objectives appear to contradict. For example, a
firm holding a large buffer of low return, highly liquid assets might be stronger from a liquidity
perspective,  but  might  have  less  lending  capacity.  Similarly,  greater  oversight  and  controls
around a particular activity may lower the associated risk, but could also reduce the provision of
that financial service. Finally, higher levels of capital may increase the weighted average cost of
funding, which could prompt banks to reduce the supply of certain financial services. The latter
 2 / 7
5
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
point remains an area of active research without a strong consensus.
This  suggests  the  potential  for  a  trade-off  between  resilience  and  intermediation,  implying  an
“optimal” level of capital. This simple, static framing, however, is incomplete and requires further
elaboration in terms of the policy horizon and a broad perspective on costs and benefits.
First, as I mentioned earlier, the core function of a bank is to provide financial services, and that
is  not  just  in  the  short-term,  but  also  in  a  sustainable  manner  over  time. A  critical  argument
behind the desire for resilient financial firms is that they are more likely to withstand shocks and
to continue to function through a wide range of macroeconomic and financial conditions. This
suggests that the apparent short-term trade-off between resilience and the provision of financial
services  may  be  reframed  over  a  longer  policy  horizon  as  a  dynamic  trade-off  between  the
provision of financial services today and in the future.
For  example,  a  stated  goal  of  the  first  public  stress  test  in  the  U.S.,  the  Supervisory  Capital
Assessment Program (SCAP) during the financial crisis in 2009, was to ensure that participating
banks  would  have  sufficient  capital  to  “withstand  losses  and  sustain  lending—even  if  the
economic downturn is more severe than is currently anticipated."  Resilience is valued because
it supports the sustained provision of financial services over time and across macroeconomic
outcomes.
6
Second, the official sector considers all potential costs and benefits to society when evaluating a
policy  in  a  way  that  private  actors  may  not.  For  example,  asset  fire  sales  dynamics  that
negatively  impact  market  prices  or  a  loss  of  confidence  in  the  industry  during  periods  of
uncertainty or distress are examples of “externalities” with far-reaching effects on the financial
system.  Moreover, those costs and benefits will be realized in the future and thus need to be
assessed ex ante from a probabilistic perspective.
7
The official sector includes all of these costs and benefits to society in assessments of policy
efficacy.  This  makes  evaluating  trade-offs  and  assessing  effectiveness  difficult,  and  suggests
that  simple  assessments  are  likely  to  be  incomplete.  Policy  assessment  requires  a  rigorous
evaluation  of  a  broad  range  of  outcomes,  and  an  important  part  of  the  ongoing  dialogue  in
conferences like this one is to continue to develop the conceptual frameworks and to study the
data in order to make the most meaningful assessments of policy effectiveness.
A Look at Bank Performance
I will now discuss two perspectives on bank performance since the financial crisis that serve as
rough  proxies  for  the  resilience  of  the  industry  and  the  provision  of  financial  services.  This  is
clearly  not  a  rigorous  test  of  whether  specific  regulations  are  optimal,  but  provides  some
indicative results about trends in resiliency and financial services.
I will focus on accounting metrics from the balance sheet and income statement, but one could
also  turn  to  market  data  to  assess  resiliency.  For  example,  equity  prices  reflect,  in  part,
investors’  expectations  of  future  profits  and  their  assessment  of  a  bank’s  management  and
business model, while bond yields and credit default swap spreads convey useful information
about investors’ perceptions of default probabilities. Supervisors regularly evaluate market data in
our  assessment  of  financial  institutions  and  these  indicators  generally  show  that  investors’
confidence in the health of U.S. institutions has increased, although there has been some debate
8
on the interpretation.
Resiliency
At the aggregate level, the largest U.S. banks have substantially improved both the quantity and
quality of capital and liquidity, supporting the belief that the system is substantially more resilient
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
relative to the pre-crisis period. As shown in (Figure 1), the ratio of tangible common equity to
risk-weighted assets has more than doubled from the crisis lows in 2009. Similarly, the ratio of
9
net liquid assets to total assets has increased substantially over the same period.
One can also look beyond the aggregates to see how capital and liquidity are distributed across
large  banks.  (Figure  2)  plots  the  aggregate  ratio  of  tangible  common  equity  to  risk-weighted
assets for a sample of large bank holding companies, and the 15th and 85th percentile bands.
The entire distribution has shifted upward with the 15th percentile in 2016 comparable to the 85th
percentile  in  the  pre-crisis  period.  Not  only  has  resilience  increased  in  the  aggregate,  it  has
increased for most large institutions.
(Figure 3) shows similar data for net liquid assets as a share of total assets. Large banks have
improved their liquidity profile, both in aggregate and in the cross-section. Over the same period,
banks  have  also  shifted  the  composition  of  liabilities  towards  more  stable  sources  of  funding
such  as  core  deposits  and  away  from  non-core  and  short-term  wholesale  liabilities.  Those
funding shifts have bolstered system resilience by reducing the risk of runs and fire sale asset
liquidations.
(Figure 4) plots the return on equity for the U.S. banking industry, both as a whole and for the
large  banks  used  above  on  a  merger-adjusted  basis.  This  accounting  measure  of  profitability
shows  an  improving  picture  over  the  last  few  years,  with  ratios  recovering  towards  historic
norms despite significant headwinds from the low rate, flat yield curve environment and modest
economic  growth.  This  trend  is  particularly  noteworthy  when  one  considers  the  substantial
increase in capital held in the banking industry. In addition, as shown in (Figure 5), earnings have
shifted  back  toward  net  interest  income  and  have  been  more  stable  in  the  post-crisis  period,
which is consistent with the idea of more sustainable and less volatile earnings streams.
Finally,  it  is  useful  to  compare  the  U.S.  experience  to  other  developed  economies. As  shown
in  (Figure  6),  large  U.S.  bank  outcomes  compare  favorably  to  their  global  peers  from  both  a
profitability and capital perspective. This is supportive of the conclusion that the suite of post-
crisis official sector actions in the U.S. has made the U.S. financial system more resilient, while
not eroding global competitiveness.
Provision of Financial Services
I will now turn to the provision of financial services by looking at indicators of different types of
banking activities such as lending or underwriting activities.
 A more rigorous analysis would
identify supply and demand factors in an attempt to understand not just what has changed, but
why,  and  could  allow  an  assessment  of  whether  financial  services  are  efficiently  provided.
Nonetheless, this perspective provides a benchmark from the pre-crisis period to support some
initial conclusions.
10
In terms of traditional lending, (Figure 7) shows that the ratio of aggregate bank loans to GDP—a
rough measure of credit intermediated through the banking sector—has recovered from the post-
crisis  low  and  is  consistent  with  historical  levels.  In  addition,  aggregate  net  lending  revenues,
proxied by net interest income and scaled by GDP, are near historic norms despite compression
of net interest margins in the low rate environment.
Survey  evidence  of  credit  availability  also  shows  ongoing  provision  of  credit. According  to  the
National  Federation  of  Independent  Business,  the  proportion  of  small  businesses  that  report
credit  as  hard  to  get  has  declined  to  pre-crisis  levels.
  This  is  consistent  with  the  generally
easing credit conditions across most loan classes over the last several years reported in the
Fed’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, particularly in commercial and auto loans, but also
expanding more recently into other types of household credit.
 This evidence suggests banks
continue to provide this core financial service.
11
12
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Turning to capital market activities, (Figure 8) plots non-interest revenues from core businesses
—trading,  investment  banking,  fiduciary  activities,  and  securities  brokerage.  While  trading
revenue has declined, non-interest revenue of other types has generally grown in line with GDP,
showing  the  compositional  shift  in  revenue.  The  changes  reflect  the  ongoing  shift  toward
activities that generate more stable income streams such as fiduciary and brokerage activities.
Looking within the trading  business,  there  is  also  some  evidence  that  activities  are  becoming
less risky, less opaque, and less complex, e.g., level 3 trading assets have declined as a share
of  total  trading  assets  over  this  period  and  there  has  been  a  shift  toward  central  clearing  of
derivatives even as volumes continue to grow.
13
I conclude this section by emphasizing that the supervisory goal is not to allocate credit or to
dictate specific aspects of business models, but rather to ensure that firms are resilient so that
they can meet the broader policy objectives of the sustainable provisions of financial services
and financial stability.
Other Issues for Supervision
I  would  be  remiss,  however,  if  I  left  you  with  the  impression  that  all  supervisors  focus  on  is
capital, liquidity and earnings. It is not all about the balance sheet and the income statement.
Financial  institutions  face  other  risks  that  threaten  their  ability  to  provide  financial  services  or
even their viability, and supervisors are acutely aware of these risks. I will briefly discuss three—
cybersecurity, fintech, and business conduct risk.
Beginning with cybersecurity, the Federal banking agencies have recently released an advanced
notice  of  proposed  rule-making  around  a  set  of  potential  enhanced  cybersecurity  risk-
management  and  resilience  standards  that  would  apply  to  large  and  interconnected  entities
under their supervision.
 Supervisors and regulators continue to work with other agencies in the
official sector to defend against cyber-attacks and to minimize the disruption from a successful
attack. This type of disruption could impede the critical services from the financial sector and is a
first-order concern.
14
On fintech, which I define simply as the intersection between financial services and technology, I
view this as potentially disruptive with the ability to transform how financial services are provided.
This could have a wide range of possible impacts on supervised firms depending on the nature
of  the  innovation,  how  new  technologies  or  service  models  are  introduced  and  adopted  by
supervised  firms,  and  the  resulting  impact  on  business  models,  competition  and  market
structure.
Federal Reserve Governor Brainard has recently discussed these issues and highlighted some
of the critical issues and potential trade-offs.
 For example, new entrants’ use of non-traditional
data  may  enhance  credit  analysis,  but  this  could  have  implications  for  consumer  privacy  and
protection. As a second example, the economics of innovation may favor rapid introduction of
new  products  to  gain  a  first-mover  advantage,  but  this  approach  may  be  a  challenge  in  an
industry like banking that requires trust and confidence to support a stable business model. It is
imperative that risk management keep pace with financial innovation.
15
Third, I’ll mention business conduct risk. The New York Fed has challenged the financial industry
to  consider  and  address  the  many  factors  that  have  contributed  to  recent,  widespread
misconduct at large financial firms.
  These  incidents  impose  real  costs  in  the  form  of  fines,
settlements, and the diversion of internal resources related to investigation and remediation. In
addition, there are more difficult to measure costs linked to the potential loss of confidence and
trust in the firm and the industry. Recurring misconduct poses a real threat to the provision of
financial services if customers and counterparties were to pull away from the sector.
16
Supervisors  can  help  mitigate  these  risks  by  supporting  the  development  of  effective  internal
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
governance  regimes,  prudent  risk  management  policies,  and  strong  compliance  and  control
structures, all within a framework of effective oversight from the firm’s board of directors. SR 12–
17, for example, describes the essential components of effective corporate governance and sets
the expectation that a firm’s board of directors should establish and maintain a firm’s culture,
incentives, structure, and processes necessary to promote compliance with laws, regulations,
and  supervisory  guidance  and  to  avoid  conflicts  of  interest  and  the  effective  management  of
reputational and legal risks. Using the trade-off language from earlier, this might be framed as
ensuring  that  potential  short-term  gains  are  appropriately  balanced  against  the  longer-term
objectives of serving clients and maximizing value over time.
In my view, this goes further than the incentives, processes, and oversight roles. All of these are
necessary,  but  they  are  not  likely  to  be  sufficient.  Firms  also  need  to  look  at  how  leadership
dimensions drive decisions, whether there is effective challenge from controls functions, how the
inevitable  mistakes  are  treated,  and  how  compensation  and  promotions  are  determined.
Ultimately, establishing and maintaining an effective culture with appropriate risk governance and
controls is the responsibility of individual firms and the industry, but the official sector can help
highlight  best  practices,  solve  collective  action  problems,  and  drive  toward  socially  desirable
outcomes.
And, finally, we must recognize that there are risks that we don’t see. We all suffer from blind
spots—issues we should be thinking about, but aren’t. One of the most important supervisory
challenges we face is to always ask ourselves—what are we missing? What else should we be
studying?  Where  are  new  risks  emerging?  As  the  financial  industry  continues  to  evolve  in
response to regulatory, technological and business factors, I expect new issues will emerge that
potentially threaten individual firms, and supervisors need to be prepared to address them.
Conclusions
Effective  supervision  and  regulation  help  create  the  environment  where  financial  institutions
provide critical intermediation services in a sustainable manner over time. A key lesson of the
financial  crisis  and  the  post-crisis  period  is  that  stronger,  more  resilient  financial  firms  can
dampen  rather  than  amplify  shocks  to  the  system.  The  greater  resilience  we  observe  today
relative to the pre-crisis period suggests the U.S. financial sector is better positioned to continue
to provide the critical services to households and businesses that are necessary to support the
U.S. economy across a wide range of potential macroeconomic and financial conditions.
It is also essential to distinguish the intended consequences of supervision and regulation where
informed choices are made based on careful data analysis from the unintended consequences
where  outcomes  are  not  consistent  with  policy  objectives.  This  requires  both  a  conceptual
framework  to  identify  costs  and  benefits  to  society  as  a  whole,  and  empirical  analysis  to
measure  them.  In  my  view,  it  is  entirely  appropriate  to  continuously  evaluate  and  rigorously
assess the impact to ensure that the observed outcomes are consistent with stated objectives
such as greater resilience, efficient financial intermediation over time, and financial stability.
Conferences  like  this  that  bring  together  the  official  sector  with  financial  analysts,  markets
participants  and  academic  economists  play  an  important  role  in  developing  the  theory  and
empirical analysis needed to inform those assessments.
Thank you very much for your attention.
Data Appendix
The primary sample includes U.S. owned bank holding companies (BHCs) with assets greater
than  $50B  as  of  3Q16.  This  represented  approximately  80%  of  all  U.S.  owned  BHC  assets.
Where available, estimates are adjusted for mergers since 2000 to include major banking and
non-banking  (broker-dealer)  operations.  The  FDIC  sample  represents  all  FDIC-insured
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
depository institutions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
The Federal Reserve supervisory program described here applies to bank holding companies, and I use the
term “bank” for ease of exposition.
"Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions,” SR 12–17, December 17, 2012.  This
framework  applies  to  institutions  that  are  part  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  Large  Institution  Supervision
Coordinating Committee (LISCC) portfolio, including domestic banking organizations with consolidated assets
greater than $50 billion, large foreign banking organizations with combined assets of U.S. operations greater
than $50 billion.
"Supervision and Regulation,” Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen, September 28, 2016.
"Amendments to the Capital Plan and Stress Test Rules,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, January 30,
2017.
The cost of capital for banks may depend on the mix of equity and liabilities due to tax effects, conjectural
guarantees, inefficiencies in raising equity, or the opacity of bank risk.  For alternative views on this topic, see
“Higher Bank Capital Requirements Would Come at a Price,” Douglas Elliott, Brookings Report, February 20,
2013 and “The Miss Opportunity and Challenge of Capital Regulation,” Anat Amati, National Institute Economic
Review, February 2016.
Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program,  May  7
2009.
"The Theory and Practice of Supervision,” Kevin J. Stiroh, April 11 2016, describes the role of externalities in
supervision in the broader context of market frictions.
"Have Big Banks Gotten Safer,” Summers, Lawrence H. and Natasha Sarin, Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, Fall 2016.
Net liquid assets are defined to include cash, central bank reserves, federal funds, net reverse repos, and
certain U.S. treasury and agency securities.
Of course, one could look at a broader range of financial services such as market-making activities, provision of
payment services, or risk transfer activities.
"Small Business Economic Trends,” National Federation of Independent Businesses, December 2016.
"Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, October
2016.
Level 3 assets are defined as fair-value assets whose value has to be estimated without benefit of observable
inputs
”Agencies Issue Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on Enhanced Cyber Risk Management Standards,”
Federal Reserve Board of Governors, October 19 2016.
"The Opportunities and Challenges of FinTech,” Governor Lael Brainard, December 2, 2016.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York hosted a conference last October on “Reforming Culture and Behavior
in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue."
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
