Peter Praet: We need to complete the Banking Union
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at the
EUROFI Conference, Malta, 6 April 2017.
 The EU moved in less than five years from decentralized banking supervision and resolution to
the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single Resolution Mechanism, based on the Single
Rulebook.  This  is  part  of  an  overarching  effort  to  create  a  sound  institutional  framework  for
financial  integration  in  Europe.  But  there  still  are  a  number  of  legal,  institutional  and  political
problems to overcome before a European bank can operate in the Banking Union as it operates
in its domestic market. Several dimensions need to be taken into account:
First, private risk-sharing. The financial system is a private risk sharing device, but we have
learned the lessons from the financial crisis in terms of budgetary costs, when excessive
risk-taking by the private sector was eventually borne by the public sector. We do not want to
revert  to  the  old  world  of  implicit  government  guarantees  for  risky  behaviour  of  financial
institutions. This entails making banks equally liable across countries for the amount of risk
they  want  to  take  into  their  respective  balance  sheet.  The  general  principle  of  the  new
European  rules  such  as  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive  is  to  absorb  bank
losses by bailing-in shareholders and uninsured creditors. The new rules contain sufficient
flexibility to deal with exceptional situations where public money may be required to ensure
financial stability.
Second,  public  risk  sharing. A  certain  level  of  public  risk  sharing  is  necessary  to  create
confidence in the overall financial system. Even well-capitalised banks can fall victim to runs
and contagion. This is why central banks act as lender of last resort and fiscal backstops
should be in place to ensure trust in the stability of the financial sector.
In the Banking Union, both supervisory responsibility and the fiscal backstop need to be at
European level, to underpin durably confidence in the area-wide financial system. Just as
necessary  is  the  establishment  of  a  European  Deposit  Insurance  System  (EDIS).  The
current  situation,  where  supervision  is  common,  but  the  consequences  of  potential  bank
failures are still predominantly national, should not last. In such an incomplete framework,
national considerations inevitably continue to affect supervisory decisions. This is not without
consequences for the incentives for banks to become more European. Concrete examples
include a lack of fungibility of liquidity or capital. The fact that the euro area is not considered
as a single jurisdiction may result in applying higher capital buffers to euro area G-SIBs.
While the institutional underpinnings of the Banking Union do not yet meet the requirements
of a genuine single financial market, the creation of the SSM has been a leap forward in the
establishment  of  a  coherent  regulatory  framework.  One  of  the  first  priorities  of  the
Supervisory Board has been to promote integration through harmonized implementation of
Options and National Discretions (ONDs), thereby evening the level playing field in the euro
area. Regarding liquidity requirements, the Single Supervisory Board can grant waivers at
national as well as cross-border level on a case-by-case basis. In the current institutional
context,  where  the  free  flow  of  liquidity  within  the  same  banking  group  but  across  border
could be impeded, a prudent supervisory approach has led the ECB’s Supervisory Board to
still maintain a floor on the liquidity requirements of significant subsidiaries.
Overall,  the  banking  landscape  still  resembles  too  much  a  collection  of  banking  systems
highly exposed to their domestic economies, with limited cross-border private risk-sharing.
At the same time, one should recognise that the Banking Union is both an objective and a
process of fundamental structural changes in the euro area’s financial architecture. The next
steps are clearly set out in the ECOFIN roadmap to complete the Banking Union. It is now
urgent to agree on an ambitious timetable for its implementation.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
