Andreas  Dombret:  The  possible  impact  of  Brexit  on  the  financial
landscape
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at zeb (consultancy for financial services), London, 24 February 2017.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen,
Good morning. I hope that you enjoyed the breakfast buffet. I am sure that what one says about
the  quality  of  breakfast  in  England  is  not  true  here  at  the  new  zeb  office.  Now  that  you  have
started the day energised after a good meal, I want to provide you with some thoughts on a most
topical issue – something else to chew on, so to speak.
I  am  talking,  of  course,  about  Brexit.  Even  though  this  is  by  no  means  a  new  issue,  and  the
element  of  surprise  that  it  had  in  June  last  year  has  vanished,  it  still  attracts  tremendous
attention. After all, it is what made all of us gather here today.
And there are many reasons why Brexit is still attracting so much attention. Among them are the
profound impact it might have on the world we live in, and the intense uncertainty surrounding its
precise effects. This combination of significance and uncertainty makes Brexit a topic well suited
for speculation about what might happen. And if you have followed the topic closely, you have
probably noticed different and even opposing statements on the same question.
But speculation doesn’t help. What makes more sense is scenario-based thinking. Today, I will
try  to  set  some  things  straight  –  at  least  regarding  the  financial  sector.  The  first  part  of  my
remarks  will  therefore  cover  the  potential  impact  of  the  Brexit  on  the  financial  sector.  In  the
second  part,  I  will  look  at  the  bigger  picture  and  share  with  you  my  expectations  for  the
negotiations as well as my thoughts on the future of regulation and supervision in the EU and
the UK.
2 The possible impact of the Brexit on the financial landscape
Let’s start with the potential impact of the Brexit on the financial landscape. First and foremost,
this means talking about market access. We should not forget that this is a two-way street, and
so I will talk about market access in both directions. But the centre of attention is certainly on
market access for UK based financial institutions to the EU, as this potentially has the largest
impact for banks and other financial institutions. It affects all institutions, both from the UK and
the  rest  of  the  world,  which  currently  use  London  as  a  hub  for  their  continental  European
business.
The debate on market access was transformed in mid-January. Prime Minister May made it clear
that the UK is looking for a clean break from the EU’s single market. For the financial industry,
this means that the current model of using London as a gateway to Europe is likely to end. Banks
from third countries need a licensed entity inside the European Economic Area to gain access to
the  whole  area,  known  as  “passporting".  Shortly  before  the  Prime  Minister’s  speech,  CityUK
already dropped demands for maintaining access through passports.
Instead, many are now hoping for an equivalence decision to fill the gap left by passporting rights.
If  the  European  Commission  deems  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  in  the  UK  to  be
equivalent  to  that  in  the  EU,  market  access  would  be  partly  retained.  However,  I  am  rather
sceptical about whether equivalence decisions – may they be likely or not – offer a sound footing
for  long-term  location  decisions  of  banks.  Equivalence  is  truly  different  from  single  market
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
access.
There are three major drawbacks to equivalence decisions. First, they only cover the wholesale
business  of  banks.  Second,  given  the  fact  that  banks  need  time  to  build  up  a  new  entity
elsewhere, an equivalence decision would have to be taken quite soon to actually have a bearing
on the location decisions of banks. Third, equivalence decisions are reversible, so banks would
be forced to adjust to a new environment in the event that supervisory frameworks are no longer
deemed  equivalent.  These  drawbacks  lead  me  to  the  overall  conclusion  that  equivalence
decisions are not a reliable substitute for passporting.
So it seems that the prospects for EU market access through the UK look rather dim. To ease
the  pressure  on  financial  institutions,  a  transition  period  could  help.  It  would  reduce  risks  and
increase  planning  security  for  banks,  which  would  be  economically  beneficial.  Furthermore,  it
could support a smooth relocation process by taking pressure off both supervisors and banks,
for  example  by  making  "first  mover  advantages"  less  important.  This  being  said,  transition
periods would be a politically sensitive topic in the negotiations, and it is unclear how likely such
an agreement might be.
As mentioned earlier, we should not forget about the access of European banks to the UK, which
is also an important issue. For German banks, for example, the UK is the second-most important
foreign market, right after the US. It will be up to the UK Prudential Regulation Authority to decide
under what circumstances European banks can retain access to the UK. Whether the UK would
be  prepared  to  unilaterally  grant  access  for  EU  financial  institutions  in  order  to  retain  the
attractiveness of London as a financial centre, remains an open question. And let me add that it
is of course not regulation alone that plays a role when European banks decide on opening a
branch or a subsidiary in the UK. It is also a question of what kind of entity their counterparties
and clients want to do business with.
Let me summarise the prospects for market access, at least from my point of view. Continued
passporting  rights  are  rather  unlikely,  and  an  equivalence  decision  would  be  a  somewhat
imperfect  substitute. A  transition  period  could  ease  some  of  the  pressure,  but  it  clearly  is  a
sensitive issue.
Could  a  free  trade  agreement  be  the  solution?  According  to  their  Brexit  white  paper,
the UK government will strive for an ambitious free trade agreement with the EU as a long-term
solution. But regardless of the fact that negotiating comprehensive free trade agreements is an
arduous  and  time-consuming  task,  financial  services  are  an  especially  tricky  area.  So  far,
the EU has never fully integrated finance in its free trade agreements with third countries.
Where does this lead us? So far, while acknowledging and accepting the divorce, policymakers
are trying to find ways to hold the UK and EU economic areas and jurisdictions together. And
they will continue trying so. The reason is that most of us are convinced that harmonised rules
eliminate  unnecessary  frictions  and  act  as  a  powerful  catalyst  for  business  across  national
borders – for the real economy as well as the financial sector. However, looking at the facts that
I’ve  just  laid  out  we  also  have  to  acknowledge  that  it  is  at  least  questionable  whether  this
undertaking will be easily achieved. Financial institutions should take into consideration that, in
the  end,  there  might  well  be  two  separate  jurisdictions  in  which  they  operate,  and  that  these
jurisdictions might diverge over time – or instantly, once the divorce has gone through.
3 Whether and where to move
As a consequence, many banks are now considering moving some of their activities to the EU.
First, let me say that I expect London to remain an eminent global financial centre. Nevertheless,
I also expect a number of UK-based market participants to move at least some business units in
order to hedge against all possible outcomes of the negotiations.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The question that is causing some excitement is: Where will banks go? As a supervisor, my
main  concern  is  that  banks  are  supervised  according  to  standards  that  are  both  high  and
consistent. This is best ensured within the SSM area. This also means that I will not promote any
particular financial centre. That said, I am open to dialogue with financial institutions in assessing
the conditions for moving business units to Germany. And I go as far as to say that – in many
respects – these conditions are attractive.
Numerous  major  market  participants  have  already  contacted  the  German  Federal  Financial
Supervisory Authority BaFin and Bundesbank. We respond to such requests pragmatically. That
is, we provide financial institutions with quick and reliable guidance and aid a smooth transition if
one  of  them  decides  to  move  business  units  to  the  continent.  Three  weeks  ago,  BaFin  has
hosted a workshop for representatives of foreign banks covering all questions surrounding Brexit.
And  just  this  Wednesday,  Bundesbank  has  launched  a  website  on  the  topic,  providing
information  as  well  as  contact  details  for  banks  assessing  to  move  part  of  their  business  to
Germany.
Of  course,  we  also  emphasise  the  requirements  for  establishing  a  licensed  entity  there.  For
example, this means that we will not accept any empty shells or “letterbox companies” where the
business  effectively  continues  to  be  done  out  of  London.  For  critical  functions  such  as
management,  controlling  and  compliance,  qualified  personnel  need  to  be  present  at  the  non-
UK EU subsidiary at all times. And I urge banks not to spend their time inventing strategies to
circumvent  these  requirements.  This  includes  seemingly  creative  solutions  such  as  “fly-and-
drive” banking, where bankers fly in daily from London, or “dual hatting", where transactions are
booked on the EU subsidiary but in fact executed in London.
To  summarise:  As  important  as  outsourcing  strategies  will  understandably  be  when  banks
restructure their business to adjust to the new environment, it has its limits, and we expect any
branch or subsidiary to retain chief responsibility for its business.
4 What to expect, and how to prepare
I  trust  that  the  vast  majority  of  financial  institutions  are  aware  of  the  many  question  marks
hanging over market access, and that they are assessing their implications. But they should not
focus  solely  on  the  obvious.  Financial  institutions  need  to  systematically  think  through  what
effects Brexit could have on each of their areas of operations. For example, banks should check
what Brexit might mean for covenants, or how it could affect the handling of margin calls.
I  said  earlier  that  scenario-based  thinking  is  called  for.  However,  assessing  the  likelihood  of
different scenarios is not an easy task by any means. Brexit negotiations will be highly political,
and the political debate is already becoming extremely tense. If policymakers on both sides agree
on one thing, it’s that arranging the divorce between the UK and the EU is going to be very hard.
European  Commission  President  Juncker  expects  the  negotiations  to  be  “very,  very,  very
difficult",  and  UK’s  Brexit  Secretary  Davis  predicts 
"most
complicated" negotiations of all time.
they  will  become 
the 
While as a central banker I don’t tend to use such dramatic words, the two gentlemen do have a
point. European leaders see the bloc as being in an existential crisis and have made it clear that
the future unity of the EU 27 is the highest priority, which includes the inseparability of the four
freedoms. The UK, on the other hand, aims at regaining control of law-making, the public budget
and immigration. With these priorities, the UK government wants to do justice to Brexit voters.
According  to  surveys,  the  voters  put  the  economy  only  in  third  place  after  sovereignty  and
immigration when making their decision.
So while economic policy will of course be an important topic during negotiations, we should not
count  on  economic  sanity  being  the  main  guiding  principle. And  that  means  we  also  have  to
factor in the possibility that the UK will leave the bloc in 2019 without an exit package, let alone
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the sweeping trade accord it is seeking. The fact that this scenario would most probably hurt
economic activity considerably on both sides of the Channel will not necessarily prevent it from
happening.
5 Regulation and supervision
Ladies and gentlemen, I have laid out my thoughts on the effects of Brexit on the financial world
and have shared my views on what mechanisms will steer negotiations. I want to dedicate the
remainder of my remarks to regulation and supervision in the light of Brexit.
My main message here is that we must avoid a regulatory race to the bottom at all costs. Given
how  the  Brexit  debate  developed  early  this  year,  this  warning  is  not  at  all  an  empty  one. A
financial centre strategy comprised, among other ingredients, of very low corporate taxes and lax
regulation has already been mentioned in the UK as a fall back option for London. And in January,
Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond made it clear that the UK would "do whatever [it
has] to do" to regain competitiveness.
Regulation and supervision in the UK have been both highly professional and stability-oriented in
the past. I strongly hope that supervisors here will be able to keep up this good work and turn a
blind  eye  to  demands  for  deregulation  and  lax  supervision.  The  current  regulatory  and
supervisory standards we have set together are an important lesson from the financial crisis and
it would be a mistake to roll them back. I am convinced that in the long run, well-capitalised and
strictly supervised financial systems are the most successful ones.
To  be  clear,  my  call  to  refrain  from  using  regulation  or  supervision  for  the  sake  of  increasing
one’s competitiveness is equally addressed to the EU. There might be a certain temptation to
use Brexit as a chance to strengthen financial centres across the rest of Europe, for example by
offering discounts with respect to licensing procedures. This is not a route we should take, and I
am confident that the strong role and far-reaching competences of the SSM, including the ECB’s
responsibility in licensing, will forestall such ideas becoming reality.
While I am serious about my warning of lax rules and supervision, I am cautiously optimistic that
we can prevent this scenario from materialising. And this is because I know my colleagues in
London  very  well,  and  I  know  that  they  share  my  views  on  this  issue.  Our  cooperation  with
the UK Prudential Regulation Authority has been exemplary in the past, and we will invest all our
efforts in continuing this partnership in the future.
Now, more than ever, we should also harness our relationship to work together closely during
Brexit. Information sharing needs to be an important part of this. For example, when European
authorities examine the risk models of banks wishing to establish a subsidiary on the continent,
we would benefit from knowing what the PRA found in their previous assessment. This includes
at what time the PRA last examined the model, under what assumptions, and to what verdict it
came. Conversely, we are open to sharing all necessary information that the PRA might need to
process applications by EU banks to operate in the UK.
The guiding principle of our cooperation should be to ensure a smooth transition to a post-Brexit
world.  As  supervisors  with  the  necessary  distance  from  political  haggling,  we  can  make  a
substantial contribution by providing pragmatic and efficient solutions. In parallel, I believe that
European and UK supervisors should fathom out how we can put our future cooperation on a
more formal footing.
6 Closing remarks
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarize. The financial landscape will change, and we cannot
know how. While I have outlined some things to expect and some not to expect, uncertainty will
persist  for  quite  some  time.  The  task  for  financial  institutions  is  to  deal  with  the  uncertainty
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
surrounding Brexit as efficiently as possible.
As regards the course of the negotiations, we should bear in mind that economic rationale might
not  be  the  main  guiding  principle  –  and  will  certainly  not  be  the  only  one.  This  means  that
companies have to factor in the possibility that the final deal will not prioritise the economy – or
that, in a negative scenario, both sides might not agree on any deal at all.
But whatever happens in terms of our future relations, it is vital to remember that lax financial
rules  have  often  paved  the  route  to  failure.  The  outcome  became  painfully  apparent  in  the
financial crisis that erupted just under a decade ago, and its costs are still being felt. None of us
wants to see such events again any time soon. And preserving the progress we have made in
increasing the resilience of financial institutions is the only way to ensure this.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
