Øystein Olsen: Economic perspectives
Annual address by Mr Øystein Olsen, Governor of the Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway), to the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank and invited guests, Oslo, 16 February 
2017.
 Accompanying slides.
On 23 October 1921 the steamship Ulvsund was taken by surprise by one of the worst storms to
hit Denmark in the last century. The ship sank and all 17 people aboard lost their lives.
When the winds subsided, the Danish Meteorological Institute had to weather a storm of its own
when  it  turned  out  the  Institute  had  downgraded  the  storm  warning  the  evening  before.  In  his
defence, Director Carl Ryder argued that it was impossible to predict that type of storm. But his
defence was in vain as it transpired that the storm had been accurately forecast by Norwegian
and Swedish meteorologists. A reluctant Ryder was ordered to the city of Bergen to learn the
methods used by the Norwegian and Swedish meteorologists. 
The Norwegian physicist Vilhelm Bjerknes had since 1917 built up what came to be known as the
“Bergen School” within the field of meteorology. His work had long focused on using the laws of
physics to predict the weather. But the practical breakthroughs were first achieved when he, in
his  own  words,  “had  washed  ashore  onto  Europe’s  stormiest  and,  from  a  meteorological
1
standpoint, most eventful shores”.
The shifting weather conditions on the west coast of Norway became a natural laboratory for
Bjerknes and his fellow researchers. Their findings were quickly put to use, and the enthusiasm
among local farmers, fishermen and seamen sent a clear signal about the importance of good
weather forecasts.
The Norwegian economy – a mild winter
The fields of economics and meteorology have a number of common features. Two key issues
in economics involve understanding how the economy functions and forecasting its future path.
Great strides have been made in the area of weather forecasting in recent decades. Accurate
weather forecasts span increasingly longer periods, but they are not always on the mark. It is no
less difficult to make accurate economic forecasts. Human behaviour does not follow the laws of
physics. Few predicted the 2008 financial crisis, and the oil price collapse in autumn 2014 came
as a surprise to many.
We have now lived with lower oil prices for a few years. The most pessimistic scenarios have
not materialised so far. But the fall in oil prices has put a damper on economic activity in Norway,
not least in the western and southwestern areas of the country where the oil service industry has
predominated in recent decades. Countrywide the downturn has not been as pronounced as the
contraction  triggered  by  the  financial  crisis.  Excluding  that  sharp,  albeit  short,  contraction,  the
period of weak growth we are now experiencing has not been seen since around 1990. Mainland
output per capita has stagnated over the past two years, and the level of real wages is lower than
in 2014.
Chart: Oil investment and spending of petroleum revenues
Most of us might say that the economic winter has been fairly mild so far. This is partly because
the economy has been provided with ample fuel. When oil prices started to fall, the economy had
for several years enjoyed both strong growth in oil investment and fiscal spending of petroleum
revenues. Oil investment has since declined, while government spending has continued to rise.
Spending of oil revenues has increased by about as much as oil investment has fallen since
1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
2013.
Chart: Key policy rates
Monetary  policy  has  also  made  a  substantial  contribution. An  already  low  policy  rate  was  cut
further. The key policy rate has now been kept at a record-low 0.5 percent for close to a year. In
our neighbouring countries, interest rates have come down to even lower levels, but in real terms
the interest rate level has been lowest in Norway.
The krone exchange rate fell in tandem with the oil price and led to higher prices for imported
goods, resulting in a temporary increase in inflation. Since there is confidence that inflation will
remain  low  and  stable,  we  have  been  able  to  disregard  that  increase  when  setting  monetary
policy.  The  social  partners  have  shown  wage  restraint.  The  krone  depreciation  has  thus
translated  into  a  marked  decline  in  relative  labour  costs,  which  has  helped  strengthen  the
position of Norwegian firms exposed to international competition.
Chart: Changes in employment
So far, however, it is only in the tourist industry where a weaker krone has led to clearly higher
activity. Since oil prices started falling in autumn 2014, employment has shown solid growth in
the hotel and restaurant industry, but otherwise almost two in three new jobs have come in the
public sector and the construction industry. Growth in those sectors has offset the decline in oil-
related industries, where one in five jobs has been lost.
The  strong  growth  in  jobs  in  the  construction  industry  reflects  the  economic  policy  pursued.
Public investment has increased, and low interest rates have fuelled house price inflation and led
to  a  sharp  rise  in  housing  construction.  In  2016,  housing  starts  came  to  almost  37  000,  the
highest number recorded since the early 1980s.
In  the  present  situation,  it  has  been  sensible  to  pursue  a  potent  countercyclical  policy.  Many
countries  have  experienced  that  a  sharp  fall  in  output  and  employment  can  have  long-lasting
adverse  effects.  It  must  be  recognised,  however,  that  the  longer-term  challenges  facing  the
Norwegian economy cannot be resolved by spending more oil revenues and keeping the interest
rate low.
Chart: Norway’s trade and current account balance
As a small open economy, much of our welfare is based on trade with other countries, providing
us with access to goods and services others are better able to produce. But we also have to
offer something in return. High oil and gas prices have over the years generated large current
account surpluses. These surpluses have declined in the past few years.
Oil and gas production passed its peak more than a decade ago. We may find once again that
these resources have been underestimated. But the oil price collapse and developments in the
Norwegian economy in the past few years have reminded us of an inescapable fact; we must
drive forward a larger non-oil tradable sector. We need more legs to stand on. 
The needed structural adjustments in the Norwegian economy will have to be dealt with against
the backdrop of more global challenges. Demographic changes and sagging productivity growth
may point towards persistently low growth in advanced economies. Protectionist tendencies and
reduced trade in goods and services could put an additional drag on growth. We must also make
changes to consumption and production methods in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
This evening I will take a closer look at these challenges.  
Is low growth here to stay in advanced economies?
In the long term, there are two factors that determine how quickly an economy can grow: the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
supply of labour and labour productivity.
Chart: Working age population
The decline in the working age population is weighing on the growth outlook for many countries.
The large post-war cohorts are leaving the labour force, and the consequences of a long period
of  low  fertility  rates  are  becoming  increasingly  clear. At  the  same  time,  the  proportion  of  the
population who are employed remains low in many countries. High unemployment and low labour
force participation among women may make room for further growth in employment even if the
population stops growing. 
The demographic situation in Norway is more favourable, but the labour force in Norway is also
likely to grow at a slower pace. Labour immigration, which has made an important contribution to
the  labour  market  since  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  has  fallen  sharply  in  recent  years.  The
unemployment rate is relatively low in Norway, but many have dropped out of the workforce. One
in six aged between 25 and 54 was without paid work in 2016. If we are able to mobilise more
people to join the workforce, labour supply growth may hold steady, but the most likely scenario
is slower growth in the labour force.
Chart: Productivity growth
The  other  factor,  productivity,  has  contributed  less  and  less  to  economic  growth,  which  is  a
tendency we have seen for several decades both in Norway and other advanced economies. The
question  then  arises  whether  the  underlying  growth  potential  of  mature  economies  has
diminished. 
Chart: Growth in technology leading countries and in Norway
If  we  broaden  our  perspective  to  span  several  centuries,  it  is  the  rapid  rise  in  productivity  in
modern  times  that  stands  out.  For  a  long  time,  there  were  only  marginal  changes  in  living
standards from one generation to the next. In economic terms, the Middle Ages was something
of an ice age.
The industrial revolution that began in England in the late 18th century put an end to this inertia.
Instead, major innovations and economic growth became the norm.
If  we  are  to  understand  why  advances  were  made  so  rapidly,  we  have  to  look  at  areas  that
economists probably do not explore often enough. In England, a parliament had emerged as a
counterweight to the crown and the landed nobility. There was also the introduction of patents,
private  property  rights  and  –  by  the  standards  of  the  day  –  a  stable  tax  regime.  These  were
important, growth-friendly institutions which remain central pillars of modern economies.
Growth  in  per  capita  GDP  in  England  accelerated  gradually  during  the  19th  century.  More
countries eventually came on board and joined the technology race. The groundwork for two of
the most important breakthroughs of the late 19th century – electricity and the combustion engine
– was laid mainly in the US and Germany. These innovations remained key growth drivers well
into the 20th century. At the same time, the US took over from the UK as the most important
base for new advances.
With the US in the driving seat, economic growth hit new heights, peaking in the middle of the
20th  century.  Since  1970,  growth  has  slowed.  Growth  has  moved  on  a  new  downward  trend
since 2000.
Growth in Norway has shown a similar pattern. Immediately after the war, our per capita GDP
was  only  around  half  that  of  the  US.  There  was  considerable  potential  for  catching  up,  and
growth was higher than abroad for a long period. In recent decades, however, growth in Norway
and many other countries has slowed.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart: Norwegian productivity growth
Since 1980, average productivity growth in Norway, as measured by growth in GDP per hour
worked, has been only around one-third of what it was in the first decades after the war.
One explanation is that we have invested less. Increased use of machinery and other real capital
per worker long helped make labour more efficient, but since 1980 the contribution from capital
has been smaller. With low investment in the business sector over several years, there is the
prospect of a further decline in the contribution from capital.
There is probably also less to be gained from raising education standards. If we go back a few
decades, the potential was considerable. In 1950, seven in ten Norwegians had only seven years
of compulsory schooling. Today, a similar proportion has at least completed upper secondary
education,  and  around  one-third  have  a  university  education.  Those  entering  the  labour  force
continue  to  be  better  educated  than  those  retiring  from  it.  This  may  provide  a  boost  to
productivity. But we cannot expect the same return on higher education standards as in previous
periods.
Productivity growth that cannot be explained by increases in real capital or education standards
is  what  we  economists  call  total  factor  productivity,  or  TFP.  Technological  progress,  better
organisation of work and gains from labour mobility across industries are key factors behind TFP
growth. Over time, this variable has provided substantial impetus to productivity growth. But as
the  chart  shows,  a  lower  contribution  from  TFP  is  also  the  main  factor  behind  the  decline  in
productivity growth in recent decades.
In the first decades after the war, Norway was able to make use of many of the solutions that had
already been developed in other countries. Today, we have caught up with the technological front
line  in  many  areas.  However,  the  front  line  is  now  advancing  more  slowly,  which  will  make  it
harder to grow at the same rate as before.
The  future  growth  path  for  Norway  and  other  advanced  economies  will  to  a  large  extent  be
determined  by  technological  advances,  structural  changes  and  international  exchange  and
cooperation.  In  some  areas,  such  as  meteorology,  we  have  been  pioneers.  Modern  weather
forecasting is largely based on the principles laid down by Vilhelm Bjerknes over a century ago.
But the results achieved by the “Bergen School” and other meteorologists since then would not
have been possible without other innovations. Weather balloons, aircraft and now satellites have
helped make it possible to measure atmospheric conditions ever more accurately. And modern
computer technology has given us almost instant access to up-to-date weather forecasts.
As more and more countries join the technological front line, technological advances may take off
again. Good ideas are not confined by national borders, and the conditions for efficient knowledge
sharing have never been better. Nearly half of the world’s population now has Internet access,
with over a billion more people coming online in the past five years alone.
More and more advances in digitalisation and information technology can improve resource use
in industries where productivity growth has so far been low. Retail trade and the financial sector
in Norway have already shown that efficiency gains can also be achieved in traditional service
industries. With the advent of driverless vehicles, the transport sector could well be the next to
undergo a major transformation.
A more integrated global econonomy – but an uncertain outlook
International trade and cooperation have been drivers of global economic growth. Open borders
are particularly important for an economy like Norway. They have given us access to technology
and capital and put us in a position to exploit our own strengths in the production of goods and
services. Much of the welfare gains we have experienced have come from reaping the benefits of
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
economic specialisation. 
Since  the  Second  World  War,  the  proponents  of  free  trade  have  had  the  wind  in  their  sails.
Around  1950,  international  trade  accounted  for  close  to  20  percent  of  world  GDP.  Today,  the
share  is  three  times  that.  This  change  has  been  politically  willed.  Customs  duties  have  been
lowered  and  trade  barriers  lifted.  Technological  advances  have  also  enabled  more  and  more
goods and services to be traded across countries.
Chart: GDP per capita in China
The march towards an ever more closely integrated global economy has been particularly fast in
recent decades. The growth story that began in the British Isles has reached China, where we
have seen a boom without parallel in world history. What took the West more than 200 years,
China has achieved in just a generation.
Chart: Global manufacturing production
China’s economic rise has seen a labour force twice that of the US and EU combined entering
the world market. A quarter of global manufacturing production now takes place in the Middle
Kingdom. The land that brought us paper, gunpowder and the compass has become the world’s
workshop.
Chart: Persons living in poverty
The benefits for the average Chinese have been immense. Worldwide, more than a billion people
have been lifted out of poverty since the early 1980s. Three in four of them have been in China.
Trade and technological progress together spell substantial economic gains. But not everyone is
a winner. Greater international competition and new production technology also mean that jobs
disappear  and  working  conditions  come  under  pressure.  In  many  rich  countries,  parts  of  the
population have been left behind. For many, the economic downturn following the financial crisis
has made things worse.
Chart: Income growth in the US
The income distribution in the US can serve as an example. The purchasing power of the lowest-
earning half of the population has been flat since the early 1980s, while the richest decile have
more than doubled their real income in the same period. Much of this increase stems from higher
capital income. 
If  we  are  to  reap  the  rewards  of  economic  integration  and  technological  advances,  structural
adjustments are essential. At the same time, we must take measures to prevent too many from
falling  behind.  In  this  respect,  the  education  system  and  social  safety  nets  are  important.
Redistribution through the tax system and transfer payments can also help spread the benefits
more  evenly.  This  is  not,  however,  helped  by  the  international  competition  to  offer  ever  lower
corporate tax rates.
The outcomes of last year’s two key popular votes are a signal that the winds have shifted, with
opposition to globalisation on the upswing. Few stand to benefit from a shift away from free trade.
For small, open economies like Norway the loss may be considerable. But the biggest losers will
be the more than 700 million people still living in poverty.
Climate change – a global challenge
The industrial revolution that began in England in the 18th century was a turning point. Ever better
utilisation of resources in terms of working hours, machinery and raw materials has continued to
raise total world GDP. But a simple indicator like GDP does not capture the full range of welfare
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
gains. Better health, less heavy work and in many countries a social safety net are also among
the gains. 
Chart: Global warming
Nor  does  it  capture  all  of  the  costs.  Our  economic  progress  has  taken  its  toll  on  our  most
important  public  good:  the  natural  environment.  The  greatest  environmental  challenge  is  of  a
global  nature.  With  ever  higher  concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere,  the
planet’s  average  temperature  has  risen.  This  has  serious,  long-term  implications  both  for
meteorological conditions and for society. The research field the “Bergen School” helped pave
the way for has now gained fresh relevance.
Greenhouse gas emissions have increased primarily due to human activity. Irrespective of their
source, emissions all have an equal weight in global carbon accounting. Action and innovation to
combat climate change are therefore necessary in multiple sectors and across countries.
The pricing of emissions is crucial for achieving future emissions targets. The polluter must pay.
Firms and consumers will then find it profitable to choose more eco-friendly production methods
and  products.  If  everyone  also  faces  the  same  emissions  costs,  the  reductions  that  cost  the
least will be made first. Departing from this principle will increase the costs of mitigating global
warming.
The pricing of emissions also boosts demand for new and more eco-friendly technology, making
it more profitable to invest in research and development of new solutions and products. These
must  stem  from  choices  made  by  the  individual  firm  and  the  individual  consumer.  The
development of new technology to combat global warming is advancing too slowly. Inadequate
pricing of emissions is one of the culprits.
An international emissions trading system covering all countries could, in principle, provide for
equal pricing of emissions. In practice, this has proved difficult to establish. Getting developing
countries to sign on to such an agreement is understandably difficult. It is hard to demand that
the polluter pays in countries where much of the population is still below the poverty line. The
transition  to  low-carbon  technologies  in  emerging  markets  is,  however,  essential  for  reaching
global emissions targets.
The  pricing  of  emissions  also  encounters  opposition  in  rich  nations.  Some  would  argue  that
higher emissions taxes will simply cause emitters to move elsewhere. This argument may be
relevant for some sectors. But there is also opposition from groups who consider themselves
better  served  by  financial  support  to  make  changes  rather  than  having  to  bear  the  costs
themselves. For the political authorities, subsidies may therefore appear a more attractive option.
The result is a more costly and less effective climate policy.
Chart: Price of emissions
Norway was among the first countries to introduce a carbon tax. In addition, several industries
are covered by the EU emissions trading system. But a glance at the cost of carbon emissions
in Norway shows that even here we have a long way to go before the principle of equal pricing of
emissions  is  realised.  Some  sources  of  pollution  are  completely  exempt.  While  the  transport
sector faces a carbon tax of more than NOK 400 per tonne of CO2 emissions, other sectors are
exempt  from  all  or  part  of  this  tax.  When  it  comes  to  agriculture,  domestic  shipping  and
manufacturing, business policy and climate policy are pulling in different directions. 
In order to promote eco-friendly technology, it may be necessary to reinforce climate policy with
funding  for  basic  research  and  for  the  development  and  deployment  of  climate-friendly
processes  and  products. At  the  same  time,  we  should  be  on  our  guard  against  attempts  to
abuse  the  “green”  epithet  to  qualify  for  public  subsidies.  The  climate  challenge  will  not  be
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
resolved by having the authorities designate the “winners” in the transition to green technology.
Regulations and subsidies in areas subject to emissions trading or carbon taxes often entail a
waste of energy and money.
The efforts to reduce global warming will provide a seedbed for new production methods, new
businesses and new jobs. Some of these will be in Norway. But it is difficult to see how we have
an  advantage  over  other  countries  in  this  area.  The  transition  to  a  low-carbon  society  is
necessary but is unlikely to take over as a new engine of growth. 
Oil revenue spending needs to be reined in
It may give cause for reflection that Norway, as a nation, has gained so much from a resource
that  is  an  important  source  of  global  warming.  If  the  countries  of  the  world  deliver  on  the
commitments made in the Paris Agreement, carbon taxes may be much higher than they are
today. This may make our oil production less profitable, but it will strengthen the work on climate
change.
A  large  portion  of  government  revenues  from  oil  production  has  been  transferred  to  the
Government Pension Fund Global – the oil fund – which is invested widely in equities, bonds and
real estate. This has provided for good returns and risk diversification.
Interest  rates  worldwide  have  fallen  to  low  levels  in  recent  years.  The  prospect  of  continued
moderate  global  growth  means  that  interest  rates  may  remain  low  ahead.  The  estimated
expected real return on the oil fund has therefore been revised down and is now quite a bit lower
than 4 percent.
2
In December, Norges Bank advised the Ministry of Finance to increase the equity allocation in the
fund.  Historically, equities have produced higher returns than bonds, but the returns have also
been more volatile. A lower return on bonds is the price we pay for dampening volatility in the
fund’s value. In recent years bonds have become a more effective, but also more expensive,
hedge against volatility. Both conditions suggest a somewhat lower allocation to bonds.
Changes in the Norway’s overall petroleum wealth also warrant a lower allocation to bonds. Apart
from the oil fund, this wealth consists of oil and gas still in the ground. There has always been a
considerable risk from having a large share of the nation’s wealth linked to a single commodity.
But  this  share  has  fallen.  Only  a  decade  ago,  oil  and  gas  reserves  made  up  two-thirds  of
Norway’s petroleum wealth. Today that share has dropped to about a third. Our aggregate wealth
has  become  more  diversified,  which  means  we  can  tolerate  slightly  higher  volatility  in  our
financial wealth.
The Government has today announced that it will propose an increase in the equity allocation in
the oil fund to 70 percent. At the same time, the estimated expected real return on the oil fund is
adjusted down to 3 percent.
The choice of equity allocation is an important decision. But an even more important choice is
the  level  of  oil  revenue  spending.  Fluctuations  in  the  value  of  the  fund  present  challenges  for
fiscal policy and for the fiscal rule. Let me comment somewhat further on this issue.
The oil fund and the fiscal rule have long been important pillars of Norwegian economic policy.
One key goal has been to preserve large parts of our petroleum wealth for future generations.
There  has  also  been  an  explicit  desire  to  shield  the  Norwegian  economy  from  swings  in  oil
prices. Allow me to quote from the Revised National Budget for 1995:
“Revenues from the petroleum sector vary more over time than other revenues. […]
a fund mechanism […] makes it easier to decouple annual spending of petroleum
3
revenues from current revenues.”  
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Returns in financial markets also vary more over time than other revenues. With the current size
of the oil fund, fluctuations in the value of the fund may be considerable from one year to the next.
Fiscal policy and the Norwegian economy must be shielded from these fluctuations in the years
ahead. The needed decoupling that was highlighted in the Revised National Budget for 1995 has
taken on a new form.
Chart: Fiscal spending of petroleum revenues
Combined with high oil prices and healthy returns, the fiscal rule has brought considerable fiscal
leeway. This year around a fifth of government spending will be financed by transfers from the oil
fund. The level of oil revenue spending has reached 8 percent of mainland GDP. There will be
less leeway further ahead. Last year was the first time money was transferred out of the oil fund
to finance the non-oil deficit. We can no longer assume that the oil fund will continue to grow as a
share of the economy.
With a high level of oil revenue spending, there is a risk of a sharp reduction in the fund’s capital.
This could, for example, happen if a global recession triggers both a decline in oil revenues and
low  or  negative  returns  on  the  fund’s  capital.  If  other  government  revenues  fall,  and  the
expenditure side of the government budget is shielded, the oil fund will have to foot the bill krone
for krone.
Chart: Probability of 50 percent decline in the size of the GPFG
The risk of a sharp decline in the size of the fund is further illustrated in this chart, which shows
the probability of a 50 percent decline in the fund over a ten-year horizon.  In the initial year, fiscal
spending of oil revenues is around 3 percent of the fund’s value – that is to say close to today’s
level. Government expenditure is then assumed to grow in pace with the expected growth of the
economy,  which  means  the  expenditure  side  is  shielded  even  in  a  situation  with  declining
revenues.
4
When and if that occurs, the oil fund will carry the cost. With a 60 percent allocation to equities,
the probability of a 50 percent decline in the fund over a ten-year period is just over 1 percent. A
higher equity share increases this risk, but the risk is still moderate.
However, with a higher level of oil revenue spending, the downside risk increases. The yellow
bars illustrate a scenario where oil revenue spending in the initial year increases to 4 percent – a
familiar figure. In that case, the risk of having to draw down the fund increases considerably. The
probability of a 50 percent decline in the fund increases threefold.
My main message concerning this issue: First, fiscal policy must be decoupled from financial
assets  subject  to  considerable  volatility.  Second,  it  would  be  unwise  to  increase  petroleum
revenue spending from today’s level even if the fund continues to grow.
The period of rising government spending of petroleum revenues should now be over. 
Inflation targeting has funcioned well 
In 2001, the same year as the fiscal rule was established, Norway introduced an inflation target
as part of its monetary policy framework. A number of countries had, in the preceding years,
abandoned  exchange  rate  targeting  in  favour  of  inflation  targeting.  This  policy  change  was  a
response to the challenges associated with the fixed exchange rate regimes in an increasingly
open global economy. Since the financial crisis, monetary policy has faced an uphill struggle in
many  countries.  The  economic  consequences  of  the  crisis  have  been  substantial,  and  the
contributions from fiscal policy have been meagre. Weakened growth capacity has magnified the
challenges. At the same time, persistently low interest rates pose challenges to financial stability.
Yet despite the fact that monetary policy has been stretched far, no country has retreated from
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
the basic rationale behind flexible inflation targeting.
In Norway, the Ministry of Finance is now considering whether the regulation on monetary policy
should be modernised. After more than fifteen years, this is only natural. It should nevertheless
be noted that the system has functioned well.
Since  the  introduction  of  inflation  targeting,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  been  exposed  to  a
number of major shocks, most of which have originated beyond Norway’s borders. In responding
to these shocks, flexibility and scope for judgement in the conduct of monetary policy have been
significant strengths. Inflation has generally been low and stable since the beginning of the 1990s
and  has  remained  so  throughout  the  period  of  inflation  targeting. At  the  same  time,  monetary
5
policy has contributed to dampening fluctuations in the real economy.
As long as inflation is firmly anchored, monetary policy can address other concerns. We can
seek to counteract the build-up of financial imbalances by keeping the interest rate a little higher
than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.  But  Norges  Bank  cannot  take  the  main  responsibility  for
developments in house prices and debt. Nor can monetary policy influence the economy’s long-
term growth capacity.
The past couple of years have been demanding for the Norwegian economy. Monetary policy can
be supportive, but cannot take primary responsibility for needed structural adjustments. The shift
towards a less oil-driven economy lies ahead.
Conclusion
The original task of meteorologists was to forecast the weather so that ships could find shelter
and property could be secured before the storm hit. Today, climatologists give advice on how we
can curb global warming. When economists take the temperature of the economy, they do so in
order to forecast its future path. This exercise provides insight that helps the business sector
adapt and facilitates the conduct of economic policy.
The greatest challenges we face are global. In addressing these challenges we should build on
fundamental economic principles. The climate challenge is calling out for cost-effective solutions,
nationally  and  globally.  The  liberalisation  of  global  trade  has  brought  undeniable  benefits.  But
insufficient attention has been paid to the other side of the coin: Not everyone has shared in the
benefits.
The signs of growing protectionism are of concern. In a world facing common problems, going it
alone is not the solution. If we all pull together, the burden becomes easier to bear. Come what
may.
1
2
3
4
5
Bjerknes,  V.  (1943)  “Hvordan  Bergensskolen  ble  til”  .  In: Vervarslinga  på  Vestlandet  25  år. Festskrift  utgitt  i
anledning  av  25-årsjubileet  1.  juli  1943 [25  years  of  weather  forecasting  on  the  western  coast.  Festschrift
published on the occasion of the 25th anniversary on 1 July 1943]. A.S. John Griegs boktrykkeri. Bergen.
Letter from Norges Bank to the Ministry of Finance, 1 December 2016. “The equity share in the benchmark index
for the Government Pension Fund Global”.
Report No. 2 to the Storting (1994–1995).  Revised National Budget 1995, p. 68.
The calculations are based on Norges Bank (2016) “Asset allocation with government revenues and spending
commitments”. NBIM Discussion Note 4/2016.
Norges  Bank  (2017) “Experience with the monetary policy framework in Norway since 2001”. Norges  Bank
Papers 1/2017.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
