Vítor Constâncio: Role and effects of the ECB non-standard policy
measures
Remarks  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB
Workshop "Monetary Policy in Non-Standard Times", Frankfurt am Main, 11 and 12 September
2017.
  Our two-day workshop on non-standard monetary policy measures is coming to a conclusion.
Similar workshops have become a regular part of our annual conference schedule here at the
ECB  for  almost  ten  years  now.  They  keep  offering  novel  insights  and  help  to  deepen  our
understanding  on  the  transmission  and  optimal  conduct  of  non-standard  measures.  This
workshop  was  no  exception.  In  my  concluding  remarks,  I  will  share  personal  takeaways
regarding some of the non-standard measures deployed by the ECB since the beginning of the
global financial crisis. These policies include the provision of liquidity on demand at fixed rate full
allotment  since  October  2008;  facilities  to  provide  medium-term  liquidity  to  banks  against
collateral  in  a  series  of  long-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs);  the  Outright  Monetary
Transactions  (OMT)  programme;  the  use  of  forward  guidance  in  our  monetary  policy
communication  as  well  as  the  large-scale  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  and  the  use  of
negative interest rates. The workshop papers provide a rich set of analysis relevant for many of
these non-standard measures that I will refer to in my remarks.
Credit easing programmes
Banks play a predominant role in the euro area financial system, so it was particularly important
to  support  banks’  credit  provision  after  the  turbulence  caused  by  the  global  financial  crisis.
Research on the bank lending channel and the effectiveness of our credit easing programme is
particularly  welcome  and  was  well  represented  at  our  workshop.  Let  me  briefly  review  two
contributions with particular relevance for the euro area:
The  paper  by  Boeckx  and  co-authors  studies  the  response  of  bank  lending  to  firms  to  credit
easing measures. They find a positive effect for the most constrained banks, provided that they
have  a  sufficiently  high  capital  buffer.  Poorly  capitalised  banks  do  not  respond  to  the  credit
support measures. These findings underscore the interactions between prudential regulation and
monetary  policy  and  gives  further  justification  for  setting  up  the  SSM  and  the  regular  stress
testing exercise, ultimately serving not only financial stability but also the effectiveness of euro
area monetary policy.
The  paper  by  Cahn  and  co-authors  is  on  the  effects  of  the  Additional  Credit  Claim  (ACC)
framework,  decided  on  8  December  2011,  to  address  bank  funding  concerns  in  several  euro
area  countries.  Credit  claims  are  loans  that  banks  can  pledge  as  collateral  with  the  ECB  to
obtain liquidity in our refinancing operations. As you may recall, at the end of 2011 we decided to
offer  the  euro  area  banking  sector  two  additional  LTROs  with  a  maturity  of  3  years  and  an
interest rate as low as 1 percent, fixed over the maturity of the operation. But that alone would not
have  been  sufficient.  Banks  also  needed  collateral  to  access  the  operations.  While  overall
collateral buffers were sufficient, the distribution of eligible collateral between banks was highly
uneven. The ACC framework comes into play here. It allowed NCBs to temporarily accept an
expanded list of credit claims as collateral in their refinancing operations. Specific risk mitigation
measures were put in place to keep the overall risk of the collateral pool unchanged. I interpret
the results of Cahn and co-authors as supportive for our decision in December 2011. The paper
shows  that  the ACC  made  a  crucial  difference  for  banks’  lending  behaviour.  SMEs  that  were
previously served by only one bank, i.e. the part of firms most vulnerable to a tightening of credit,
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
benefitted the most from the introduction of the ACC framework. The findings clearly show the
importance for policy makers to understand the constraints under which lending decisions are
being made; although collateral appeared to be sufficient when we launched the 3-year LTROS.
Without ACCs, many firms would not have benefitted from the liquidity injection.
Besides  the  bank  lending  channel,  our  credit  easing  policies  also  influenced  the  euro  area
economy through the exchange rate channel. The nominal exchange rate is one of the asset
prices that we pay particular attention to because of its impact on the inflation rate. Dedola and
co-authors  (2016)  document  the  effectiveness  of  our  balance  sheet  policies  on  the  exchange
rate and their transmission to prices and economic activity in a careful empirical analysis. It is
notable that the authors find significant exchange rate effects predominantly emanating from a
reduction  in  international  financial  distortions  achieved  by  our  liquidity  policies.  It  is  an  open
question whether their results will change were they to redo their exercise in a follow-up study for
APP-related  balance  sheet  changes.  For  this  exercise  to  be  feasible,  further  data  points  are
however needed.
The Outright Monetary Transactions Programme
By mid-2012, the global financial crisis had morphed into a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area.
In  stressed  countries,  interest  rate  spreads  had  grown  excessively  and  monetary  conditions
became tight despite the easy stance of monetary policy. The problem was a liquidity crisis: a
general distrust among market participants about the future ability of distressed sovereigns to roll
over their debt. The crisis had self-fulfilling features: under low interest rates sovereigns were
solvent,  but  the  high  interest  rates  demanded  by  market  participants  and  the  ensuing
deterioration  of  the  economic  outlook  indeed  threatened  the  sustainability  of  some  of  the
stressed sovereigns.
The  OMT  programme  was  designed  to  diffuse  such  tensions.  It  offers  conditional  liquidity
insurance by promising outright purchases of sovereign bonds with maturities up to 3 years on
the condition that the countries meet domestic economic conditions laid out by an agreement
with the European Stability Mechanism. The credibility and the potential ‘fire-power’ of the ECB
have  made  the  programme  successful.  Without  actually  spending  one  euro  to  this  day,  the
programme  has  contributed  to  the  steep  decline  of  sovereign  spreads  by  as  much  as  2
percentage points. The evidence analysed by ECB researchers in Altavilla, Giannone and Lenza
(2016), suggests that this helped ensure a more uniform transmission of our exceptionally easy
interest  rate  policy  and  led  to  substantial  increases  in  credit  growth,  activity  and  prices  in
stressed countries, with some positive spill-overs to core countries.
These events and the success of the different policy actions have drawn renewed attention to the
relevance of macroeconomic frameworks that can help us understand situations with multiple
equilibria  and  devise  appropriate  policy  responses.  I  am  encouraged  to  see  new  quantitative
1
macroeconomic models incorporating such frameworks,
See  e.g.  Corsetti-Dedola,  2016  for  a  framework  with  self-fulfilling  sovereign  debt  crises  and
Gertler and Kiyotaki, 2016 for a framework with systemic bank runs.
some  with  the  help  of  ECB  researchers,  and  see  some  potential  for  future  policy-relevant
research in this area.
Forward guidance
Let me now turn to the most “standard” instrument in the central bankers’ toolkit of non-standard
measures: “forward guidance” about the future conduct of monetary policy. Its emphasis is on
the  management  of  expectations,  as  opposed  to  the  current  setting  of  a  monetary  policy
instrument. Most frequently it has been related to the future course of policy rates, but the ECB
also  provides  forward  guidance  in  relation  to  its  asset  purchases.  In  fact,  ECB’s  forward
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
guidance currently links the lift-off date for interest rates to the end of net asset purchases by
stating that “we expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at their present levels […] well past
the horizon of our net asset purchases.”
The effectiveness of forward guidance is however, a hotly debated topic, both in academia and in
policy  circles.  In  standard  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium  (DSGE)  models,  forward
guidance  is  extremely  effective,  under  the  usual  assumptions  of  forward-looking  rational
expectations, coupled with the central bank’s ability to commit to future actions. So much so that
the  lower  bound  on  nominal  interest  rates  in  these  models  becomes  a  trivial  constraint:  the
central  bank  can  maintain  the  full  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  by  setting  an  appropriate
future lift-off date. This is a consequence of the models assuming that consumer behaviour is
determined by standard Euler equations that impose a strong present impact on consumption
resulting  from  the  future  behaviour  of  interest  rates.  However,  economists  and  policy  makers
around the world including myself, are much more sceptical about the power of forward guidance
alone to deliver stable macroeconomic outcomes in relation to the predictions of the standard
models. This became known in the literature as the “forward guidance puzzle” (a term coined by
Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson, 2015). Naturally, forward guidance helps but it certainly does
not possess the powerful grip on the economy that it shows in the standard theory. Furthermore,
its marginal effectiveness is certainly not increasing as the central bank extends the lift-off date
further in the future. Therefore, an effort to amend the standard theory is needed, and I am very
glad that some of the papers presented at this conference address this very issue.
At  this  point  in  time,  there  is  a  wealth  of  approaches  to  solve  the  problem  created  in  DSGE
2
models.
See Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson, 2015, Gabaix (2016), Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford
(2015), McKay, Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Werning (2015), for example.
Among these, I find the solutions of McKay and co-authors (2016) and Gabaix (2015 and 2016)
particularly useful. Heterogeneous agents, credit constraints and precautionary savings limit the
reaction of consumers to future interest rate movements. Gabaix introduces behavioural agents
with  myopic  capacity  to  perfectly  anticipate  the  future,  a  hypothesis  reflected  in  a  discounted
Euler  equation  that  avoids  the  “forward  guidance  puzzle”  and  illustrates  the  advantages  of
considering shorter horizons implied by behavioural cognitive impairments.
3
The approach of Angeletos and Lian (2016) is also promising.
Their  work  is  related  to  earlier  contributions  by  Morris  and  Shin  (1998,  2002)  and  Woodford
(2003)  and  is  similar  in  spirit  to  Adam  and  Marcet’s  work  (2011)  on  “internal”  vs  “external”
rationality.
It relaxes the assumption of ‘common knowledge,’ which typically goes hand in hand with the
assumption of rational expectations. The paper points out that the puzzlingly strong effects of
forward  guidance  arise  through  general  equilibrium  mechanisms,  such  as  the  feedback  loop
between aggregate spending and inflation. Assuming a lack of common knowledge attenuates
the  general  equilibrium  effects.  Sufficiently  strong  information  frictions  qualitatively  solve  the
forward guidance puzzle through anchoring the response of expectations to changes in policy.
This  is  clearly  another  intuitive  and  welcome  development  in  the  theory  of  monetary
macroeconomics.
What do these findings imply for the practice of forward guidance? As policy makers, we know
that many of the conditions that the standard models presuppose are often not met in practice.
We  are  also  acutely  aware  of  the  challenges  that  arise  when  attempting  to  effectively
communicate the conditionality of promises on the future path of interest rates. We understand
the  advantages  of  a  consistent  and  clear  communication  strategy  –  indeed,  inconsistent  or
vague promises about the future course of monetary policy often introduce additional noise and
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
raise rather than reduce economic uncertainty. My answer therefore is that we will continue using
forward guidance to some extent, but knowing that it is an imperfect tool and therefore only as
one of the various non-standard measures that we can activate when deemed necessary.
Large Scale Asset Purchases
Large-scale asset purchases, especially purchases of sovereign bonds since early 2015, have
been  one  of  our  most  salient  non-standard  measures  in  the  euro  area.  The  Eurosystem  has
already  purchased  more  than  2  trillion  euros  of  public  and  private  assets  and  we  intend  to
purchase  assets  at  a  monthly  pace  of  60  billion  euros  until  December  2017,  or  beyond,  if
necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path
of  inflation  consistent  with  our  inflation  aim.  The  programme  was  instrumental  in  eliminating
deflation risks, contributes to the ongoing recovery and helps us bring inflation closer towards our
objective.
The APP in the euro area has drawn attention to particular transmission channels of large-scale
asset purchases over and above the standard portfolio rebalancing and signalling channels.
Another  classic  channel  through  which  the  programme  exerts  its  influence  is  the  so-called
‘duration channel,’ which also appeared in multiple papers presented at the workshop. According
to this view, the public-sector purchase programme can best be understood as a swap of long-
term  sovereign  debt  for  short-term  –  actually  overnight  –  central  bank  deposits  by  the
Eurosystem.  This  swap  influences  asset  prices  because  the  central  bank  eliminates  duration
risk from the private market. Suggestive evidence on this channel in action in the euro area was
described  in  Altavilla  and  co-authors  (2016).  The  ECB  researchers  analysed  the  intraday
development of government bond prices during the January 2015 press conference, when the
details  of  the  programme  were  announced.  Surveys  conducted  before  the  announcement
suggested  that  market  participants  expected  the  maximum  maturity  of  eligible  assets  to  be
around 10 years. Instead, the eligible assets included bonds with maturities up to 30 years. The
researchers  could  separately  identify  the  impact  of  this  duration  surprise,  because  its
announcement  came  somewhat  later  than  the  announcement  of  the  overall  size  of  the
purchases, (which was also somewhat larger than expected). They confirmed that the duration
announcement reduced yields all across the maturity spectrum – and not just for assets with
maturities over 10 years – in line with the predictions of the duration channel.
The paper by De Graeve and his co-author (2016) presented at this workshop confirms, for the
United States, that reducing the outstanding maturity of sovereign debt through asset purchases
does  indeed  reduce  long-term  interest  rates.  This  is  consistent  with  recent  euro  area
observations. Their paper also draws attention to an important condition for the effectiveness of a
public-sector purchase programme: governments’ maturity policy should not undo the impact of
the  maturity  reduction  through  increasing  the  relative  supply  of  long-term  government  bonds.
U.S. evidence cautioned about this effect: Greenwood and co-authors (2014) estimated that the
Treasury’s active maturity extension programme offset around one-third of the duration supply
impact of Quantitative Easing (QE) between 2007 and 2014. Early euro area evidence suggests
comparable numbers. ECB researchers in Andrade and co-authors (2016) find that during the
period  when APP  reduced  the  ten-year  equivalent  government  supply  in  the  euro  area  by  4.5
percent of GDP, euro area treasuries increased it by around 1.9 percent. So they could have
offset  around  40  percent  of  the  impact.  This  requires  further  monitoring,  and  points  to  the
importance of co-ordination with national treasuries.
I would also like to use this opportunity to draw your attention to ongoing modelling work at the
ECB.  We  are  working  to  incorporate  financial  frictions  and  an  effective  asset  purchase
programme into our euro area wide structural macroeconomic model, the New Area-Wide Model
(Coenen and co-authors, 2017). Similar efforts apply to the New Multi-Country Model that is now
being developed and includes a more granular treatment of the financial sector. The New Area-
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Wide Model aims to take into account the importance of bank-based financing in the euro area as
well as the importance of open economy considerations. The estimated model finds a relevant
role for both financial imperfections and shocks emanating from the financial sector in explaining
business  cycle  fluctuations  and  propagation  in  the  euro  area.  The  APP  is  effective  in  the
framework, because the central bank can temporarily improve the balance sheet constraints of
financial  intermediaries,  which  then  leads  to  better  credit  conditions,  improving  the  economic
outlook and raising the inflation rate. The ensuing lower term premium, furthermore, depreciates
the  exchange  rate  to  satisfy  an  arbitrage  condition  between  the  local  and  foreign  long-term
sovereign debt markets. This exchange rate channel increases consumer prices, with marginal
impact on output, not unlike those identified by Dedola and co-authors (2017). This new version
of  the  framework  will  continue  to  help  us  form  a  consistent  view  about  conjunctural
developments  and  will  be  applied  to  analyse  the  quantitative  impact  of  alternative  policy
scenarios.
So what have I learned about QE programmes and specifically the APP? A key question is how
large a balance sheet the ECB should maintain in the long-term. This issue is broader than just
the question about a possible “permanent QE” addressed in the paper by Harrison (2017) from
the perspective of its contribution, to a reduction in the frequency of zero lower bound episodes.
He concludes that the contribution would be small and therefore dismisses the case for what he
calls “permanent QE”.
The debate about the size of the central banks’ balance sheets however, refers mainly to other
objectives. In the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium, two papers by Duffie and Krishnamurthy and
4
by Greenwood, Hanson and Stein,
See  Duffie,  D.  and  A.  Krishnamurthy,  (2016),  “Pass-through  efficiency  in  the  FED’s  new
monetary  policy  setting”,  presented  at  the  2016  Jackson  Hole  Symposium  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City and Greenwood, R., S.G. Hanson and J. C. Stein, (2016), “The
Federal  Reserve’s  balance  sheet  as  a  financial  tool”,  presented  at  the  2016  Jackson  Hole
Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
stressed  the  importance  of  the  U.S.  Federal  Reserve’s  Reverse  Repurchase  agreement
Programme (RRP) through which it repos against cash securities on its balance sheet. The first
group  of  authors  advocate  the  continued  use  of  this  programme  in  order  to  involve  more
counterparties and to affect several interest rates beyond the overnight rate, thereby contributing
to a better transmission of monetary policy. The decline in size and importance of the unsecured
interbank money market affects the pass-through to other maturities.
A second set of objectives relates to central banks keeping a large balance sheet as a way to
steer the supply of safe assets, particularly through the same RPP, to create very short-term
safe  assets.  This  fosters  greater  financial  stability  by  avoiding  unsuccessful  private  sector
attempts in fulfilling that role and amplifying risks in financial markets as seen before the crisis.
This  is  an  important  issue  as  the  attempt  to  create  safer  private  assets  was  behind  the
5
expansion of a shadow banking sector that played a significant role in the crisis.
See Constâncio, V., (2017), “The future of monetary policy frameworks”.
Finally, a third objective was recently expressed by the President of the New York FED
6
See William, D., (2017), “The U.S. Economic Outlook and the Implications for Monetary Policy”,
speech on 7 September 2017 available in.
that it would be justified to keep a balance sheet with a sufficient size in order to enable the use
of bank reserves’ remuneration and the RRP as ways to steer short-term rates, instead of using
open market operations only as was previously the case.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  the  euro  area,  some  similarities  regarding  the  transmission  via  the  unsecured  interbank
market may justify in the future, reflections on these new aspects of conducting monetary policy.
Meanwhile, the predominantly bank-based nature of the European financial system allows us the
possibility of going back to a “leaner” balance sheet, with lending to banks remaining the main
channel  for  managing  liquidity  and  steering  short-term  interest  rates.  Asset  purchase
programmes would be in any case a potential tool to be applied again in future contingencies, if
necessary.
Negative interest rates
The  ECB  was  the  first  major  central  bank  to  introduce  negative  policy  rates.  The  rate  of  the
ECB’s deposit facility was lowered to –10bps in June 2014 and reached –0.40bps in March 2016.
Negative rates stimulate the economy via the usual channels: they lower real yields and bank
lending  rates  at  various  maturities,  encouraging  borrowing  and  real  activity.  In  this  context,
negative policy rates have been an effective tool in the euro area, lowering not only short-term
rates but also rates at longer maturities via expectations. I agree with both keynote speakers in
our  workshop  that  the  transmission  of  rate  cuts  in  negative  territory  may  be  different  from
conventional rate cuts. Let me briefly outline why.
While banks enjoy valuation gains on securities they hold on their balance sheet, as with any
other rate cut, they may face a squeeze in their interest rate margin in the future for their loans,
new and/or old, depending on whether the loans are fixed or floating rates. Such a loan margin
squeeze may occur because a significant part of banks’ funding costs is unlikely to fully reflect
the  central  bank’s  move  to  negative  rates:  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  banks’  retail  deposits  are
essentially  floored  at  zero,  as  was  also  emphasised  in  the  keynote  speech  by  Eggertsson.  If
banks cannot adjust the rates they pay their customers for their deposits as a reaction to falling
loan rates, their profitability could decrease, leading to lower bank equity which in turn, could lead
to lower lending, potentially hindering the pass-through of policy. This mechanism points to the
importance of banks’ balance sheet structures for the transmission of negative rates: banks’ with
large securities holdings and relatively small retail deposit shares are more likely to benefit from
negative rates than are banks with relatively small securities holdings and a higher retail deposit
share.
Work conducted by ECB economists, Demiralp and co-authors (2017), explores this exact point.
They identify banks’ exposure to negative rates by their exposure to excess liquidity conditional
on each banks’ business model and find that banks have reacted to negative interest rates by
granting more loans, reducing their reliance on wholesale funding and by acquiring non-domestic
government  bonds.  Interestingly,  banks  classified  as  investment  banks,  i.e.  those  with  largest
securities holdings and smallest retail deposit share are the one most active in granting more
loans. Overall, Demiralp and co-authors (2017) conclude that negative rates have led to a more
expansionary  stance  of  monetary  policy  as  well  as  an  empowerment  of  the  ECB’s APP,  as
banks’ desire to adjust their balance sheets has contributed to lowering interest rates in financial
markets.
Similar findings were reported by Basten and Mariathasan at this workshop in their paper on the
impact of negative rates on banks in Switzerland. The Swiss National Bank (SNB) introduced
negative rates in December 2014 and lowered rates to a record low of –0.75bps in January 2015.
The paper by Basten and Mariathasan (2016) is a very welcome contribution to the emerging
literature on the effect of negative rates in that it uses a very detailed dataset, notably comprising
supervisory data and a convincing identification, constructed around the institutional specificities
of  the  implementation  of  negative  rates  in  Switzerland.  This  puts  the  authors  in  a  position  to
answer a variety of questions regarding the impact of negative rates on Swiss banks. Just like
Demiralp and co-authors (2017), they find that negative rates have been overall expansionary.
With the help of their comprehensive dataset, they are able to point out that banks have been
able to more than offset the compression of their interest rate margin by lending to customers
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
formerly not served. This expansion is in line with the predictions of the risk taking channel of
monetary  policy  and  in  line  with  what  Heider  and  co-authors  (2017)  find  in  the  case  of  the
syndicated loan market in the euro area.
At the same time, I do not challenge the view that there can be an effective lower bound, or a
reversal rate, as it was called by Brunnermeier in his work with Koby, under which an interest
rate  cut  would  turn  contractionary.  However,  where  this  lower-bound  lies  is  still  unknown,  we
have  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  still  below  the  current  rates  in  the  euro  area  or  in
Switzerland. Once this lower bound is reached, however, perverse outcomes may materialise
because the interest rate cut does not reach retail bank deposit holders as Eggertson pointed
out. I share these concerns: negative rates are a tool that needs to be closely monitored. We are
happy with the experience and we think the evidence accumulated so far points to the negative
side effects being dominated by the positive aspects of the policy, which means that this is a
new instrument in the central banks’ toolkit to be used in exceptional circumstances.
Conclusions
Let  me  conclude.  The  non-standard  measures  that  the  ECB  had  to  use  in  order  to  face  the
challenges of the crisis and the threat of too low inflation have been successful to avoid the worst
for  the  European  Monetary  Union.  From  innovative  liquidity  facilities  to  asset  purchase
programmes  and  negative  deposit  rates,  non-standard  measures  proved  crucial  to  avoid
deflation and foster the economic recovery. We have not yet achieved our main goal of inflation
being  below  but  close  to  2  percent.  We  share  with  other  advanced  economies  the  puzzle  of
wage and prices not responding to strong growth as usual. By keeping a sufficient degree of
monetary policy accommodation we can be confident that our goal will eventually be reached, in
accordance with our mandate..
I  thank  the  presenters,  the  discussants,  the  organisers  and  the  audience  for  this  successful
workshop. Non-standard measures are going to be part of our toolkit for some time to come, and
some of them might even be deemed standard measures at some point, so I can promise you
that  we  will  continue  to  organise  similar  events.  I  am  looking  forward  to  seeing  further
contributions  on  the  ongoing  debates,  further  analysis  on  the  potential  costs  of  non-standard
measures  and  new  results  related  to  relevant  questions  like  the  impact  of  non-standard
7
measures on inequality that I recently addressed.
See Constâncio, V., (2017), “Inequality and macroeconomic policies”.
I  look  forward  to  your  future  work  to  foster  our  understanding  of  the  non-standard  times  that
continue to challenge all of us.
References
Adam,  K.,  and A.  Marcet  (2011),  “Internal  Rationality,  Imperfect  Market  Knowledge  and Asset
Prices”, Journal of Economic Theory, 146: 1224–1252.
Adam, K., A. Marcet and J. Beutel (2017), “Stock Price Booms and Expected Capital Gains”,
American Economic Review 107(8): 2352–2408, August.
Altavilla, C., D. Giannone and M. Lenza (2016), “The Financial and Macroeconomic Effects of the
OMT Announcements,” International Journal of Central Banking, September.
Andrade,  P.  and  J.  Breckenfelder,  F.  De  Fiore,  P.  Karadi  and  O.  Tristani  (2016),  “The  ECB’s
asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 1956.
Angeletos, G.-M. and C. Lian (2016), “Forward Guidance Without Common Knowledge,” NBER
Working Paper No. 22785.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Basten,  C.  and  M.  Mariathasan  (2017),  “Banks’  response  to  negative  interest  rates:  evidence
from the Swiss exemption threshold”.
Boeckx, J., M., De Sola Perea and G. Peersman (2017), “The transmission mechanism of credit
support policies in the euro area”.
Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Koby (2016), “The Reversal Interest Rate – An Effective Lower Bound
on Monetary Policy”.
Cahn,  C.,  A.  Duquerroy  and  W.  Mullins  (2017),  “Unconventional  monetary  policy  and  bank
lending relationships”.
Chakraborty, I., I. Goldstein and A. MacKinlay (2017), “Monetary stimulus and bank lending”.
Coenen, G., P. Karadi, S. Schmidt, A. Warne (2017), “The New Area-Wide Model II: An Updated
Version of the ECB’s Micro-Founded Model for Forecasting and Policy Analysis with a Financial
Sector”.
Constâncio, V. (2017), “The future of monetary policy frameworks”
Constâncio, V. (2017), “Inequality and macroeconomic policies”
Corsetti,  G.  and  L.  Dedola  (2016),  “Mystery  of  the  printing  press  –  Monetary  Policy  and  self-
fulfilling debt crises,” CEPR Discussion Paper 14(6), December.
Dedola, L., G. Georgiadis, J. Graeb and A. Mehl (2017), “Does a big bazooka matter? Central
bank balance-sheet policies and exchange rates”.
De Graeve, F. and K. Theodoridis (2017), “Forward guidance, quantitative easing, or both?”
Del Negro, M., M.P. Giannoni, and C. Patterson (2015), “The Forward-Guidance Puzzle,” Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 574, Revised December 2015.
Demiralp,  S.  and  J.  Eisenschmidt,  T.  Vlassopoulos  (2017),  “Negative  interest  rates,  excess
liquidity  and  bank  business  models:  Banks’  reaction  to  unconventional  monetary  policy  in  the
euro area”, forthcoming ECB Working Paper
Dudley,  W.  (2017)  “The  U.S.  Economic  Outlook  and  the  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy”,
speech of 7 September
Duffie,  D.  and A.  Krishnamurthy  (2016),  “Pass-through  efficiency  in  the  FED’s  new  monetary
policy setting”, presented at the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City
Gabaix, X. (2015), “Sparse dynamic programming and aggregate fluctuations”, mimeo.
Gabaix, X. (2016), “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model”, NBER Working Paper No. 22954.
Garcia-Schmidt, M. and M. Woodford (2015), “Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox of
Perfect-Foresight Analysis,” NBER Working Paper No. 21614.
Gertler,  M.  and  N.  Kiyotaki  (2015),  “Banking,  Liquidity  and  Bank  Runs  in  an  Infinite  Horizon
Economy” American Economic Review, 105(7), July.
Greenwood, R., S.G. Hanson and J. C. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a
financial tool”, presented at the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Greenwood,  R.,  S.  G.  Hanson,  J.  S.  Rudolph  and  L.  H.  Summers  (2014),  “Government  debt
management at the zero lower bound,” Hutchins Center at Brookings Working Paper No. 5.
Eggertsson, G. (2017), “Are negative nominal interest rates expansionary?”.
Harrison, R. (2017), “Optimal quantitative easing”.
Heider, F., S., Faruq and S. Glen (2017), “Life below zero: Bank lending under negative policy
rates”.
McKay, A., E. Nakamura and J. Steinsson (2016), “The Power of Forward Guidance Revisited,”
American Economic Review, 106(10), 3133–3158.
Morris, S. and H. S. Shin (1998), “Unique equilibrium in a model of self-fulfilling currency attacks.”
American Economic Review, 587–597.
Morris,  S.  and  H.  S.  Shin  (2002),  “Social  Value  of  Public  Information”, American  Economic
Review, 92(5): 1521–1534.
Loisel, O. and D. Behzad (2017), “Pegging the interest rate on bank reserves”.
Werning,  I.  (2015),  “Incomplete  Markets  and Aggregate  Demand”, NBER  Working  Paper  No.
21448.
Woodford,  M.  (2003),  “Imperfect  Common  Knowledge  and  the  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy”,
Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S.
Phelps.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
See e.g. Corsetti-Dedola, 2016 for a framework with self-fulfilling sovereign debt crises and Gertler and Kiyotaki,
2016 for a framework with systemic bank runs.
See Del Negro, Giannoni, and Patterson, 2015, Gabaix (2016), Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford (2015), McKay,
Nakamura and Steinsson (2016), Werning (2015), for example.
Their work is related to earlier contributions by Morris and Shin (1998, 2002) and Woodford (2003) and is similar
in spirit to Adam and Marcet’s work (2011) on “internal” vs “external” rationality.
See Duffie, D. and A. Krishnamurthy, (2016), “Pass-through efficiency in the FED’s new monetary policy setting”,
presented at the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and Greenwood,
R., S.G. Hanson and J. C. Stein, (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a financial tool”, presented at
the 2016 Jackson Hole Symposium of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
See Constâncio, V., (2017), “The future of monetary policy frameworks”.
See William, D., (2017), “The U.S. Economic Outlook and the Implications for Monetary Policy”, speech on 7
September 2017 available in.
See Constâncio, V., (2017), “Inequality and macroeconomic policies”.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
