  “The Role of Finance and Banking for the Prosperity of Asia” 
Speech by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
IIF lunch seminar during the 50th Anniversary ADB Annual meeting  
6 May 2017, Yokohama, Japan 
 
Mr. Timothy Adams, President of the Institute of International Finance,  
IIF fellows, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good afternoon to you all. 
I am honoured to be here today and be a part of this remarkable event celebrating the 50th 
anniversary of the Asian Development Bank. I would like to thank the Institute of International 
Finance for hosting this lunch seminar and for inviting me to share with you my thought.    
Throughout the past five decades of the Asian Development Bank, the ADB has been a trusted 
development partner of the public and private sectors in Asia. Its lending packages, technical 
assistance  along  with  policy  dialogues  have  been  tailored  to  specific  needs  of  member 
countries, and have helped reduce poverty and laid foundations for inclusive and sustainable 
growth in Asia.  Evidently, the number of people living in extreme poverty has fallen markedly 
across Asia throughout the past decades.  
Half a century is an important milestone. It is an opportune time to look back and look forward. 
My topic for today is “The role of Finance and Banking for the Prosperity of Asia”.  I will 
start off briefly with the past journey of Asian development, and then focus on how to prepare 
our bank centric financial system for challenges and opportunities that lie ahead in this rapidly 
evolving  economic  environment  and  financial  landscape.    Having  a  smooth-functioning 
financial system is of course a necessary condition for growth as finance is often referred to 
as the life blood of the economy. On the other hand, if the blood is infected, it could lead to 
severe malfunctions of the body and serious adverse consequences.  Thus, going forward, in 
pursuit of the prosperity of Asia, I propose that the role of finance and banking must focus on 
three key words: “productivity, immunity, and inclusion”. I will come back to these three 
key words later in my talk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let’s  begin  by  looking  back  over  the  past  fifty  years.  Undoubtedly,  it  has  been  an 
incredible journey of Asia’s achievements. From a primarily agrarian and poor region in the 
1960s, Asia has transformed itself into today’s key engine of the global economy. According 
to the latest IMF’s World Economic Outlook, emerging and developing Asia is expected to 
 1 
  
grow at 6.4 percent in 2017, making it the fastest growing region and contributing almost half 
of the world’s output growth.  
To get to where we stand today, Asia has gone through various rounds of boom and bust 
cycles.  The  Asian  Miracle  decades  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  were  largely  fueled  by  the 
industrialization,  rapid  capital  accumulation,  migration  of  cheap  labour,  urbanization, 
emergence of middle class, and hot money, largely supported by banks at the core of financial 
intermediary. The “miracles” eventually turned out to be a crisis in the making, and Asia had 
learned the lessons the harshest way.   
Fortunately, Asia has come a long way after the Asian Financial Crisis. A series of structural 
reforms  were  carried  out  to  reduce  structural  weaknesses,  improve  growth  potential  and 
safeguard monetary and financial stability. Policies, including monetary and exchange rate 
policies, prudential regulations and supervision, as well as legal and market infrastructures, 
have been redesigned to prevent distorted incentives that could lead to vulnerabilities or 
building up of fragility in the system. Thus far, the Asian economies’ and financial systems’ 
resilience has been well tested by the Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath.  
However,  against  the  backdrop  of  the  increasingly  volatile,  uncertain,  complex,  and 
ambiguous world we live in today, we cannot be complacent and I think it is not an 
overstatement to say that the real challenges still lie ahead for Asian financial systems.     
Ladies and gentlemen,  
After the Global Financial Crisis, the persistently low-growth and low-yield environment 
has affected Asian banks in various channels.  Deteriorating asset quality with higher credit 
costs tends to outweigh benefits of the lower funding costs, thereby squeezing profit margins.  
Furthermore, new flow of credit demand has been sluggish, owing to the low-growth prospect, 
low private investment, excess capacity in many industries, and low commodity prices. The 
loan growth prospect has also been hampered by the more attractive funding sources in the 
capital market.  Debt overhangs of both corporates and households in many Asian economies 
have also undermined investment and consumption, while threatening financial stability in 
some  countries.  In  addition,  the  trend  towards  trade  protectionism  and  growing 
geopolitical tension in the Northeast Asia and the South China Sea could jeopardise both 
growth and stability in our region, leading to financial volatility and possibly much higher cost 
of funds.   
Along with rapidly changing and increasingly volatile economic and financial environment, 
technology advancement is fast re-designing financial and business landscape.  Sharing 
economy will soon become the key feature of modern economy and financial system.  Cross-
border transactions of e-commerce as well as payment and settlement will become more 
widespread.    New  fin-tech  firms  have  offered  financial  products  unbundled  from  the 
 2 
  
longstanding value chain of banks.  Certain banks’ existing business models might be obsolete 
and they must be agile enough to keep up with customers’ new lifestyle and requirements 
as well as competitors’ new business practices.  In the current world, banks having economies 
of scale and scope might not gain advantages without agility and economies of speed.  And, 
one should not forget that new forms of technology also bring along new forms of risks. 
Among others, cyber safety should be in the top priority of all banks. 
Looking forward, roles of Asian banks as intermediary could be diminished on the back 
of the growing capital markets and shadow banking, which includes not only traditional 
ones like asset management companies and savings cooperatives, but also more modern ones 
like crowd-funding and peer-to-peer lending. Capital account liberalization will also lead to 
asset diversification abroad.  Banks’ funding sources are likely prone to be more vulnerable 
and volatile, with the increasing interconnectedness between banks, non-banks and capital 
markets.  After many years of consolidating our financial systems after the Asian financial crisis, 
technology  could  fragment  our  financial  systems  in  an  unprecedented  way.  Regulatory 
arbitrage  could  lead  to  pockets  of  vulnerability,  particularly  in  the  less-regulated  or 
unregulated areas of shadow banking. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the need for rapid transformation in Asia is not limited to only banks 
and financial institutions. Changing technology, changing demographic structure, and changing 
global operating environment also necessitate that Asian businesses transform themselves to 
be able to compete in the new environment, where productivity is key. In addition, they need 
to improve their risk management and immunity to be able to cope with increasing volatility 
and uncertainties of the modern world. 
It is also crucial that Asian banks and businesses understand developments in the society 
at large that could affect their operating environment, chief among these is income 
inequality. The income gap in many Asian countries will widen further and threaten social 
and  economic  stability,  as  those  with  higher  capital  can  more  easily  reap  benefits  from 
economic growth and new technology, leaving those without access  or know-how further 
behind. Evidence has shown that benefits from economic growth are highly concentrated and 
not at all broad-based. Rising income inequality has raised social polarization and we have 
seen it culminated in Asian politics even before the Brexit vote and the U.S. Presidential 
election.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
While  all  sectors  of  Asian  economies,  including  businesses,  households,  banks,  financial 
institutions, as well as authorities, must transform themselves in order to thrive in the new 
world, I strongly urge that banks and financial institutions look beyond their conventional 
 3 
  
financial intermediary function, and get actively involved in addressing the key issues of the 
economy.  After all, the financial system is the blood vessel of the economy. 
Facing with these challenges, and aspiring to achieve a sustainable and prosperous Asia 
for many more years to come, financial system must, at the very least, help with the 
three key words I mentioned earlier: 1) productivity, 2) immunity, and 3) inclusion. 
First,  to  enhance  productivity,  the  trend  in  technology  advancement  together  with 
research and development will be the key enablers to increase productivity in Asia.  The 
IMF’s chief, Madame Christine Lagarde, has recently warned that “another decade of weak 
productivity growth would seriously undermine the rise in global living standards”.  In this 
regard,  banks  have  to  embrace  and  employ  technologies  not  only  to  improve  their 
organisation’s own competitiveness, but also to be able to provide more efficient and lower-
cost financial services to Asian businesses and households.  Regulators also need to establish 
an ecosystem that encourages financial innovation, competition, and efficiency improvement. 
In my view, there are at least two areas that banks and financial institutions could help 
improve productivity. 
First, digitization will certainly enhance productivity in financial services.  In Thailand, 
electronic payment and digital banking are becoming increasingly widespread.   Under the 
national e-payment program, businesses, households, and the government will significantly 
benefit from the cost reduction of financial services both in terms of money and time saved. 
Many initiatives under the national e-payment program, for instance, the new faster payment 
system or “PromptPay” and electronic government payments will provide foundation for 
many new add-on applications that will improve productivity across different segments of the 
Thai society. Thai banks have definitely played significant roles in hatching out these initiatives, 
starting from ideas and all the way through to implementation.  
Second, financial connectivity, particularly within our region, will also play a key role in 
enhancing productivity. Regional cooperation amongst Asian countries, not only in trade and 
investment, but also in finance has a potential to expand much further. I strongly believe that 
improved financial connectivity in Asia will be mutually beneficial to all. There are already 
many ongoing initiatives, for instance, promoting the usage of local currency in the region, the 
ASEAN Banking Integration Framework, the Asian Payment Network, and the Asian bond and 
capital  market  initiatives.  Despite  progress  made  thus  far,  financial  institutions  and 
policymakers in the region could step up our joint efforts in various ways. 
Let me now turn to immunity, which is equally important under the increasingly volatile, 
uncertain, complex, and ambiguous world in order to keep the financial system resilient 
throughout and thus be able to continue to support their clients and the real economy. 
 4 
  
As the financial system is the blood vessel of the economy, immunity needs to start from 
safeguarding against blood infection. We will need to ensure that banks have adequate capital 
and provisioning cushion  to be able to withstand  swings of economic  cycle and financial 
volatility.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  welcomed  the  post  GFC’s  regulatory  reform  addressing 
concerns on systemic risks including the conservation buffer, the countercyclical buffer, G-SIBs 
and D-SIBs, as well as the recovery and resolution plan to further strengthen financial safety 
net. To complement these rules, and build a better immune system that is strong and resilient 
through any cyclical or structural shocks, I believe we need to target the underlying factor 
contributing to immunity, namely, the culture and behaviour of banks.  
Fundamentally, an organisation is predominantly defined by its behaviour and culture. 
Behaviour  and  culture  influences  operations  at  almost  every  levels  within  an 
organisation, ranging from decision making, strategic positioning, as well as risk appetite 
and risk taking. The risk-reward incentive structure has to focus more on long term gains 
rather than short-term profits, and the design of compensation scheme should fully reflect 
that aim. The strong culture of risk awareness and good governance should be  rigorously 
instilled such that it becomes organisational culture and natural behaviour of bankers. Culture 
of  transparency  along  with  proper  check  and  balance  also  contribute  towards  a  solid 
foundation of banks’ immune system. 
The other area of immunity that will be key for financial institutions is immunity against 
cyber security risks. Everyone, every bank, every system must be prepared and ready to 
both prevent and respond effectively to cyber security risks. Incidents of cyber attacks, 
no  matter  how  small,  can  undermine  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  To  boost  the 
immune system, it is imperative that cyber resilience and cyber security be given the highest 
priority.   
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Financial stability could not exist without social stability, which brings me to my third 
and  last  point  that  requires  collaboration  from  financial  institutions.    The  economic 
benefit  of  growth  has  to  be  inclusive  and  financial  system  can  play  significant  roles  in 
promoting inclusive growth, starting with financial inclusion.  
The people at large must have access to basic financial products including payment, 
savings, credit, and insurance. The pricing has to be lower, choices wider, and access better.  
Products that we should see more of are, for example, basic savings account with no minimum 
balance to  cater for the low-income group, low-fee payment and transfer services, micro 
insurance  for  farmers,  and  increased  information-based  lending  to  small  businesses 
complementing to collateral-based lending.   
 5 
  
Despite the high level of access to finance in Thailand relative to other emerging Asian 
countries, the Bank of Thailand regards financial inclusion as one of our top priorities. In 
collaboration with both banks and non-banks, we have continually put our efforts to promote 
financial access in many areas.  They include, for instance, SMEs’ credit guarantee scheme, 
free-of-charge fund transfer through our new faster payment system for any amount up to 
5,000 Thai Baht (approximately equivalent to 145 US dollar), no-fee bank savings account, 
nano finance to accommodate small borrowers, as well as the new Business Securities Act to 
widen the scope of eligible collateral for secured lending. In addition, we will soon launch an 
unsecured debt restructuring scheme for individual borrowers with multi-creditors to address 
the household debt overhang.   
To ensure a “good quality” financial inclusion, financial literacy and financial technology 
literacy are crucial life skills for both households and small businesses. Effective financial 
literacy would help increased consumers’ financial discipline and understandings of financial 
products and their risks. Thus, deepening such basic knowledge and turning concepts into 
changing  behaviour  would  be  particularly  helpful  to  shelter  vulnerable  businesses  and 
households from getting themselves into over indebtedness or stuck with unsuitable financial 
contracts.  
Besides,  as  technology  advancement  permeates  into  all  businesses,  all  lifestyles,  and  all 
sectors, if we also could ensure that households and small businesses that make up  the 
majority of our economic agents can practically apply and benefit from the new technology, 
while being aware of its associated risks, then we could significantly raise their standards of 
living.   
Ladies and gentlemen, 
That brings me to the end of my talk today. To aspire for a better standards of living for all 
citizens of Asia for the next half century and more, we, all of us, must collectively do our part 
to ensure inclusive and sustainable growth. In so doing, banks and financial institutions, as 
the blood vessels of our economy, have important roles to play to prevent the blood 
from being infected as well as to ensure the well-functioning of our blood circulation 
for more productive, better immuned, and more inclusive economies in Asia. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention.  
 6 
