Jens Weidmann: Current developments in the euro area
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Bank of Slovenia, Ljubljana, 1
March 2017.
 1 Introduction
Governor Jazbec
Ambassador Riedel
Ladies and gentlemen
I am delighted to have the opportunity to return to Slovenia – and to Ljubljana. I was here just over
four years ago to attend the external meeting of the ECB Governing Council. So I already know
the  charm  Ljubljana  holds  for  its  visitors.  This  time,  I  will  also  have  time  to  visit  the  National
Gallery, where I am especially interested in seeing the works of Slovenian artists. To me, art is
far more than mere decoration: it grants insights – for example, into a country’s soul at a given
point in time.
Johann  Wolfgang  von  Goethe,  the  great  German  poet,  summed  up  this  aspect  of  art  as  an
expression of our inner selves when he said: “The mediator of the inexpressible is the work of
art.” Ladies and gentlemen, by accepting the invitation of the Bank of Slovenia to this event, you
no  doubt  had  the  expectation  that  I  would  express  my  views  clearly.  Indeed,  this  afternoon  is
dedicated  to  a  format  that  stands  for  arguments  and  facts  –  meaning  the  opposite  of
“inexpressible”.
In  my  speech  I  would  like  to  shed  some  light  on  current  euro-area  developments  and  the
challenges ahead. I will then be glad to discuss with you the picture I have drawn.
2 Economic situation and monetary policy
The current economic situation of the euro area is quite good. The upturn has stabilised. With a
macroeconomic growth rate of 1.7%, GDP in 2016 actually grew more quickly than euro-area
production capacity; the output gap is gradually closing. Thus, unemployment in many euro-area
countries  is  falling;  in  2016  the  unemployment  rate  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  declined  by
almost 1 percentage point to 9.6%. That means it is now just a little less than 1 percentage point
above  its  average  in  the  pre-crisis  years.  The  current  Eurosystem  projection  from  December
assumes that the euro-area economy will continue to grow; namely by 1.7% this year and by
1.6% in each of the next two years.
A similar economic situation holds for Slovenia and Germany. Both countries currently benefit
from robust economic growth. In fact, capacity utilisation in Germany is yet perceptibly higher
than that of the euro area as a whole, employment is on maximum-value and confidence is quite
high, for both, consumer and enterprises. The Bundesbank’s economists expect the economy to
grow at a rate of 1.8% in 2017, too. But this is nothing compared to the figures forecasted for
Slovenia. The European Commission is projecting growth rates of 3.0% in 2017 and 2018 due to
higher consumer spending and accelerating investment.
The robust economic upswing and rising capacity utilisation in the euro area will also drive up
price pressures gradually. Of late, however, inflation has risen even more strongly than expected
in  the  December  projection,  recently  hitting  1.8%.  This  sharp  increase  in  prices,  however,  is
attributable mainly to base effects and the higher oil prices of late – since the end of November,
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
oil has become significantly more expensive. Assuming that oil prices do not rise any further, I
see two notable developments.
First, inflation this year is likely to be well in excess of the figure projected to date; for Germany,
an upward revision of around one-half percentage point is expected – and this might also be the
case for the euro area as a whole. Second, we are likely to return to somewhat lower inflation
rates by the end of the year. This is because domestic price pressures are still comparatively
low  at  present.  Core  inflation,  for  example,  which  looks  through  energy  price  fluctuations  and
other volatile components of the consumer price index, stands currently at around the 1% mark.
According to Eurosystem forecasts, however, it will slowly increase as the euro area continues
its economic recovery and it is expected to reach 1.7% at the end of the forecast horizon in 2019.
In this constellation, an accommodative monetary policy certainly continues to be appropriate,
though opinions differ over the right degree of monetary accommodation and the point in time at
which  the  price  outlook  will  have  firmed  enough  to  justify  a  change  in  communication  and
ultimately in the monetary policy stance. In this context, in my view some thoughts are worth
sharing.
First, monetary policy is automatically looser in the coming months, even without central bank
action: due to the increased inflation, the real interest rate declined. The effects are similar to a
central  bank  rate  cut.  Second,  in  the  euro  area,  we  are  now  far  removed  from  the  threat  of
deflation, which is to say an expectations-driven downward wage-price spiral. Financial market
participants seem to have a similar take on it: the probability, derived from inflation options, that
the inflation rate will be negative in the next five years is now at its lowest point since the summer
of 2011. Personally, I have always deemed such a deflation scenario highly unlikely. Third, some
of the unconventional measures, which were taken in order to loosen the monetary policy stance,
come with a different risk-reward calculus than the standard instruments of monetary policy. I am
sure that it will come as no surprise that I am rather critical of government bond purchases.
This is because, in a monetary union of sovereign member states with a single monetary policy
and  largely  autonomous  economic  and  fiscal  policies,  government  bond  purchases  are  not  a
monetary policy instrument like our policy rates, for instance. Government bond purchases are
increasingly blurring the line between monetary and fiscal policy, and government funding costs
are depending to an ever greater extent directly on monetary policy decisions.
Euro-area central banks are now the largest creditors of their member states. All governments
ultimately  pay  nearly  the  same  interest  rate  on  the  debt  in  central  banks’  balance  sheets,
regardless of the country’s creditworthiness. What’s more: the larger the part of the debt that
central  banks  withdraw  from  the  market,  the  less  markets  will  exert  their  disciplining  forces,
sanctioning unhealthy public finances with higher risk premiums. This is all the more worrisome
as the low-interest-rate environment offers few incentives for governments to consolidate their
budgets.
And indeed, fiscal policy in the euro area has been loosened noticeably over the past few years.
In contrast to what would be needed given the still high debt levels in many euro-area countries,
governments’ savings in interest payments aren’t being put towards the urgent goal of reducing
debt, but instead are being spent to a significant extent. John F Kennedy once said: “The time to
repair a roof is when the sun is shining.” This is most certainly true. But if you don’t want to risk
permanent damage to your house, you sometimes have no choice but to repair the roof when it’s
raining.
I fear the danger of finance ministers becoming more and more comfortable with the high levels
of debt the longer these favourable financing conditions exist.
This could lead to a situation in which fiscal policy takes the bait of a sustainability illusion. And,
when  the  monetary  policy  reins  have  to  be  tightened  due  to  increasing  price  pressure,  the
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Eurosystem could come under political pressure to make high levels of debt sustainable through
low interest rates. This, however, would put price stability at risk.
Against this backdrop, it is essential that the Eurosystem is independent. After all, history has
shown that independent central banks are better able to safeguard price stability than dependent
central banks. This is also one of the key findings enshrined in the economic literature of the
1970s and 1980s. To quote the words of Otmar Issing, former ECB chief economist: “Central
bank independence is indispensable if monetary policy makers are to be expected to pursue the
primary objective of a central bank to maintain price stability and to do everything in their power to
achieve  this.”   On the other hand, independence does not give a central bank carte blanche to
do as it pleases; it obligates the central bank to interpret its monetary policy mandate narrowly,
meaning  to  maintain  price  stability.  This  is  because  central  banks’  independence  in  monetary
policy matters is not a self-evident feature of a sovereign democracy given that other areas of
economic policy are subject to parliamentary control.
1
Monetary  policy  has  to  avoid  the  markets’  perception  that  the  central  bank  is  only  willing  to
counter  downward  pressure  on  financial  markets  with  an  accommodative  policy  stance  but
refrains from tightening the reins in times of higher price stability risks due to the fear of triggering
market turbulences. The so-called “Greenspan put” illustrates the moral hazard that can come of
such an asymmetrical approach. In extremis, monetary policy can even be held hostage by fiscal
policy or the financial markets.
At the same time, it is a matter of fact that the success of central banks in fulfilling their mandate
also depends on factors they cannot control. Sound public finances are only one precondition;
prudent measures to generate growth and to foster the stability of the European monetary union
are other examples.
3 Politics and the economic setting
3.1   Creating prosperity
Ladies and gentlemen
Contrary to what some believe – or might wish – it is not the responsibility of central banks to
ensure  sufficient  growth  and  economic  convergence:  it  is  the  responsibility  of  the  member
states. Or to put it metaphorically: it’s not enough for a car to have a tank full of “liquidity” if you
want to speed up. Someone still has to rev up the engine.
Financing  costs  in  the  euro  area  are  exceedingly  low;  the  Eurosystem  has  done  its  part  in
maintaining access to bank credit. In my view, financing conditions are no obstacle to private
investment, but muted long-term growth prospects are. In the end, it’s the politicians who hold
the key that can unlock long-term economic growth. That’s why the Governing Council has been
tireless  in  calling  for  structural  reforms  –  for  example,  in  tackling  the  impact  of  demographic
change.  Both  Germany’s  and  Slovenia’s  long-term  economic  outlook  is  dampened  because
demographic change will hit our countries particularly hard. In the coming years, more people in
both countries will be retiring than young people entering the job market.
But while the ambition should be to move into a higher gear on reforms, there are signals that we
have  already  shifted  back  down  to  a  lower  gear.  “Going  for  growth  2016”,  a  recent  study  by
the OECD, shows that since 2013 the speed of reforms has slowed down, especially with regard
to  measures  in  the  fields  of  “innovation  policy,  public  sector  efficiency  or  product  and  labour
2
market regulation”.
It is clear that each country has its own economic situation and preferences – meaning there’s
no such thing as a “one size fits all” approach.  But I am convinced that measures which lead to
sound public finances as well as competition-based economic systems with flexible labour and
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
product  markets  would  foster  long-term  growth.  Let  me  give  you  an  idea  of  what  could  be
achieved  by  implementing  the  appropriate  reforms.  The  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)
conducted  a  study  to  determine  which  OECD  countries  have  the  most  growth-friendly  tax
regimes, labour markets and social insurance systems. IMF economists then calculated what
would happen if euro-area member states closed half of the gap to the leaders. The result is that
3
annual euro-area growth in subsequent years would be just under one percentage point higher.
Making  it  easier  for  new  firms  to  enter  the  market  is  one  type  of  reform  that  helps  to  raise
competition and innovation. Measures which ease the process of setting up a new business and,
where necessary, eliminating red tape would boost growth potential, too. Lowering the barriers
that prevent enterprises from exiting the market would likewise foster growth. It would facilitate
what  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  “creative  destruction”.  OECD  research  suggests  that  policy-
induced exit barriers matter for productivity growth, because fewer exits lead to less scope for
productivity  spillovers  and  the  misallocation  of  capital,  labour  and  skills.  It  concludes,  for
instance, that insolvency regimes should be streamlined.  The creation of a common services
market  and  a  single  digital  market  in  Europe  could  also  speed  up  long-term  growth.  Studies
show  that  this  could  yield  twice  the  growth  effect  unleashed  by  the  creation  of  the  common
market for goods.
5,6
4
Additionally, companies in the euro area would benefit from a deeper and more integrated capital
market. This would also improve financial stability, because equity flows would be less prone to
sudden stops. Hence, more equity financing makes companies more shock-resistant, thereby
supporting  growth  and  jobs.  This  is  where  the  Capital  Markets  Union  comes  in.  Currently,
European companies largely rely on bank debt – in relation to GDP, about four times more than
in the United States.  Improving and harmonising regulation could help to make equity markets a
better funding source for enterprises. The integrated equity markets in the US cushion around
40% of total cyclical fluctuations between federal states.  If a negative shock hits an industry or a
specific region, then this loss is spread widely beyond that region. Creditors, on the other hand,
are not exposed to losses – except in the event of insolvency. In other words: equity is a shock
absorber, debt is a shock amplifier.
7
8
But let me state clearly at this point. I am not pushing for the European financial system of the
future to look exactly like the American one. What is needed, however, is to supplement Europe’s
financial system, not supplant it.
Finally, investing more in skills and education promises to deliver rich rewards, too. This would
not only boost labour productivity, but also reduce the risk of workers losing their jobs. Thus, it
would  enable  them  to  better  cope  with  the  structural  change  induced  by  globalisation  and
technical  progress.  Labour  market  flexibility  can  also  contribute  to  higher  employment  and
growth.  Germany  is  a  point  in  case  here.  Research  shows  that  the  labour  market  reforms
implemented  in  the  middle  of  the  last  decade  in  combination  with  the  moderate  wage  policy
definitively contributed to the fact that employment in Germany went up significantly and that the
country overcame the crisis better than other countries in Europe.  At the same time, however,
despite  having  contributed  to  preventing  a  further  rise  in  income  inequality,  some  see  these
reforms as an explanation for the increasingly widespread perception that globalisation comes at
the expense of the low-skilled workers.
3.2  Preserve open markets and a competition-oriented economy
9
Ladies and gentlemen
The economic growth of our countries will also be influenced by one additional factor: the future
of global trade. Not least Ljubljana is a very good example of the welfare-enhancing effects of
trade.  Emona,  too  –  the  ancient  predecessor  of  Ljubljana  the  early  Christian  times  –  was  a
thriving city thanks to flourishing trade.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
These days, however, open markets don’t seem to be very popular anymore. As all of you know,
the decision by UK voters to leave the European Union and the result of the presidential election
in  the  US  have  also  been  interpreted  as  signs  of  growing  scepticism  about  globalisation.
Elsewhere  in  the  world,  too,  many  people  are  mainly  seeing  the  disadvantages  which
globalisation – and technological progress – unquestionably entail for some.
Public concerns on matters like these need to be taken seriously. But it’s safe to say that barriers
and  exclusion  would  be  the  wrong  response.  That’s  because  open  markets  boost  prosperity.
Free trade makes production more efficient by allowing specialisation and, therefore, by using
economies of scale. By increasing competition, it lowers the prices of goods and facilitates the
spread of new ideas and technologies. This, in turn, leads to more innovation and growth. Think
of  the  more  than  3,000  year-old  wheel  which  was  found  in  the  moor  of  Ljubljana.  It  is  surely
undisputable that the invention of the wheel catapulted the well-being of mankind much as the
invention of money did when it spread throughout the world.
However, while the effects of globalisation on overall welfare are generally positive, this does not
necessarily apply for each of us all the time. The invention of the wheel, for example, left the
owners of pack animals worse off rather than better off, even though it did bring relief to mankind
in  general.  The  right  reply  to  public  concerns  about  a  competition-based  economy  with  open
markets is not to build up barriers. Instead it would be to enable as many people as possible to
benefit  from  it  and  to  shield  the  rest  from  its  negative  aspects.  This  would  mean  enhancing
education, but also improving the flexibility of goods and labour markets. And it would mean a
well-targeted  and  transparent  tax  and  transfer  system  which  could  act  as  a  cushion.  The
interplay  of  these  factors  was  well-known  to  the  mentor  and  creator  of  the  so-called  “social
market economy” in Germany, Ludwig Erhard. For him, this is the foundation of what he neatly
encapsulated  with  the  phrase  “Prosperity  for  all".  In  any  case,  together  with  the  German
government I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the issue of open markets and fair trade in the
current G20 process under the German presidency.
Ladies and gentlemen
If  I  might  be  permitted  one  side  note:  an  accusation  has  been  made  that  Germany  is  taking
advantage of the United States and other countries with an undervalued currency. In my view,
this criticism is actually beside the point. While there is a kernel of truth in the argument that
the  US  dollar  is  currently  strong,  the  United  States  has,  up  until  recently,  enjoyed  a  very
favourable competitive position for almost a decade. These ups and downs in exchange rates,
and  thus  also  in  terms  of  price  competitiveness,  are  entirely  within  the  realm  of  normal
fluctuations.
The  fact  that  Germany’s  economy  is  highly  competitive  certainly  isn’t  the  outcome  of
manipulative policy, either. While its competitiveness certainly does benefit from the low external
value of the euro, this is predominately due to different monetary policy paths on both sides of the
Atlantic, which also reflects different cyclical positions, as well as to policy announcements by
the new US administration. Additionally, German enterprises are competitive because they are
excellently  positioned  in  global  markets  and  offer  innovative  products.  The  very  high  current
account surplus of 8½% of GDP is mainly attributable to this.
Given the foreseeable demographic change, current account surpluses for Germany are quite
appropriate at the present time, as this reflects how Germans provide for old age, amongst other
things. The assets held abroad will later be depleted as more and more employees retire and run
down their savings. German investors, then, are harnessing the higher returns on offer in regions
with faster-growing economies, not at least in Slovenia, where German enterprises are the third
most important investors. In my view, this seems to be a situation in which both sides win.
That said, however, the high current account surplus we see today in Germany cannot be put
down to demographics alone. And also the low oil price, which diminished the cost of imports,
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
explains only part of the high surplus.
It would nonetheless be wrong, in my opinion, to scale back this surplus by adopting economic
policy  measures  that  deliberately  erode  the  competitiveness  of  German  enterprises  or  by
embracing debt-fuelled government spending, as some have been calling for. First, the import
content of German exports is quite high. Intermediate inputs and goods delivered by other euro-
area countries account already for nearly 40 percent of German exports. So, making German
exports less attractive also weakens component suppliers, including those located in other euro-
area  countries.  Second,  with  capacity  utilisation  currently  running  at  above-average  levels,  a
government expenditure programme would not only be pointless; it would also be of little benefit
to other countries. The ripple effects would be too small. And if monetary policy were to react
with higher policy rates, the effect on the economies in other euro-area countries could possibly
be negative.
At the same time, it is appropriate that public investment increases given the need to improve the
infrastructure  and  provide  more  education.  What  is  also  indispensable,  however,  is  a  more
growth-friendly environment to foster private investment and growth.
3.3  Institutional framework of the EMU
Ladies and gentlemen
Economic uncertainty is the enemy of investment. That is true not only of uncertainty over the
future of global trade but also of uncertainty over the stability of the European Monetary Union. It
is crucial that we also make the institutional setting of the EMU more stable and restore trust, for
instance by abiding by the agreed rules.
The financial and sovereign debt crises in the euro area had one major characteristic in common
– both saw a core economic principle being violated: the liability principle. German economist
Walter Eucken, who was another founding father of Germany’s social market economy, once
said very aptly: “Those who reap the benefits must also bear the costs.” If banks assume they
are too big to fail, they will be tempted to make the most of this implicit insurance and take on
excessive risks, at the expense of society at large. This is exactly what happened before the
financial  crisis.  This  kind  of  implicit  insurance  is  not  altogether  unlike  the  framework  of  the
European  Monetary  Union,  where  a  single  monetary  policy  exists  alongside  19  largely
autonomous economic and fiscal policies. I have already mentioned this special feature of our
monetary union.
As the crisis taught us, this set-up potentially exposes the EMU to vulnerability. Because at the
end of the day, the community may have to foot the bill for unhealthy developments in individual
member states if it wishes to prevent the stability of the union as a whole from coming under
threat.  The  option  to  spread  the  consequences  of  unsustainable  policy  across  the  entire
monetary  union  might  weaken  the  incentives  to  run  sound  policies,  in  particular  a  healthy
budgetary  policy.  This  is  why  institutional  safeguards  were  put  in  place  before  the  euro  was
launched:  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the  no-bail-out  clause,  and  the  ban  on  monetary
financing  of  governments.  Unfortunately,  these  safeguards  failed  to  prevent  public  debt  from
ballooning in some euro-area countries. The crisis played a role in this, but so did the fact that
the fiscal rules were repeatedly violated and the capital markets didn’t sanction these breaches
because the no-bail-out clause lacked credibility.
When doubts about the debt sustainability of some euro-area member states surfaced during the
sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  urgently-taken  rescue  measures  helped  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
escalating. But they did so by mutualising fiscal liability on a substantial scale. Economic and
fiscal policies, on the other hand, essentially remained a national prerogative, though the fiscal
rules have admittedly been adapted. As a result, the balance between liability and control has
been thrown out of kilter. However, striking an even balance between liability and control is crucial
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
for the functioning of the EMU. In theory, there are two possible ways to restore this balance:
through deeper integration, or through greater national responsibility on the part of the individual
member states.
The  first  solution  would  be  to  create  a  fiscal  union  with  centralised  decision-making  powers.
While a fiscal union would not guarantee sound fiscal policymaking, it could certainly mitigate the
deficit bias of individual member states. But let’s be honest here. A fiscal union approach is not
on  the  cards,  because  it  implies  the  delegation  of  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  in  a
substantial  scale.  As  long  as  there’s  no  willingness  to  transfer  national  sovereignty  to  the
European level, there will be no basis for mutualising sovereign risks.
And that’s why a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) is also not the right institutional
response  in  restoring  the  balance  between  liability  and  control  in  the  euro  area  at  the  current
point in time. As long as actions taken at the national level, such as drafting insolvency laws, or
very high stocks of government bonds on banks’ balance sheets can have a substantial impact
on the health of financial institutions, the European Deposit Insurance Scheme would allow risks
arising from national decisions to be shifted to the European level. This would send the wrong
incentives to banks and investors alike. The mutualisation of risk would not go hand in hand with
the necessary mutualisation of control rights – irrespective of the Single Supervisory Mechanism
that has been put in place.
Whenever – as a reaction to the Brexit-vote – calls are made for greater mutualisation of debt, I
think it’s rather like a ship that is listing: when the passengers – eager to help – rush to the lower
side  of  the  ship  then,  contrary  to  their  good  intentions,  they  are  not  helping  to  remedy  the
unfortunate situation at all but are, in fact, making it worse.
The  second  way  to  restore  the  balance  between  liability  and  control,  meanwhile,  would  be  to
strengthen  the  Maastricht  approach  based  on  individual  responsibility.  This  would  leave
economic  and  fiscal  policy,  as  well  as  ultimate  liability  for  public  debt,  in  the  hands  of  the
individual member states. But how could such a decentralised approach work better in future
than it has done in the past?
Although the rules were changed after the crisis, the European Commission was granted more
flexibility in interpreting them. And it has used this flexibility quite a few times so far – and always
to interpret the rules very loosely. As a result, the binding force of the budgetary rules is weaker
than ever before – as we can see, for instance, in the budgetary developments in France, Spain,
Portugal and Italy. One way of ensuring that the rules are binding would be to install a new and
independent authority, a fiscal council. This institution would not be exposed to the same political
conflicts of interest as the Commission, which has to assess whether national budgets comply
with the Stability and Growth Pact and hammer out political compromises between the interests
of the different member states. Of course, the European Council ultimately holds the key to the
success  of  any  budgetary  control.  Its  determination  to  enforce  the  rules  and  support  the
Commission in a strict interpretation is all-important.
“Debt is a two-edged sword. Used wisely and in moderation, it clearly improves welfare. But,
when  it  is  used  imprudently  and  in  excess,  the  result  can  be  disaster.”  This  statement  by
former  BIS  chief  economist  Stephen  Cecchetti  and  his  colleagues  Madhusudan  Mohanty  and
Fabrizio Zampolli is directed not only at private debt but at public debt as well.
 They show that
excessively  high  private  and  public  debt  is  a  risk  not  only  to  financial  stability  but  also  to
economic growth. According to their estimations, in the euro area we are already in the danger
zone – at least with regard to corporate debt, at 105% of GDP, but also in terms of public debt, at
91%. And  so  this  is  one  more  reason  why  effective  limits  for  government  debt  are  urgently
needed.
10
Binding fiscal rules and an institution that observes their adherence are just one component of a
consistent reform agenda. Additionally, it is important for capital markets to resume their role of
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
disciplining national fiscal policy. As for enterprises, more deeply indebted countries ought to pay
higher interest rates. This will only happen if the no-bail-out clause in the Maastricht Treaty really
does have teeth. Therefore, it must be possible to restructure public debt without posing major
risks to the financial system.
The July 2016 edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly Report describes what needs to be done to
make this possible. There are two reforms I would now like to mention. First, we need to sever
the sovereign-bank nexus. A strong inter-linkage between banks and sovereigns increases the
probability of a bail-out by other member states and weakens incentives for risk-oriented pricing.
And it is precisely this sovereign-banking nexus that contributed to a mutual intensification of the
crisis in the euro area, when banks suffered from declining prices for sovereign bonds in their
balance  sheets  and  countries  from  struggling  banks  in  their  territory.  The  European  banking
union  already  marks  a  huge  step  towards  untangling  this  dangerous  embrace.  However,  to
complement the banking union, it is also crucial that we do away with the preferential treatment
of sovereign debt in banking regulation. This implies that, similar to banks’ lending to the private
sector,  sovereign  exposures  will  need  to  be  backed  by  capital  and  also  be  part  of  a  large
exposures regime.
A  second  measure  concerns  the  design  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism’s  financial
assistance  programmes.  The  ESM  is  there  to  provide  resources  to  countries  that  apply  for
an ESM financial assistance programme. However, these funds are generally used not only to
cover  budget  deficits,  but  also  to  redeem  maturing  sovereign  bonds.  By  implication,  when  a
programme is activated, European taxpayers are, in essence, bailing out the respective country’s
creditors.  This  does  not  exactly  foster  willingness  on  the  part  of  member  states  to  agree  to
restructure a programme country’s debt. Instead of a truly viable solution being reached, when
push  comes  to  shove,  a  strategy  of  muddling  through  would  win  the  day.  That’s  why  the
Bundesbank is proposing to add a clause to the government bonds of euro-area countries which
automatically  extends  the  maturity  of  bonds  by  three  years  if  the  member  state  in  question
applies  for  ESM  assistance.  This  way,  the  initial  creditors  would  remain  liable,  and  if  the
government  debt  really  did  need  to  be  restructured,  that  could  be  done  in  an  orderly  fashion
without jeopardising financial stability.
The  financial  crisis  also  showed,  however,  that  wobbling  banks  can  cause  sovereigns  to
stumble. To cut this part of the nexus, financial market regulation has already been improved
substantially.  In  the  euro  area,  a  common  restructuring  and  resolution  regime  (the  Single
Resolution  Mechanism)  and  a  bank  supervision  body  under  the  aegis  of  the  ECB  (the  Single
Supervisory Mechanism) are in place. The Single Resolution Mechanism and the Bank Recovery
and  Resolution  Directive  (BRRD),  which  assure  the  harmonised  implementation  of  the  rules
throughout all member states, substantially strengthen the principle of individual responsibility in
the banking sector, thereby reducing the likelihood of public bail-outs. And in this sense, both are
important elements not only to protect tax payers but also to make the euro area more stable.
However, the first line of defence in making a bank resolution less likely is the establishment of
higher capital requirements for banks, as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision already
decided  in  principle  six  years  ago.  The  good  news  is:  the  resilience  of  the  European  banking
sector went up significantly. This is proven by the fact that Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) for the
directly supervised SSM banks rose after the financial crisis to 12.8% by mid-2016, and that this
level is well above  the  unchanged  aggregated  capital  demand  of  the  Supervisory  Review  and
Evaluation Process (SREP) for 2017 of around 10%. Nevertheless, it is important that Basel III is
implemented in a timely manner. This would also reduce regulatory uncertainty for banks, which
in my view is a serious burden for them.
4 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
writer  Mary  de  Rachewiltz  once  called  money  the  obscene  Doppelgänger  of  creative  writing,
because both are made from nothing, their economies both hinge on moderation and efficiency,
yet they both tend to proliferate.
As  a  central  banker,  I  know  rather  more  about  monetary  policy  than  about  literature.  But  I  do
know that too many words can be just as inflationary as too much money. I’m certainly aware,
however, that I’ve used quite a number of words to clarify my stance on monetary policy and the
challenges facing the euro area which still have to be resolved.
Luckily, language appears to be of major importance here in Slovenia, which is understandable
given your country’s history; this can also be seen in the country’s great admiration for France
Preseren.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Interview with Otmar Issing, published  4 August 2015; www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdqSYSvr3DY
www.oecd.org/eco/growth/going-for-growth-2016-executive-summary.htm
Spilimbergo A, Berger H, Schindler M (eds)  (2014), Jobs and growth – supporting the European recovery.
International Monetary Fund.
Müge Adalet McGowan and Dan Andrews (2016), “Insolvency regimes and productivity growth: a framework for
analysis”, OECD Working Paper (2016)33.
Roland de Bruijn, Henk Kox, Arjan Lejour (2008), “Economic benefits of an integrated European market for
services”, Journal of Policy Modeling 30, pp 301–319.
Copenhagen Economics (2010), The economic impact of a European digital single market, Final Report.
www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper33.pdf, p 6.
P Asdrubali, B Sørensen and O Yosha (1996). Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: US 1963–1990, in Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4), pp 1081–1110.
H.  Bonin  (2012),  “The  Two  German  Labour  Market  Miracles:  Blueprint  for  Tackling  the  Unemployment
Crisis?”, Comparative Economic Studies, 54.
Stephen  G  Cecchetti,  Madhusudan  Mohanty  and  Fabrizio  Zampolli  (2011),  “The  real  effects  of
debt”, BIS Working Papers No 352
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
