Encik  Abdul  Rasheed  Ghaffour:  Sustainable  development  of
affordable housing
Keynote address by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Dialogue  on  “Sustainable  Development  of Affordable
Housing”, Kuala Lumpur, 4 July 2017.
 I am sure many of us here can still remember when we set out to buy our first house, which may
be between 20 to 30 years ago. Back then, a typical terrace house or a 3-bedroom apartment
came at a price tag of between RM200,000 to RM300,000. The monthly repayment would be
around RM1,200 to RM1,600. It was a big commitment. But it was manageable; it made financial
sense, and it was affordable.
That was many years ago. Those who are starting out today face much higher barriers to buying
a house. The numbers speak for themselves. Lets take a widely used measure – the Median
Multiple, for example. Under this measure, a house is considered affordable if the median house
price is less than three times the median annual household income. For Malaysia, this ratio has
consistently been above four since more than 10 years ago. In our major cities, the ratio can be
as high as ten. Even if we look at other measures, the broad conclusion remains: housing in
Malaysia is becoming less affordable.
This  dialogue  on  “Sustainable  Development  of  Affordable  Housing”  is  therefore  very  timely.
Confucius once famously said that the strength of a nation derives from the integrity of the home.
This underscores an important truth. Housing is not just about putting a roof over our heads, nor
is it only a personal or financial issue. Assuring housing stability helps ensure that households
can meet other basic needs and establish roots that build stronger communities. The challenges
facing affordable housing are also complex and call for multiple stakeholders to work together to
find  solutions  that  will  deliver  desirable  outcomes  over  the  long  term.  It  therefore  has  much
broader socio-economic dimensions that concerns all of us.
It is firstly crucial to frame the issue of affordable housing correctly. Fundamentally, the issue is
one  of a  large  and  growing  mismatch  between  demand  and  supply,  owing  to  significant
changes in our housing markets and demographic shifts. Prior to 2012, investor purchases of
multiple  homes  increased  very  sharply,  crowding  out  first-time  homebuyers  and  pushing  up
prices of homes across the board in preferred locations. At its peak, the growth in housing loans
taken out to buy second and third homes exceeded 15%. This excludes cash purchases. This in
turn drove a higher concentration of new supply in higher priced segments, further widening the
demand-supply gap for affordable homes. By 2012, annual house price growth had risen above
11%, almost four times the 10-year average house price growth between 2000 and 2009.
Demand  for  affordable  homes  has  also  increased  rapidly  from  the  higher  rate  of  net  new
household  formation.  This  reflects  trends  that  point  to  smaller  household  sizes;  the  young
moving  out  from  family  homes  earlier,  including  to  take  jobs  in  urban  cities;  and  an  ageing
population  preferring  to  remain  in  their  homes  than  move  in  with  their  adult  children.  Such
demand pressures have been further compounded by income levels that have not increased in
tandem with the increase in house prices.
All told, the shortage in affordable housing based on 2014 data is estimated at 960,000 units.
This could rise to one million units by 2020 if further measures are not taken to increase supply
of affordable houses and improve affordability.
Financing measures implemented by the Bank along with fiscal measures by the Government
between  2010  and  2013  did  in  fact  achieve  this  to  a  certain  degree.  House  price  growth  has
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
since  moderated  to  5.5%,  closer  to  income  growth,  following  measures  taken  to  dampen
speculative  activities  in  the  housing  market  and  manage  high  household  debt  levels.  Lending
standards  that  are  more  aligned  with  the  level  of  income  have  also  encouraged  private
developers  to  shift  their  focus  to  the  more  affordable  segments  which  should  help  improve
supply conditions.
Approval rates for housing loans by the banking sector remain high at 74%, with more than 60%
of the new housing loans extended for house purchases below RM500,000. Loan rejection rates
for  houses  in  the  affordable  segment  have  actually  been  on  a  declining  trend,  falling  by  18%
since  2012.  Nevertheless,  there  is  also  scope  for  financial  institutions  to  develop  innovative
financing schemes – such as equity finance – to make home ownership more affordable. These
include shared ownership schemes where buyers can acquire partial interest in a home, instead
of  being  burdened  by  an  outright  purchase.  Similarly,  we  have  also  observed  lease-to-own
schemes under Islamic finance arrangements, where tenants have the option to increase their
stakes in a home after leasing for a period of time. Bank Negara Malaysia continues to work with
the industry to uncover new opportunities, including through financial education, to support first-
time home buyers within their means.
Financing therefore is not the issue. More to the point, financing measures have had an important
role in tempering house price increases and encouraging an increase in the supply of affordable
homes.
This  alone,  however,  is  insufficient.  Public  policy  can  play  a  bigger  role  in  advancing  the
affordable  housing  agenda.  Given  the  structural  factors  that  are  shaping  the  housing  market,
solutions have to go beyond advocating for the construction of more houses. It is also imperative
that we improve the existing ecosystem for affordable housing delivery to respond to both current
and new challenges ahead.
Let me briefly touch on several key components of such an ecosystem.
First  is  having good data. An integrated database on housing supply and demand is critical –
this  should  provide  insights  on  the  needs  and  preferences  of  households,  their  linkages  with
demographic shifts, as well as housing gaps across different parts of the country. As much as
possible,  the  repository  of  information  should  be  made  available  to  all  relevant  stakeholders,
thereby  enabling  better-informed  decisions  across  the  board.  For  the  Federal  and  State
Government  authorities  in  particular,  the  database  will  be  useful  in  supporting  housing
interventions  that  are  more  targeted,  more  efficient,  and  better  coordinated  with  other  public
policies to build stronger communities.
With an aggregated view of market conditions, large-scale housing projects can also be better
planned and executed. This will be key in capitalising on the lower costs made possible through
smarter procurement processes and industrial construction approaches, as proven in countries
such as Singapore, Hong Kong and Australia. It will also enable affordable housing quotas for
development projects to be implemented in a way that is more responsive to market conditions,
and therefore more practical to enforce.
Importantly,  we  must  seek  to  connect  affordable  housing  initiatives  with  broader  social
development  programmes  to  create  livable  and  vibrant  communities.  Homes  should  be
reasonably close to centres of employment, schools and healthcare facilities. Good connectivity
between these areas and transportation hubs would encourage the development of affordable
housing, strengthen supply conditions, and create opportunities for the more efficient allocation of
scarce development resources. A major part of this is an integrated public transportation system
that spans the greater KL and Klang Valley. The Government’s ongoing efforts to improve public
transportation such as the LRT and MRT projects are major steps in the right direction.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, innovative financing models  to  fund  affordable  housing  projects  should  be  further
developed. Current intervention measures largely focus on subsidising home-buyers or the direct
provision  of  housing.  Over  the  longer  term,  these  need  to  be  complemented  by  new,  more
sustainable  alternatives  that  combine  public  and  private  funding  for  affordable  housing
development and investment. In other parts of the world, public-private partnerships through joint
ventures have replaced traditional methods of financing for the supply of public housing. Public
funding could also be deployed more efficiently to crowd in private capital for affordable housing
developments  –  for  example,  by  providing  cost-efficient  funding  to  institutions  that  finance
affordable housing projects.
Regardless of the measure, it will be crucial to build in mechanisms that promote programme
efficiency  and  effectiveness.  These  include  business  models  that  are  based  on  sound
commercial principles, good governance and appropriate risk management strategies. Schemes
introduced  could  specify  minimum  technical  standards,  execution  guarantees  and  other
conditionalities for financing or payment. ‘Social impact bonds’ – which have gained interest in
some  countries  such  as  the  United  Kingdom,  United  States,  and  Australia  –  are  a  useful
example.  These  investment  structures  operate  on  a  “pay-for-success”  model,  where  the
Government repays the costs of a programme plus a return, only if pre-defined social outcomes
are achieved.
Third,  there  is  a  need  to foster  more  diverse  collaborative  partnerships  to  deliver
affordable housing. This includes a vibrant community of social housing enterprises, private
foundations  and  non-profit  organisations  that  support  or  complement  the  Government’s
affordable  housing  agenda.  Notably,  such  organisations  have  also  been  instrumental  in
encouraging  the  development  of  a  vibrant  rental  market  as  a  viable  alternative  to  home
ownership. For example, in Australia and Hong Kong, social enterprises have had an important
role  in  building  affordable  housing  units  or  revitalising  existing  properties  for  sale  or  rental,
typically targeted at lower-income groups.
We need to consider how similar models could be developed here and the role of public policy to
enable  this.  In  the  context  of  rental  properties,  a  robust  legal  and  institutional  framework  to
safeguard  the  rights  of  tenants  and  landlords,  mechanism  to  protect  tenancy  deposits,  and
arrangements  for  dispute  resolution  have  been  key  success  factors  for  countries  that  have  a
thriving rental market. At the same time, the introduction of “rent-to-own” schemes could also
complement  this.  The  Government  has  recently  launched  such  a  programme.  We  would
welcome the private sector, particularly developers, to also explore such a strategy.
Sound, innovative and coordinated public policy is central to addressing the affordable housing
challenge.  We  have  advocated  that  this  should  reside  with a  central  authority  that  leads,
oversees and coordinates affordable housing initiatives for the nation. This would promote
greater  strategic  and  operational  cohesion  at  the  national  level.  Regulatory  processes  that
increase  the  cost  of  supplying  affordable  homes  should  be  reviewed  and  streamlined.  The
central  authority  can  also  spearhead  more  effective  communications  and  build  stronger
collaborations with key partners to advance the affordable housing agenda. Certainly, more can
also  be  done  to  increase  awareness  and  further  increase  the  take-up  rates  for  financial
assistance  programmes  introduced  by  the  Government  such  as  Skim  Rumah  Pertamaku
(SRP), Skim Jaminan Kredit Perumahan (SJKP), Skim Deposit Rumah Pertama (MyDeposit),
Skim Pembiayaan Fleksibel for PRIMA homebuyers and Skim Pembiayaan Fleksibel (SPEF) for
PR1MA homebuyers.
We only have a few hours ahead of us to discuss a very complex and important issue that has
no  easy  solutions.  We  need  to  think  creatively  and  act  collectively,  and  today,  we  have  an
opportunity  to  do  both.  I  am  therefore  excited  to  hear  the  insights  from  our  distinguished
speakers, as well as the constructive exchange of ideas between everyone here today. As we
do, we should keep in mind that the goal of affordable housing is not just about owning property; it
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
is about building stronger and more resilient communities – with greater opportunities created for
those  within  them  to  succeed  in  life.  This  could  well  change  how  we  see  the  problem  and
approach its solutions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
