François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Euro  area  monetary  policy  and
businesses
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Vereinigung
der Bayerischen Wirtschaft, Munich, 26 January 2017.
 I am very pleased to be here with you and wish to thank you for inviting me. It is the second time
in recent months that I have had the pleasure of visiting Bavaria. In September, here in Munich, I
had  the  great  honour  of  receiving  the  Montgelas  prize,  presented  by  Minister  Erwin  Huber,  in
remembrance  of  one  of  your  great  statesmen.  If  I  may  add  a  personal  note,  I  am  here  as  a
committed European and a friend of Germany. I am French but my roots are in Saarland where
my  family  has  lived  since  the  end  of  the  18th  century  and  where  its  porcelain  manufacturing
company Villeroy & Boch forms part of the German “Mittelstand”. I feel close to your country and
admire its success, particularly that of its business enterprises. Bavaria illustrates this success.
It  is  currently  one  of  Europe’s  major  economic  centres.  I  will  also  have  the  pleasure  later  of
meeting Dr Theo Waigel, who, alongside other German political leaders, has played such a key
role in the construction of our solid common currency, the euro.
Our growth forecasts for the euro area are for growth of 1.7% in 2017, the same as in 2016. This
confirms the economic recovery, which is good news, but the situation is not yet satisfactory.
The  euro  area  as  a  whole  must  aim  for  stronger  and  more  lasting  growth.  Monetary  policy
naturally plays a vital role: it ensures the price stability required for growth; this is my first point.
However, on its own, it can never be enough. To accelerate growth, the other economic policy
levers must be brought into play; I shall come back to this later. Lastly, I will share some thoughts
on the new international environment that heightens the urgency of taking action in Europe.
**
1. Our monetary policy is an asset for the euro area.
          I am perfectly aware that the ECB’s monetary policy is the subject of lively debate in
Germany. I would first like to explain the reasons for this policy and what the situation is today.
a) Why have we been pursuing this monetary policy? Our European Central Bank, it should
be remembered, was constructed on solid foundations shaped according to  the model of the
Bundesbank and its successes. And I sincerely believe that our present monetary policy is very
much  in  accordance  with  the  German  values  that  I  fully  share:  independence,  respect  of  the
Treaties, price stability and a long-term approach. Contrary to what some critics suggest, our
monetary  policy  is  not  some  sort  of  Latin  fantasy.  It  is  decided  collectively  by  the  Council  of
Governors and we take the mission entrusted to us – ensuring price stability – very seriously.
This means ensuring that inflation is neither too high nor too low. Overly high inflation would have
disastrous consequences for the economy – as German history shows. Excessively low inflation
would have exposed us to deflation, a mortal danger as we know from the 1930s. In practice,
price stability was defined by the Council of Governors as from 2003 as an inflation rate of close
to,  but  below,  2%  over  the  medium-term.  This  definition  has  not  changed  and  is  now  widely
shared by all the central banks in developed countries, including the United States and the United
Kingdom. Up to recent years, the stability of prices in the euro area was remarkable. However,
as from 2013, inflation dropped to well below the 2% mark. Our mandate required us to respond
so as to bring inflation back to healthier levels for our economies.
b) What is the situation today? Inflation is gradually recovering in the euro area, as we had
announced: we have gone from a fall of 0.2% in April 2016 to a rise of 1.1% in last December.
This is partly due to the rebound in energy prices but is also the result of our monetary policy: it
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
has enabled us to ward off the risk of deflation which was still a threat in 2015. Now in contrast,
some seem to fear a resurgence of inflation; this is very exaggerated. We have not yet reached
our  2%  target  and  “core”  inflation  –  excluding  energy  and  food  –  is  of  only  0.9%.  The  other
question mark concerns the differences between countries, with inflation of 1.7% in Germany.
However, following a temporary peak in the first quarter, German inflation is expected to remain
under 2% on average throughout 2017. Moreover the inflation differences between countries are
consistent  with  their  different  national  economic  situations:  growth  and  employment  are  also
stronger in Germany; and these differences could even contribute, via their impact on relative
wages, to correcting the imbalances, hence achieving greater convergence within the euro area.
I can naturally grasp the concern of German savers in the face of low interest rates. It is not our
aim to keep interest rates low for too long: low interest rates are not a goal in themselves; they
are merely the necessary condition today for gradually returning towards our inflation target, and
ensuring  lastingly  higher  interest  rates  in  the  future,  as  Mario  Draghi  himself  has  put  it.  This
movement has already started for long-term interest rates, with the 10-year Bund gaining nearly
60 basis points since the end of September. In December, in view of the progress achieved, we
decided to reduce the volume of our monthly asset purchases from 80 to 60 billion euro. I also
repeat that although I am convinced that negative interest rates have their use, they have clear
limitations. But, although QE will obviously not last forever, we clearly did not discuss tapering or
any exit strategy. Our monetary policy decisions have indeed given predictability for the whole
year to come, and we will during this period look through transient inflation changes to focus on
the  medium  term  inflation  outlook  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Lastly,  interest  rates  do  not
depend on monetary policy alone, they also stem from economic growth. It is therefore in the
savers’ interest that growth should be more vigorous in Europe.
            Yet, as my colleague, Jens Weidmann, said last spring, “people are not just savers”
[ “ Menschen  sind  nicht  nur  Sparer”].  In  Germany  and  in  Bavaria,  businesses,  employees,
consumers and home buyers benefit from the ECB’s low interest rates. Our measures create
particularly favourable financing conditions for businesses and households. Lending has grown
significantly:  in  Germany,  lending  to  businesses  had  grown  by  3.5%  year  on  year  in  the  12
months to November 2016. Moreover, borrowing costs less as bank interest rates have fallen
steadily. As  has  been  confirmed  by  several  studies,  monetary  policy  has  also  boosted  GDP
growth  –  for  more  than  1.5  percentage  points  from  2015  to  2018.  The  definitive  stability  of
exchange rates within the euro area and the more favourable effective rate observed outside the
euro area are clear advantages for German and Bavarian exporters, from Airbus to Dräxlmaier or
BrauKon. The economic studies all agree: the benefits linked to the euro have been good for all
the member countries but it is the German economy that has benefited most from belonging to
the euro area. And regardless of the debate surrounding our monetary policy, it is in Germany
that support for the euro is strongest, and still growing: 81% at the end of 2016. Support is also
strong on average in the euro area (70%) and in my own country (68%). However, we are all
agreed that monetary policy alone is not enough to ensure stronger growth.
2. To achieve stronger growth, our countries must reform and Europe must rapidly bring
two supplementary levers into action. 
The  first  growth  lever  for  the  euro  area  is more  reform  in  our  countries  and  a  better
collective economic strategy. Growth and employment would be stronger in Europe with more
structural reforms where they are a priority, such as in France, and more public investment for
instance and fiscal support in those countries with room for manoeuvre, such as Germany.
Regarding reform, like you, I would like France to accelerate; I say it frequently in my country.
These reforms are compatible with the European social model that we share; many successes
in  Europe  have  demonstrated  this.  But  you  must  not  consider  your  French  neighbour  to  be
“unreformable”.  France  has  not  been  immobile  over  the  past  few  years.  Pensions  have  been
reformed. Reforms such as the CICE tax credit, the Responsibility Pact and the so-called “El
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Khomri” labour law have substantially reduced the burden for businesses. France has met its
deficit reduction targets for the past two years. This fiscal credibility must continue to improve in
2017. All this is not enough, but you should not doubt France too much, even in this election year.
The soundness of our political institutions and majority system represent lasting advantages.
From  its  significantly  more  positive  economic  situation,  Germany  should  also  continue  with
reform: demographic change is likely to result in a decline in the working population – and the
present inflow of refugees will not change this to any significant extent. This means that growth
will  slow  in  the  long  term.  However,  it  is  obviously  not  for  me  to  advise  measures  for  your
country. At  European  level,  our  competitiveness  will  depend  in  particular  on  creating  a  large
digital single market. 
I know that when the French speak of coordination in Europe, Germans sometimes suspect it to
be  a  new  trick  to  avoid  reform.  We  must  break  out  of  this  dead-end:  we  need both national
reforms  and  European  coordination.  As  Helmut  Schmidt  repeated  frequently,  we  must  build
economic  union  as  well  as  monetary  union.  But  this  does  not  in  my  view  mean  a  “Union  of
Transfers”, which Germany quite legitimately refuses.
The  second  growth  lever:  create  in  parallel  what  I  call  a “Financing  and  Investment
Union” (FIU). Why? Because numerous businesses in Europe wish to invest and innovate but
are unable to find appropriate financing. Still, the funds are by no means lacking: the euro area
has a savings surplus of 350 billion euro, i.e. more than 3% of GDP. The FIU would facilitate the
mobilisation of these abundant savings towards investment. To achieve this, we must develop
synergies between the existing initiatives: Capital Markets Union, the Juncker Plan and Banking
Union. But we must also go still further, with two clear goals. Firstly, diversification of financing to
meet businesses’ needs. Equity financing, rather than debt financing, is better adapted to risk
taking and therefore to innovation. But Europe currently lags very far behind in this area: equity
financing of businesses is less than half that in the United States (67% of GDP in the euro area
compared  with  125%  in  the  United  States).  Secondly:  increased  resilience  of  the  euro  area
thanks to integrated capital markets. As Jens Weidmann and I wrote last year, this manner of
sharing private risks is the best way to counter asymmetric shocks within a monetary union. In
the United States for example, private equity is capable of absorbing around 40% of an economic
shock specific to a State.
3. The new international environment makes action more urgent.
Some of those around us seem to no longer believe in the benefits of the European Union. The
new US president has stated this very clearly, and the British chose to leave the union. These
changes bring us face to face with our responsibilities: we can no longer afford to wait and see.
But how should we respond? Not by less Europe. That would be a mistake if we wish to have
collective  control  over  our  destiny  in  this  new  world.  We  should  respond  with  a  “better”
Europe, less distracted by details, more focused on its priorities and more efficient. There is no
point in just talking about it, we must take the necessary measures to achieve concrete results.
There are, of course, non economic areas such as defence, border security, climate change and
youth education and training, to mention just a few. But in economic matters, there is also a lot
that remains to be done. We in Europe have three major assets: our single currency, our single
market and our common European social model. I wish to stress the extent to which this “soziale
Marktwirtschaft” is a response to the questions raised in the Anglo-Saxon world. Germany, like
many other European countries, proves that economic success can go hand in hand with social
welfare and less inequality. Now is not the moment to haul down the European flag: it is time to
build on our assets more actively, including by achieving a better economic union, which I spoke
of earlier.
I wish to add a few words about Brexit. It is not something we wanted and it is obviously bad
news, first and foremost for the United Kingdom and its economy. I note that the victory of Brexit
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
has brought the official growth forecast for Britain down to below that of the euro area, at only
1.4% in 2017. Our priority is to manage the consequences as smoothly as possible and reduce
uncertainty as much as we can. The British prime minister’s speech last week provided some
clarifications  but  it  is  essential  to  bear  one  clear  principle  in  mind:  the  single  market  is  not
divisible;  access  to  the  single  market  is  inseparable  from  respecting  its  rules.  This  makes  a
simple free trade agreement such as that proposed by Theresa May very difficult and there can
be no cherry picking with regard to Europe. The German Chancellor has quite rightly stressed
that it is essential for all 27 Member States to be united on this matter.
 I will conclude by sharing my conviction with you. In the face of US and global uncertainties, I
want the euro area to be an area of relative stability and growth. But now more than ever, France
and Germany must act together. As a central banker, our duty is to implement the best possible
monetary policy for the euro area, in keeping with our mandate. But this monetary policy neither
can, nor should, do everything. It is also my responsibility to make proposals for more effective
economic policies. I have outlined some ideas to you with my conviction as a European and I am
now happy to answer your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
