Central clearing: reaping the benefits, 
controlling the risks
Benoît CŒURÉ
Member of the Executive Board
European Central Bank
Chair
Committee on Payments 
and Market Infrastructures 
(Bank for International Settlements)
As a result of structural changes in financial markets and the introduction of mandatory 
central  clearing  obligations  for  standardised  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives,  central 
clearing has expanded significantly in recent years. In parallel, public authorities have devoted 
greater attention to strengthening the global safeguards for central clearing, notably with 
the adoption of the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures in 2012, 
a complementary CPMI-IOSCO report on recovery of financial market infrastructures in 
2014, and dedicated Financial Stability Board guidance on how to apply the “Key Attributes 
of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions” to financial market infrastructures 
in 2014. In 2015 global standard-setting bodies launched a comprehensive work plan on 
central counterparty (CCP) resilience, recovery, resolution and clearing interdependencies 
to further enhance this framework. 
This article takes stock of the latest achievements in this area and outlines future priorities, 
concerning the finalisation of the CCP work plan, interactions between requirements for 
central  counterparties  and  those  for  banks,  greater  granularity  of  central  counterparty 
supervision  and  oversight,  cross-border  cooperation  between  authorities  as  well  as 
macroprudential safeguards for central clearing.
NB:  All views expressed 
 here are the author’s own 
 and do not necessarily reflect 
those of the ECB, the CPMI 
or CPMI-IOSCO.
97
C entral clearing has expanded significantly in 
recent years as a result of both market‑driven 
and regulatory factors. The clearing 
industry had already started to undergo structural 
changes before the financial crisis in 2007‑2009 
against the backdrop of globalised financial markets, 
regulatory harmonisation, the removal of trade 
barriers, and technological process reducing the 
cost of services provided by CCPs (CPSS, 2010). 
The financial crisis subsequently underscored the 
benefits of central clearing in terms of systemic 
risk reduction through robust counterparty risk 
management, greater transparency and more efficient 
use of collateral through multilateral netting. Particular 
concerns regarding bilateral clearing were identified 
with regard to OTC derivatives markets, as the 
opacity of the underlying exposures, together with 
uncertainty regarding counterparty creditworthiness 
and the inherent leverage and complexity of OTC 
derivatives, had been a major factor, if not in triggering 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the near‑default 
of AIG, at least in amplifying market disruptions 
in their aftermath. At the Pittsburgh summit in 
September 2009, G20 leaders committed themselves 
to increasing the resilience and transparency of OTC 
derivatives markets, including through mandatory 
central clearing of standardised OTC derivatives. As a 
result, the share of OTC derivatives cleared centrally 
has increased markedly, especially in the OTC interest 
rate and credit derivatives segments (see Chart 1). As 
evidenced by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), there 
also seems to be scope for substantial further growth 
in central clearing, especially for interest rate swaps 
(IRS) and credit default swaps (CDS) (FSB, 2016).
Inevitably, the increased share of central clearing 
has been associated with further risk concentration 
in CCPs. This in itself is not a concern. As long as 
CCPs are superior risk managers and act as pillars 
of strength rather than sources of contagion during 
potential crisis situations, they act as risk poolers, 
not risk takers, and they therefore reduce the overall 
level of risk in the global financial system (not to 
mention other benefits such as a more efficient 
use of scarce collateral). In this respect, they are 
98
C1  Share of centrally cleared transactions in OTC derivatives markets
(%)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
S2
2011
S1
2012
S2
2012
S1
2013
S2
2013
S1
2014
S2
2014
S1
2015
S2
2015
S1
2016
Interest rates swaps
Credit default swaps
Source: FSB data, ECB calculations.
fundamentally different from banks, whose social 
function is to transform risk and maturity. In 
addition, the financial resources included in the 
CCP recovery waterfall provide for “built‑in bail‑in” 
of their shareholders and clearing members.
Nevertheless, in order to ensure that this is the case 
and that CCPs can withstand not only tail events 
but “tail of tail” events involving the default of 
multiple clearing members, policymakers have in 
recent years embarked on an ambitious agenda to 
enhance their robustness. The adoption by the CPMI 
and the Board of the International Organization of 
Securities Commissions (IOSCO) of the Principles 
for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI)  
(CPMI‑IOSCO, 2012), related guidance on financial 
market infrastructure recovery (CPMI‑IOSCO, 2014) 
and the FMI annex to the FSB’s Key Attributes of 
Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions 
(FSB, 2014) were important milestones of this work. 
In 2015, at the request of G20 finance ministers 
and governors, relevant global standard‑setting 
bodies agreed to further strengthen the safeguards 
for central clearing with the adoption of the 
“CCP work plan” (FSB SRC/FSB ReSG/BCBS/
CPMI/IOSCO 2015). The CCP work plan 
focuses on assessing whether existing international 
requirements for CCP resilience, recovery and 
resolution are adequately implemented and whether 
additional guidance should be provided. It also 
provides for further exploring the interdependencies 
between CCPs and their participants to better 
understand respective contagion channels and 
potential vulnerabilities. Significant progress has 
been made in the CCP work plan in the meantime, 
with most deliverables expected to be finalised by 
mid‑2017. Meanwhile, at the European Union 
level, the European Commission has proposed 
new rules for the recovery and resolution of CCPs 
(European Commission, 2016).
This article takes stock of recent progress in the 
global policy framework for CCPs (Section 1) 
and  outlines  future  priorities  (Section  2). 
Section 3 concludes.
1| 
Recent progress in the global 
policy framework for central 
counterparties 
1|1  Resilience 
CCPs are exposed to various types of risks, notably 
credit and liquidity risk, custody and investment 
risk, operational risk and general business risk. 
Robust credit and liquidity risk management is 
CCPs’ first and foremost line of defence against 
potential financial threats to their viability. CCPs 
should be resilient in the sense that their financial 
resources allow them to withstand potential failures 
of major clearing members as well as any other 
extreme but plausible stress events (“non‑default” 
scenarios, e.g. related to custody investment losses, 
operational and legal risk and cyber threats). 
Box 1
CPMI-IOSCO additional guidance on PFMI requirements
In April 2017, based on public consultation, CPMI-IOSCO expects to propose clearer and more granular guidance on the implementation 
of certain PFMI requirements, including on:
•  explicit board responsibilities and disclosure mechanisms regarding CCPs’ financial risk governance to promote both closer senior 
level scrutiny and involvement of relevant stakeholders; 
•  rigorous stress-testing on the basis of more detailed guidance for identifying relevant risks, developing extreme but plausible scenarios 
and treating client exposures, as well as for calculating and aggregating stress test results;
•  distinguishing between credit and liquidity risks in identifying stress scenarios and determining the necessary loss-absorbing resources 
as well as duly considering affiliates of clearing members when gauging the largest potential exposures arising from member default;
•  deeper analysis to determine whether, in view of a CCP’s specific risk profile, there could be a need to go beyond the minimum 
coverage requirements for credit and liquidity risk set out in the PFMI;
•  robust margining practices through a more granular approach reflecting the specific risks of each product, portfolio and market served; 
prudent assumptions regarding the assumed margin period of risk, other margin model parameters and pricing data; measures to 
pre-empt a potential intraday erosion of initial margin and further safeguards for portfolio margining; 
•  further developing the toolkit to measure and address procyclicality with respect to margin and collateral haircut policies;
•  determining and exposing an appropriate amount of CCPs’ own financial resources to absorb losses related to participant default, 
custody and investment of participants’ assets and ensuring that such resources are of high quality and sufficiently liquid.
99
Against this backdrop and in the context of the 
CCP work plan, CPMI‑IOSCO assessed CCPs’ 
loss absorption capacity and liquidity coverage 
against the related PFMI requirements.
In a report issued in August 2016, CPMI‑IOSCO 
(2016b) reviewed the financial risk management 
and recovery practices at a sample of ten CCPs 
– including a mix of globally active and more 
regionally focused ones – that provide clearing 
services for derivatives in nine jurisdictions. The 
report underlined that while CCPs have made 
progress in developing frameworks in line with 
the PFMI, there are a number of shortcomings 
that should be addressed, notably in the areas 
of recovery planning and credit and liquidity 
risk management. Taking into account the 
stakeholder feedback received, CPMI‑IOSCO 
issued initial proposals for guidance (CPMI‑
IOSCO, 2016a), which is expected to be finalised 
in April 2017 (Box 1).
1|2  Recovery
Notwithstanding the substantial work on CCP 
resilience including under extreme but plausible 
stress conditions, it cannot be excluded that CCPs 
may face even more extreme market events where 
their existing safeguards and financial buffers may 
not be fully sufficient. To address such tail‑of‑tail 
risks, the PFMI require CCPs to draw up recovery 
plans to ensure continuity of their critical functions 
without intervention or support from public 
authorities. CPMI‑IOSCO have also provided 
specific additional guidance on the development 
of recovery plans (CPMI‑IOSCO 2014).  
While CCP resilience requirements have been 
in place for several years (CPSS‑IOSCO 2004), 
recovery planning is still a fairly new area. When 
monitoring the implementation of the PFMI, 
CPMI‑IOSCO (2016b) found that a number 
of CCPs had not yet put in place recovery plans 
fully in line with the PFMI. Against this backdrop, 
CPMI‑IOSCO (2016a, 2017) recently reiterated 
the requirement for CCPs to have recovery plans 
in place that address both default and non‑default 
scenarios. These need to include arrangements for 
comprehensively allocating potential credit losses 
and liquidity shortfalls as well as for replenishing 
mutualised default resources and capital after 
financial buffers for extreme but plausible conditions 
have been exhausted (see Cœuré, 2015a for a 
broader discussion of the loss‑absorbing capacity of 
CCPs and its impact on stakeholders’ incentives). 
In addition, CPMI‑IOSCO are currently working 
on guidance to further facilitate CCPs’ preparation 
of recovery plans by elaborating on some aspects 
of their 2014 report (see section 2.1).
1|3  Resolution
Recovery arrangements are in principle designed 
ex ante and should be comprehensive. However, 
since extreme – and by definition implausible – 
market conditions are difficult to predict, there 
is a remote possibility that even a very carefully 
designed recovery plan may ex post turn out not 
to be effective in returning the CCP to viability 
or that its implementation may give rise to 
unexpected risks to financial stability. Besides, 
expectation of a possible public bail‑out would 
weaken risk management practices in CCPs and 
encourage a race to the bottom in margining and 
haircutting practices. A framework enabling orderly 
intervention by a resolution authority must therefore 
also be in place, especially to ensure the continuity 
of critical functions of the CCPs, minimise risks 
to financial stability and set the right incentives 
for CCP shareholders and clearing members so 
as to avoid potential reliance on public bail‑out 
funds and related risks for taxpayers.
It should be underlined that the resolution of a 
CCP would not necessarily imply winding it down. 
There could be cases where a CCP in resolution 
may cease to exist as a legal entity, for example 
where the resolution authority may choose to sell 
or transfer its business. However, the economics 
of clearing favour economies of scale and the 
emergence of local monopolies, making such a 
100
solution in many cases difficult to implement. 
Interoperability between CCPs may facilitate 
the transferability of portfolios, but it may also 
have unwelcome financial stability consequences 
(Cœuré, 2015b, and ESRB, 2016). The continuity 
of the CCP’s critical functions should be ensured 
in all cases.
As noted in the introduction, the FSB Key Attributes 
of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial 
Institutions and the respective FMI Annex have 
already set out a framework for CCP resolution. 
Under the CCP work plan, the FSB has considered 
the need for additional guidance on implementation 
in order to assist authorities in resolution planning 
and promote consistency in approaches across 
countries. Following up on an earlier consultation 
(FSB, 2016), in February 2017 the FSB published 
draft granular guidance on central counterparty 
resolution and resolution planning for comments 
(FSB, 2017, see Box 2). Related work has been 
led by the European Commission (2016) at the 
European level.
1|4 
Interdependencies
In order to ensure the robustness of the central 
clearing landscape as a whole, measures calibrated 
to individual CCPs may not be fully sufficient. In 
particular, CCPs all rely heavily on contributions, 
financial resources and liquidity provided by the 
same major banks (as clearing members and/or  
financial  service  providers),  which  creates 
significant interdependencies between CCPs. 
These interdependencies may affect the robustness 
of CCPs especially in the case of distressed market 
conditions that could trigger default management, 
recovery and/or resolution actions in more than 
one CCP at a time. Recent supervisory stress test 
exercises in the EU and in the United States have 
started lifting the veil on such interdependencies 
(ESMA, 2016, and CFTC staff, 2016).
Against this backdrop, the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision (BCBS), the CPMI, 
the FSB and IOSCO established a joint study 
Box 2
FSB draft guidance on CCP resolution
Key elements underlined in the draft guidance include the following: 
•  CCP resolution should pursue the objective of financial stability, ensure the 
continuity of critical functions and avoid exposing taxpayers to losses in 
all jurisdictions where those functions are critical. It should also maintain 
appropriate incentives for effective default management and recovery.
•  Resolution should to the extent possible, be predictable and ensure that no 
creditors are “worse off” in resolution than they would have been under CCP 
insolvency proceedings. Resolution authorities should therefore follow the 
steps under the CCP recovery plan unless a departure is deemed necessary 
to achieve the resolution objectives and safeguard financial stability. Resolution 
authorities should also have the power to award compensation to clearing 
members contributing resources in excess of their obligations under CCP 
rules in the form of equity or other types of ownership.
•  In defining the timing of entry into resolution, there is a need to balance 
predictability for stakeholders with flexibility for resolution authorities. To 
this end, the draft guidance sets out potential indicators for default and 
non-default-related losses that may inform the decision on whether to place 
the CCP in resolution. In addition, relevant authorities should cooperate closely 
in the lead-up to resolution. 
•  Resolution authorities should pursue prudent and consistent approaches when 
assessing CCPs’ resolution funding. To this end, the draft guidance sets out 
some common minimum criteria that should be considered. Temporary public 
funding should only be used as a last resort and coupled with very robust 
ex post recovery mechanisms.
•  When conducting resolution planning, authorities should carefully differentiate 
between potential default and/or non-default resolution scenarios and related 
arrangements for allocating financial losses and replenishing CCPs’ financial 
resources.
•  Oversight, supervisory or resolution authorities should be able to address 
material impediments to resolvability that may be identified by the resolution 
authority. 
•  To assist in the establishment of crisis management groups for CCPs that 
are systemically important in more than one jurisdiction, further guidance is 
provided on identifying the relevant CCPs and the composition of these groups.
101
group in July 2015 to identify, quantify and 
analyse interdependencies between CCPs and 
clearing members and any resulting systemic 
interdependencies. As a first step, the study group 
collected data from around 25 CCPs globally 
in order to identify CCPs’ exposures to banks 
as direct members, clients and financial service 
providers. This work was complemented by an 
assessment of existing information on banks’ 
counterparty and funding exposures to CCPs 
compiled by the International Data Hub at the 
Bank for International Settlements. 
2| 
Future priorities  
2|1  Completing the CCP work plan
The CCP work plan is currently being finalised. 
While, as regards CCP resilience, final guidance 
on CCPs’ risk management practices is expected 
to be issued in April 2017, CPMI‑IOSCO have 
in the meantime also begun exploring the scope 
for supervisory stress-testing as a complement to 
CCPs’ in‑house stress testing. The rationale for 
supervisory stress‑testing is twofold, namely 
to (i) support authorities’ review of individual 
CCPs’ stress tests and to (ii) make it possible 
to test the collective response of CCPs to 
shocks affecting them simultaneously. Given 
the latter rationale, supervisory stress‑testing 
of CCPs has an inherently macroprudential 
dimension. The development of supervisory 
stress‑testing is a project with a longer‑term 
horizon, given the related data requirements 
and analytical challenges in terms of building 
relevant scenarios and identifying contagion 
channels across CCPs and (from and to) 
their clearing members. However, CPMI and 
IOSCO, also building on existing experience 
(as noted above), have recently taken a major 
step forward by launching the development 
of a basic conceptual framework to guide 
authorities in the construction and execution 
of multi‑CCP supervisory stress tests. 
Concerning CCP recovery, one important area still 
under discussion relates to safeguards for effective 
interaction between CCP recovery and resolution. 
There are at least three reasons why recovery 
and resolution plans have to be consistent. First, 
recovery planning provides the presumed starting 
point for resolution and may therefore limit the 
options available to the resolution authority. Second, 
recovery takes place in the shadow of resolution, 
implying that resolution plans shape stakeholders’ 
incentives in recovery. Third, resolution should 
obey the “no creditor worse off” principle, for 
which recovery provides a relevant benchmark.
Since different types of authorities are involved, 
with supervisors and overseeers reviewing CCPs’ 
recovery plans and resolution authorities conducting 
CCP resolution planning, good coordination is 
of the essence. 
Potential risks for effective CCP resolution arising 
from the interplay with CCP recovery plans are not 
a remote theoretical possibility. CCP recovery plan 
provisions regarding requirements for participants 
to make additional contributions in cash to CCPs 
in the event of financial shortfalls (“cash calls”) 
are an important case in point. 
Cash calls are recognised as an essential element of 
resolution authorities’ toolkit for allocating financial 
losses, notably in view of their measurability. 
Indeed, while clearing participants can fully prepare 
for cash calls if they are contractually defined 
and capped ex ante (e.g. in relation to clearing 
members’ guaranty fund contributions), potential 
exposures arising from alternative measures, such 
as gains‑based haircutting of variation margins 
(VMGH) or partial tear‑up may be difficult to 
predict and prepare for as they depend on open 
positions and market movements at an uncertain 
point in the future. The ability of clearing members 
to measure and manage their potential exposures 
in CCP resolution is an important aspect not only 
from a bank supervisory perspective but also from 
a broader financial stability angle, as it clearly 
102
has an impact on the credibility of resolution 
funding. However, based on a stocktake of public 
information on the rules of ten major global 
CCPs for allocating participant‑default‑related 
losses, the ECB found that half of those CCPs 
provide for only one cash call in their recovery 
plans. Therefore, if resolution authorities of those 
CCPs were to favour the use of cash calls over 
alternative loss allocation tools such as VMGH, 
they would be restricted in their ability to act 
accordingly: they could either be stripped of this 
tool (if they intervene after CCPs have already 
used the call) or, in order to make use of the cash 
call embedded in the CCP’s rulebook, they would 
need to intervene immediately after the exhaustion 
of the prefunded waterfall, thereby entirely short‑
cutting recovery, which could also be unwarranted. 
Unless applicable statutory regimes provide the 
concerned resolution authorities with a dedicated 
resolution cash call on CCP participants, they may 
have to require amendments to the recovery plan 
to ensure adequate flexibility for their actions.
CPMI‑IOSCO are also considering potential 
additional guidance for non-default-related recovery 
events, notably regarding loss allocation. As set out 
in the 2014 recovery guidance, losses arising from 
non‑default risk are first and foremost the responsibility 
of CCPs and their owners, especially with regard to 
general business and operational risk. However, CCPs 
may provide for the involvement of participants in 
the allocation of custody and investment losses in a 
manner proportionate to participants’ involvement 
in the respective risk governance.
An issue that may warrant further consideration 
in the medium term is the calibration of CCPs’ 
own defences against non-default losses. Under the 
PFMI, CCPs are required to hold liquid net assets 
funded by equity equal to at least six months of 
current operating expenses to absorb general 
business losses. It must be underlined that this is 
a minimum requirement only. First, given that 
capital is calibrated in relation to normal operating 
conditions, it may not be sufficient for large‑scale 
or recurring business losses in a highly distressed 
market environment. Second, potential losses 
will depend on the type of risk to which a CCP 
may be exposed. For instance, while losses arising 
from a small operational outage would be limited, 
substantial investment losses could arise in case 
of sharp and sudden market movements. Against 
this backdrop, consideration should be given to 
examining whether CCPs should be explicitly 
required to pursue an appropriately differentiated 
and prudent approach when calibrating their 
capital defences for non‑default recovery scenarios. 
When it comes to covering investment risk, the 
size of the initial margin could be an important 
metric to determine the size of losses that may 
crystallise. As set out in Chart 2 below, an internal 
ECB stocktake of the capital held by eight major 
EU CCPs, based on publicly available information, 
showed that capital amounts to less than 2% of 
initial margin holdings. This appears rather low in 
view of the prospectively very significant market 
movements during a CCP recovery situation 
and also considering the highly demanding 
requirements for taking into account large‑scale 
market movements when calibrating CCPs’ financial 
resources for default‑related losses.
Initial margins and capital at selected EU CCPs
C2 
(x-axis: total initial margins in EUR billions,
y-axis: total CCP capital/total initial margins in %)
2.0
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100 110 120 130
140
Source: CPMI-IOSCO public disclosures ; financial statements.
103
With respect to CCP resolution, the FSB is 
currently considering stakeholder feedback on its 
draft guidance issued in February 2017, with the 
objective of issuing final guidance by mid‑2017. 
As set out in the draft guidance, one issue that will 
continue to be assessed with a longer‑term horizon 
is CCP resolution funding. Robust requirements to 
ensure the availability of adequate funds to allocate 
financial losses in resolution and to replenish CCPs’ 
financial resources are critical given that a key 
objective of CCP resolution is to avoid exposing 
taxpayers to losses. However, the determination 
of appropriate funding arrangements raises some 
complex issues.
On the one hand, there is a burden of proof on 
CCPs that the available funding credibly ensures 
the continuity of their critical functions, including 
in the event of very severe market conditions going 
beyond the scenarios covered under CCP stress‑
testing. In such circumstances, resolution funding 
that relies entirely on ad hoc funding could raise 
challenges as funds would need to be increased at 
the height of market stress, which could in itself 
further exacerbate market disturbances and may 
simply not work. Temporary public funding could 
be difficult to recover from the private sector in a 
comprehensive and timely manner. Especially in the 
case of global CCPs with members dispersed across 
multiple jurisdictions, there could be challenges 
in enforcing purely contractual obligations on a 
cross‑border basis over a longer‑term horizon, 
including in view of potential changes in the 
CCP landscape following the resolution of a CCP. 
On the other hand, funding arrangements should 
be proportionate to the “tail‑of‑tail” nature of CCP 
resolution risks and should not weaken incentives 
for CCPs and their members to contribute to 
effective ongoing risk management and recovery. 
Funding arrangements should not become so 
costly so as to call into question the business case 
for CCPs, thereby thwarting the central clearing 
objective or adversely impacting market liquidity. 
Finally, it is difficult to accurately predict funding 
needs for extremely unlikely events that are, by 
definition, more severe than extreme but plausible 
market conditions.
Balancing these different considerations will 
require further analytical support. The work on 
CCP interdependencies, multi‑CCP stress‑testing 
as well as practical experience in actual CCP 
resolution planning under the forthcoming FSB 
guidance are expected to provide significant input 
in this regard. Against this background, the FSB 
intends to determine by the end of 2018 whether 
additional guidance for CCP resolution funding 
may be needed. 
2|2  Addressing interactions between CCP  
and banking rules 
CCPs and major financial institutions are highly 
interdependent. Global banks account for the bulk 
of centrally cleared business and provide critical 
services to CCPs, e.g. as investment agents, settlement 
banks, custodians and liquidity providers. The 
robustness of CCPs therefore depends on the ability 
of their participants and critical service providers 
to meet all ongoing obligations under CCPs’ rules 
and arrangements (e.g. margin calls, contributions 
to default management and recovery, liquidity 
arrangements) in an effective and timely manner. 
Robust CCPs are equally important for banks. 
Given the large share of banks’ counterparty 
exposures concentrated in CCPs, any CCP failure 
or delay in its payment and delivery obligations 
to its members will imply significant risks for its 
members. Banks also entrust CCPs with large 
amounts of high‑quality collateral and depend 
on CCPs for services ancillary to central clearing, 
such as securities lending and settlement facilities. 
Given that the safety of banks and that of CCPs 
are closely interrelated, respective regulatory 
requirements are, in principle, mutually reinforcing. 
For example, progress on bank capital, liquidity 
and resolution significantly reduces the risk that 
CCPs will face the potential default of one of their 
largest members. Similarly, progress in reducing 
104
the inherent procyclicality of CCPs’ margin and 
collateral policies makes it less likely that banks 
may be exposed to sudden and steep increases in 
collateral requirements and related liquidity strains 
in tightened market conditions. However, given 
that banks and CCPs are quite dissimilar in terms 
of their risk profile, risk controls and balance sheets, 
the regulatory tools applied to them are different. 
For instance, while banks mitigate credit risk in 
their banking books with capital calibrated in 
relation to their risk‑weighted assets, CCPs always 
maintain balanced positions and rely on mutualised 
default resources to absorb potential losses in 
case of member default. As already mentioned, 
assuming that they are properly managed under 
the PFMI, CCPs are fundamentally risk poolers, 
not risk takers. In addition, central clearing is by 
nature a more concentrated business than banking. 
These differences need to be taken fully into 
account when designing CCP and banking rules 
to avoid unwarranted cross‑sectoral externalities. 
A case in point is the treatment of clients’ cleared 
derivatives transactions under the Basel III leverage 
ratio framework, which provides that clearing 
members are not able to offset the initial margin 
posted by their clients against their potential future 
exposure to that client. This treatment could 
weaken the business case for providing client 
clearing services, thereby limiting the scope for 
indirect access to CCPs and ultimately reducing 
hedging opportunities for end users. It could 
also give rise to disincentives for using CCPs and 
increased recourse to bilateral clearing, which 
would be associated with greater systemic risk, 
including for banks. In addition, the prospective 
further concentration of client clearing business 
in a smaller number of clearing members would 
further increase the respective financial risk 
concentration and could limit the ability to port 
client positions and collateral in case of member 
default, heightening potential systemic spill‑over 
risks. The consequences of the Basel III framework 
for the incentives to clear OTC derivatives and 
other products centrally therefore need to be 
carefully monitored.
Similar problems could be associated with the 
potential inclusion of banks’ exposures to CCPs 
under the large exposure framework. The large 
exposure regime, which applies quantitative limits 
to banks’ exposures to individual counterparties, is 
in principle difficult to reconcile with the nature 
of the CCP industry. Even high hard limits may 
not be workable for products where only one 
CCP provides relevant services, and could conflict 
directly with mandatory central clearing obligations. 
Banks could also be forced to move to a greater 
extent into bilateral clearing, which would also 
be undesirable in view of the recognised greater 
safety of central clearing. 
Such cross‑sectoral frictions should be addressed in 
a manner that appropriately balances the prudential 
objectives of banking supervisors, the concerns of 
CCP supervisors and overseers, and the shared 
interest in an overall safe and efficient clearing 
landscape. The FSB as coordinator of the CCP 
work plan could play an important role in this 
regard, notably by supporting joint ex ante and 
ex post impact assessments of prudential changes 
by the affected standard‑setting bodies. In this 
context, it would be important to also consider 
possible qualitative changes in market structures 
that could give rise to new systemic vulnerabilities 
and that may be difficult to subsequently control 
or reverse.
2|3  Making CCP supervision and oversight 
more granular
Increased central clearing and improved safeguards 
for CCPs contribute not only to the safety but 
also to the efficiency of the financial system, given 
the benefits of central clearing in terms of greater 
collateral efficiency and market transparency. 
However, more stringent CCP rules come at a 
cost to CCPs, clearing members and the financial 
system as a whole. It is also true that while CCPs 
are, in principle, systemically relevant in the 
markets served, each CCP is different in terms 
of its cross‑jurisdictional risk implications and 
resulting impact on global financial stability. 
105
It is therefore important to keep the regulatory 
requirements for CCPs strictly proportionate to 
the risks incurred.
To this end, CCP supervision and oversight 
should increasingly evolve towards a more granular 
calibration of requirements in line with CCPs’ specific 
risk profiles. The PFMI already provide the basis for 
such a differentiated approach with their emphasis 
on minimum requirements and more demanding 
coverage requirements for more wide‑ranging or 
complex CCPs. Recent additional guidance on 
CCPs’ in‑house stress‑testing, the development of 
supervisory stress‑testing as well as the enhanced 
understanding of CCP interdependencies could 
make it possible to move, in the medium term, 
towards an approach to CCP supervision and 
oversight that would combine standardised minimum 
requirements for CCPs with “Pillar II” entity‑
specific requirements reflecting individual risk in 
a proportionate way. Such requirements would 
derive from a supervisory review process, including 
regular supervisory stress‑testing, similar to what 
is now in place for banks. 
Such an enhanced framework would require 
far‑reaching changes to the existing frameworks 
(such as, in the EU, an overhaul of the European 
Market Infrastructure Regulation), but it would 
have several merits. On top of allowing for more 
proportionate supervision and oversight, it could 
also help to reduce some of the open questions 
regarding recovery and resolution funding. While 
it will never be possible to fully predict events that 
are by definition implausible, a more granular 
approach to CCP supervision and oversight 
could help to reduce the “unknown unknowns” 
of central clearing and to better gauge and address 
residual vulnerabilities.
2|4 
Ensuring effective cross-border cooperation
The introduction of mandatory central clearing 
obligations for eligible OTC derivatives has 
increased the role of CCPs with cross‑border 
systemic risk implications, given the global 
nature and high degree of concentration of OTC 
derivatives markets. 
Against this backdrop, the FSB (2012) identified 
effective cooperation of authorities as a critical 
safeguard for global clearing, including the 
existence of (i) cooperative oversight arrangements 
between relevant authorities, both domestically 
and internationally and on either a bilateral 
or multilateral basis, that result in robust and 
consistently applied regulation and oversight of 
global CCPs and (ii) resolution and recovery 
regimes that aim to ensure that the core functions 
of CCPs are maintained during times of crisis and 
that consider the interests of all jurisdictions where 
CCPs are systemically important.
These concerns were reflected in both the PFMI 
and the FSB Key Attributes of Effective Resolution 
Regimes for Financial Institutions. “Responsibility E” 
of the PFMI provides for cooperation between 
relevant authorities that is commensurate with a 
financial market infrastructure’s systemic importance 
across jurisdictions for both normal times and crisis 
situations. Under the FSB Key Attributes, crisis 
management groups (CMGs) should be maintained 
for all financial market infrastructures that are 
systemically important in more than one jurisdiction 
for resolution planning and execution purposes.
Nevertheless,  progress  towards  the  actual 
establishment of cooperative arrangements in line 
with Responsibility E and of CMGs has been 
slow. CPMI‑IOSCO found in their report on 
jurisdictions’ implementation of the responsibilities for 
authorities under the PFMI (CPMI‑IOSCO, 2015) 
that there was not yet sufficient evidence on 
Responsibility E‑type arrangements to assess the 
practical outcomes of the respective cooperation across 
jurisdictions and called upon authorities to continue 
to establish or refine those arrangements. Similarly, 
an internal FSB stocktake of the resolution regimes 
in its member jurisdictions in 2015 highlighted that 
CMGs (or equivalent arrangements) and systematic 
resolution planning processes were not in place for 
several of the largest CCPs.
106
In this context, the CPMI, IOSCO and the FSB 
have taken action to increase the momentum for 
cross‑border‑cooperation. CPMI and IOSCO 
have developed criteria for identifying CCPs 
that are systemically relevant in more than one 
jurisdiction and have also launched a review of 
whether further guidance on the implementation 
of Responsibility E could be helpful. As part of its 
February 2017 draft guidance on CCP resolution, 
and based on a consultation by CPMI‑IOSCO 
of CCPs’ home and host authorities, the FSB has 
clarified the CCPs for which CMGs should be 
established and has also issued further guidance 
on the composition of CMGs.
effects across the wider financial system in the 
event of a CCP emergency that may arise from the 
high degree of risk concentration in CCPs as well 
as interdependencies between CCPs and major 
financial institutions. Another, more ambitious, 
objective would be to act in a countercyclical manner 
by preventing the excessive build‑up of risk in good 
times and smoothen the impact of CCPs’ financial risk 
management during the economic cycle, similar to 
what is already pursued in the banking sector (ECB, 
2016), but of course operationalised in a way that is 
appropriate to the specific nature of central clearing. 
Cœuré (2016) discusses the former objective, while 
Constâncio (2016) discusses the latter.
An important additional priority in the future will 
be to ensure effective and consistent cross‑border 
cooperation for major cross‑border CCPs throughout 
their potential lifecycle. In particular, given the 
close linkages between CCP resilience, recovery 
and resolution, it will be essential for a core group 
of authorities to be able to assess the robustness of 
the CCP throughout its normal risk management, 
recovery and resolution planning processes as 
well as to prepare for close communication and 
coordination in emergency situations. Accordingly, 
authorities responsible for major cross‑border 
CCPs should not only operate CMGs but also 
establish cooperative arrangements in line with 
Responsibility E (the composition of which does 
not have to fully coincide with that of CMGs), 
and for this purpose they should use multilateral 
information‑sharing to the extent possible. 
2|5  Enhancing the macroprudential 
safeguards for central clearing 
Given the central role of CCPs in the financial 
system, it is critical to ensure that CCPs are not 
only robust on a stand‑alone basis, but that their 
potential wider systemic risk externalities are also 
understood and mitigated. 
Macroprudential safeguards for CCPs should, at a 
minimum, prevent CCPs from acting in a procyclical 
manner. This implies limiting potential contagion 
Macroprudential safeguards for central clearing 
were already established under the PFMI and the 
Key Attributes and have been further enhanced 
under the CCP work plan. 
•  The PFMI require CCPs to adopt stable‑through‑
the‑cycle margin and collateral haircut practices 
to avoid sudden and steep increases of related 
requirements during an economic downturn. 
The forthcoming CPMI‑IOSCO guidance 
on CCP resilience will further strengthen the 
requirements for non‑procyclical behaviour by 
requiring CCPs to adopt a holistic approach 
in addressing these issues, using quantitative 
metrics and considering this aspect during the 
model validation process. 
•  The PFMI emphasis on stress‑testing CCPs’ 
liquid and mutualised default resource has made 
CCPs’ risk management much more forward‑
looking than in the past. The forthcoming 
CPMI‑IOSCO further guidance on stress 
testing as well as expected progress towards 
supervisory stress‑testing are designed to introduce 
additional caution in preparing for stressed 
market conditions. 
•  Under the PFMI, CCPs with cross‑border 
systemic relevance or a more complex risk profile 
need to comply with more stringent coverage 
requirements for their credit and liquidity 
107
exposures so as to ensure that their financial 
buffers will be commensurate with their wider 
systemic risk implications. Measures to spur the 
establishment of cooperative arrangements in 
line with Responsibility E as well as of CMGs 
will provide important checks and balances for 
the risk management, recovery and resolution 
planning of cross‑border CCPs and will be 
essential in supporting effective cooperation 
between authorities. This will help to ensure that 
a potential CCP emergency can be addressed in a 
swift, orderly and comprehensive manner, thereby 
limiting potential wider systemic contagion effects.
One area where further progress is still needed relates 
to the enhanced consideration of interdependencies 
between CCPs and major financial institutions 
in identifying cross‑sectoral vulnerabilities and 
contagion channels. It would seem useful to 
develop the recent stock‑take of central clearing 
interdependencies into a regular global data 
collection in order to ensure effective monitoring 
of related exposures over time. In the medium 
term, subject to further progress on supervisory 
stress‑testing, it would seem useful to conduct 
top‑down (model‑based) stress‑testing of the central 
clearing network and potential risk implications 
for the wider financial system.
3| 
Conclusion
The recent review of CCP resilience, recovery 
and resolution under the CCP work plan has 
confirmed that the safeguards established by the 
PFMI and the Key Attributes for Effective Resolution 
of Financial Institutions are adequate. Additional 
guidance on the application of these requirements 
will promote further rigour and consistency in 
CCPs’ approaches as well as enhanced cooperation 
between authorities. The main priority at this 
juncture is to finalise that guidance and to then 
ensure its full and timely implementation.
In this context, one important priority is to ensure 
a sufficient level of granularity in the approaches 
of both CCPs and the relevant authorities. The 
respective global rules are minimum requirements 
only. Enhanced CCP in‑house stress‑testing as well 
as progress in supervisory stress‑testing should be 
used to assess more closely if and to what extent 
some CCPs, depending on their specific risk 
profile, may need to move beyond that. In the 
medium term, it is worthwhile considering an 
approach that would combine standardised 
minimum requirements with entity‑specific ones 
based on a supervisory review process, including 
supervisory stress‑testing. Greater granularity of 
CCP supervision and oversight will also help 
to better calibrate CCPs’ defences for potential 
recovery or resolution scenarios. 
Authorities should step up their efforts to enhance 
cooperation with regard to major cross‑border 
CCPs and should ensure that the frequency and 
depth of cooperation is in line with the systemic 
risk implications of CCPs. Cooperation should 
also reflect the significant overlaps and interactions 
between potential default management, recovery 
and resolution scenarios and ensure that a core 
group of authorities from the most affected 
jurisdictions will be able to assess a CCP’s defences 
throughout its potential lifecycle in a consistent 
and coherent manner. In addition, cooperation 
between authorities in charge of CCP supervision 
and oversight on the one hand, and resolution 
on the other, should ensure the consistency of 
recovery and resolution plans, the alignment of 
stakeholder incentives down the recovery waterfall 
and beyond, and the effective application of the 
“no creditor worse‑off” principle.
Finally, authorities should work to further enhance 
the robustness not only of individual CCPs, 
but of the central clearing landscape as a whole.  
To this end, it would seem useful to move in the 
medium term towards a structured framework 
for the ongoing monitoring of central clearing 
interdependencies and multi‑CCP stress testing.  
In addition, potential cross‑sectoral spillover effects 
of CCP and banking rules should be carefully 
assessed when considering prudential changes.
108
References
CFTC staff (2016)
Supervisory stress test of clearing houses, November.
Cœuré (B.) (2015a)
“Ensuring an adequate loss‑absorbing capacity of 
central counterparties”, special invited lecture at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 2015 Symposium 
on Central Clearing, Chicago, 10 April.
Cœuré (B.) (2015b)
“The international regulatory agenda on CCP 
links”, speech at the ESRB workshop on CCP 
interoperability arrangements, 2 November.
Cœuré (B.) (2016)
“Towards a macroprudential framework for 
central counterparties”, introductory remarks 
at a policy panel discussion on the progress with 
new macroprudential instruments at the ESRB 
international conference on macroprudential 
margins and haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June.
Constâncio (V.) (2016)
“Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, 
remarks at the ESRB international conference on 
the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, 
Frankfurt am Main, 6 June.
Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures 
(CPMI) – International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) (2012)
Principles for financial market infrastructures,  
April. 
CPMI-IOSCO (2014)
Recovery  of  financial  market  infrastructures,  
October. 
CPMI-IOSCO (2016a)
Resilience and recovery of central counterparties 
(CCPs): Further guidance on the PFMI – Consultative 
Report, August.
CPMI-IOSCO (2016b)
Implementation monitoring of PFMI: Level 3 
assessment – Report on the financial risk management 
and recovery practices of 10 derivatives CCPs, August.
CPMI-IOSCO (2017)
Resilience of central counterparties (CCPs), April.
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems  
– CPSS (2010)
Market structure developments in the clearing industry: 
implications for financial stability, report of the 
Working Group on Post‑trade Services, November. 
CPSS-IOSCO (2004)
Recommendations for Central Counterparties, 
November.
European Central Bank (2016)
“Topical  issue:  the  ECB’s  macroprudential 
policy framework”, in: Macroprudential Bulletin, 
Issue 1/2016.
European Commission (2016)
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on a framework for the recovery 
and resolution of central counterparties and amending 
regulations (EU) No 1095/2010, (EU) No 648/2012, 
and (EU) 2015/2365, November.
European Securities and Markets Authority (2016)
EU-wide CCP stress test report 2015, 29 April.
CPMI-IOSCO (2015)
Implementation monitoring of PFMI: Assessment 
and review of application of Responsibilities for 
authorities, November.
European Systemic Risk Board (2016)
ESRB report to the European Commission on the 
systemic risk implications of CCP interoperability 
arrangements, January.
109
FSB (2017)
Guidance on central counterparty resolution and 
resolution planning – consultative document, February.
FSB SRC/FSB RESG/BCBS/CPM/IOSCO (2015)
CCP work plan, April.
Financial Stability Board – FSB (2012)
Overview of progress in the implementation of the 
G20 recommendations for strengthening financial 
stability. Report of the Financial Stability Board to 
G20 Leaders, 19 June.
FSB (2014)
Key attributes of effective resolution regimes for 
financial institutions, October.
FSB (2016)
Essential aspects of ccp resolution planning – discussion 
note, August.
110
