Yves Mersch: Central banking in times of technological progress
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia)  Monetary  Policy  Conference,  Kuala
Lumpur, 24 July 2017.
 There have been many significant advances in technology over the three and a half centuries that
central banks have existed: railways, electrification, computerisation, and the internet to name
but  a  few.  Each  of  these  great  waves  of  technological  revolution  has  transformed  how
economies function. While not all have had such a marked impact on central bank operations,
we have nonetheless changed a great deal over the past 350 years, and should expect to do so
in the future.
Given the uncertain impacts of technology, central banks should react prudently, and in the same
forward-looking fashion that we implement policy. In my mind, there are three key responses of
central banks to technology:
adapt our policies to take into account technology-driven changes in the real world,
adopt  appropriate  technology  that  enables  us  to  best  carry  out  our  functions.  As  I  will
highlight  throughout  my  remarks  today,  appropriate  does  not  always  mean  the  newest  or
most fashionable technology. Each new advance must be carefully and prudently assessed
for its potential impact.
anticipate technological risks to our operations.
With  these  three  key  responses  in  mind,  I  will  consider  the  challenges  –  and  opportunities  –
arising  from  technology  to  our  mandate  for  price  stability,  central  banks’  role  in  payment
systems, and safeguarding our operations in the internet age.
Price stability
The first important consideration for monetary policy relates not to any particular technology, but
to the overall rate of technological progress. As the technological frontier shifts outwards, and
that  knowledge  diffuses  across  the  economy,  overall  productivity  increases.  That  increased
productivity affects the rate of return on investment and hence the level of real equilibrium interest
rates.
Since  monetary  policy  aims  to  vary  short-term  real  rates  around  that  equilibrium  to  meet  our
price stability mandate, changes in the overall rate of technological progress affect the interest
rates central banks set. As such, policymakers need to adjust policy settings to adapt to changes
in the real economy.
Setting policy according to a fixed rule with pre-determined coefficients on inflation and the output
gap is at the best of times likely to lead to sub-optimal policy settings, given the uncertainties in
measurement  of  the  output  gap.  But  in  times  of  technologically  driven  changes  in  economic
relationships, such a rule could potentially result in interest rates that are wholly inappropriate for
the economy and inconsistent with our mandate for price stability.
Yet that is not to say that different policy tools are all inappropriate. The past decade has posed a
number  of  challenges  for  policymakers.  For  some  observers,  there  appears  to  have  been  a
secular  fall  in  measured  productivity  growth   and  equilibrium  real  rates   across  advanced
countries. Lower equilibrium rates reduce the room for manoeuver that central banks have to
lower  rates  and  still  remain  above  the  effective  lower  bound.  Other  observers  attach  more
attention to measurement of productivity changes due to technological progress and globalisation
1
2
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and hence warn against hasty changes to targets and objectives.
At the same time, interbank markets in the euro area became fragmented along national lines
during the crisis, threatening the transmission of monetary policy.
The  various  so-called  unconventional  monetary  measures  undertaken  by  the  ECB  and  other
central banks throughout the crisis are a good example of adapting policy to changes in the real
economy.  Forward  guidance,  asset  purchases,  negative  nominal  interest  rates  and  lending
schemes that incentivise banks to increase lending, such as the targeted longer-term refinancing
operations, were all designed to combat the challenges of the period. Such policies were seen
as appropriate – being both necessary and proportionate responses by central banks to fulfil their
mandate  for  price  stability.  But  as  conditions  normalise,  it  is  unlikely  that  these  policies  will
remain necessary.
While my comments so far about technical progress in aggregate reflect a perennial challenge
for central banks, current technological progress poses a particularly acute challenge because of
its  direct  impact  on  the  price-setting  behaviour  by  businesses  that  underlies  the  inflationary
process.  Improvements  in  logistics  have  permitted  the  growth  of  global  value  chains,  and  e-
commerce  has  revolutionised  the  transparency  of  pricing  within  and  across  countries.  These
technological advances can affect how domestic inflation reacts to shocks, the pass-through of
exchange  rate  movements  into  inflation  and  the  domestic  impact  of  global  developments  and
inflation.
These factors pose their own issues for the measurement of inflation. While that generally falls
under the jurisdiction of statistical institutes, central banks have clear interest in engaging with
methodological  decisions  given  our  mandate  for  price  stability.  Without  wishing  to  devote  too
3
much time to technical details of index construction, allow me to highlight some of the issues.
Technological  progress  has  resulted  in  the  creation  of  products  such  as  smartphones  and
internet service providers that had no equivalent in the past. And the conceptual foundation of
inflation being the annual change in prices is challenged when some electronic articles have a
shelf-life of less than a year. This is particularly true when part of the consumption value of the
good in question is being the latest edition. Heavy discounting of the now less fashionable older
4
editions could create downward bias in traditional indices.
Similarly  pricing  online  services  poses  a  number  of  challenges.  For  example,  in  the  past
consumers  would  buy  premade  package  holidays  from  a  travel  agent.  Nowadays,  online
services  permit  households  to  create  their  own  packages.  This  task  is  more  and  more
outsourced  by  the  agencies,  i.e.  they  reduce  their  cost;  and  accepted  by  the  customers.
Measuring – and pricing – the value of that service is not always transparent. This complicates
the proper inclusion of the economic activity undertaken into national accounts. Indeed, in the
absence of a measurable transaction, it would normally be beyond the scope of consumer price
indices.
Some internet services do not even have a monetary charge, but customers pay via providing
data – sometimes without being aware of the full extent of their payment. Search engines and
other  portals  are  nominally  for  free,  but  create  revenue  through  advertising,  paid  ordering  of
search results and commissions from linking customers to businesses.
A further challenge for price indices arising from internet sites is their ability to tailor individual
prices  to  the  consumer  –  two  people  looking  at  the  same  website  at  the  same  time  may  be
offered two different prices. As indeed does the speed at which prices change. It was not that
long ago that a hotel would post its prices for the year ahead and leave them fixed, whereas now
hotels  dynamically  manage  occupancy  through  changing  room  prices  perhaps  even  several
times in one day.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Of course, change in  consumption  habits  and  expenditure  patterns  are  not  a  particularly  new
problem for statistical agencies to deal with. It has long been recognised that regularly updating
weights  and  the  goods  and  services  included  in  the  basket  results  in  an  index  that  better
describes the prices faced by consumers. Consumer price indices, including the Harmonised
Index of Consumer Prices used in the euro area, have already made large strides in adapting
their methodology to account for changes in technology.
And technology has itself been a benefit in price collection. Gone are the days of price collectors
walking through shops with a clipboard with reams of paperwork requiring multiple input steps.
Price  collection  on  the  ground  is  now  carried  out  with  electronic  tablets  directly  updating
databases, and the opportunity to use web scraping technology has facilitated a much cheaper
and widespread source of price quotes. Research can now be carried out on data sets not of
hundreds of price quotes, but of a billion.  The use of scanner data has enabled a much greater
idea of not only more granular purchases, but also seasonality in purchases.
5
But the technological changes to price and wage setting behaviour have much deeper relevance
for  central  banks  than  just  the  measurement  of  inflation.  The  speed  and  extent  that  inflation
reacts to shocks – both domestic and global – affects the optimal response of monetary policy to
those shocks. Allow me to give a few examples of how technology can affect the price-setting
process and the economy’s reaction to shocks, focusing on e-commerce.
E-commerce can erode the monopolistic and monopsonistic power of suppliers of goods and
services, reducing mark-ups. Such a change in mark-ups can be viewed as a flattening of the
Phillips curve, meaning a given change in the output gap has a weaker impact on inflationary
pressures.  Conversely,  e-commerce  may  result 
in  suppliers  changing  prices  more
frequently.   As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  is  certainly  evidence  of  this  happening  in  certain
sectors. Partly this is due to lower menu costs for producers, but also lower search costs for
consumers  increases  the  likelihood  of  them  switching  supplier  and  hence  increases  the
opportunity cost of being away from the optimal price. More frequent price changes result in a
steeper Phillips curve – prices react more quickly and stronger to changes in output.
6
At the same time, e-commerce may restrict the ability of businesses to set prices that deviate
substantially from those of large online retailers.  So prices may change more often, but there
may be a greater clustering of prices, which in turn may restrict the ability of prices to reflect
idiosyncratic  shocks.  Furthermore,  the  dominance  of  certain  online  retailers,  which  may
potentially  be  reinforced  by  the  algorithms  of  search  engines,  may  lead  to  market  power  and
stifling of competitive forces over the longer term.
7
Overall, the impact of e-commerce on the slope of the Phillips curve is uncertain, and studies
have in general struggled to find large effects on annual inflation.  Given the overall difficulty in
estimating  the  slope  of  the  Phillips  curve,  this  is  not  entirely  a  surprise. And  beyond  just  e-
commerce, the development of global value chains  facilitated  by  technology  could  potentially
change  the  influence  of  global  inflation  factors  on  domestic  inflation   and  the  degree  of
exchange rate pass-through.
10
11
8
9
As  with  the  measurement  of  consumer  price  indices,  the  greater  availability  of  more  granular
data  has  enabled  a  much  greater  understanding  of  how  businesses  set  prices.  But  while
policymakers  should  adapt  policy  to  take  into  account  changes  in  the  underlying  price-setting
process, we should exercise due prudence, given the range and uncertainty surrounding model
estimates.
12
And  the  effects  of  technology  run  deeper  than  just  price  setting.  Email,  videoconferencing,
secure VPN   connections,  and  outsourcing  across  countries  enable  services  to  be  provided
from distance, and permit a greater degree of flexibility in working practices. It is a notable socio-
economic shift in the interaction between employers and employees.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the labour market the internet allows for more services being offered with less intermediation
at lower prices. Fragmentation of labour time is shown in the diverging results of compensation
per employee and compensation per hour worked.
13
 allowing them to participate in the workforce
For some workers this is a positive development,
where previously they may have been unable. But for others, the greater individualisation of roles
can  lead  to  insecurity,  in  turn  affecting  households’  income  and  spending.  More  individualised
roles  can  also  weaken  the  ability  of  collective  bargaining  to  maintain  the  labour  share  of
income.
  changing  the  Phillips  curve
relationship between unemployment and wage pressure, and hence how monetary policy should
react.
Payment systems
  These  changes  combined  could  lower  the  NAIRU,
14
15
16
The second area where I wanted to discuss the impact of technology on central banks is that of
payment systems. Let me begin with cash, something that central banks have issued since their
inception. For cash to carry out its roles as a medium of exchange and store of value, the public
has to have trust in its integrity.
To maintain that integrity and protect the currency from counterfeiters, central banks have for
centuries not only adopted innovations at the cutting edge of printing technology to protect their
notes from counterfeiting, but actively driven innovation in that area. Our latest €50 note – issued
earlier this year – is no exception, incorporating an enhanced range of security features. Such
technological  adoption  is  wholly  appropriate  in  this  case,  where  ceding  the  technological  high
ground to criminals risks undermining the currency.
Cash is the only central bank liability available to the public. It maintains a tangible link between
the general public and the central bank, a link which is important for maintaining trust between
the two. Of course, several private sector payment instruments and systems are already well
established:  credit  cards,  direct  debits  and  online  payments  to  name  but  a  few.  More  recent
developments include payment methods based on smartphone technology, mobile wallets and
investigations into the use of distributed ledger technology.
These  technological  developments  have  encouraged  some  to  argue  for  the  abolition  of  cash.
Broadly  speaking,  those  arguments  fall  into  three  camps:  overcoming  the  restrictions  on
monetary  policy  arising  from  the  zero  lower  bound,  frustrating  the  actions  of  criminals  by
eliminating the primary means of illicit payments and reducing the high costs of cash storage,
issuance and handling faced by the financial sector.
I have to admit some scepticism about these arguments. The various unconventional measures I
mentioned earlier that central banks put in place during the past decade have proven sufficient to
meet  the  challenges  of  low  inflation  and  low  equilibrium  rates.  The  United  States  has  already
begun to tighten policy. In the euro area, while our cycle is further behind, we already witness a
broad-based and resilient recovery.
While being able to set significantly negative rates may work smoothly in an economic model, I
am  less  certain  how  the  public  would  react,  particularly  given  the  experience  of  millennia  of
positive nominal rates. Not only would such rates be deeply unpopular, there may be unintended
changes in behaviour that would dampen the effectiveness of the measure.
Given the overall level of uncertainty of data and economic models, policymakers should act in a
prudent fashion and only take actions that are necessary for the fulfilment of the price stability
mandate  and  proportionate  to  the  challenge  in  hand.  To  my  mind,  the  abolition  of  cash  for
monetary policy purposes does not pass the appropriateness test.
In terms of the cost savings from new technologies such as the distributed ledger, I would again
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
add caution. Far more detailed research is needed into the most beneficial system for all parties,
and  not  just  for  financial  institutions.  As  just  one  example,  suppose  central  banks  stopped
providing cash and instead shifted to just providing Digital Base Money (DBM) – an electronic
claim on the central bank. Would the system involve each individual having an account at the
central bank, or involve a decentralised system where each individual has an electronic wallet
and  the  central  bank  is  unaware  of  transactions  that  take  place.  Either  system  could  be
implemented  using  a  distributed  ledger,  but  the  set  up  would  be  quite  different  in  each
scenario.
17
In  any  case,  just  as  cash  has  a  number  of  technological  safeguards  to  protect  from
counterfeiting,  DBM  would  require  significant  safeguards  to  protect  individuals  from  theft  and
from loss of personal information. Prudence should underpin our decision on what technology to
adopt. Adopting  untried  technology  that  ultimately  proves  unreliable  could  seriously  endanger
public trust in the currency and in the central bank. Any new payments system technology should
be rigorously tested before implementation, with due regulation and oversight thereafter.
As  to  the  often  stated  link  between  cash  and  illicit  payments,  there  is  no  evidence.  Even  the
available  anecdotal  hints  attribute  only  a  relatively  minor  role  to  illicit  activity  compared  to  the
overall honest use of cash as a private means of payment.
Moreover, for all the buzz currently surrounding new payment technologies, it is worth noting that
cash, despite having been around for millennia, still remains popular. In the euro area, around
80% of transactions at point of sale are carried out in cash, and cash transactions account for
around  half  the  total  value.  For  now,  provision  of  physical  cash  remains  an  important  role  for
central banks.
There  may  be  a  time  in  the  future  when  the  general  public  favour  electronic  money.  Cash
transactions are already a minority in some countries. In that future time, it would be appropriate
for central banks to adopt technology that best reflects the general preferences of the population.
It  is  not  our  role  to  drive  technological  adoption  in  the  general  public,  but  to  enable  changing
preferences  to  be  fulfilled  in  a  secure  fashion.  For  that  reason  we  test  new  technologies  in
laboratory environments with an array of partners.
Safeguarding our operations
Security is the final area I wish to consider today. What steps need to be taken to safeguard our
operations from technological risks?
Banknotes and payment systems are not the only areas where technology creates risk for public
trust in the central bank. Traditionally we have maintained strong physical security measures to
protect our gold and currency reserves. In 1781, the Bank of England acquired and subsequently
tore down the adjacent church St Christopher le Stocks, fearing that the spire could be seized by
rioters and used as a platform to attack the Bank.
As a result of technology, potential attacks on central banks extend beyond the physical realm
and  can  be  launched  from  much  further  away  than  the  building  next  door.  Thick  walls  of  a
different  kind  are  required  to  protect  our  valuable  data  from  technological  incursions.  Recent
examples of such incursions include payment systems being accessed and substantial funds
being transferred; suspicions – since proven unfounded – of financial market trades occurring on
the  basis  of  hacking  the  electronic  link  between  the  central  bank  and  newswires;  sensitive
information being emailed accidentally to outside sources; and journalists breaking embargo on
interest rate decisions.
Central banks are also vulnerable to more generalised technological risks. There have been a
number  of  recent  examples  of  computer  virus  outbreaks  that  have  simultaneously  disabled
computer  networks  across  a  range  of  institutions  in  several  countries.  Were  such  a  virus  to
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
affect the central bank’s own network, there would be considerable operational risk. Similarly, the
smooth functioning of payment systems could be threatened if those servers were affected.
Faced  with  this  range  of  threats  to  our  operations,  central  banks  should  regularly  assess
potential risks, and take measures to anticipate them. Anti-counterfeiting measures incorporated
into our banknotes are designed to foil the most sophisticated counterfeiters. Measures put in
place  to  protect  our  information  should  likewise  aim  to  foil  the  most  sophisticated  assailants.
Adopting the latest technological advances in security is not only appropriate, but vital.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude.
Technological change is an integral driver of economic development. It is disruptive at times and
impacts not only economies but also our societies. Central banks are not isolated from these
processes.
Central  banks  are  well  advised  to  be  prudent  and  forward-looking  when  approaching  the
respective  challenges  –  just  as  they  are  when  implementing  monetary  policy  to  honour  their
mandates.
Facing the uncertainties of technological change, central banks therefore should
1.  adapt policies to take into account technology-driven socio-economic changes,
2.  adopt  appropriate  technology  that  supports  the  various  functions  and  tasks  of  a  central
banks, and
3.  anticipate technological risks to our operations.
With these principles in mind, central banks can better manage the challenges stemming from
technological  change,  even  when  it  is  disruptive.  Used  appropriately  they  can  even  help  to
improve our operations and efficiency.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See, e.g., Gordon, R. (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The US Standard of Living since the Civil
War,  Princeton  University  Press.  It  is  worth  noting  that  others  contest  the  slowdown,  arguing  it  relates  to
measurement error, e.g. Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2011), Race Against The Machine: How the Digital
Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the
Economy. Digital Frontier Press.
See, e.g., evidence presented in Constâncio, V. (2016), “The challenge of low real interest rates for monetary
policy”, Lecture at the Macroeconomics Symposium, Utrecht School of Economics, 15 June.
For a more detailed analysis of issues relating to index calculation, see Diewert, W. E. (1998), “Index Number
Issues in the Consumer Price Index”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12(1): 47–58 and von der Lippe, P.
(2007), Index Theory and Price Statistics, Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Main.
The direction of the bias for the aggregate index is less certain. Broda, C. and Weinstein, D. (2010), “Product
Creation and Destruction: Evidence and Price Implications”, American Economic Review, 100 (3): 691–723, find
that failing to take into account product creation across the index creates an upward bias to traditional “fixed
good” indices.
Cavallo, A.  and  R.  Rigobon  (2016),  “The  billion  prices  project:  using  online  prices  for  measurement  and
research”, Journal of Economics Perspectives, 30(2): 151–78.
Gorodnichenko,  Y.  and  O.  Talavera  (2014),  “Price  setting  in  online  markets:  basic  facts,  international
comparisons and cross-border integration”, NBER Working Paper, No. 20406.
Cavallo, A. (2017), “Are online and offline prices similar? Evidence from large multi-channel retailers”, American
Economic Review, 107(1): 283–303, finds price levels are identical around 72% of the time.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
See,  e.g.  Lorenzani,  D.  and  J.  Varga  (2014),  “The  economic  impact  of  digital  structural  reforms”, European
Commission Economic Papers, No. 529.
For a more detailed discussion of the impact of global value chains see ECB (2017), “Domestic and global
drivers of inflation in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4 : 72–96.
Ciccarelli, M. and B. Mojon (2010), “Global Inflation”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 92(3): 524–535
find that a large proportion of domestic inflation rates in 22 OECD countries can be explained by global factors.
Parker, M. (2017), “Global inflation: the role of food, housing and energy prices”, Working Paper Series, No 2024,
ECB, extends the analysis to a much larger sample of 223 countries and territories, showing the influence is
particularly strong in food and energy prices.
For  example,  Amiti,  M.,  Itskhoki,  O.  and  J.  Konings  (2014),  “Importers,  exporters  and  exchange  rate
disconnect”, American Economic Review, 104(7): 1942–78, find that larger shares of imported intermediates in
production influence the degree of price pass-through from exchange-rate movements.
Virtual Private Network.
Bloom,  N.,  Liang,  J.,  Roberts,  J.  and  J.  Zichun  (2015),  “Does  working  from  home  work?  Evidence  from  a
Chinese Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(1): 165–218 find a 13% increase in productivity of
workers who work from home.
International Monetary Fund (2017), “Understanding the downward trend in labor income shares”, IMF World
Economic Outlook, April.
NAIRU = Non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment. The NAIRU refers to a level of unemployment below
which inflation rises.
For a more detailed discussion of the impact on wages, see Haldane, A. (2017), “Work, wages and monetary
policy”, Speech at the National Science and Media Museum, Bradford, United Kingdom, 20 June.
The  issues  surrounding  DBM  are  discussed  in  more  detail  in  Mersch,  Y.  (2017),  “Digital  Base  Money:  an
assessment from the ECB’s perspective”, Speech at the Farewell ceremony for Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy
Governor of Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank, Helsinki, 16 January.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
