Jacqueline Loh: Strengthening Shanghai-Singapore cooperation –
anchoring stability and seizing opportunities
Welcome address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the 3rd Singapore-Shanghai Financial Forum, Singapore, 12 April 2017.
Shanghai Municipal Government, Deputy Secretary General Mr Jin Xingming
Shanghai Municipal Financial Services Office, Director General Dr Zheng Yang
 Distinguished Speakers and Guests
Ladies and Gentlemen
Introduction
1     Good morning, and welcome to the 3rd Singapore-Shanghai Financial Forum. It is a great
pleasure to welcome our good friends from Shanghai, as well as our strong representation of
local stakeholders joining us at the forum today.
Uncertainty is the New World Order
2          The  second  edition  of  the  forum  was  held  in  November  last  year.  Since  then,  global
economic  activity  has  firmed,  led  by  robust  consumption  in  the  US  and  a  pickup  in  China’s
underlying growth momentum. The Eurozone and Japan have also registered steady expansions
on account of stronger domestic demand and exports, respectively. Concurrently, the turnaround
in commodity prices last year, followed by an IT upswing in Q4, have improved the prospects for
emerging markets, including the trade-dependent economies here in Asia. A range of indicators
have picked up in tandem with the strengthening of manufacturing and trade in the region, and
forward-looking surveys reaffirm a continued mild improving trend into 2017. Within the region,
domestic demand has generally been resilient and overall growth this year will receive additional
support from the stronger performances of export industries.    
3     Yet amid this cautious optimism, we should acknowledge the continued unevenness in the
strength of the expansion across regions in the global economy, as well as the persistence of
policy uncertainties, which will weigh on firms’ long-term spending commitments. We are also
confronted  with  the  seeming  rise  of  nationalism  and  growing  populism  which  can  have
unpredictable effects on policies and growth. Against this backdrop, the uncertainty over trade
policies and the future of the multilateral trading system is another area of concern of trading
nations  in  Asia,  as  it  comes  at  a  time  when  important  underlying  structural  shifts  in  global
production and trade arrangements are already taking place. 
4     In the financial sector, the advent of FinTech – driven by unprecedented mobility, connectivity
and computing power – possesses the potential to fundamentally change the way intermediation
takes place in the financial sector.
5          Indeed,  it  seems  that  continuous  shifts  and  unrelenting  changes  are  the  defining
characteristics of the future economic and financial landscape.
Finding Opportunities amidst Uncertainty
6     While some degree of uncertainty is inevitable in this environment, there remain several
broad  trends  which  will  unfold  and  present  opportunities  which  Shanghai  and  Singapore
institutions can leverage together.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  China’s  future  direction  in  financial  sector  deepening  and  liberalisation  is
7     
clear. President Xi Jinping announced at the G20 Summit last year that China would continue
with  efforts  to  make  the  RMB  an  international  currency  and  further  internationalize  China’s
financial sector. 
8          To  support  such  efforts  in  Shanghai,  Singapore  financial  institutions  can  partner  the
Shanghai  authorities  and  financial  institutions  to  spearhead  policy  innovation  supporting  the
liberalization  agenda.  For  example,  DBS  participated  in  underwriting  the  pilot  issuance  of  free
trade zone (FTZ) bonds by the Shanghai Municipal Government last year, demonstrating how the
complementarity  of  overseas  networks  that  foreign  banks  provide  can  contribute  to  the
internationalization of China’s capital markets.
9      Second, the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) will remain a priority trans-national initiative in
China. During the National People’s Congress meetings last month, President Xi suggested that
the  Shanghai  FTZ  could  be  a  bridgehead  for  the  BRI,  to  help  domestic  companies  channel
investment overseas and set up a legal framework in line with international trade and investment
rules. As a hub for trade and investment flows in Southeast Asia, Singapore would be a natural
partner to Shanghai in realizing this vision to promote trade and investment flows between China
and the ASEAN region.
0     Third,  technology  will  continue  to  present  benefits  and  opportunities  to  the  financial
1
sector. As leading FinTech centres, there is great scope for Shanghai and Singapore to harness
technology together in a purposeful way, while ensuring appropriate and responsive regulatory
frameworks to safeguard against possible new risks.
Anchoring Stability, Leveraging Opportunities
11          Shanghai  and  Singapore  can  look  forward  to  further  strengthening  collaboration  and
deepening  mutual  understanding  in  these  as  well  as  other  areas.  Indeed,  Shanghai  Pudong
Development Bank (SPDB)'s decision to establish its branch in Singapore – the first for SPDB
outside China – is testament to the bank’s confidence in deepening Shanghai-Singapore ties.
12     So how do we leverage the strengthening ties and the positive developmental trajectory to
benefit  Shanghai  and  Singapore  as  regional  financial  centres?  Allow  me  to  propose  some
suggestions, which I hope would lead to further discussion during the forum today.
13     Amidst the current focus on developing China’s onshore capital markets to support
capital  market  liberalization  and  RMB  internationalization,  Singapore  and  Shanghai
financial institutions can work together in developing appropriate risk management and
hedging tools. A wider suite of risk management tools would address the needs of a larger pool
of investors, which would in turn facilitate more investments into China’s capital markets.
1 4     To support the Belt and Road Initiative, there is room for Shanghai and Singapore
financial  institutions  to  develop  a  comprehensive  financial  architecture  to  support  the
wide range of financial needs related to the initiative. 
a. First, both can work together to encourage greater use of capital markets and direct
financing  channels. To  incentivise  the  use  of  bond  markets  for  financing  purposes,  MAS
introduced  the Asian  Bond  Grant  Scheme  in  Nov  2016,  for  first-time Asian  bond  issuers.  To
make  it  more  attractive  to  tap  international  bond  markets,  the  scheme  offsets  up  to  50%  of
issuance  costs  arising  from  engaging  related  legal,  arrangement  and  credit  rating  services.
Shanghai  and  Singapore  financial  institutions  can  work  together  to  encourage  Chinese
corporates to leverage the scheme and access direct financing for their BRI projects overseas.
b. Second, the BRI also presents a good opportunity for promoting sustainable financing,
given  the  potential  negative  environmental  impact  from  unsustainable  forms  of  infrastructure
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
development. China leapfrogged into top position as the largest issuer of green bonds globally in
2016 . There is much that Singapore can learn from. To encourage green bond issuances, MAS
introduced the Green Bond Grant Scheme in March of this year to offset the costs of external
reviews  required  for  issuing  sustainability-oriented  bonds.  Together,  Shanghai  and  Singapore
can  grow  the  global  green  bond  market  and  play  important  roles  in  furthering  sustainable
financing.
c . Third,  there  is  also  room  for  Shanghai  and  Singapore  insurers  to  provide  better
insurance  coverage  of  BRI  projects. BRI  projects  can  leverage  insurance  pools  or
consortiums  to  manage  risk  exposures  of  large-scale  infrastructure  projects.  Shanghai  and
Singapore insurers can participate in regional insurance pools to provide more comprehensive
coverage  for  a  wider  range  of  risks,  while  introducing  new  projects  that  would  enhance  the
profitability of these insurance pools.
5     In  the  FinTech  space,  Shanghai  and  Singapore  can  collaborate  in  creating  a
1
conducive  eco-system  for  FinTech  companies  and  start-ups. The  need  for  collaboration
arises  from  the  fact  that  technology  companies  are  dynamic  and  continually  looking  to
internationalize  their  businesses.  For  example,  CXA  Group,  a  health  technology  start-up
established in Singapore, is expanding its services to China and is planning to partner Shanghai
Zhongheng  Insurance  Brokers  for  its  China  expansion.  There  is  scope  for  collaboration  to
enhance our mutual understanding of new business models and assist in negotiating regulatory
hurdles for these companies.
16          One  important  aspect  of  enhancing  the  eco-system  is  the  enrichment  of  the  range  of
financing opportunities for FinTech companies. Venture capital (VC) managers are an essential
component of the start-up eco-system, providing capital as well as expertise to start-ups and
2
early growth businesses. China already has the largest concentration of VC funding globally .
Singapore  also  hopes  to  create  a  conducive  environment  for  VCs  by  simplifying  the  approval
process and regulatory regime for VC managers. At the same time, we hope to expand the range
of funding options to cater to the varied needs of companies at different stages of development.
17     Finally, there is also room to deepen information and knowledge exchange between
Shanghai and Singapore industry participants. To this end, MAS and the Shanghai Financial
Services Office are discussing a customised training programme to encourage mutual exchange
between financial sector players. Through such exchanges, industry participants can get a better
understanding of each other’s markets and enhance their knowledge of specialized topics.
18         And  this  marks  only  the  beginning  of  our  long-term  relationship.  We  hope  that  such
exchanges would pave the way for many opportunities for meaningful collaboration between both
cities,  resulting  in  synergistic  outcomes  that  will  elevate  both  cities  through  the  new  financial
world order. Expressing this aspiration in mandarin: 新沪友谊深, 共创新思路.
19     These are some thoughts for everyone to consider. I am sure our strong panel of speakers
will provide even greater insights during the discussions later. I wish you a fruitful day ahead at
the forum.
1
2
China accounted for 39% of global issuance in the year, with USD 36.2bn (RMB 238bn) in labelled green bonds
issued.
China accounted for more than half of all fintech investments globally in 2016, specifically in terms of venture
capital.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
