  Remarks by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Managing Capital Flows: Challenges for Developing Economies Conference 
   Livingstone, Zambia  
5 May 2017 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Let me start by thanking the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for inviting the South African 
Reserve Bank to be a part of this conference – and in these rather spectacular and splendid 
surroundings. As many of you will know, the Victoria Falls next to us were declared one of 
the seven natural wonders of the world. Luckily, the issues we have been asked to address 
today do not leave us at the mercy of nature, but are rather about the choices we need to 
make to ensure that we harness the good that comes with international capital flows while 
managing the risk of damage that they admittedly may cause under certain circumstances. 
 1. Introduction 
 In this session, we have been asked to provide some concrete advice to policymakers in 
light  of  what  has  been  discussed  during  the  course  of  the  day.  When  I  read  this,  I  was 
reminded  of  an  old  Zambian  saying:  “One  who  enters  the  forest  does  not  listen  to  the 
breaking of twigs in the bush.” This speaks to remaining focused on one’s particular task 
despite what one may see or hear in the process of the quest. Unfortunately, when it comes 
to providing advice on managing capital flows, one tends to hear many twigs breaking. This 
is  a  complicated  task.  Any  piece  of  advice  cannot  be  based  on  generalisations  or 
extrapolations as country-specific factors and features of the financial system, as well as the 
time at which measures are considered, are of critical importance.  
   1 
  
 
In my remarks today, rather than dispensing concrete advice on liberalisation and volatility 
management,  I  will  restrict  myself  to  making  some  general  observations  on  capital  flow 
management,  followed  by  sharing  experiences  from  South  Africa.  I  will  leave  it  to  you  to 
judge which of our experiences could be useful in certain environments and which should 
rather be avoided. What will be successful or effective will be highly dependent on country-
specific circumstances, although we should  always be cognisant of the potential spillover 
effects of our individual and collective actions.  
 2. Views on the liberalisation of capital flows  
 It  is  an  undisputed  fact  that  most  countries  have  made  impressive  progress  in  the 
liberalisation  of  their  capital  flows  in  order  to  reap  the  benefits  of  capital  inflows  while 
remaining mindful of the unintended consequences of these inflows. According to the IMF 
publication titled Capital flows: review of experience with the institutional view, published in 
December  2016,  the  average  number  of  easing  measures  introduced between 2013  and 
2016  amounted  to  851,  with  almost  60%  representing  easing  by  emerging  market 
economies.  China,  Colombia,  India,  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  South  Africa  and  Thailand 
introduced  about  127  easing  measures.  During  the  same  period,  only  233  tightening 
measures were introduced, with more than half representing emerging market economies. 
In order to rationalise this behaviour, it is perhaps at this point worth recapping some benefits 
of capital flows.  
 Countries  with  a  liberalised  capital  account  tend  to  be  able  to  tap  into  foreign  savings  to 
invest in infrastructural projects that contribute to sustainable domestic employment creation 
and generate income to service the underlying debt. The other benefit relates to the typically 
ensuing  technology  transfer  and  financial  market  development  and  innovation  that  assist 
countries 
in 
increasing 
the  absorption  capacity  of 
flows  without  distorting 
the 
macroeconomic fundamentals. Needless to say, opening a country’s capital account also 
increases its vulnerability to the changing conditions in global financial markets.  
 The most fundamental and intricate rule about the liberalisation of the capital account is that 
the process has to be well thought through in terms of timing and sequencing in order to 
minimise  costs  and  unintended  consequences.  The  manner  in  which  these  controls  are 
eased  should  be  tailored  to  a  country’s  specific  circumstances  and  economic  objectives. 
 2 
 
 
Careful planning ensures that macroeconomic stability is maintained over time and that the 
 benefits outweigh the costs.  
 The IMF has recommended a phased approach to capital flow liberalisation, prioritising the 
liberalisation of stable flows such as foreign direct investment, which are closely correlated 
with growth, before more volatile and short-term portfolio flows. It further recommends that 
the relaxation of controls on capital inflows be prioritised before capital outflows.  
 As  Napoleon  Bonaparte  once  said:  “Forethought  we  may  have,  undoubtedly,  but  not 
foresight.”  Some  countries  which  may  have  planned  the  process  of  capital  account 
liberalisation  and  subsequently  met  some  macroeconomic  preconditions  to  liberalisation 
(like  strong  and  stable  growth,  low  inflation, and high  levels  of foreign  reserves)  might  in 
retrospect  discover  that  they  have  liberalised  prematurely  or  too  rapidly.  While  the 
liberalisation of the capital account is generally associated with the abolishing of capital flows 
measures that confine capital mobility, the reimposition of temporary controls in instances 
where  the  openness  was  prematurely  or  too  rapidly  undertaken  or  posed  a  risk  to 
macroeconomic and/or financial stability may be justified. If a country has liberalised at too 
fast a pace than its economy was able to handle, temporary and limited measures may be 
effective  in  providing  some  stability  until  macroeconomic  adjustments  and  policies  have 
created, once again, a more suitable environment that can support the free movement of 
capital. 
 As  stated  earlier  and  according  to  the  institutional  view  of  the  IMF,  it  is  permissible  to 
reimpose capital flow measures on a temporary basis when the excessive flows pose a risk 
to  the  macroeconomic  and/or  financial  stability  of  the  country.  More  so,  the  Code  of 
Liberalisation  of  Capital  Movements  of  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development  (OECD),  established  in  1961  and  currently  under  review,  provides  an 
established  process  of  international  dialogue  and  cooperation  with  regard  to  the 
management  of  capital  flows.  In  addition,  the  Code  serves  as  the  platform  for  countries 
adhering  to  it  to  explain  their  policies  on  capital  controls  and  raise  questions  about  the 
policies of others.  
 Ideally, one would prefer to avoid a situation where capital flow measures are reimposed. 
However,  it  would  be  important  to  accept  the  burden  of  explaining  rather  than  putting 
financial systems and economies at risk for fear of being accused of having committed policy 
 3 
  
 
mistakes. Ongoing engagement and collaboration to stay abreast  of the developments in 
the  capital  liberalisation  of  other  countries,  including  exchanging  views  and  sharing 
experiences at conferences such as this one, is necessary to both avoid the need to possibly 
reimpose capital flow measures and be better prepared should the need to reimpose arise. 
To  further  the  international  debate  on  understanding  and  managing  capital  flows  better, 
including the macroprudential tools that have a capital flow intent, the G201 re-established 
in 2016 the International Financial Architecture Working Group  which is in the process of 
compiling a report on its work for the G20 Hamburg Summit scheduled for July this year.  
 3. The case of South Africa 
 The  administration  of  exchange  controls  is  a  function  delegated  to  the  South  African 
Reserve  Bank  by  the  Minister  of  Finance.  South  Africa  has  progressively  liberalised  its 
exchange control framework since 1994, removing all restrictions on the capital flows of non-
residents.  These  initiatives  were  undertaken  with  the  explicit  objective  of  attracting 
investment into South Africa. As a result of this predetermined approach, South Africa has 
thus far never found itself having to reimpose capital controls but has instead endeavoured 
to  minimise  the  barriers  on  residents,  enabling  domestic  firms  to  expand  internationally, 
particularly into Africa. 
 In South Africa, the sequencing of liberalising controls by type of flow was generally broad-
based for both inward and outward flows. The country does not have restrictions on inward 
capital flows and these inflows have thus far been effective in adequately financing the deficit 
on  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments.  The  country’s  reliance  on  portfolio 
inflows makes it difficult to impose measures that may dry up this source of funding.  
 Regarding  outward  capital  flows,  a  phased  as  opposed  to  a  ‘big  bang’  approach  was 
adopted  to  ensure  that  financial  stability  was  maintained.  The  sequencing  started  with 
current account transactions, followed by removing controls on non-residents capital flow, 
direct  foreign  investments  by  South  African  corporates,  and  finally  allowing  for  the 
diversification  of  the  portfolios  of  institutional  investors.  This  approach  was  followed  also 
because  of  the  large  amount  of  domestic  savings  after  years  of  tightening.  Although 
prudential limits to regulate the foreign exposure of domestic institutional investors still exist, 
                                            
1 Group of Twenty 
 4 
 
 
they have a built-in stabilising effect, such that as the rand depreciates, the institutions closer 
to their limit will breach the threshold and will over time be required to repatriate the funds. 
  As the only source of knowledge is experience, allow me at this point to share our use of 
the  policy  toolkit  for  managing  capital  flows.  The  policy  response  to  capital  flows  is 
embedded in maintaining macroeconomic policy discipline and strengthening the depth and 
regulation  of  financial  markets.  The  flexible  exchange  rate  continues  to  act  as  a  shock 
absorber, where the currency is allowed to strengthen if it is not deemed overvalued relative 
to the fundamentals or to weaken if it is not deemed undervalued. In a nutshell, South Africa 
has a relatively hands-off approach to managing capital inflows while monetary policy is not 
focused  on  the  exchange  rate  but  rather  on  the  possible  inflationary  implications  of 
exchange  rate  changes.  However,  during  periods  of  sustained  inflows,  the  authorities 
accumulated  foreign  exchange  reserves,  without  in  any  way  seeking  to  influence  the 
exchange rate towards a particular level or range. 
 During  periods  of  large  capital  outflows,  such  as  in  the  final  quarter  of  2008,  the  South 
African Reserve authorities deemed it inappropriate to impose capital control measures on 
outflows, for the following reasons: 
  According  to  the  2016  results  of  the  triennial  survey  conducted  by  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, about two thirds of rand trading occurs in offshore markets. 
Any  domestic  capital  flow  restrictions  will  therefore  have  little  to  no  impact  on  this 
trading but could rather lead to an increase in offshore trading.  
        The risk of the prevailing domestic financial stability being disturbed if the exchange 
rate  were  to  depreciate  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  both  the  private  sector  and 
government borrow mainly in the local currency. 
There  is  no  major  mismatch  between  South  African  banks’  foreign  assets  and 
liabilities, which are both moderate relative to the size of their total balance sheets.  
The low level of foreign currency-denominated indebtedness protects balance sheets 
as it limits the impact of sudden stops on the accessibility of foreign liabilities. Large 
corporates also adopt strategies, such as hedging, to manage exchange rate volatility.  
5 
 South  Africa 
recorded  a  positive  net 
international 
investment  position 
in 
September 2015, the first time on record (since 1956). The national balance sheet acts 
as a stabilising mechanism as a weaker exchange rate increases the value of South 
Africa’s foreign assets.  
  South Africa’s view on capital account liberalisation and capital flow management is aligned 
with the institutional view of the IMF. As an enhanced engagement member of the OECD 
Advisory  Task  Force  Committee  (ATFC)  with  no  voting  rights,  the  country  has been fully 
engaged in the ongoing review of the OECD Code. Continued cooperation between the IMF 
and the OECD remains crucial for addressing any perception that countries might receive 
seemingly conflicting signals regarding the appropriateness of capital flow measures, and is 
helpful  in  enhancing  the  consistency  between  the  IMF’s  institutional  view  and  OECD 
approaches with the G20 Coherent Conclusions for the Management of Capital Flows. This 
cooperation  is  also  crucial  for  ensuring  that  the  approaches  by  various  international 
organisations  do  not  give  rise  to  any  conflicting  policy  advice.  Participation  in  the  ATFC 
affords South Africa an opportunity to learn about the effective use of capital flow measures 
from a full description of the experiences of other countries. 
 The  work  on  capital  flow  management  by  the  IMF  and  the  OECD  is  also  crucial  for  the 
macroprudential  framework  and  the  policy  tools  that  are  being  developed  by  the  South 
African  Reserve  Bank.  The  constant updating  on  the  developmental  work  on  capital flow 
management,  which  forms  part  of  the  G20  agenda  on  the  reform  of  the  international 
monetary system, under the International Financial Architecture Working Group, is crucial 
in  the  construction  of  a  macroprudential  framework  and  policy  tools  currently  under 
consideration by the South African Reserve Bank. 
 In addition to reviewing its capital flow measures framework, South Africa is continuously 
pursuing efforts to further modernise its regulatory framework through reforms in its financial 
regulatory and supervisory architecture. In 2016, the South African Reserve Bank published, 
as part of its financial stability mandate, a proposed macroprudential policy framework for 
the South African financial system and its regulated entities. Although this macroprudential 
framework is currently silent on capital flow measures that have a macroprudential intent, 
the  inclusion  of  capital  flow  measures  in  South  Africa’s  macroprudential  framework  is  an 
integral  part  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  current  research  agenda.  While 
acknowledging  the  role  of  foreign  savings  in  financing  domestic  demand,  it  is  of  utmost 
 6 
  
 
importance to develop a toolkit of macroprudential measures required to deal with credit and 
asset price cycles driven by global capital flows. I must, however, stress that the prudent 
way  of  dealing  with  volatile  capital  flows  is  to  maintain  disciplined  macroeconomic  and 
countercyclical  policies  during  periods  of  inflows  to  ensure  that  the  economy  is  resilient 
should outflows occur.  
 In a broader context, it is important for source countries of capital flows to be cognisant of 
the role and effect of their measures on the policies of recipient countries. Improved global 
policy  coordination  will  help  to  mitigate  the  unintended  spillovers  from  country-specific 
policies and will add stability to and improve efficiency in the global financial system.  
 In summary, South Africa has made remarkable strides in liberalising capital controls since 
1994,  especially  on  non-resident  investors.  Exchange  control  restrictions  on  foreign 
investment by private individual residents in South Africa have been progressively relaxed 
since 1997, such that the current limits are no longer a constraint. It is estimated that by now 
less than 3% of individuals are ‘somewhat constrained’ by the remaining exchange controls. 
Limits on outward foreign direct investments for corporates have also been abolished. And 
as  a  step  towards  prudential  regulations,  institutional  investors  are  permitted  to  invest 
abroad, subject to a foreign exposure asset limit (currently 25% or 35% depending on the 
type of institutional investor).  
 With  every  experience  there  is a  lesson  to be  learnt;  the  progressive  liberalisation  of the 
exchange controls came at the cost of losing key information on cross-border flows that is 
crucial  for  macroeconomic  policy  decisions.  It  was  at  this  point  that  the  authorities 
strengthened  the  cross-border  system  for  monitoring  and  reporting.  As  the  process  of 
applying  for  approval  of  foreign  exchange  was  largely  eliminated,  authorities  were  also 
required to strengthen regulatory, supervisory, inspection and monitoring roles to prevent 
the  illegal  export  of  capital.  The  illicit  flow  of  capital  is  currently  a  big  challenge  for  most 
countries that have liberalised capital control measures, but that is a topic for another day. 
   7 
 
 
4. Conclusion 
  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  the  IMF’s  views  on  the  importance  of  maintaining 
sound  policies  and  strong  frameworks,  including  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate 
flexibility, as the first line of defence against excessive capital flows. Robust macroprudential 
measures  as  well  as  capital  flow  management  measures  can  serve  as  a  supplementary 
defence mechanism, where warranted. The macroeconomic environment should encourage 
domestic  savings  and  the  deepening  of  financial  markets  so  that  capital  flows  can  be 
effectively absorbed and channelled towards productive investment.  
 The work on capital flow management by the IMF and the OECD, which forms part of the 
G20  agenda  on  the  reform  of  the  international  monetary  system,  under  the  International 
Financial  Architecture  Working  Group,  is  crucial  in  the  construction  of  a  macroprudential 
framework and policy tools currently under consideration by various countries. Therefore, a 
more  consistent  global  approach  to  capital  flow  management  issues  among  various 
international frameworks and agreements should be facilitated, including addressing data 
gaps. We  therefore  welcome  and  support  the  current  collaboration  between the  IMF,  the 
OECD, the G20 and the Bank for International Settlements in this area.  
 Thank you. 
   8 
