REMARKS BY MR. JAVIER GUZMÁN CALAFELL, DEPUTY GOVERNOR AT THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO,  ON  “MONETARY  POLICY  AMID  VOLATILE  CAPITAL 
FLOWS”.  SCOTIABANK  GLOBAL  CENTRAL  BANK  &  PUBLIC  INSTITUTIONS 
CONFERENCE. Miami, April 6th, 2017.1 
 First of all let me say that I am very glad to participate in this Conference. My 
sincere  thanks  to  Scotiabank  and  especially  to  Alejandro  García  for  the 
invitation. 
The  implementation  of  monetary  policy  under  volatile  capital  flows  has  for 
long  been  a  challenging  issue  for  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs). 
Naturally, with globalization and the consequent increased integration of the 
world economy, the difficulties have become more acute.  As is well known, 
the  combination  of  a  number  of  factors,  including  domestic  financial 
liberalization,  a  widespread  removal  of  cross-border  controls,  and  the 
development of financial technology, has brought about a dramatic expansion 
of international financial transactions in recent decades. 
But the complexities of these trends have been substantially accentuated as a 
result  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  The  pressures  resulting  from  the  crisis 
forced the central banks of many advanced economies (AEs) to reduce short-
term interest rates to very low, even negative levels, which resulted in turn in 
historically low figures for long-term rates. This led to an aggressive search for 
yield  and  a  boost  to  capital  flows  towards  EMEs,  giving  as  a  result 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  challenges  for  these  countries. 
                                                           
1 The opinions and views expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole.  
1 
 Subsequently, as the situation has begun to improve in the AEs, and especially 
in  the  United  States,  EMEs  have  faced  the  need  to  cope  with  the  opposite 
challenge,  i.e.  a  tightening  of  external  financial  conditions  and  episodes  of 
capital outflows, although in a context of wide swings, with the corresponding 
stresses  on  domestic  and  external  stability.  The  situation  has  been  further 
complicated  by  divergent  monetary  positions  among  the  main  AEs  and  by 
periodic bursts of turbulence. 
Naturally, the challenges deriving from the global financial crisis do not end 
here. On the one hand, it has had long-term effects on the world economy, 
including a lower rate of potential growth, a decline in commodity prices, and 
a  substantial  increase  in  global  uncertainty,  among  others,  that  have 
significantly  deteriorated  the  external  environment  faced  by  EMEs.  On  the 
other hand, the costs that have accompanied the crisis have  underpinned a 
backlash  against  globalization,  which  is  threatening  to  undermine  the 
economic progress achieved over many decades of efforts. 
At the same time, the crisis has given rise to deep question marks about our 
understanding of economics, in general, and of monetary policy in particular. 
For instance, it has become increasingly evident that while the possibility of 
implementing an independent monetary policy is greater under exchange rate 
flexibility, floating implies costs that set limits on the degree of independence 
a central bank can enjoy.  Furthermore, doubts have emerged regarding the 
adequate monetary policy framework under current circumstances, the merits 
of  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  role  to  be  played  by 
monetary policy in the preservation of financial stability, and the use of capital 
 2 
controls as a means  to counter the adverse  effects of volatile capital flows, 
among others.  
How has monetary policy in Mexico responded to these challenges? 
At  present,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  Mexico  rests  on  four 
pillars.  
First, an independent central bank with the mandate to focus on achieving a 
low and stable rate of inflation. Both features, as well as the key provision that 
no authority will be able to order the Banco de México to provide financing, 
are stipulated at the constitutional level.   
Second, an inflation targeting regime, with a specific target for headline CPI 
annual inflation of 3 percent within a variability interval of +/- 1 percent, and 
where convergence to the target is sought at the lowest possible cost in terms 
of economic activity.  
Third, a commitment with transparency and clear communication of actions 
and goals of the Central Bank. 
Fourth, awareness that under a situation of high uncertainty, there are clear 
merits  of  an  approach  emphasizing  prudence  and  readiness  to  act  on  a 
preventive basis whenever this is considered convenient.  
Naturally, an efficient achievement of the macroeconomic objectives requires 
a balanced policy approach.  It may be useful to note, for instance,  that the 
global financial crisis has evidenced the costs derived from a policy response 
that relies excessively on monetary policy. In the case of Mexico, two elements 
are central in this regard:  
 3 
  The  implementation  of  measures  aimed  at  fostering  an  orderly 
functioning  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  a  context  of  sharp 
depreciation and high volatility of the peso-dollar rate. With the support 
of a comfortable level of international reserves and a Flexible Credit Line 
with the IMF, actions taken by the Foreign Exchange Commission2 have 
varied according to circumstances, and have included pre-announced or 
sporadic  discretionary  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market 
and,  more  recently,  the  introduction  of  a  new  mechanism  for  the 
hedging of foreign exchange risk for an amount of up to USD 20 billion, 
which in fact does not imply the use of international reserves. The latter 
has  contributed  to  the  significant  appreciation  shown  by  the  peso  in 
recent weeks. 
 It  is  important  to  note  that  this  approach  is  fully  consistent  with  a 
flexible exchange rate regime that plays a key role as a shock absorber, 
which operates under the premise that the level of the equilibrium real 
rate must be determined by market forces, and where the value of the 
domestic currency is supported mainly by economic fundamentals.  
   Against the background of an increase in public debt as a share of GDP, 
a major fiscal adjustment has been announced for 2017 and subsequent 
years. Indeed, the strict implementation of these measures should allow 
                                                           
2 Integrated by representatives of the Banco de México and the Secretaría de Hacienda y Crédito Público.  
4 
 more flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy and, therefore, a more 
efficient economic adjustment to an adverse external environment.  
The role of monetary policy in preserving or restoring financial stability is  a 
subject  of  much  debate.  Macroeconomic  stability  is  a  necessary  although 
insufficient condition for financial stability, and of course monetary policy is a 
key element in this regard. But the role of monetary policy beyond this is not 
always clear. In my opinion, although there may be instances where monetary 
policy actions can be usefully steered towards financial stability, frequently its 
effects on the broader economy beyond the financial sector will make it a blunt 
and  inefficient  tool.  For  this  reason,  it  will  often  be  better  to  rely  on  the 
implementation, with the involvement of all the corresponding authorities, of 
macroprudential policy measures specifically tailored to fend off risks to the 
stability  of  the  financial  system,  and  which  in  general  do  not  have 
consequences beyond their intended purpose. It should be noted, on the other 
hand, that financial stability is a complex objective that will many times require 
coordinated actions in several fronts, including, in addition to macroprudential 
instruments, fiscal, monetary and microprudential policy tools. The Financial 
System  Stability  Council  (CESF),  created  in  Mexico  in  mid-2010,  and  which 
encompasses  all  the  authorities  in  charge  of  macroeconomic  policy,  and 
financial regulation and supervision, represents an effort in this direction 
Naturally, the pernicious implications of volatile international capital flows on 
macroeconomic and financial stability are hard to avoid. In this context, the 
possible implementation of measures to “manage” the flows of capital to and 
from  an  economy  has  been  gaining  adherents.  However,  the  distortions 
introduced by capital controls are likely to offset any potential benefits, and 
5 
 markets,  one  way  or  another,  always  find  a  way  to  circumvent  them. 
Consequently, this has not been considered a sensible course of action in the 
Mexican case, and the country remains one of the most open to capital flows 
among emerging market economies.   
The  approach  I  just  described  has  allowed  a  flexible  implementation  of 
monetary policy in Mexico with satisfactory results. Let me illustrate this with 
the experience of recent years.  
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, as in other EMEs, significant 
downward pressures on economic activity emerged in Mexico. As a result, 
the Central Bank embarked on an aggressive cycle of cuts to the policy rate, 
which during the six-month period from January to July 2009 declined by 
nearly 400 basis points. External developments also played an important role 
in this outcome. In particular, the Federal Reserve’s lowered the target for 
the federal funds rate by about 500 basis points over the 15 months between 
September 2007 and December 2008.  
 Subsequently,  following  a  relatively  prolonged  period  with  an  unchanged 
monetary  policy  stance,  the  reference  rate  in  Mexico  was  reduced  by  an 
additional  150  basis  points  between  March  2013  and  June  2014.  The 
combination  of  a  negative  output  gap,  easy  external  financing  conditions3 
(barring  the  “taper  tantrum”  episode  of  mid-2013)  and  a  generally  stable 
exchange rate, allowed the simultaneous achievement of record-low inflation 
                                                           
3 The Federal Reserve adhered during most of this period to an accommodative monetary policy stance, as 
the target for the federal funds rate remained in the 0-0.25% range from December 2008 to December 
2015, and several rounds of quantitative easing measures were implemented in this lapse.  
6 
 and policy interest rates. In particular, the reference rate remained constant 
at its lowest historical level of 3 percent for slightly over a year and a half, while 
overall inflation fell below the 3 percent target.4 
More recently, with the beginning of the normalization of interest rates in the 
United States in December 2015, an upward trend in interest rates in Mexico 
has  started.  This  has  responded  to  a  combination  of  factors,  including  of 
course the higher federal funds rate, but also  a preventive response by the 
Banco  de  México  during  2016  to  the  potential  impact  of  the  significant 
depreciation of the peso on domestic prices and, since early this year, the need 
to  avoid  second  round  effects  from  an  inflation  spike  deriving  from  the 
liberalization  of  energy  prices,  an  adjustment  of  the  minimum  wage  and  a 
more evident pass-through from the exchange rate to prices.5 Thus, from late 
2015 to March 2017, the reference rate has been increased on 8 occasions, to 
a level of 6.5 percent.  
The monetary policy framework adopted in Mexico in recent years has been 
fundamental  to  preserve  macroeconomic  stability  in  a  context  of  highly 
volatile capital flows and severe external shocks, such as the sharp decline in 
oil  prices,  bouts  of  uncertainty  in  international  financial  markets  linked  to 
geopolitical or other factors, the increase in interest rates in the United States 
and the results of the electoral process in that country. Furthermore, together 
with micro- and macroprudential measures implemented over the course of 
many  years,  it  has  contributed  to  the  preservation  of  financial  stability. 
                                                           
4 The annual rate of growth of the CPI recorded figures below 3 percent during the period May 2015-
September 2016. 
5 Headline inflation, as measured by the CPI, increased to 5.29 percent at annual rate in the first fortnight of 
March 2017. 
7 
 Naturally, many challenges remain. The most evident one in the short term is 
to ensure that the recent increase in inflation does not affect  medium- and 
long-term  inflation  expectations  and  the  process  of  price  formation  in  the 
economy. In this respect, it is worth to note that the fact that the impact of 
the  most  recent  shocks  on  prices  has  concentrated  mostly  on  short-term 
inflation expectations, with a sharp downturn in price growth anticipated since 
early  2018,  attests  to  the  merits  of  the  actions  undertaken  thus  far  and  in 
general to the credibility of monetary policy. On the other hand, it is evident 
that monetary policy in Mexico will continue to be implemented under very 
uncertain and changing conditions. Therefore, the Central Bank will need to be 
ready to adapt the monetary policy stance as needed to ensure an efficient 
accomplishment of its mandate.  
   8 
