Stephen  S  Poloz:  Opening  statement  before  the  Standing  Senate
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 13 April 2017.
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are pleased to be back before you today to discuss the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
which we published yesterday.
At  the  time  of  our  last  appearance  in  October,  I  spoke  about  the  factors  that  caused  us  to
downgrade our outlook for the Canadian economy. Six months later, I’m pleased to say that I can
discuss the factors that have led us to upgrade our forecast.
For some time, we have been talking about how the oil price shock that began in 2014 set in
motion  a  complex  series  of  adjustments  throughout  the  economy,  including  a  significant
restructuring in the oil and gas sector. What we are seeing now is that energy-related activity has
stopped declining and is transitioning to a new level that is commensurate with the current level
of oil prices.
Because that large negative force is now essentially past, it is no longer masking the sources of
strength that have been at work for some time, particularly the growth in output and employment
that is being driven by the service sector. The expansion over the past six months has exceeded
our earlier forecasts, and we have revised up our outlook for average annual growth in 2017 to a
bit over 2 1/2 per cent, one-half percentage point greater than we projected in the January MPR.
We project growth of just under 2 per cent in 2018 and 2019.
A crucial question for the Bank now is whether the stronger economic data that we have been
seeing are signalling increasing momentum. Some of the strength is coming from factors that
are unlikely to continue at the same pace. For example, the very strong growth in consumption in
the first quarter was supported by a temporary boost from the Canada Child Benefit. Housing
activity has also been stronger than expected. While we have incorporated some of this strength
in a higher profile for residential investment, we still anticipate slowing over the projection horizon.
The  current  pace  of  activity  in  the  Greater  Toronto  Area  (GTA)  and  parts  of  the  Golden
Horseshoe region is unlikely to be sustainable, given fundamentals. House price growth in the
GTA has accelerated sharply in recent months, suggesting that speculative forces are at work.
In terms of the labour market, recent data have been mixed. While job growth has certainly been
firm, both wages and unit labour costs have grown only slowly. The data suggest that material
slack remains in the Canadian labour market, in contrast with the US labour market, which is
close to full employment.
At  the  same  time,  Canadian  exports  and  business  spending  are  still  weaker  than  you  would
expect to see at this stage of the business cycle. Companies are telling us that while they plan to
raise  spending,  the  planned  increases  are  modest,  or  tied  to  maintenance,  rather  than
expansion. In short, the economy is not yet firing on all cylinders.
In addition, Canadian companies are dealing with heightened levels of uncertainty related to US
tax  and  trade  policies.  We  still  do  not  know  what  tax  changes  are  coming,  or  when. And  the
range of potential trade measures under discussion is even wider now than it was in January. It
includes a border-adjustment tax, increased tariffs aimed at specific industries or countries, non-
tariff barriers and even broader, multilateral measures. We do not know which of these will be
enacted;  their  timing  is  uncertain;  and  each  would  affect  the  global  and  Canadian  economies
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
through a different, complex set of channels. With all of this uncertainty, we cannot reliably model
the impact of changes to US trade policy. Instead, we have built in an extra degree of caution in
our forecast for exports and investment relative to our January projection.
Total inflation has been close to 2 per cent and is expected to dip to about 1.7 per cent in the
middle of the year before returning to near its target. However, our core inflation measures are all
in the lower half of the target band and have been trending downward. This supports the view that
the  economy  continues  to  have  significant  excess  capacity.  Our  current  base-case  forecast
calls for the Canadian economy to absorb its excess capacity sometime in the first half of 2018,
which is a bit sooner than we projected three months ago.
We are certainly happy to see the recent strength in the economic data and want to see more of
it in order to be confident that growth is on a solid footing. We judge that the economy still has
material room to grow. And we remain mindful that significant uncertainty continues to weigh on
the outlook.
Given  all  of  this,  we  judged  that  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  still  appropriate  and
maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1/2 per cent.
With that, Mr. Chairman, Senior Deputy Wilkins and I would be happy to answer questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
