Yves Mersch: 2017 - a decisive year for innovative retail payment
services
Keynote speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank,  at  the  French  Payments  Committee  conference  on  "Technological  innovations  in
payments and beyond", Bank of France, Paris, 6 January 2017.
Introduction
 Between  Christmas  and  New  Year,  many  TV  programmes  and  magazines  looked  back  at
events, cultural and political, that shaped 2016. Focusing on the field of payments innovation, I
will also begin with a very short review of the events of last year. But the main part of my speech
will be dedicated to looking ahead. In particular, I will discuss why 2017 is going to be a decisive
year for the success of innovative retail payments services in Europe.
In 2016 the foundations were laid for pan-European innovative payment solutions. In the scheme
layer, the European Payments Council (EPC) finalised the framework for pan-European instant
payment  solutions.  The 
the  Europe-wide
implementation of instant credit transfers, as well as the launch pad for other innovative payment
solutions, such as person-to-person mobile payments. Fostered by the Euro Retail Payments
Board (ERPB), work is under way not only on instant payments and mobile payments, but also
payment initiation services and e-invoicing, among other things.
instant  payment  scheme 
the  basis 
for 
is 
In the clearing layer, (some) automated clearing houses (ACHs) agreed and committed to a pan-
European  approach  for  clearing  instant  payments  in  euro.  This  approach  consists  of  (i)
harmonised risk management, (ii) a uniform settlement procedure in TARGET2 and (iii) fair and
open access policies to facilitate interoperability.
In the settlement layer, the Eurosystem launched an investigation into providing a pan-European
instant payment settlement service in central bank money.
With these foundations in place, 2017 will see decisive action in all three layers. First, payment
service  providers  will  have  to  deliver  instant  payment  solutions  to  the  end  users.
Second, most ACHs will be ready to launch their instant payment clearing systems. And
last but not least, the Eurosystem will decide on whether or not to provide a pan-European
instant payment settlement service in central bank money to payment service providers.
I would now like to look more closely at two specific areas of action:
1.  how the Eurosystem – in its role as catalyst – will continue to drive European retail payment
integration by fostering the provision of pan-European instant payment solutions, person-to-
person mobile payment solutions and payment initiation services by the industry in 2017;
2.  how the Eurosystem – in its role as operator – could advance the retail payments market by
offering instant payment settlement services in central bank money.
1. Fostering European retail payments integration – deliverables the Eurosystem expects
from payment service providers in 2017
For the Eurosystem, a major challenge of digitalisation in the payments industry is ensuring that
the  introduction  of  innovative  payment  solutions  does  not  (re)introduce  fragmentation  into  the
European  market.  It  is  understandable  that,  initially,  most  innovative  retail  payment  solutions
delivered by the industry tend to focus on national markets. However, I want to be very clear here
and  emphasise  that innovative  solutions  that  do  not  have  the  potential  to  extend  their
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
reach at pan-European level are not in line with the expectations of the Eurosystem and
the goals of the Single Market.
The three most important areas for improving the user experience in retail payments are instant
payments, (person-to-person) mobile payments and payment initiation services. In conjunction
with the European legislator and the ERPB, the Eurosystem, in its role as catalyst, fosters pan-
European developments in all three areas.
(1) Instant payments
In  line  with  the  expectations  of  the  ERPB,  the  Eurosystem  encourages  payment  service
providers  to  make  instant  payment  solutions  in  euro  available  to  end  users  at  a  pan-
European level from November 2017.
(2) (Person-to-person) mobile payments
Aligned with the timeline for the implementation of the instant payment scheme, the Eurosystem
expects  the  launch  of  a  standardised  look-up  service  that  allows  (person-to-person)
mobile payments using the mobile phone number of the payee as a proxy for the IBAN.
This  service  should  be  launched  by  the  end  of  2017  and  should  not  be  restricted  to  national
IBANs.
(3) Payment initiation services
In line with the ERPB, the Eurosystem expects the market to work on the definition of a common
set  of  technical,  operational  and  business  requirements  for  the  development  of  an  integrated
market for payment initiation services. These requirements will be based on the provisions of the
Payment Services Directive and the related Regulatory Technical Standards (RTS). They should
become  available  in  2017  so  as  to  leave  sufficient  time  for  the  relevant  market  actors  to
implement them by the time the RTS apply (i.e. towards the end of 2018).
2.  Advancing  the  retail  payments  market  by  offering  instant  payments  settlement
services in central bank money
The provision of innovative retail payment solutions does not depend only on the payment service
providers, but also on the availability of a safe and efficient underlying market infrastructure that
can  process  instant  payments  across  Europe.  Payment  service  providers  should  have  the
choice to either clear their instant payments through ACHs or use a settlement service for instant
payments.
With  regard  to  the  clearing  of  instant  payments,  the  Eurosystem  supports  industry  efforts  to
establish  interoperability  between ACHs.  In  its  catalyst  function,  the  Eurosystem  obtained  the
commitment  of  the  clearing  industry  to  adhere  to  a  number  of  conditions,  facilitating  the
processing  of  instant  payments.  As  operator,  the  Eurosystem  is  enhancing  the  TARGET2
functionalities as relevant to address ACHs’ needs by November 2017. These steps need to be
complemented  by  concrete  interoperability  arrangements  between  ACHs.  In  this  regard,  the
Eurosystem  encourages  the  industry  to  establish  operational  links  between  ACHs  by  the
November 2017 deadline.
With regard to the settlement of instant payments, the Eurosystem is investigating the possibility
of offering a settlement service for instant payments in central bank money. Instant payments
require  gross,  real-time  processing.  The  proposed  settlement  service,  which  is  called  TIPS
(TARGET Instant Payment Settlement), would leverage the pan-European nature of TARGET2 to
offer settlement of instant payments directly and without credit risk.
Three days from now, on 9 January 2017, the Eurosystem will launch a market consultation on
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the user requirements for the centralised settlement service. I would like to take this opportunity
to unveil some of the features the new service could have.
First, TIPS would help participants to comply with the SEPA Instant Credit Transfer (SCT
Inst)  scheme  by  providing  pan-European  reachability.  Common 
functionalities  across
jurisdictions would ensure harmonisation of practices and market integration in the settlement of
instant payments.
Second, participation in TIPS would follow the same criteria as participation in TARGET2. It is
not intended to change the criteria for access to central bank money. Those who do not
have access to central bank money (or those who may not wish to open a TIPS account) may
establish contractual agreements with a TIPS participant to use the participant’s TIPS account
for the settlement of instant payments. They may also be authorised by the participant to instruct
directly on this account.
Third,  it  goes  without  saying  that  TIPS  would  respect  the  principle  of  full  cost  recovery.  It  is
anticipated  that the price per transaction would not exceed 1 euro cent, with the aim of
ultimately reaching a level of around 0.5 euro cent.
Fourth,  market  participants  would  be  able  to connect  to  the  service  via  a  network  service
provider of their choice, as long as this network vendor meets the criteria that the Eurosystem
will establish.
The  Eurosystem  is  committed  to  taking  a  decision  in  June  2017  on  whether  to  develop  the
service. TIPS could commence operations in 2018.
Conclusion
To conclude, we can look forward to 2017 being a year of decisive action for innovation in retail
payments. The main deliverables at the consumer end of the payments chain are pan-European
instant  payment  solutions  and  a  service  for  (person-to-person)  mobile  payments  using  the
mobile  phone  number  as  a  proxy  for  the  IBAN.  In  the  payment  service  provider  domain,  a
common  set  of  technical,  operational  and  business  requirements  for  the  development  of  an
integrated market for payment initiation services is to be developed. In the market infrastructure
domain,  the  Eurosystem  is  committed  to  taking  a  timely  decision  on  whether  to  build  a
settlement  service  for  instant  payments  in  euro  in  central  bank  money,  leveraging  the  pan-
European nature of TARGET2.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
