Jens  Weidmann:  "Green  bond  issuance  and  other  forms  of  low-
carbon finance" - welcome and opening speech
Welcome and opening speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank
and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the OMFIF
Global  Public  Investor  Symposium  on  "Green  bond  issuance  and  other  forms  of  low-carbon
finance", Frankfurt am Main, 13 July 2017.
1. Introduction
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure for me to welcome you all to the Bundesbank.
For those of you who are here for the first time, I would like to mention that this building serves as
our Regional Office in Hesse. Located at the heart of Frankfurt’s financial district and equipped
with  all  the  necessary  facilities,  it  has  become  a  venue  of  choice  for  conferences  and  other
business conventions.
Those  of  you  who  have  been  here  on  a  previous  occasion  may  have  noticed  that  the  artistic
features in this building are all related to Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the famous poet and a
son of this city.
When the building was planned, various artists were explicitly commissioned to depict scenes
from his drama “Faust Part Two". The drama deals with issues such as the creation of paper
money and the consequences of uncontrolled growth in the money supply – issues which are
obviously very much at home in a central bank.
Goethe may have been inspired to tackle these topics by his professional experience as finance
minister of the (highly indebted) duchy of Saxe-Weimar.
A less well-known fact about Goethe is that he was also very interested in meteorology, and even
did some research in this field. His goal was to find a relationship between cloud formation, wind
direction and other weather phenomena.
In contrast to his literary work, his studies were nevertheless widely ignored by the experts in this
field of science.
Climate change and, in particular, man-made climate change was not a topic in Goethe’s time –
neither in natural sciences nor in finance. But I am sure he would have devoted his attention to it
if  it  had  been.  Given  his  financial  expertise,  he  would  certainly  have  been  interested  in  the
question  how  public  investors  can  help  combat  climate  change  and  how  capital  might  be
allocated to low-carbon investments in order to improve overall welfare.
In my welcome remarks I would like to touch upon the G20 policies on green finance and the
promotion of green finance.
2. G20 policies on green finance
Global warming is among the greatest challenges of the 21st century. It affects all regions of the
world. Polar ice shields are melting and the sea level is rising. Extreme weather events like heavy
rainfall or droughts are becoming more frequent. This is why, at the Hamburg summit, all G20
member states but one reaffirmed their strong commitment to the Paris climate agreement and
declared  their  willingness  to  move  swiftly  towards  its  full  implementation  –  acknowledging  the
principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  the  words  of  David  Kennedy,  the  former  Chief  Executive  of  the  British  government’s
Committee on Climate Change: “Global warming threatens the ‘sustainability’ not of life on the
planet, but of the economic and political arrangements people have come to think are natural."
From  an  economist’s  viewpoint,  climate  change  is  inherently  a  public  goods  problem.  The
atmosphere is a global public good, and as always with public goods there are strong free-riding
incentives.
Nations that do not subscribe to the mitigation of carbon emissions can benefit from the efforts of
others. So, even if all nations were to acknowledge human influence on the climate, there is a
risk that too little will happen too late.
And that is the reason why collective action is necessary. The G20 countries account for more
than  80%  of  global  carbon  dioxide  emissions.  Collective  and  decisive  action  by  the  G20
membership  is  therefore  of  the  essence  when  it  comes  to  mitigating  global  warming.
Consequentially,  climate  protection  is  one  of  the  major  topics  of  the  G20.  At  the  Hamburg
Summit  last  weekend,  a  great  deal  of  attention  was  paid  to  climate  issues  including  green
finance.
The G20 understands “green finance” as the financing of investments that provide benefits in the
broader context of environmentally sustainable development. China flagged the issue in the G20
under its presidency last year by establishing the Green Finance Study Group within the Finance
Track.  The  group’s  objective  is  to  enhance  the  capability  of  the  financial  system  to  mobilise
private capital for green or low-carbon investment.
A  “green  economy”  will  require  a  capital-intensive  transition,  with  investments  in  new  skills,
institutions  and  technologies.  While  public  funds  are  important,  they  can  only  provide  a  small
share  of  what  is  required.  This  means  that  private  capital  will  have  to  meet  most  of  these
investment needs.
A  robust  and  coherent  set  of  basic  information  is  always  required  before  taking  sensible
investment decisions. The provision of publicly available data on climate risk and better tools for
investors to use them is therefore a precondition for almost all other steps to follow.
In this context, the Green Finance Study Group was tasked to focus on two themes. First: what
approaches  are  financial  actors  taking  to  identify  and  quantify  environmental  risks,  and  what
analytical tools do they have to assess the financial impact of these risks? In this regard, the
Group has found that many financial institutions encounter difficulties in quantifying environmental
risks in spite of increasing evidence of the potential negative effects on asset values. 
Second:  how  can  publicly  available  environmental  data,  for  instance  on  greenhouse  gas
emissions  or  projections  of  natural  disaster  probabilities,  be  better  used  for  the  purpose  of
financial analysis and to inform decision-making in the financial sector?
A  separate  but  complementary  work  stream  (of  the  G20)  is  the  industry-led  Task  Force  on
Climate-related  Financial  Disclosures  convened  by  the  FSB.  The  Task  Force  developed
recommendations and guidance for helping businesses to disclose climate-related financial risks
and opportunities in the context of their existing disclosure requirements. Their standard aims to
provide the information that investors, lenders and insurance underwriters need to appropriately
assess the sustainability of business models by adequately pricing future risks and opportunities
in a low-carbon economy.
Both the recommendations of the Task Force as well as the 2017 Synthesis Report of the Green
Finance Study Group were presented to the G20 Leaders Summit last week.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. Promoting green finance
While green finance is becoming increasingly important in funding investment, “green bonds” are
still  merely  a  tiny  segment  of  financial  markets.  Less  than  0.2%  of  the  global  bond  market  is
currently  explicitly  designated  as  “green",  which  means  that  the  bond  is  explicitly  issued  to
finance an ecological project.
That  raises  the  question  whether  the  public  sector  should  support  or  even  promote  the
development of the market. As regards the issuance of green bonds, promotional banks like the
German KfW are playing a pioneering role. Such “semi-public” issuance helps to address the
problem of information asymmetries associated with new financial products.
However,  the  public  sector  can  also  support  the  development  of  green  finance  in  its  role  as
investor.  In  the  German  public  sector,  sustainable  investment  recently  gained  momentum,
especially for equity investments.
The  Bundesbank  has  several  mandates  of  public  sector  entities,  notably  pension  funds  for
federal  and  state  governments’  civil  servants.  While  we  are  responsible  for  the  operational
implementation of investment decisions, it is the clients’ task to define sustainability criteria. In
some  cases,  sustainability  criteria  are  already  applied,  through  passive  replication  of  a  green
equity index preselected by our customers.
Green bonds, however, do not play an important role in this regard. Due to the small market size
and low market depth, they could only be used as an addition to a portfolio.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  to  foster  the  necessary  transition  to  a  low-carbon  economy  some
observers are actually calling for monetary policy to take climate risks into account.
However,  neutrality  is  an  important  principle  of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework.  In  a
monetary union with 19 national financial systems, which differ in various ways, it is important not
to  favour  certain  financial  instruments  over  other  forms  of  financing.  Any  type  of  privileged
treatment would increase national differences in the transmission of our single monetary policy.
Thus, to avoid opening Pandora’s box, we should not to award preferential treatment to green
bonds,  for  example,  either  in  the  Corporate  Sector  Purchase  Programme  or  in  the  collateral
framework. The Eurosystem’s mandate is to maintain price stability. And in order to safeguard its
ability  to  maintain  price  stability,  monetary  policy  should  not  be  overburdened  by  other  policy
objectives.
4. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, I began by telling you about Goethe’s studies on the weather. The reason
why  his  weather  theory  was  widely  ignored  by  mainstream  scientists  is  that  he  made  an
abstruse hypothesis concerning the mechanism of air pressure variations – which shows us that
even universal geniuses sometimes get it wrong. But it doesn’t take a genius to understand why
the transition to a green economy is necessary. A financial system that facilitates this transition
is indispensable.
On that note, I wish you a fruitful debate and thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
