ABI and Confindustria 
    ITALIAN COMPANIES AND BANKS 
IN THE NEW GLOBAL CHALLENGES 
 Introductory speech by  Salvatore Rossi 
Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy and 
President of the Institute for the Supervision of Insurance  
           Embassy of Italy in Washington, D.C. 
April 21, 2017 
 I would like to thank the organizers of this conference on the Italian economy 
for inviting me to open the discussion. My thanks also go to Ambassador Varricchio 
for hosting us in such a beautiful venue, and for his kind words of welcome. 
Today’s  conference  centres  around  three  words  –  companies,  banks  and 
global challenges – which, in my view, are the key elements for understanding the 
dismal growth performance of our economy since the late nineties, its exceptional 
difficulties during the double recession, its recent recovery, and its prospects for the 
future.  
In  my  remarks  I  will  start  by  mentioning  one  important  challenge  that  the 
whole  advanced  world  is  facing,  and  which  affects  our  economy  too:  policy 
uncertainty.  I  will  then  focus  on  the  Italian  economy,  looking  at  it  from  a  longer 
perspective. Finally, I will touch on the Italian banks. 
 Policy uncertainty as the main global challenge 
We see encouraging signs in the global economy, which we are discussing in 
depth during the meetings here in Washington. But we also see a sharp increase in 
policy  uncertainty,  especially  in  the  advanced  world.  This  is  a  matter  for  great 
concern. Policy uncertainty does not mean uncertainty about future political events 
in  this  or  that  country,  relating  to  the  emergence  of  populist  movements,  but 
something  much  more  specific:  which  economic  policies  will  be  adopted  in  our 
countries  in  the  immediate  future,  even  by  traditional  political  forces?  The  usual, 
historical  distinction  between  left  and  right,  labour  and  capital,  is  no  longer  the 
infallible guide it used to be. 
Policy  uncertainty  dampens  not  only  domestic  economic  activity,  but  also 
international trade. Financial markets have so far reacted unemotionally to events 
such as Brexit or the presidential election in the US, but the kind of uncertainty I am 
1 
talking  about  may  acquire  longer-term  dimensions  than  the  macro  outlook  that 
markets traditionally consider. 
If  the  international  openness  achieved  by  our  countries  diminishes  in  the 
future, dire consequences will ensue for small open economies like Italy. If global 
trade and global value chains shrink, so  will productivity. Inward-oriented policies 
are  not  the  right  reaction  to  political  discontent.  Protectionism  is  the  wrong 
response to collateral damage of free trade, the exclusion of many from its benefits. 
Nostalgia for the past does not eliminate inequality; rather, it aggravates it. 
 Italian companies 
But let me turn to Italy. Between 2008 and 2013 the Italian economy suffered 
the worst slump of its history: GDP went down by 9 percentage points, slightly more 
than household spending, while investment fell by 30 points, industrial production 
by almost 25 and employment by 4. The double-dip recession was far more severe 
in Italy than in the rest of the euro area.  
Since  then  the  Italian  economy  has  gradually  recovered,  mostly  thanks  to 
domestic demand, especially consumption and, more recently, capital spending, but 
also with a significant contribution from exports. Potential output has been slowly 
improving  too.  Three  years  into  the  recovery,  business  investment  in  Italy  is  now 
approaching the average of the ten years preceding the global financial crisis. 
We expect this positive trend to continue over the current and the next two 
years, partly thanks to the support of external demand. The latest surveys run by 
the  Bank  of  Italy  on  a  large  sample  of  companies  indicate  that  the  recovery  of 
investment plans is now on a firmer footing, and that the lack of productive capital 
is  being  reabsorbed,  with  the  exception  of  construction  spending,  which  remains 
extremely low. 
2 
The  common  monetary  policy  designed  by  the  European  Central  Bank  has 
provided an important stimulus to every component of aggregate demand. But fiscal 
incentives  have  also  played  a  role,  while  respecting  the  European  rules  on  public 
finance. 
However, we need a longer perspective than a purely cyclical one. The large 
swings since 2008 followed a decade of very slow growth, when the debate centred 
on the question of whether Italy was in a sort of unstoppable decline. From 1999 to 
2007,  GDP  grew  on  average  by  1.5  per  cent  per  year,  where  the  positive 
contributions  of  population  and  employment  growth  were  accompanied  by  a 
disappointing performance on the part of total factor productivity (+0.1 per year on 
average), which instead recorded significant increases in France (0.6) and Germany 
(0.9). 
Such a prolonged sluggishness of productivity reflects structural factors. The 
interpretation  we  proposed  at  the  Bank  fifteen  years  ago1  –  nowadays  shared  by 
many experts – is that since the mid-nineties Italian companies have been hit by a 
double world revolution: a shift in the dominant technology (ICTs) that triggered a 
re-organization of production on a global scale, and globalization.  
The Italian economy was harder hit by these shocks because of its structural 
features:  most  of  its  companies  are  small  in  size  and  never  grow,  a  characteristic 
that goes hand in hand with a lower propensity to innovate and worse-than-average 
management  skills  and  practices.  The  predominance  of  small  and  medium 
enterprises  (SMEs),  which  was  an  asset  in  the  past  because  of  their  supposed 
flexibility, is nowadays a liability. 
                                                 
1 Cfr. Rossi (2003), La nuova economia: i fatti dietro il mito (ed.), Il Mulino, Bologna. 
3 
  Let  me  give  you  some  figures.  According  to  Istat,  the  national  statistical 
institute, in Italy the private non-financial sector consists of 4.3 million units. Some 
30 per cent of total value added is produced by independent workers and very small 
firms (less than 10 employees), another 30 per cent by large firms (more than 250 
employees) and the rest (40 per cent) by SMEs. In Germany and France the number 
and economic importance of SMEs are also large, but less so than in Italy. 
The share of firms with an established research and development activity is 
less than 20 per cent among the smallest companies and above 50 per cent among 
the largest. Italy is the European country with the largest share of firms in which the 
whole management – not only the CEO – is in the hands of the family owning the 
firm.  Family  management  is  less  modern  and  embeds  lower  incentives  for 
technological and organizational innovation. 
When an Italian SME has the opportunity to grow a lot – and many of them 
do, even in these difficult years – often it does not. Why? For many reasons. Some 
have  to  do  with  the  traditional  practices  and  psychological  traits  of  our 
entrepreneurs.  Others,  probably  the  most  important  ones,  relate  to  the  overall 
economic  context,  such  as  red-tape,  high  taxes,  and  inadequate  human  capital. 
Clearly, 
It  has  been 
empirically proved, on one hand, that small firm size is associated with the excessive 
duration of judicial proceedings and with the combination of high taxes and low tax 
compliance,  and  on  the  other  that  the  limited  supply  of  human  capital  interacts 
perversely  with  the  weak  demand  for  skills  by  small  firms  in  low-technology 
sectors.2 
internal  and  external  weaknesses  are 
interconnected. 
                                                 
2 Cfr. Visco (2014), Investire in conoscenza. Crescita economica e competenze per il XXI secolo, Bologna, Il Mulino. 
4 
Still, Italy is populated by companies, mostly of medium size, that are highly 
innovative and competitive on international markets. They have driven the Italian 
economy’s recovery from the crisis, especially through their export performance.3 
How  can  we  reconcile  micro  optimism  and  macro  worries?  Three  magic 
numbers  can  solve  the  puzzle:  25-50-25.4  We  have  a  quarter  of  excellent  and 
healthy  firms  and,  at  the  other  tail  of  the  distribution,  another  quarter  with  little 
potential and a high risk of exiting the market. In the middle, there are companies 
that  could  become  key  players  but  whose  growth  is  currently  hampered  by  the 
internal and external factors I mentioned before. 
So, the question becomes: is Italy capable of changing these magic numbers 
into, say, 50-40-10?  
The answer lies in the capabilities of the economy and in public policies. The 
existence of the first has been borne out on many occasions by history and by the 
literature. 5  The  second  depends  on  the  people,  civil  servants  and  politicians 
generating together the right policies. We are talking mainly of structural policies: 
economic  development  is  a  long-term  issue,  barely  related  to  the  economic  cycle 
and to macroeconomic stabilization policies.  
In fact, important structural policies have been put in place in Italy in recent 
years: for example, the pension reform and the labour market reform (the Jobs Act). 
However, there is still much to be done if our economy is to become modern and 
innovative.  What  I  personally  have  in  mind  are  the  legal  and  education  systems, 
which I believe to be at the heart of all reform. 
                                                 
3 Cfr. Banca d’Italia (2015), Annual Report for 2014, Chapters 5 and 6, pp.43-59. 
4 Cfr. Istat (2017), Rapporto sulla competitività dei settori produttivi, Chapter 3, pp. 58-63. 
5 Cfr. Giunta and Rossi (2017), Che cosa sa fare l’Italia: la nostra economia dopo la grande crisi, Laterza, Roma-Bari. 
5 
Of  course,  the  interest  of  private  investors,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  can 
encourage the right policies, in a virtuous circle. 
 Italian banks 
Let me now move on to the situation of Italian banks, which is linked to that 
of non-financial firms in many ways. The financial structure of Italy is unusual: the 
leverage of non-financial firms is on average 45 per cent, against 41 in the euro area 
and 28 in the US, with a ratio of bank debt to total financial debt of more than 60 
per  cent,  against  less  than  40  in  the  euro  area  and  33  in  the  US.  Thus,  we  have 
companies that are both more indebted and more dependent on banks. 
Is the importance of banks in our real economy an obstacle to the recovery, 
now that they are burdened with non-performing loans (NPLs)? 
I would say no, for two reasons.6  
First,  bank  credit  to  the  non-financial  sector  is  expanding,  though  at  a 
moderate  pace.  True,  lending  to  households  drives  the  trend,  while  corporate 
lending remains modest and varies considerably across firms of different size, but 
the cost of credit is on average stable at historically low levels.  
Bank  credit  fell  in  the  recession  years  essentially  because  of  the  lack  of 
demand. The 25 per cent of good companies I mentioned before do not need much 
bank credit as they are large enough to have access to the financial markets or to 
use  internal  financial  resources.  The  50  per  cent  of  problematic  companies  are 
striving  to  weather  the  storm,  so  their  demand  for  long-term  credit  has  fallen 
                                                 
6 Visco (2017), ‘Exchange of views with the Governor of the Bank of Italy Ignazio Visco on the economic and financial 
situation of Italy and prospects for economic governance in the European Union’, European Parliament, Committee on 
Economic and Monetary Affairs, Brussels, 11 April 2017. 
6 
considerably  in  past  years.  Only  the  25  per  cent  of  really  troubled  firms  are 
desperately seeking survival credit, but they probably do not have a good enough 
credit scoring to get it. A recent Bank of Italy study found no evidence that the NPL 
stock is significantly impairing the credit allocation mechanism in Italy.7 
The second reason is that the NPL stock, most of which originated with the 
terrible  recession  of  2009-2013,  is  finally  being  trimmed  back  by  the  recovery, 
though with the usual time lag. 
But  how  serious  does  the  problem  continue  to  be?  At  the  end  of  last  year 
NPLs in Italian banks’ balance sheets amounted to around 170 billion euros net of 
write-downs,  around  9  per  cent  of  total loans. The  equivalent  figure  for  the  euro 
area  was  much  lower,  around  3  per  cent.  But  Italian  banks  have  much  fewer 
level2/level3 assets, which are no less problematic than NPLs. 
I refer here to net NPLs, not gross, because that is the indicator of the actual 
risk  run  by  the  banks.  The  gross  figure  is  an  indicator  mostly  of  the  state  of  the 
economy, rather than of banks. In fact, Italian banks' NPL coverage ratios are higher 
than  the  European  average:  the  book  value  of  NPLs  (net  of  write-downs)  is  now 
about half the face value.  
We  must  also  bear  in  mind  that  NPLs  are  a  very  heterogeneous  category, 
ranging  from  truly  bad  loans  –  loans  to  failed  firms  or  insolvent  households  –  to 
those granted to perfectly solvent borrowers who may just be in breach of overdraft 
ceilings.  
Net  bad  loans  account  for  less  than  half  of  total  net  NPLs  at  Italian  banks. 
They are largely backed by real-estate collateral, whose market value is uncertain, 
                                                 
7 Accornero et al. (2017), ‘Non-performing loans and the supply of bank credit: evidence from Italy’, Banca d’Italia, 
(Occasional 
Questioni 
at 
https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/qef/2017-0374/QEF_374.pdf  
Economia 
available 
Papers), 
Finanza 
374, 
di 
e 
7 
however: even if we accept the valuation made by the banks and validated by the 
asset quality review conducted in 2014 by the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the 
value depends on how easily and quickly one can seize and dispose of the property. 
That is why an NPL market is struggling to develop and banks prefer to keep 
most of their NPLs and work them out internally. Forcing all banks to liquidate NPLs 
immediately  may  not  be  the  best  option.  Most  NPLs  are  held  by  banks  whose 
financial position is such that they do not need to sell them quickly. 
Some banks, however, are not well equipped to work out NPLs internally. It is 
very  important  to  eliminate  all  the  inefficiencies  in  judicial  and  extra-judicial 
procedures.  Substantive  reforms  have  been  undertaken  in  the  last  two  years. 
Additional improvements should be sought. 
The  Italian  banking  system  has  two  interrelated  problems:  a  sometimes 
cumbersome corporate governance, preventing swift and orderly access to capital 
markets if need be,  and the legacy of the recession, which, together with serious 
episodes of mismanagement, has hit a few medium and small banks hard.  
The first problem was recently addressed by a couple of important legislative 
reforms regarding cooperative banks (Popolari and BCCs, small mutual banks). The 
second was tackled with the decision of the Government, subject to the approval of 
the  European  Commission,  to  offer  public  guarantees  on  newly-issued  bank 
liabilities  and  to  undertake  a  precautionary  public  recapitalization  of a  number  of 
banks (currently three have applied), a tool provided for by the BRRD, the European 
directive on bank recovery and resolution; 20 billion euros have been budgeted for 
this purpose.  
Of  course,  the  significant  amount  of  loan  loss  provisions  has  weighed  on 
banks’ gross operating profits. But low profitability is a long-term problem for our 
banks  going  forward,  because  of  the  evolution  of  technology  and  of  the  market. 
8 
Indeed,  it  is  a  problem  for  all  European  banks,  but  for  the  Italian  banks  it  is 
particularly acute.  
Cutting costs and changing business model are the strategic targets of Italian 
banks. How they can be achieved remains the responsibility of banks' boards and 
managers. What we do know is that banks' stability and competitiveness depend on 
reaching  those  goals.  Mergers  and  acquisitions,  especially  among  small  and 
medium-sized banks, may be of help. 
   The world is changing rapidly, and technology is making low value added retail 
activities less and less relevant and profitable. Italian companies need to rely less on 
bank  credit and more on banks' market  services and on non-bank intermediaries. 
Transforming our financial structure is one way to put the Italian economy back on 
track towards sustained and lasting development. 
9 
