Remarks by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the  
ACI South Africa – The Financial Markets Association 
Market conduct and market best practice 
Johannesburg 
1 June 2017 
Introduction 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you to ACI South Africa for inviting me this evening, and for creating the opportunity 
for us to interact on  the very pertinent subject of  market  conduct  issues  and best market 
practice.  
In the over 60 years of its existence, ACI has made good progress in influencing industry 
behaviour and supporting market best practice, with member education and the promotion 
of the highest standards of ethical conduct being among the core principles guiding the work 
of the ACI worldwide. It is indeed always a pleasure to engage with you as our partners in 
the financial markets as we continue to strive towards promoting more effective and more 
efficient foreign exchange markets, our collective efforts aimed at increasing transparency, 
minimising risks, and enhancing confidence between ourselves as market participants and 
the people we serve.  
About 15 months ago, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) co-hosted, with the Group 
of Thirty (G30) and Barclays Africa, a forum on banking conduct and culture. At the time, we 
spoke extensively about the enormous trust deficit that had built up since the global financial 
Page 1 of 8 
crisis as well as about efforts to restore confidence and trust not only in banks, but also in 
the  effective  and  efficient  functioning  of  financial  markets.  The  G30  had  just  released  a 
report, titled Banking conduct and culture: a call for sustained and comprehensive reform, 
which is still very relevant today, not least because the implementation of required conduct 
reforms has been somewhat slow.  
 The focus of that G30 Forum was mainly on banks because, as Sir David Walker of the G30 
had put it, ‘the social externalities of banking are as great as, if not greater than, those of 
any other “business”’. Moreover, the majority of the conduct issues  that we are grappling 
with has originated from the banking sector, be it issues around reference rates, as we saw 
with the Libor scandal in 2012, or the manipulation of foreign exchange rates and benchmark 
fixings, including, as you know, allegations of distorting competition being levelled at certain 
institutions trading in our own currency.   
 Focusing on banks, however, should not be construed to suggest  that we should be less 
worried  about  the  role  played  by  other  financial  services  providers  and  in  the  process 
inadvertently create scope for arbitrage opportunities. Today, we have broadened the scope 
of our activities to recognise this and to avoid an unintended consequence of creating an 
uneven  playing  field  that  could  fuel  financial  disintermediation.  I  will  talk  more  about 
broadening the scope of our initiatives later when I give a review of what we have already 
implemented and are still in the process of implementing here in South Africa.  
 Often, when misconduct has occurred, there tends to be the temptation to look to increased 
regulation as the best way to go about fixing the problem. As I said at the G30 Forum, it is 
preferable for market participants to self-correct on the basis of guidelines (not rules) that 
are  developed  to  address  integrity  within  banks  as  well  as  between  banks  and  other 
stakeholders in the financial services industry  – all in the interest of financial stability and 
the longevity of the role of banking in financial systems. Longer-lasting solutions are required 
to  embed  the  correct  culture  rather  than  to  impose  conduct  rules  and  police  market 
participants.  The  financial  services  industry  needs  a  fundamental  shift  in  its  mind-set  on 
culture – that which is a value system that shapes the way in which we do business and 
contributes to building and maintaining trust. This is not to say that these value systems do 
not  exist;  I  just  think  that  the  need  to  ‘meet  targets’  in  a  profit-driven  environment  often 
 Page 2 of 8 
supersedes other goals and creates conflicts of interest. A regulatory response should be 
the last resort, only when there is clear evidence that self-regulation has failed.  
 All market participants should ensure that the performance assessment and compensation 
of  employees  takes  adequate  account  of  governance,  compliance  and  market  conduct  – 
and  not  solely  of  profits  generated.  Individuals  who  do  not  meet  a  specified  threshold  of 
acceptable  behaviour  that  is  aligned  to  their  employer’s  value  system  and  conduct 
expectations should feel the direct effect on their discretionary compensation. To guide this, 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  has  developed  a  set  of  principles  for  sound 
compensation practices; the aim of these principles is to reduce incentives for excessive risk 
taking  that may  arise from  the  structure of  compensation  schemes  in  significant financial 
institutions. As a member of the FSB, South Africa subscribes fully to these principles.  
 Moreover, advancement in the financial services industry should increasingly recognise the 
behaviour and conduct of employees. This should be done in the spirit of encouraging the 
type of behaviour that is aligned to the desired culture and  addressing lapses by holding 
those responsible accountable. The leadership should be seen to be leading by example. 
The desired culture and conduct should cascade from top to bottom. Boards of directors and 
chief executive officers should also change their behaviour from recognising just the results 
to also embracing the ‘how’ aspect that should talk more to the manner in which the results 
were achieved. 
 The financial markets review  
 Let me return to my earlier remark about the initiatives of regulatory authorities in overseeing 
market conduct.  
 It is very important to emphasise that the initiatives which we have thus far embarked on are 
not about creating rules of conduct, but are meant to be guiding principles intended to create 
consensus  on  the  standards  of  market  practice.  The  Fixed  Income,  Currencies  and 
Commodities  Markets  Standards  Board  (FMSB)  in  the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  is  a  good 
example of what this means. The FMSB is a private-sector body , which cooperates closely 
with  the  official  sector,  with  a  mission  to  create  and  enhance  standards  of  behaviour  by 
 Page 3 of 8 
developing principles of good conduct.  Since its inception in 2015 the FMSB has already 
issued standards relating to ‘Reference Price Transactions for the Fixed Income Markets’, 
Binary Option for the Commodities Market, and New Issue Process Standard for the Fixed 
Income Markets’. South Africa is working on establishing a standards group similar to the 
FMSB as part of a broader financial markets review.   
 The former Minister of Finance announced in his Budget Speech  in February 2017 that a 
financial markets review, modelled on the Fair and Effective Markets Review in the UK – 
which gave rise to the formation of the FMSB just mentioned – would be undertaken in 2017. 
This  work  has  already  started  and  market  participants  will  be  consulted  as  part  of  the 
process. The review will focus on conduct practices aimed at improving effectiveness to the 
benefit  of  market  participants  and  customers.  This  review  exercise  will  be  a  lot  more 
comprehensive  than  the  initial  foreign  exchange  review  that  the  SARB  and  the  Financial 
Services conducted in 2014; it will consider conduct in the wholesale money, debt capital, 
foreign exchange, commodities and derivatives markets. 
 The Financial Markets Review Committee (FMRC) – which operates under the guidance of 
a joint steering committee comprising National Treasury, the Financial Services Board and 
the SARB – will look mainly into the following aspects in relation to market conduct:  
         Review  the  standards and  practices  in  South  Africa’s  wholesale financial  markets, 
both regulated and unregulated. 
Review governance, accountability and incentives in wholesale financial markets.  
Develop  overarching  principles  for  conduct  and  integrity  to  provide  a  consistent 
framework for specific reforms in wholesale financial markets. 
Identify  any  gaps  in  the  legislation,  regulation  and/or  supervision  of  conduct  in 
wholesale  financial  markets,  to  be  addressed  through  the  market  conduct  policy 
framework under the Twin Peaks model of regulation. 
Identify  and  incorporate  the  role  of  global  standards  and  good  practice  in  South 
Africa’s regulatory approach to wholesale financial markets.  
Develop recommendations for regulators on a pre-emptive, outcomes-focused and 
risk-based approach to conduct and integrity in wholesale financial markets.  
Facilitate the establishment of a market-led Financial Markets Standards Group. 
Page 4 of 8 
 The FMRC will develop an overarching definition and high-level principles of sound conduct 
and integrity for wholesale financial markets.  The recommendations will focus on specific 
tools  to  strengthen  the  implementation  and  governance  of  conduct  standards  by  market 
participants  as  well  as  on  areas  where  changes  to  financial  markets  legislation  and 
associated  subordinate  legislation  are  required  to  support  a  new  conduct  framework  for 
wholesale financial markets. This area of work will evaluate the concept of market integrity 
in South Africa and will set out the expected outcomes that characterise market integrity. It 
will  examine  how,  where  appropriate,  the  market  integrity  objective  can  be  given  effect 
through  legislation  and  market-led  initiatives.  The  review  will  examine  existing  initiatives 
relating  to  wholesale  market  conduct  and  incorporate  these  work  streams  under  the 
recommendations. The review will not duplicate work that has already been undertaken or 
is in progress but will rather draw on conclusions and recommendations, where available. 
To ensure that this is not a one-off exercise to tick a box that we, like other jurisdictions, 
have conducted a market review, a Financial Markets Standards Group will be established 
with the objective of sustaining the good practice standards for wholesale financial markets. 
 The mandate of the FMRC  indicates that its focus is much broader than just the banking 
sector. This is one of the ways in which we are trying to prevent the unintended consequence 
of creating an uneven playing field. This approach is meant to recognise the evolution of 
asset managers and hedge funds, for example, from being niche businesses to playing a 
more important role in the financial system.  
 The financial markets review, which we hope will be completed by the end of 2018, is just 
one of many initiatives that South Africa has embarked on. Allow me to now touch briefly on 
the other initiatives that are also aimed at strengthening market conduct.  
 The Twin Peaks model of financial regulation  
 Very relevant to our discussions here today is the introduction of the Twin Peaks model of 
financial regulation in South Africa that proposes a new approach to the regulation of market 
conduct,  namely  through  the  establishment  of  a  standalone  conduct  authority  for  the 
financial services industry. This proposal was first put forward by National Treasury in 2011 
 Page 5 of 8 
and I am sure everyone here is aware of what the plan is going forward. Nonetheless, let 
me remind you that, among other things, the proposed conduct authority will have a mandate 
to enhance and support the integrity and efficiency of the domestic financial system. This 
mandate  will  be  provided  for  in  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  which  is  expected  to 
confer powers on the SARB (as the Prudential Authority) and the Financial Services Board 
(as the Financial Sector Conduct Regulator) to preserve and enhance financial stability and 
to improve market conduct in order to protect financial customers.  
 Codes of conduct  
 In the wake of the recent scandals of market manipulation, South Africa has been very active 
in the development of codes of conduct, starting with the Jibar1 Code of Conduct in 2012, 
the Code of Conduct for authorised Over-the-counter (OTC) Derivative Providers is in the 
process  of  being  finalised  and,  most  recently,  the  Code  of  Conduct  for  wholesale  OTC 
financial markets (OTC Code) which is still in a developmental phase, having had the benefit 
of input from relevant financial market stakeholders. It is envisaged that a number of other 
specialist  codes  of  conduct  will  be  developed  for  different  segments  of  the  wholesale 
financial  markets,  with  the  OTC  Code  serving  as  a  general  code  for  those  market 
participants  who  are not covered by a  specific  code of conduct pertaining to their market 
segment.   
 As regards the foreign exchange market, many of you will be aware that the BIS  Foreign 
Exchange Working Group released the Global Foreign Exchange Code (the Global Code) 
last week, which addresses, in a comprehensive manner, best practice covering areas such 
as market ethics and information sharing, but also tackles complex issues such as electronic 
trading and algorithmic trading. This is the first time that a single, unified, global code was 
established, providing guidance and principles that can apply across many jurisdictions and 
market segments. The SARB was afforded the opportunity to participate in the development 
of the Global Code. South Africa has become a member of  an expanded and formalised 
Global Foreign Exchange Committee, whose objectives are to promote collaboration among 
local  foreign  exchange  committees,  to  exchange  views  on  trends  and  developments  in 
                                                           
1 Johannesburg Interbank Agreed Rate 
 Page 6 of 8 
global foreign exchange markets, and to promote, maintain and update the Global Code on 
a  regular  basis  to  ensure  its  continued  relevance.  Each  member  foreign  exchange 
committee  designates  a  central  bank  and  private  sector  representative  for  the  Global 
Foreign Exchange Committee. 
  Following consultations with the Financial Markets Liaison Group and its foreign exchange 
subcommittee, we have endorsed and adopted the Global Code. This endorsement of the 
Global  Foreign  Exchange  Code  implies  that  we  are  now  committed  to  evolving  our  own 
institutions’ foreign exchange practices to be consistent with the principles outlined in the 
Code. This will include a review of the structure of our local foreign exchange committee 
over the next few months. We believe that this code is a big step in the right direction and 
will contribute to strengthening standards in foreign exchange markets around the globe. 
 The  Global  Code  contains  principles  of  good  practice  that  provide  a  common  set  of 
guidelines to the market, with the intention of promoting the integrity and effective functioning 
of the relevant financial markets without imposing legal or regulatory obligations on market 
participants; the Code is not a substitute for regulation. Having endorsed the Global Code, 
the SARB will strive to adhere to it in its own market operations and, over time, we would 
also expect counterparties that we transact with in the foreign exchange market to confirm 
their  commitment  and  adherence  to  the  Global  Code  for  them  to  continue  to  be  eligible 
counterparties.  
 Conclusion 
 I would like to conclude by saying that we are still some distance away from the finish line 
when it comes to inculcating the highest standards of conduct and market best practice. And 
it is not the job of the regulators alone to cross that line; it is the job of the financial sector 
as a whole. We recognise the contributions that each of you makes towards strengthening 
the standards of market practice. In continuing to do so, I would like to appeal to you to take 
very seriously the challenge of aligning your current culture to the desired culture. There is 
definitely the need for a fundamental shift in the mind-set of the financial services industry 
on the issue of culture; more regulation is not necessarily the best way to go about fixing 
problematic conduct.  
 Page 7 of 8 
 I am pleased to note that, following the launch of the Global Code last week, ACI Worldwide 
has announced that it has developed a new ACI Global Foreign Exchange Code Certificate 
aligned to the principles and practices of the new code. This initiative is certainly a step in 
the right direction to promote the integrity and effectiveness of the foreign exchange market. 
 Let  me  use  this  opportunity  to  ask  for  your  cooperation  with  our  current  review  of  the 
standards and practices in the domestic wholesale financial markets. The committee that 
has  been  appointed  to  carry  out  this  review  will  soon  be  on  your  doorsteps,  seeking  to 
engage with you on various aspects relating to the structure of the financial markets.   
 Together we can make it work. 
 Thank you very much. 
   Page 8 of 8 
