William  C  Dudley:  Panel  remarks  at  the  Bank  for  International
Settlements' Annual General Meeting
Panel  remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Bank for International Settlements' Annual General Meeting,
Basel, 25 June 2017.
 John  Clark,  Gerard  Dages,  Linda  Goldberg,  Eric  LeSueur,  Jonathan  McCarthy,  and  Joseph
Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 
Let  me  start  by  thanking  Jens  Weidmann  and  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  for  the
opportunity to respond and comment on Professor Hélène Rey’s thoughtful remarks and on the
issue of international spillovers associated with U.S. monetary policy.  As always, what I have to
say  today  reflects  my  own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market
1
Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
As is characteristic of her work, what Hélène has to say is well-argued and provocative.  It is also
very relevant to the conduct of monetary policy and the functioning of the international monetary
system.  I mostly agree with the major points she makes. 
First, I wholeheartedly agree with her on the hazards of financial booms.  Rapid increases in
credit and capital flows, asset prices, and leverage can lead to potentially severe corrections that
can impose great stress on financial systems.  As we have seen repeatedly, this stress can
impair the ability of the financial system to perform well in intermediating credit between savers
and borrowers, and in helping households and businesses manage their financial risks.  When a
financial system becomes impaired, there can be dire consequences for economic activity and
the ability of central banks to achieve their macroeconomic objectives.
Hélène’s work highlights an important global dimension to financial cycles, showing that gross
capital  flows,  asset  prices  and  credit  often  move  in  a  synchronized  way  across  countries  as
perceptions of risk change.  As we now know all too well, the global financial crisis dramatically
underscored  the  fact  that  instability  in  the  U.S.  financial  system  and  those  of  other  advanced
economies imposed extraordinarily high costs on the entire global economy. 
Making the global financial system more resilient and less procyclical has been a key focus of
policymakers since the financial crisis, and most countries have made substantial progress on
this  front.    This  is  evident  in  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  for  banks,  lower  reliance  on
wholesale  short-term  funding,  reforms  of  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets,  and  the
development  of  resolution  and  recovery  regimes  for  banks  and  key  financial  market
infrastructures, among other efforts.  Nonetheless, we must continue to work on these issues.
In  particular,  the  U.S.  financial  system—the  epicenter  of  the  crisis—has  been  considerably
strengthened.    Here,  I  would  highlight  additional  reforms  such  as  the  Comprehensive  Capital
Analysis and Review (CCAR) regime, which imposes annual capital stress tests on systemically
important  banks;  tri-party  repo  reform;  and  money  market  mutual  fund  reform.    Policymakers
globally have also made good progress on strengthening supervisory oversight, and are making
headway—albeit more slowly—in developing effective macroprudential frameworks and toolkits. 
But, more work remains to be done in several areas.  I would put particular emphasis on the
tasks of completing the creation of a credible bank resolution regime that will work on a cross-
border basis, and developing effective recovery regimes for key financial market infrastructures. 
I also agree with Hélène that monetary policy in the United States—given the size of its financial
markets and the U.S. dollar’s status as a reserve currency—can have a significant impact on
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
global financial conditions, including exchange rates, and that shifts in U.S. monetary policy can
lead to consequential shifts in global capital flows.  However, it is also important to note that the
impact  of  U.S.  monetary  policy  restraint  on  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  has  varied
widely  across  tightening  cycles.    The  impact  depends  on  many  factors,  including  EME
fundamentals, asset valuations, and the extent and composition of prior capital inflows to those
economies.    Importantly,  the  impact  has  tended  to  be  more  benign  when  U.S.  yields  rise  in
response to good U.S. growth prospects.  In contrast, spillovers have tended to be more adverse
when  increased  monetary  policy  stringency  is  associated  with  a  deteriorating  U.S.  economic
2
outlook.  
These  observations  point  to  the  need  for  the  United  States  to  keep  its  own  house  in  order. 
Promoting  economic  growth  and  financial  stability  in  the  United  States,  I  believe,  is  the  most
important contribution we can make to promoting growth and stability worldwide.
Like  nearly  all  central  banks,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  domestic  mandate  set  for  it—in  our
case, by the U.S. Congress.  It cannot subordinate its legal mandate of maximum employment
and price stability in the United States to alternative international goals.  But, given the role of the
United  States  and  the  U.S.  dollar  in  the  global  economy  and  financial  system,  the  Federal
Reserve is—and indeed, needs to be—mindful of the international effects of its policy.  That is
because those consequences can have important potential spillbacks to the U.S. economy and
financial markets. 
The bond market “taper tantrum” of 2013 highlighted that prospective changes in U.S. monetary
policy  could  affect  the  EMEs—particularly  those  with  existing  vulnerabilities—and  how  those
consequences, in turn, could spill back to the United States.  This episode underscored the need
for clear communication and transparency around U.S. policy so that expectations can adjust
smoothly and be appropriately calibrated to what is likely to occur. 
As you know, the Federal Reserve has become increasingly transparent in recent years, in part
to  mitigate  such  risks.    Good  communication  and  transparency  is  always  important  during
periods of conventional policy normalization.  But, good communication and transparency may
be  even  more  important  when  one  begins  to  unwind  unconventional  monetary  policy  actions,
such  as  balance  sheet  policies  with  which  we  have  little  prior  experience.    Moreover,  I  would
surmise that adjustments to balance sheet policies undoubtedly affect asset prices in ways that
differ from changes in short-term interest rates. 
Earlier this month, we announced an addendum to the FOMC’s Policy Normalization Principles
and Plans.3   In this addendum, we spelled out how the balance sheet normalization program
would work.  This was another step in a long chain of communications about the balance sheet
—incremental steps that highlight the evolution of our communication practices. 
I hope you would agree that we have taken a very measured and careful approach. 
This process started with the initial release of the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans in
September 2014, which indicated that the FOMC planned to reduce securities in a gradual and
predictable manner.  Related comments followed in the minutes of the July 2015 FOMC meeting
and  the  December  2015  FOMC  statement.    Subsequently,  FOMC  participants  discussed
potential long-run frameworks for monetary policy implementation as detailed in the November
2016 FOMC minutes. 
Next, the March 2017 FOMC minutes reaffirmed that a change in balance sheet policy would be
gradual  and  predictable,  and  achieved  primarily  by  changing  the  reinvestment  policy.    These
minutes also noted that most participants judged a change in reinvestment policy would likely be
appropriate this year, should economic data develop as they expected.  Then, in the May 2017
minutes,  it  was  noted  that  nearly  all  participants  had  a  favorable  view  of  a  phased-in,  cap
approach  whereby  reinvestments  would  be  decreased  gradually.    Participants  favored  this
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
strategy  because  a  preannounced  schedule  would  be  gradual  and  predictable,  limiting  the
magnitude of the runoff could help mitigate any adverse market effects, and the strategy would
be relatively easy and straightforward to communicate. 
Finally,  as  I  noted  earlier,  we  followed  up  in  our  last  FOMC  meeting  with  the  release  of  an
addendum to our Policy Normalization Principles and Plans that outlined how our balance sheet
normalization  plan  will  work  when  it  is  implemented.    We  also  said  clearly  in  the  FOMC
statement  that  if  the  economy  evolves  in  line  with  our  expectations,  we  expect  to  begin  this
process this year. 
In  response,  market  participants  have  progressively  increased  the  probability  assigned  to  a
change  in  reinvestment  policy  this  year.    Yet,  Treasury  and  agency  MBS  markets  have
responded little at the time of these announcements—including those undertaken most recently. 
To me, this suggests that these communications have generally been effective in fostering an
orderly adjustment in expectations about how we are likely to normalize our balance sheet. 
I also agree with Hélène about the important role of financial conditions in influencing economic
activity.   As  I  see  it,  financial  conditions  are  a  key  transmission  channel  of  monetary  policy
because  they  affect  households’  and  firms’  saving  and  investment  plans  and  thus  influence
economic activity and the economic outlook.  If the response of financial conditions to changes in
short-term interest rates were rigid and predictable, then there would be no need to pay such
close attention to financial conditions.  But, as we all know, the linkage is in fact quite loose and
variable. 
For  example,  during  the  mid-2000s,  financial  conditions  failed  to  tighten  even  as  the  Federal
Reserve pushed its federal funds rate target up from 1 percent to 5¼ percent.  Conversely, at the
height  of  the  crisis,  financial  conditions  tightened  sharply  even  as  the  Federal  Reserve
aggressively  pushed  its  federal  funds  rate  target  down  toward  zero.    As  a  result,  monetary
policymakers need to take the evolution of financial conditions into consideration.  For example,
when financial conditions tighten sharply, this may mean that monetary policy may need to be
tightened by less or even loosened.  On the other hand, when financial conditions ease—as has
been  the  case  recently—this  can  provide  additional  impetus  for  the  decision  to  continue  to
remove monetary policy accommodation. 
While I agree with Hélène in most respects, there are a few points where I am less convinced. 
While the global financial cycle complicates policymakers’ ability to guide financial conditions in
their own economies, I’m not persuaded that the trilemma has been replaced by a dilemma—that
is,  essentially  an  “either/or”  choice  between  an  independent  monetary  policy  versus  an  open
capital account. 
While there is no panacea to insulate countries from financial spillovers—particularly when policy
in  some  areas  is  constrained  by  the  effective  lower  bound  on  interest  rates—I  think  a
combination of exchange rate flexibility, a credible monetary policy framework, sufficient foreign
exchange  reserves,  and  a  strong  financial  system  can  help  mitigate  the  effects  of  such
spillovers.  Moreover, it strikes me that market participants have become more discriminating
over time about the circumstances of different countries, rather than painting all EMEs with a
similar broad brush. 
That  said,  I  accept  Hélène’s  suggestion  that  there  may  be  other  good  alternatives,  such  as
operating with less financial leverage and the increased use of macroprudential policy, including
more aggressive stress testing.  Also, the current regime—in which countries mostly have to
self-insure against external shocks—seems inefficient.  I believe that a regime with more risk-
sharing across countries could be beneficial for the global economy. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, 2017
1
2
See “Spillovers from Unwinding Monetary Support in Advanced Economies,” IMF, 2014 Spillover Report, Chapter
2.  See also, “On the Receiving End: External Financial Conditions and Emerging Market Growth Before, During
and After the Global Financial Crisis,” World Economic Outlook, April 2013, Chapter 4.
See FOMC issues addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
