Amando Tetangco: Financial inclusion
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of the Memorandum of Agreement for the Banking
on Your Future (BOYF) Kiddie and Teen Account Program and the Awarding Ceremony of the
2015-2016 Guro ng Pag-Asa, Manila, 7 March 2017.
 Fellow advocates of financial education and financial inclusion, special guests, good afternoon
and welcome to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board and our fellow central bankers, we thank you for
joining us to celebrate two milestones in our continuing program to develop an inclusive financial
system to promote inclusive growth.
Today, our focus is on two complementary programs that we are implementing in partnership
with the Department of Education and our banking industry.
Our  goal  is  to  raise  financially  responsible  Filipinos  starting  with  our  schoolchildren  and  to
promote  good  money  habits  such  as  saving  regularly  by  providing  our  youth  access  to  child-
friendly deposit accounts and other bank products. 
We are honored therefore that Secretary Leonor Briones of the Department of Education is with
us,  along  with  our  outstanding  finance  education  teachers  whose  achievements  we  celebrate
today,  bank industry leaders including Bankers Association of the Philippines  President Nestor
Tan  of  the  BDO,    Bank  Marketing Association  President Ann  Marie  Ducanes  of  China  Bank,
Bankers Institute of the Philippines President Liza Ortiz, and representatives from the Chamber
of Thrift Banks and the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines.          
Our first milestone is the signing of a Memorandum of Agreement where the depositor-friendly
Kiddie Account Program for children up to 12 years old is amended… to now include teens up to
19 years old. Under this program, Filipinos 19 years and below can open a savings account with
17  participating  banks  with  a  minimum  deposit  of  one  hundred  pesos  (P100.00),  with  no
maintaining balance required.  The MOA is timely as it is aligned with the DepEd’s program to
include financial lessons in the new curriculum of K to 12 students.  
Aside from targeting a wider market of savers, we also wish to help those who have started the
habit of saving to sustain it until they graduate and start working. Before the MOA amendment,
Kiddie deposit accounts reverted to regular accounts once the depositor reached the age of 13
years.
The depositor-friendly accounts were introduced as part of the Banking on Your Future program
of the BSP and the banking sector. That the number of participating banks has increased from
10 (in 2012) to 17 today is a good sign – rightfully, our banks are taking the long view that this is a
developmental  undertaking  that  will  ultimately  benefit  not  only  young  depositors  but  also  our
banks and our economy as a whole. 
Let us therefore acknowledge the participating banks who have welcomed more than a million
kiddie savers.
The top three banks with the highest number of kiddie savers are BDO, BPI and PNB, followed
by RCBC Savings, Security Bank, PSBank,  EastWest Bank, Veterans Bank, Development Bank
of the Philippines, and China Savings Bank.
Let us also acknowledge the additional banks under our new Memorandum of Agreement: BPI
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Family  Savings  Bank,  RCBC,  Maybank,  UCPB,  UCPB  Savings  Bank,  Sterling  Bank  and
Metrobank.   
We look forward to higher numbers under this expanded Kiddie and Teen Account Program.
Our second milestone this  afternoon  is  the  awarding  of  our  outstanding  teachers  for  financial
education  under  the  DepEd-BSP’s    Gantimpala  Para  sa  Ulirang  Pagtuturo  ng  Pag-iimpok  at
Araling Pansalapi, more popularly known as Guro ng Pag-Asa.
Using teaching guides jointly developed by DepEd and the BSP, teachers developed creative and
effective ways to impart lessons on saving, money management and basic entrepreneurship to
their pupils.
The  common  denominator  among  our  awardees  is  that  they  have  also  brought  financial
education to their communities to help improve lives. In other words, they have become agents of
positive change not only in their schools but also in their communities.     
At the same time, our student-awardee this year for Bida sa Pag-iimpok and Pangkabuhayan is
remarkable not only for his good money habits but also for his entrepreneurial drive and social
consciousness.  He donated a sewing machine to a person with a disability so that she could
start her own entrepreneurial venture. 
Indeed, we are heartened by stories about children who took financial lessons to heart and went
on to inspire their families to adopt sound financial habits.
Let us give all our awardees a well-deserved round of applause.
Let  us  also  thank  those  who  have  worked  behind  the  scenes  to  make  our  Guro  ng  Pag-Asa
program  a  success  —  the  Board  of  Judges,  represented  by  Dr.  Marilette  Almayda,  DepEd
Director  for  Learning  Delivery  and  the  Screening  Committee  who  went  through  voluminous
nomination documents and visited each of our Finalists from all over the country.
Moving forward, I hope that the ties that bind us to our common goal will continue to nurture a
new generation of financially educated and included young citizens. 
To us at the Bangko Sentral and the DepEd, financial education is important and necessary. The
ability to handle one’s finances properly is a lifelong skill one must have to be a responsible and
successful adult. The ideal place to start is in schools where children are learning and developing
what could be lifelong habits on spending, saving and earning money.
We all know the phrase, “our children are the future of our nation.”  To us, this is not rhetoric.   It
is a truth and it gives us a sense of purpose and urgency. This has given impetus to our joint
programs.
In fact, our efforts have caught the attention of finance education advocates in other countries. In
2013, the  Netherlands-based Child and Youth Finance International which is at the forefront of a
global campaign to promote finance education and savings gave us the country award for having
the best  finance education and savings program.
They were curious and actually wondered how we were able to work with our Department of
Education to teach financial lessons as part of the curriculum as well as to inspire our biggest 
banks to welcome kids to open accounts with them with deposits of less than US$3.00 at that
time.  Let us therefore thank the DepEd and our banks for their strong support and for being on
the same page with us. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  timing  of  this  year’s  awards  ceremony  is  fitting  as  it  falls  at  the
culmination of Global Money Week. This is a worldwide celebration that aims to create greater
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
consciousness among children and youth about proper handling of money and how it can help
them secure a brighter future.  
I  am  pleased  to  share  that  in  November  2016,  our  participation  in  Global  Money  Week  was
acknowledged by Child and Youth Finance International as among the best in Asia. Under this,
pupils interacted with those from other local schools and with their counterparts from Brunei and
Russia through video conferencing and social media chats to share their views and practices on
saving and handling money.  Our students were enthusiastic and proud for being part of a “cool”
global community of savers.
It is our hope that through our continuing joint programs, millions of young Filipinos will benefit
from  financial  education,  being  financially  included,  globally  competitive,  and  being  able  to
contribute to making our economy better, bigger and stronger.
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
