R Gandhi: Payment systems - next orbit
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the launch of the
Bharat QR Code, Mumbai, 20 February 2017.
Good Morning everybody
I am very happy to be launching the Bharat QR Code.
 The QR code development for card payments in India has happened at the most appropriate
time; we are on the threshold of a digital payments ‘moment’ and ‘movement’.
This is a momentous occasion for the payments industry in India with the launch of this global
first  of  its  kind,  low  cost,  interoperable,  mobile  based  acceptance  solution.  I  would  like  to
congratulate the payment networks for their enthusiastic collaboration to develop this solution. An
innovative interoperable solution, the Bharat QR, that is easy to scale, and provides a seamless
customer  experience,  and  above  all  is  safe  and  secure,  essential  to  accelerating  India’s
transition  to  a  less–cash  society.  I  am  glad  that  India  is  setting  yet  another  standard  in  the
payment arena for others to adopt.
Since cards began to be used in the country in early 1980s, the industry has set up about 1.5
million Point Of Sale (POS) terminals. However, in comparison to the 800 million cards that have
been  issued  as  of  now,  the  number  of  POS  terminals  in  the  country  has  not  been  really
adequate.  Among  other  factors,  the  high  capex  and  Opex  associated  with  traditional  POS
terminals, have been the major deterrents to the expansion of POS infrastructure.
Gradually, with increasing mobile density in the country, many developments in the payments
space have taken place using this channel, including m-POS on the merchant side. Now, QR
code based systems leverage mobile usage on the consumer side as well. Being asset-light,
they  become  easy  to  deploy.  So,  it  is  but  natural  that  the  two  developments  should  come
together to offer an efficient, secure and convenient experience for card payments.
What makes this development more momentous is that the card payment industry in the country
has come together, of course at our direction, to make this process interoperable so that the
users get the same experience of card payments – that is, interoperability.
No  doubt,  the  visibility  to  QR  code  and  its  consequent  widespread  usage  came  from  non-
payments area first, followed by non-banks in payments area. These are mostly used by users
within the same ecosystem and are not built on interoperable standards. However, we strongly
felt that the time has arrived to consider some level of harmonisation in the use of QR-codes.
Bharat QR Code has shown that it is possible!
Let me once again congratulate the industry and the team in the Reserve Bank for making this
possible in such a coordinated and timely manner. I wish all success to the industry and suggest
that this opportunity should be leveraged to spread digital payments acceptance infrastructure in
the country quickly.
I would like to take this opportunity to discuss some contemporary thoughts on payment systems
for it to go into its next orbit.
The Reserve Bank has been taking a studied stance with reference to bringing in changes to and
in  the  payment  systems.  Periodically,  it  constituted  various  committees  like  the  Rangarajan
Committee I & II, Saraf Committee, Patil Committee, Burman Working Group, etc. to guide use
of ICT for the benefit of banking in general and particularly the payment systems Further, from
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
1998 onwards, the Reserve Bank has been continuously bringing out a Payment System Vision
document for every three years, enlisting the road map for implementation. The latest one is for
the  period  2015  –18.  Improvement  in  the  safety,  security,  soundness,  efficiency  and
effectiveness of the payment systems has been the focus all along, besides expansion in use of
various payment modes and ushering in various payment products and services. Reserve Bank
has  played  the  crucial  roles  of  an  operator,  developer,  catalyst  and  facilitator,  regulator  and
supervisor, as the occasion demanded.
While  concluding  an  address  (on  Payment  System  –  An  Evolution,  or  a  Revolution)  to  the
students of Banaras Hindu University in October 2016, I had said “India has been enjoying a very
healthy evolution of payment systems over the past thirty years. In looking back, we can easily
admit that it had been a revolution, without so realising. This has been the result of the measured
road maps periodically adopted by the Reserve Bank, in the initial years as a developer, and in
later  years  as  a  catalyst  and  facilitator.  Today  our  systems  are  not  only  comparable  to  any
system anywhere in the world, our systems also do set standards and good practices for the
world to follow. We remain vigilant for ensuring safety and soundness of the payment systems
and are committed to customer safety and convenience".
In  these  six  months,  there  have  been  heightened  discussions  on  taking  payment  systems  to
further levels. Case in point is the Watal Committee deliberations and their recommendations.
Also  aiding  this  special  attention  has  been  the  recent  Demonetisation  of  the  Specified  Bank
Notes of the high denomination of   500 and   1000 since November 9, 2016 and the consequent
recognition of the need for speedy conversion to and adoption of digital payments.
In August 2016, the  Government  of  India  constituted  a  Committee  under  the  Chairmanship  of
Shri Ratan Watal, Principal Adviser, NITI Ayog, to review the payment systems in the country and
recommend appropriate measures for encouraging digital payments. The Committee studied the
regulatory and legislative structure and recommended that the Payment and Settlement Systems
Act 2007 should be amended to provide for improved regulatory governance, competition and
innovation,  consumer  protection,  open  access,  data  protection  and  security,  and  graded
penalties for offences.
One of the key recommendations is to form a Payment Regulatory Board under the PSS Act.
The Committee said that the payments function should be independent of the central banking
function  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  This  can  be  achieved  by  making  the  Board  for  Payment  and
Settlement Systems (BPSS) more independent by introducing members from outside RBI. This
new independent board is referred to as the Payment Regulatory Board (PRB). Government of
India has accepted this recommendation and has followed it up with promoting an amendment to
the PSS Act 2007 by including it as a part of the Finance Bill 2017.
For records, I may mention that the BPSS as it stands today does have eminent independent
members  with  knowledge,  experience  and  expertise  in  payment  systems  and  information
technology and operations. Hence, it is welcome to make this arrangement de jure in PRB.
Another recommendation is that the law should be amended to explicity cast responsibility on the
regulator to promote competition and innovation in payment industry. The Committee says that
the primary objectives of the PRB must include promotion of competition and innovation in the
payments market. Though we do understand the spirit behind this recommendation, we differ the
way in which it is sought to be achieved. For competition, there is a separate statue and authority
associated. Enshrining it within PSS Act can lead to overlapping jurisdictions which can best be
avoided. Likewise, if promoting innovation is to be hard coded in the Act, defining what would
constitute “an innovation” would be difficult.
Yet another recommendation relates to data protection and consumer protection. We agree that
data protection and consumer protection are essential. The role of the regulator and supervisor
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of payment systems is to ensure the safety, security and soundness of the systems and hence
consumer  protection  is  a  very  relevant  objective.  However,  the  concept  of  data  protection  is
relevant  much  beyond  the  payment  system;  it  should  in  fact  encompass  any  digital  data.
Appropriately, this should be enshrined in Information Technology Act; otherwise, again there will
be overlapping jurisdictions, which is best avoided.
The Committee observes that “banking as an activity is separate from payments, which is more
of a technology business”. I beg to differ. As I had said in my address at BHU, payments can be
effected only in either of two ways – one you use cash to make payments and the other you
transfer money in your bank account. There is no third method. Thus for the non-cash payments,
the origination and ending places are banks only. Therefore, minus the banks, there is no non-
cash  payment  instrument  or  system.  Perhaps,  what  the  Committee  refers  as  ‘payments’  is
actually  ‘remittances’.  This  view  is  further  strengthened  when  they  say,  it  is  “more  of  a
technology business”. Yes, “Remittances” are today a technology business.
There is a misconception that non-bank entities are being discriminated against, as compared to
banking entities. As regards the opening up of access to various systems and activities for non-
bank entities, we have been opening up the space and allowing entry to non-bank entities. At
origination, in between originating bank and destination bank and at the receiving end, there is no
restriction for a non-bank entity to be present. Examples include the PPI issuers, BBPS operating
units, TReDS, WLAs, payment aggregators, etc. There is an implied suggestion that this sector
needs to be freed of licensing mechanism and once a set of criteria are fixed, any number of
entities meeting those criteria should be allowed to function. We differ from this idea. Such a free
entry  may  not  be  appropriate  for  ‘payment  industry’.  We  must  remember  that  the  payment
service provider is ‘entrusted’ with money, and therefore “fit and proper” criterion is of utmost
importance  and  consequently,  “free  entry”  based  on  tick-box  exercise  will  be  a  risky
phenomenon.
Some  people  ask  why  a  non-bank  cannot  be  allowed  to  keep  “accounts”.  They  quote  the
success of mPesa, a non-bank entity in Kenya in ushering payment revolution in that country.
Many  mobile  phone  companies  do  feel  they  can  offer  “account”  based  payment  service.  Our
answer is simple. If you maintain “an account”, then you are a bank and you need a banking
licence. When you keep the money of the public in “account”, you are a financial entity taking
deposits and you must be public trustworthy and so be regulated as a deposit taking financial
entity.
Let me now explain what we intend to do to take the payment systems to the next orbit.
The Vision-2018 for Payment and Settlement Systems in India reiterates the commitment of the
Reserve Bank of India to encourage greater use of electronic payments by all sections of society
so  as  to  achieve  a  “less-cash”  society.  The  objective  is  to  facilitate  provision  of  a  payment
system for the future that combines the much-valued attributes of safety, security and universal
reach with technological solutions which enable faster processing, enhanced convenience, and
the extraction and use of valuable information that accompanies payments.
The  broad  contours  of  Vision-2018  revolve  around  the  5  Cs:  •  Coverage  –  by  enabling  wider
access  to  a  variety  of  electronic  payment  services  •  Convenience  –  by  enhancing  user
experience through ease of use and of products and processes • Confidence – by promoting
integrity of systems, security of operations and customer protection • Convergence – by ensuring
interoperability across service providers • Cost – by making services cost effective for users as
well as service providers.
Vision-2018 focuses on four strategic initiatives viz., responsive regulation, robust infrastructure,
effective  supervision  and  customer  centricity.  With  the  formation  of  PRB,  the  regulatory  and
supervisory  structure  will  be  strengthened.  With  the  Unified  Payments  Interface  (UPI),  the
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
National  Unified  USSD  Platform  (NUUP),  the Aadhar  Payment  Bridge,  Bharat  QR  etc  we  will
have  robust  payment  infrastructure.  For  customer  centricity,  we  will  be  focusing  on  ensuring
soundness  of  payment  system  products  and  services,  cyber  security,  effective  customer
grievance  redressal  arrangements  and  preventive  and  punitive  enforcement  actions  for
omissions and commissions by the operators.
To  conclude,  the  Reserve  Bank  remains  committed  to  play  a  catalytic  and  facilitating  role  for
enabling  innovations  in  payment  systems  arena,  while  performing  its  responsibilities  as  a
regulator and supervisor of payment systems for ensuring their safety, security and soundness,
along with customer protection.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
