Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Turning vision into partnership
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Awards Ceremony and Appreciation Lunch, Manila, 11 July 2017.
 PDIC  President  Roberto  Tan,  National  Statistician  Lisa  Bersales,  Members  of  the  Monetary
Board, sector heads, fellow BSPers, former Central Bank Governor Jaime C. Laya, guests, a
pleasant  good  morning  to  all  of  you.  Magandang  umaga  especially  to  our  stakeholders  and
awardees.
Every  year  for  the  last  fourteen  (14)  years  we  at  the  BSP  have  held  this  annual  ceremony
traditionally right around this time: our Anniversary month… There is significance in this chosen
timing.  The message we wish to convey is that, not only do we value you: our stakeholders... 
More so, we recognize that the BSP would not have achieved all it has if it were not for your
partnership.  This is why we celebrate with you during our milestone month of July. 
The theme of our 24th Anniversary here at the BSP is “together moving forward: a new season of
excellence.”  There is a journey implied, and a needed collaboration and cooperation expressed. 
This theme includes, not just the members of the BSP family progressing onward in unity, but
this includes you too, our esteemed stakeholders, whom we honor today. 
I have been with the BSP – then, the Central Bank of the Philippines – since 1981… And as a
young Central Banker one of my tasks was to draft technical speeches…  So even thirty-six (36)
years after, I still have a passion for words. 
Let  me  focus  on  this  event’s  keyword.    Stakeholder.    It  sounds  quite  ominous.    Its  origin  is
consistent with this sense of foreboding.  The word “stakeholder” first appeared in the Oxford
English Dictionary in 1708.  It referred to one holding a wager, a bet. 
Thankfully,  for  us  now,  the  word  has  evolved  into  a  dynamic  —  even  an  exciting  and  active
concept, where speculation has no role.  As presently understood, stakeholders are partners and
can be involved in the successes of an enterprise, from whose accomplishments they too can
greatly benefit.
The  importance  of  collaboration  and  partnerships  was  stressed  by  Governor  Amando  M.
Tetangco, Jr. in his two (2) terms at the BSP’s helm…  Gov. Say repeatedly said that in the BSP,
our  work  could  not  be  accomplished  by  the  BSP  working  alone,  but  only  through  continued
discussion and cooperation with others, like government agencies, institutions, other regulatory
bodies, private organizations and entities.  This is a belief we strongly hold and will continue to
hold here in the BSP.
This  morning  we  have  one-hundred  and  forty  six  (146)  outstanding  partners  that  we
acknowledge. You are government agencies and departments… private businesses… leaders in
your  respective  industries.    You,  our  honorees  and  stakeholders  are  here  today  because  you
helped the BSP in its programs.  But did you know that beyond the altruism you displayed, where
you  extended  assistance  willingly  and  often  without  expectation  of  anything  in  return  from  the
BSP, there was in your actions, a reward that will ultimately redound to the fulfillment of a shared
vision and dream? 
In the BSP, all employees know our vision by heart.  Memorize nila ito.  Our vision is to be a
world-class monetary authority and a catalyst for a globally competitive economy and financial
system that delivers a high quality of life for all Filipinos.  A high quality of life for all Filipinos.  This
includes each person here in this Assembly Hall.  And with your contribution, with the assistance
you  gave  us,  this  is  precisely  what  you  are  helping  us  achieve.    So,  for  this,  we  thank  you. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Please give yourselves a warm round of applause.
This is not rhetoric.  For example, the outstanding survey respondents and information partners
here  who  assisted  the  BSP,  helped  us  in  formulating  data-driven  monetary  policy.    The
responses  you  gave  and  the  information  you  provided  underpinned  enabling  decisions  that
allowed the Philippine economy grow by 6.4 percent in the first quarter of 2017.  You helped so
that the Philippines continues to be one of the fastest growing economies in Asia. Stakeholder
participation  is  essential  so  that  even  amidst  confounding  global  developments  such  as  the
Brexit and the United States’ seeming turn to protectionist policy, we can stand resilient and stay
calm, with inflation at 3.1 percent in the first half of 2017, well within the government’s inflation
target range for the year.
Our  external  payments  position  remains  manageable.  Robust  remittances  from  overseas
Filipinos  and  ample  receipts  from  the  business  process  outsourcing  sector  continue  to  fuel
economic  growth.  The  country’s  external  debt  remains  at  sustainable  levels,  with  the  ratio  to
GDP improving in Q1 2017 to 24.1 percent from 26.5 percent in the same quarter last year. In
addition,  the  country’s  Gross  International  Reserves  remain  more  than  adequate  at  US$81.4
billion  as  of  end-June  2017,  equivalent  to  nearly  9.0  months’  worth  of  imports  of  goods  and
payment for services and income.  These are achievements that were brought about by sound
policy-making  built  on  our  collective  dedication  and  willingness  to  cooperate  for  the  sake  of
something larger than ourselves.
In this assembly hall are exemplary partners who have enabled us to carry out programs that
reinforce the BSP’s three pillars of central banking. You have contributed to BSP’s initiatives and
programs  in  financial  inclusion  and  education…  consumer  protection…  payments  and
settlements... overseas Filipino remittances… coin recirculation… the clean note policy… and
demonetization of our new design series currency. 
The banking system today is very robust and is poised for broader reach and better service.
The number of operating banks as of March 2017 is 599 (head offices) with an overall branch
network of 10,679 units.  Assets of the banking sector also grew by nearly 12.42% percent year-
on-year as of December 2016 boosted by an increase in deposits, profits, and fresh equity.  No
less important, assets grew without compromising their quality. The Philippine banking system’s
capital  adequacy  ratio  as  of  Q3  2016  has  reached  15.59  percent,  almost  double  the  global-
minimum.
Prudent policy-making has led to a sturdy financial system and a stable economy. The critical
contribution  of  our  partners  as  exemplified  through  your  compliance  with  the  BSP’s  various
surveys,  provision  of  information,  and  participation  in  our  diverse  programs,  advocacies  and
initiatives, assisted the BSP in fulfilling its mandates.
To reinforce the importance of data gathering and increasing our interface with the public, we are
pleased to announce the formal launching of the user-friendly BSP e-Survey Portal.  This online
facility will make it easy and convenient for respondents to participate in the surveys of the BSP. 
The  Coordinated  Direct  Investment  Survey  went  online  last  June.  The  Coordinated  Portfolio
Investment Survey (CPIS) and monthly Cross Border Transactions Survey questionnaires shall
be included in the e-Survey by the end of this month.  The launch of the BSP e-Survey Portal
aims to improve efficiency in generating the Cross Border Transactions Survey results which are
used  as  inputs  for  the  Balance  of  Payments  and  International  Investment  Position  Statistics.
These indicators help the BSP craft and assess our policy settings.
So as you can see, there are more exciting times ahead, more collaboration planned, and better
avenues  to  make  them  more  successful  and  productive.    We  look  forward  to  continuing  the
journey with you.  Congratulations to all our stakeholders.  Mabuhay kayo.  Mabuhay ang BSP. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mabuhay ang ating bansang Pilipinas!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
