Rameswurlall  Basant  Roi:  Recent  reforms  in  banking  regulation,
supervision and prudential accounting in Mauritius
Address by Mr Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at the IMF Afritac
South Seminar on International Financial Reporting Standards 9, Ebène, 7 April 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen
Good morning
I am happy to be here with you this morning.   Thank you Mr Ravi Mohan, Resident Advisor to the
IMF’s AFRITAC South, for inviting me to share my views on recent reforms in the area of banking
regulation and supervision, including on prudential accounting, in Mauritius. 
In  2012,  the  BCBS  released  the  revised  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  to
address  weaknesses  that  came  to  light  during  the  2007–08  global  financial  crisis.    In  recent
years, supervisors around the world – including the Bank of Mauritius – have taken radical steps
to improve the regulatory and supervisory framework by drawing lessons from the crisis and by
raising  standards  in  line  with  the  revised  core  principles  and  other  internationally-accepted
norms.
The  2007–08  crisis  demonstrated  how  easily  a  failed  financial  institution  –  in  particular,
systemically important ones – could send tremors across jurisdictions worldwide. Shockwaves
can be transmitted, for instance, directly via the liquidity channel by way of severe constraints to
access funding or indirectly via second-round effects resulting from an economic slowdown. It is
thus important that financial institutions build up resilience to be able to absorb both internal as
well as external shocks. 
Many regulators have made stress testing an integral component of the capital planning exercise
for financial institutions.  The Bank of Mauritius has recently developed stress testing models to
independently assess the resilience of banks to shocks, both at macro and micro levels.  Banks
are being required to implement an internal capital adequacy assessment by conducting stress
testing for key risks at least once a year.
In line with international trends, the Bank of Mauritius issued guidelines on capital conservation
buffer  back  in  June  2014.    Domestic  systemically  important  banks  are  called  upon  to  build
adequate  capital  buffers  that  can  be  used  in  the  event  of  stressed  financial  and  economic
conditions.
Whereas  some  supervisory  authorities  have  already  developed  a  risk  based  supervisory
framework,  a  good  number  of  authorities  are  still  in  the  process  of  constructing  their  own
framework to ensure that resources and compliance requirements are commensurate with the
risk levels as well as the systemic importance of financial institutions.  The Bank of Mauritius has
initiated a phased roll out of a robust risk-based supervisory framework.
One of the BCBS core principles for Effective Banking Supervision is consolidated supervision.
 Financial conglomerates can be faced with various risks, unknown to regulators looking only at
one  segment  of  their  operations.    Further,  large  financial  groups  may  operate  across
jurisdictions,  with  possibly  differing  regulatory  regimes.  The  core  principles  emphasise  an
effective framework for consolidated and cross-border supervision with appropriate home-host
coordination. 
The Bank of Mauritius has been working on these recommendations and not later than last year
the banking legislation was amended to allow for consolidated supervision of banking groups. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Bank of Mauritius actively engages with the host regulator of subsidiaries of local banking
groups as well as with home regulators of foreign groups through regular supervisory colleges. 
The Bank of Mauritius has also entered into Memoranda of Understanding with other regulators
for the purpose of fostering exchange of information and facilitating regulation and supervision of
entities with affiliates falling under the purview of other regulators.
A strong liquidity base is key to ensuring robustness of a regulatory and supervisory framework. 
The BCBS has reviewed liquidity standards, including the need for High Quality Liquid Assets to
safeguard survival under stressed scenarios and a Net Stable Funding Ratio to guarantee that
banks have appropriate level of stable funding.   The Bank of Mauritius has lately released its
upgraded  liquidity  guidelines,  which  are  presently  under  consultation  and  are  expected  to  be
finalised in 2017.
Another  Core  Principle  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision  requires  an  appropriate  crisis
management and resolution regime to minimize disruption in the financial system as well as the
reduces both the impact and probability of failures.  This also requires adequate collaboration
across regulators to ensure that responsibilities are discharged in a coordinated approach.  The
Bank of Mauritius is currently reviewing the existing regime with assistance from the IMF to cater
for an effective resolution and crisis management regime.
The establishment of a deposit insurance scheme is one of a series of reforms initiated with a
view to preserving financial stability.  The Deposit Insurance Scheme Bill has been finalised by
the Bank of Mauritius and sent to government to be enacted.
Nine years after the global financial crisis, loan loss provisioning and asset quality remain key
issues for banks and regulators.  Accounting standards around the world are currently based
upon  the  incurred-loss  impairment  model.    This  approach  permits  recognition  of  impairment
losses centred on “objective  evidence”  –  which  basically  means  that  loan  loss  provisions  are
computed  on ex post losses.  The existing model is, in many cases, applied by banks so that
impairment  is  only  recognised  just  before  the  default  of  a  loan.    The  existing  standards  for
provisioning thus do not meet supervisory requisites.
IFRS 9 is a complex accounting standard relating to financial instruments.  The key reform with
IFRS  9  is  that  provisions  for  loan  losses  will  be  based  on  an  expected  loss  model  for  credit
losses. This is a distinct improvement as it will make it difficult for banks to hide problem assets
on their balance sheet. I don’t need to dwell at length on this topic knowing that you have just
participated in the course.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  engaged  with  external  auditors  and  banks  as  from  March  2016  to
ensure  smooth  implementation  of  IRFS  9.    Banks  have  been  requested  to  submit  the
implementation plans to the central bank and are required to make quarterly presentations on
progress achieved and roadmap to complete implementation.  The Bank of Mauritius has already
conducted  a  first  round  of  discussion  with  most  banks  to  better  understand  their  plans  and
challenges as well as guide them in terms of our expectations.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  envisaging  parallel  runs  by  financial  institutions  to  allow  for  a  good
transition as well as provide management and the regulator and external auditors with sufficient
time to verify the reliability of the models and the assumptions.  In addition, the Bank of Mauritius
has issued several guidelines which would be assisting in ensuring the safety and soundness of
the banking sector during the implementation phase.
In  April  2016,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  added  prudential  norms  for  credit  classification  and
provisioning  requirements  to  the  existing  Guideline  on  Impairment  Measurement  and  Income
Recognition.  This was in response to difficulties in comparing information across banks, given
that there could be significant differences on how banks identify and report their asset quality.  In
addition,  as  highlighted  earlier,  the  global  financial  crisis  revealed  that  the  existing  accounting
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
framework resulted in “too little and too late” provisions. 
The Guideline Impairment Measurement and Income Recognition prescribes rules for valuation
of collateral given that that proper valuation of collateral is important for an accurate estimate of
expected losses.  The Bank of Mauritius has included provisions for the treatment of restructured
loans to address the risk of ‘cosmetic’ restructuring to postpone expected losses and the setting
aside of adequate provisions.     
As regards loan loss data, credit profiles currently available on the Mauritius Credit Information
Bureau, which is hosted by the Bank of Mauritius, is in the process of being upgraded to provide
default history.  The new information would then be used in assessing expected losses.
The  Banking Act  2004  sets  out  the  duties  of  external  auditors  which,  among  others,  requires
them to report any breach of regulations and or material issues to the Bank as well as to certify
that  the  financial  statements  represent  a  true  and  fair  picture  of  the  affairs  of  the  financial
institutions.
Sound credit risk management is a key factor in the accuracy of expected loss models.  The
Bank of Mauritius issued a Guideline on Credit Risk Management back in 2003 which establishes
sound  principles  of  credit  risk  management  whilst  at  the  same  time  establishing  the
responsibilities and accountabilities of senior management and the board of directors. There are
several other regulations regarding credit risk management and adequacy of provisions which in
addition to the ones I have just stated will assist in the maintenance of the safety and soundness
of banks and other deposit taking institutions through the transition period. 
Will the new standards on IFRS 9 help to avoid the next crisis?
The concept of expected credit loss model aims to recognise losses adequately and in time.  It
will address the ‘too little and too late’ provisioning problem.  However, the model itself will be
largely dependent on underlying data, expert judgement, subjective estimates of macroeconomic
parameters  as  well  as  adequacy  of  the  internal  control  framework  notwithstanding  the  IT
infrastructure and analytics.  
Subject  to  these  challenges  being  effectively  addressed,  boards  and  senior  management  of
banks  will  take  informed  decisions  to  proactively  manage  provisions.    Banks’  senior
management, board of directors, external auditors as well as supervisors all have a critical role
to play in the smooth transition and implementation of the new prudential accounting regime.
Thank you. 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
