 M a y   9 ,   2 0 1 7 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
The Global Economy and the Global Financial System:   
In an Era of Revival and Metamorphosis 
Speech at the Institute of International Finance (IIF) 
Spring Membership Meeting 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction: Ten Years On from the Global Financial Crisis 
Thank  you  very  much  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  the  Spring  Membership 
Meeting of the Institute of International Finance (IIF). 
 This year, we will be entering the ninth year since Lehman Brothers collapsed. That event 
in September of 2008 was one of the most visible flashpoints of the Global Financial Crisis, 
but if we count from what should be seen as the foreshock -- severe disruptions in the U.S. 
subprime  mortgage  market  in  2007  --  we  are  marking  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  Crisis. 
We  have  indeed  come  a  long  way.  Since  the  Crisis,  the  global  community  has  put 
considerable efforts into rebuilding the financial system, and such efforts have contributed 
to  greatly  enhancing  the  stability  and  resilience  of  the  international  financial  system, 
compared with what we had before the Crisis. 
 The list of achievements regarding the reform of the international financial system since the 
Crisis  is  quite  long.  Basel  III  was  introduced.  The  over-the-counter  (OTC)  derivatives 
market was reformed. Risk management at central counterparties (CCPs) was strengthened. 
The process of resolving financial institutions was improved, and so on. Of these reforms, 
Basel III, which applies to internationally active banks, ushered in significant changes to the 
existing  framework  of  banking  regulation  in  terms  of  both  capital  and  liquidity.  After 
almost seven years of negotiations, we are now crossing the t's and dotting the  i's. The fact 
that  we  have  reached  this  stage  for  a  very  complex  framework,  which  must accommodate 
conflicting national interests, proves that financial authorities and banks, which experienced 
perhaps the worst turbulence since the Great Depression of the 1930s, have worked together, 
sharing a firm commitment not to see a repeat of the Crisis. This is a notable achievement in 
the annals of international financial cooperation. 
 Obviously, financial regulation is a means to an end. That end is financial stability, which is 
one  of  the  fundamental  underpinnings  of  sustained  growth  of  the  economy.  Many  of  the 
new international prudential regulations that were agreed in the wake of the Crisis, such as 
the enhanced capital levels, the liquidity coverage ratio, and the countercyclical buffer, are 
now  being  introduced  in  steps,  and  more  regulations,  such  as  the  leverage  ratio,  total 
loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC), and net stable funding ratio (NSFR), are on the way, again 
in steps. 
1 
 Since  all  these  new  internationally  agreed  rules  are  part  of  a  bigger  package,  they  must 
unfalteringly  come  into  effect  as  envisaged  if  the  rules  are  to  have  the  desired  effects. 
Having said that, we also must be mindful of the danger of the means becoming an end unto 
itself. If compliance to rules becomes an overarching goal, there could be unintended effects 
on  the  functioning  of  financial  intermediaries.  Financial  regulation  must  not  be  the 
Procrustean  bed  of  Greek  mythology.  Accordingly,  financial  authorities  and  banks  must 
closely  monitor  the  effects  of  the  new  rules  on  the  macro  economy  and  financial  markets 
without prejudice and from the broadest of perspectives.   
 I. Global Economic Developments: Adjustment Ending but Fragility Lurking 
Global Recovery and the Waning of Pessimism   
As the global financial system is generally returning to a surer footing, the global economy 
is also regaining its momentum since the second half of last year. In the World  Economic 
Outlook  (WEO)  published  last  month, the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  expects the 
global  economy  to  grow  by  3.5  percent  this  year.  The  developed  economies  --  Japan,  the 
United  States,  and  Europe  --  are  all  envisaged  to  enjoy  robust  domestic  demand  growth, 
while  the  forecast  for  Chinese  growth  is  around  6.5  percent.  At  the  same  time,  with  the 
strengthening  of  major  economies  and  the  bottoming  out  of  commodity  prices,  nascent 
recovery  is  observed  in  the  growth  momentum  of  developing  countries  and  resource-rich 
economies.  All  in  all,  the  prevailing  pessimism  since  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  which 
fostered colorful language such as "secular stagnation" and "low growth trap," is clearly on 
the wane. 
 Such a sea change probably could be attributed in part to the anticipation over the economic 
policies of the new U.S. administration. Having said that, more fundamentally, I would note 
that the global economy has finally reached escape velocity. Support from various policies 
during the ten years since the Crisis is now finally bearing fruit. 
 Looking  back,  during  the  last  few  years,  the  global  economy  suffered  weak  corporate 
investment  and  there  was  talk  of  the  C-suite  losing  its  animal  spirit.  While  the  huge 
negative  demand  shock  resulting  from  the  Crisis  inevitably  depressed  investment,  it  also 
seems difficult to deny that the cloud of pessimism rising from the shocks cast a pall over 
the  economy,  resulting  in  a  negative  feedback  loop  delaying  autonomous  recovery. 
2 
 Cognitive  psychology  tells  us  that  perception  creates  reality.  The  prevalence  of  skewed 
negativism  from  the  damaging  demand  shock  could  have  dampened  investment  and  new 
hires, and that in turn could have depressed potential growth. One can interpret this as one 
form of hysteresis, as described in economic textbooks. 
 Fortunately,  various  measures  of  business  and  consumer  confidence  are  on  an  upswing 
everywhere, and what I might describe as a chain reaction of pessimism is almost a thing of 
the past. Meanwhile, we are beginning to see active debate on the desirable policy mix for 
sustaining the recovery, and more generally on a possible new economic policy framework. 
If  these  discourses  catalyzed  by  the  launch  of  the  new  U.S.  administration  are  uplifting 
business  and  consumer  sentiment  in  one  way  or  another,  I  would  view  this  as  a  clearly 
positive development. 
 A Caveat regarding the Global Financial System: Circularity of Offshore Dollars 
Even  as  the  global  economy  improves,  there  are  still  fragilities  that  should  not  be 
overlooked.  One  that  I  would  like  to  point  out  is  the  dollar-denominated  debt  of  some 
emerging economies, which has been repeatedly  called to attention by observers including 
economists at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). These economies -- especially 
firms in these economies -- have increased the levels of dollar-denominated debt under the 
accommodative global monetary environment following the Global Financial Crisis. Now, 
as  the  United  States  embarks  on  monetary  policy  normalization,  we  now  need  to  monitor 
the  debt  dynamics  of  these  economies  from  two  perspectives:  increasing  interest  payment 
burden and exchange rate depreciation. 
 Mentioning  the  dollar-denominated  debt  of  emerging  market  economies  calls  to  mind  the 
1980s debt crisis in Latin America, which shook the world and led to the establishment of 
the IIF to deal with the problem. The origins of the debt crisis could be traced back to the 
recycling  of  excess  dollars  at  oil-producing  economies,  which  ballooned  in  the  1970s,  to 
Latin  American  economies  through  U.S.  and  European  banks.  When  the  United  States 
began  monetary  tightening  and  the  dollar  began  appreciating  under  the  new  Reagan 
administration in 1981, the Latin American economies suffered deteriorating debt dynamics 
and soon fell into arrears on their external payments. 
 3 
 Reflecting on their experiences during the Asian Monetary and Banking Crisis of the 1990s, 
many emerging market economies today have adopted flexible exchange rates, strengthened 
risk  management  at  banks,  and  built  up  firewalls  such  as  foreign  exchange  reserves. 
Accordingly,  emerging  economies  are  generally  more  resilient  in  the  face  of  stress. 
Nevertheless,  with  the  increased  capital  mobility  across  borders  and  ever  more  complex 
geopolitical  risks,  we  should  continue  to  pay  attention  to  the  issue  of  dollar-denominated 
debt and currency mismatch at emerging market corporates. 
 If  I  may  add  a  few  more  words  here,  currency  mismatch  is  also  an  issue  that  cannot  be 
ignored  by  financial  institutions  of  the  major  economies.  For  example,  over  the  last  few 
years, Japanese financial institutions have taken pains to ensure stable funding of dollars as 
they  expanded  their  overseas  activities.  Even  so,  they  still  depend  on  foreign  exchange 
swaps for some portion of their dollar funding. The foreign exchange swap market has been 
described as the black box of the international financial market, because it was difficult to 
pin  down  the  details  of  its  structure.1  The  increasing  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  United 
States would result in higher dollar funding costs through swaps. Furthermore, if emerging 
market  economies  reduce  the  investment  of  dollar  reserves  in  anticipation  of  currency 
support  operations,  financial  institutions  would  also  experience  tighter  dollar  financing 
conditions in terms of availability.2 
 The  issues  of  repaying  dollar-denominated  debt  by  emerging  economy  corporates  and  of 
stable dollar funding at non-U.S. financial institutions are, in a sense, two sides of the same 
coin.  They  are  the  manifestation  of  the  circularity  and  recursivity  of  the  dollar  as  the 
exceptional  reserve  currency.  In  view  of  the  sometimes  extreme  fluctuation  of  dollar 
demand and supply in the offshore markets, we should perhaps not forget a comment by a 
former U.S. Treasury Secretary: "The dollar is our currency but your problem."3 
                                                    
1  Nevertheless,  recent  efforts  --  for  example,  by  various  foreign  exchange  market  committees  -- 
have resulted in enhanced data collection regarding this market. 
2  See  Hiroshi  Nakaso  (2017),  "Monetary  Policy  Divergence  and  Global  Financial  Stability:  From 
the Perspective of Demand and Supply of Safe Assets." 
3  Attributed to John Connally, U.S. Treasury Secretary (February 1971-June 1972). 
4 
 II. Financial Business Environment: Profitability and Digital Innovation 
Profitability of Financial Institutions 
Under  these  conditions  that  I  have  just  described,  how  is  the  environment  evolving  for 
financial institutions in the major economies? 
 During the last few years, U.S. and European financial institutions, which bore the brunt of 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  had  to  slim  down  and  restructure  their  balance  sheets  in 
response. However, this is not the end of the story for financial institutions in the developed 
economies.  Since  well  before  the  Crisis,  these  economies  have  been  confronted  with 
long-term  structural  challenges,  such  as  stagnating  potential  growth  and  changing 
demographics. More recently, risks arising from climate change have been added to the list. 
These  challenges  are  forcing  financial  institutions  to  fundamentally  review  their  business 
strategies. 
 In  this  context,  if  I  may  touch  upon  the  situation  in  Japan,  changes  in  business  models  at 
Japanese banks have been less visible compared with U.S. and European banks, reflecting 
to  an  extent  the  relatively  limited  impact  of  the  Crisis.  Nevertheless,  the  low  interest  rate 
environment  that  has  persisted  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  and  accelerating  aging  of  the 
population  are  significantly  weighing  down  on  domestic 
interest  margins  and 
loan-to-deposit  ratios,  and  pressure  from  these  two  directions  is  reducing  the  underlying 
profitability of Japanese banks. In response, Japanese banks have been actively attempting 
in  recent  years  to  enhance  profitability  through  measures  such  as  expanding  overseas 
business, shifting assets and taking non-yen and equity risks, and diversifying non-interest 
revenues. 
 Given  the  variety  of  business  models  for  financial  institutions,  there  is  no  single  panacea 
that  could  improve  profitability.  There  are  good,  rational  reasons  for  how  various  models 
have  evolved.  For  example,  in  the  United  States,  where  there  is  a  deep  capital  market, 
investment banking has evolved, and in Europe, where firms and households are relatively 
more  dependent  on  banks,  there  is  a  preference  by  tradition  for  universal  banking  or 
5 
 bancassurance.4  Having  said  that,  with  due  respect  to  the  differences  in  weighting  of 
factors  between  economies,  attempts  by  financial  institutions  to  sustainably  enhance  their 
profitability must clear higher hurdles that now exist, such as the low-for-long environment, 
increasing compliance costs, and intensifying competition. Financial institutions must build 
business  models  that  can  flexibly  accommodate  any  changes  in  environment  and  at  the 
same  time  enable  them  to  proactively  take  risks  supported  by  strong  capital  foundations. 
This is a common challenge for all financial institutions in every economy. 
 As a footnote, I would like to note that, from the perspective of maintaining the stability of 
the  financial  system,  authorities  are  paying  close  attention  to  the  profitability  of  financial 
institutions, because higher profitability is one route for financial institutions to organically 
generate their capital. At the same time, authorities need to closely monitor the robustness 
of risk management at financial institutions so that  these institutions do not take excessive 
risks in pursuit of profits; in other words, not endanger financial stability via an overheating 
channel. 
 FinTech: A New Wave of IT Innovation 
In  such  an  environment, FinTech,  which  is  fast  emerging  worldwide,  could  potentially  be 
an  "enabler,"  opening  up  new  business  frontiers  and  allowing  financial institutions  to  free 
themselves from the yoke of low profitability. 
 Looking  at  the  current  state  of  the  global  economy,  we  find  the  rise  of  "connected 
businesses,"  which  tie  together  information  and  services  almost  instantly  over  a  wide 
horizon,  against  the  backdrop  of  advances  in  digital  communications  technologies  and 
epitomized  with  terms  like  "the  fourth  industrial  revolution"  and  the  "Internet  of  Things 
(IoT)."  "Sharing  economy"  is  one  example  of  such  development  that  is  gaining  traction 
everywhere, and broadly speaking, FinTech can be understood in the same context. 
                                                    
4  A business model where banks develop and sell insurance products. It became popular in Europe 
(France,  Italy,  and  Spain  in  particular)  from  the  1990s  onward,  involving  mainly  life  insurance 
products. However, there have been signs of deemphasizing this model recently, reflecting doubts on 
synergies achieved. 
6 
 This trend is probably changing the nature of innovation from the longstanding emphasis on 
improving individual products to an emphasis on transforming how services are provided; 
in other words, the distribution channel of services. In adapting to such a change, firms that 
can perform meticulous customer analytics will be able to more appropriately and promptly 
provide  individual  customers  with  services  that  are  tailored  to  their  attributes  and 
preferences. 
 Such "personalization of services," as it often  is called, is making rapid inroads, especially 
in  fields  such  as  healthcare  and  development  of  new  drugs.5,6  It  also  could  become  more 
prevalent  in  finance, leveraging  on  advances  in  FinTech,  in  areas  such  as  retail  payments, 
remittances,  and  lending,  as  well  as  in  less  capital  intensive  areas  such  as  transaction 
banking and wealth management.7  Here, it is interesting to note that trends in the two of the 
most  heavily  regulated  activities  --  medicine  and  finance  --  are  pointing  in  the  same 
direction with the personalization of services. 
 Meanwhile,  financial  institutions  cannot  shy  away  from  improving  their  cost  structure  in 
meeting their profitability goals, and here again, FinTech can make significant contributions. 
For example, it is a well-known fact that the return on equity (ROE) of financial institutions 
is materially higher in the Nordic economies, where online banking is prevalent and branch 
network  density  is  generally  low.  Furthermore,  while  financial  institutions  have  been 
spending  more  on  compliance  with  various  regulations  following  the  Global  Financial 
Crisis, we are now seeing efforts to apply IT technologies in this area, which are referred to 
as  RegTech,  following  FinTech.  The  use  of  RegTech  is  still  in  its infancy,  but  I  must  say 
that it was a groundbreaking endeavor by the IIF to release a report on this issue as early as 
it did.8 
                                                    
5  "Personalization of services" could be regarded as a tailoring of services at a more granular level 
than previously possible. 
6  For  example,  in  everyday  application,  monitoring  of  physical  conditions  through  censor-based 
wearable devices, and in a more rarefied setting, gene therapy  taking account of individuals' DNA 
readings. 
7  Examples of transaction banking are cash management, trade finance, and supply-chain finance. 
8  IIF (2016), "RegTech in Financial Services: Technology Solutions for Compliance and Reporting." 
7 
 Circumspection and Innovation at Financial Institutions 
Although  there  are  opportunities,  some  leading  thinkers  argue  that  banks  should  distance 
themselves from innovation and return to a simpler business structure focusing on deposit 
taking  and  lending.  Such  a  view  is  one  reflection  of  the  situation  that  existed  before  the 
Global  Financial  Crisis,  at  which  time  banks  were  jokingly  described  as  "too  complex  to 
succeed." In fact, in places like Europe following the Crisis, we can observe trends in banks' 
lending and funding, which might be described as back to retail. Nevertheless, I cannot buy 
the idea that banks should be dull, boring, and far removed from innovation. Such a view 
seems  too  extreme  and  ignores,  among  other  things,  the  extensive  information  gathering 
ability of banks. 
 If banks distance themselves from cutting-edge innovations, that could affect their business 
models.  For  example,  if  retail  deposits  begin  to  move  around  more  frequently  due  to 
FinTech,  intermediary  services  performed  by  banks,  for  which  funding  is  reliant  on 
relatively  sticky  deposits,  would  be  forced  to  change.  In  the  United  Kingdom  and  the 
United States, debate is now underway on the appropriateness of granting banking licenses 
and  central  bank  access  to  FinTech  enterprises,  and  this  shows  that  a  new  horizon  of 
cooperation and competition is being opened up between banks and FinTech enterprises. 
 Once  upon  a  time,  the  U.S.  economist  William  J.  Baumol  noted  that  the  number  of 
musicians  needed  to  play  a  Beethoven  string  quartet  was  four  in  the  19th  century  and 
remained so in the 20th century. That illustrated the Baumol effect, which observed that it 
was  difficult  to  raise  productivity  in  labor-intensive  service  industries.  However,  such  a 
view  as  Baumol's  is  now  beginning  to  be  a  thing  of  the  past,  reflecting  the  widespread 
deployment  of  technologies  such  as  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  and  robotics  in  many 
industries, not only in transportation and logistics but also in medicine and care-giving. 
 While we must not forget that there are still issues with FinTech in areas such as customer 
protection and security, we also should recognize its value as a "sandbox," where financial 
institutions  can  test  innovations  according  to  their  respective  competitive  advantage.  We 
should not let ourselves fall into complacency. After all, as the saying goes, "the stone age 
did not end for the lack of stone." 
 8 
 III. Conclusion: the Changing Face of Globalization and Multilateral Engagement 
Up  to  now,  I  have  discussed  recent  developments  in  the  global  economy  and  financial 
institutions. For the remaining few minutes, let me offer some personal observations on the 
bright and the not-so-bright sides of globalization, on which debate is now raging in every 
direction, drawing in part on my experiences at the Asian Development Bank (ADB), where 
I served as its president until a few years ago. 
 Increasing Uncertainty in a Multipolar World 
Over  the  last  few  years,  we  have  seen  growing  momentum  around  the  world  for 
anti-globalism, which argues that the globalization of the economy is exacerbating income 
inequality.  However,  such  a  view  overlooks  the  unmistakable  fact  that  global  economic 
integration  is  mitigating  global  poverty,  most  obviously  in  places  such  as  China  and  East 
Asian  economies.  It  also  is  safe  to  say  that  access  to  financial  services  is  improving 
significantly  in  emerging  economies,  as  a  result  of  developments  such  as  the  widespread 
adoption  of  mobile  banking.  Therefore,  it  is  slightly  ironic  to  find  that  anti-globalism  is 
becoming  more  acute  in  the  developed  economies.  I  believe  that  there  is  no  future  in  an 
inwardly obsessed movement turning its back on globalization. 
 Economies  of  the  world  are  now  strengthening  their  mutual  ties  through  many  channels, 
including  the  establishment  of  value  chains  transcending  national  borders.  Digital 
innovations  taking  place  in  cyberspace  are  also  accentuated  by  openness  to  the  outside 
world. Any ring-fencing attempt  that ignores such global interdependencies is  inconsistent 
with the reality of the 21st century in both the real and virtual worlds. 
 It  is  true  that,  in  today's  world,  people's  values  are  fragmenting,  leading  to  increased 
uncertainty  in  politics  and  economic  activities,  as  attested  to  by  anti-globalization 
movements.  Just  as  a  degree  of  stress  is  useful  in  maintaining  our  personal  health, 
uncertainty will act as a brake on our unwarranted optimism or complacency. Nevertheless, 
that is true only up to a point. If everyone is saying, as in today's financial markets, that the 
only certainty is uncertainty, it is not difficult to imagine that decision making is becoming 
increasingly difficult for economic agents. 
 9 
 The Importance of Multilateral Cooperation 
As the world becomes more and more fragmented and uncertain in a mutually reinforcing 
cycle,  we  must  maintain  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system  in  the  face  of 
inescapable international flows of capital. For this purpose, economies must overcome their 
narrowly-defined self-interest so as to cooperate and coordinate from a broader perspective. 
This  is  to  mitigate  to  some  extent  the  so-called  financial  trilemma,  through  multilateral 
cooperation,  and  it  requires  a  well-functioning  institutional  framework  such  as  the  IMF, 
multilateral  development  banks  (MDBs),  and  the  G20.9  The  financial  reforms  that  I  have 
referred  to  earlier  would  not  have  been  possible  without  confidence  building  among 
stakeholders  through  various  international  fora,  including  the  G20,  the  Financial  Stability 
Board (FSB), and the IIF. 
 Since  the  IIF  came  into being  in  the  first  half  of  the  1980s,  its  membership has  expanded 
more than tenfold and now covers more than 70 economies. This underscores the fact that 
financial institutions were both the driver and beneficiary of globalization. Building on the 
experiences of the most extreme financial crisis of the last decade, central banks around the 
world  have  strengthened  their  defenses  against  acute  liquidity  problems  involving  foreign 
currencies,  through  cooperative  measures  such  as  multilateral  swap  lines.  Obviously, 
reinforcing  the  safety  net  like  this  takes  into  account  the  fact  on  the  ground  that  financial 
institutions now operate more broadly and deeply across borders. 
 For the last 30 years, the world economy was engulfed by a strong homogenizing current of 
globalization. Having said that, I must also note that every trend has an inflection point. As 
polarization and fragmentation are becoming more evident, globalization may have reached 
a  turning  point  of  sorts.  I  would  thus  like  to  conclude  my  remarks  today  with  the  sincere 
hope that every one of you gathered here in this room, who are the leaders in international 
finance,  will  continue  to  play  the  role  of  inspirators  regarding  the  direction  of  the  global 
economy. 
 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                   
9  Financial trilemma is the term for noting that it is impossible to pursue the following three policy 
objectives  alongside one another: financial stability, global financial integration (free movement of 
capital across borders), and domestically oriented financial policy. For a more detailed explanation, 
see D. Schoenmaker (2011), "The Financial Trilemma," Economic Letters, 111, pp 57-59. 
10 
