Yves Mersch: Monetary policy challenges for Europe - banking on
the recovery
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 2017 Institute of International Finance (IIF) Spring Membership Meeting, Tokyo, 8 May 2017.
Introduction
 The recovery underway in the euro area is spreading by sector and geography and is gathering
momentum.  Confirmation  of  a  broadly  balanced  risk  outlook  is  within  realistic  reach.  The
extraordinary monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 are bearing fruit. The financial
sector has an important role to play in supporting this recovery and ensuring continued resilient
growth in the future. My intention today is to give a brief overview of the recovery, before making a
few remarks about financial institutions that are relevant to the current situation.
Economic recovery
The first quarter of this year marked the 16th consecutive quarter of real growth in the euro area.
In  fact,  GDP  grew  by  0.5%  in  the  first  quarter.  This  translates  to  annualised  growth  of  1.8%,
according to Eurostat – much higher than the 0.7% annualised growth recorded in the United
States  in  the  same  quarter.  Moreover,  the  latest  survey  data  support  expectations  of  robust
growth  throughout  the  first  half  of  2017.  The  PMI  composite  output  index  –  which  is  strongly
correlated with growth in the euro area – registered its highest quarterly average in nearly six
years during the first three months of 2017, while the forward-looking components of the survey
data  point  to  continued  growth  in  future  quarters.  Meanwhile,  economic  sentiment  in  the  euro
area is at a six-year high and unemployment is at an eight-year low.
Five million jobs have been created since 2013. This proves that the combination of consolidation
and reform measures has worked where it was pursued credibly.
The  economic  recovery  is  also  broad-based.  The  dispersion  of  growth  rates  across  both
countries and sectors is at its lowest level in two decades, reflecting a convergence of growth
rates at higher levels. This is good news for economic growth going forward because recoveries
tend to be stronger and more resilient when they are broad-based. These developments have, of
course, been supported by our monetary policy measures, which have led to a sharp easing of
financing  conditions  and  a  convergence  of  funding  costs  across  countries.  The  remaining
spreads are clearly related to credit risks – which fall outside our mandate.
The monetary policy measures taken since mid-2014 have supported price stability in particular
by buoying domestic demand, which is now the mainstay of the ongoing recovery. This marks a
departure from the past when euro area growth was far more reliant on external demand. While
world  trade  has  weakened  considerably  and  last  year  grew  at  the  slowest  pace  since  the
financial crisis, growth in the euro area has accelerated.
Looking  at  the  domestic  recovery  in  more  detail,  consumption  expenditure  is  a  key  source  of
support for growth. Rising employment and growth in real disposable income are translating into
increased  spending  rather  than  increased  saving,  reflecting  households’  confidence  in  future
economic  prospects.  This  contributes  to  a  positive  feedback  loop  between  consumption,
employment and income, further bolstering the recovery. But wage dynamics still lag behind due
to the remaining slack. Higher incomes are mostly the result of job creation rather than salary or
wage increases.
Investment  is  also  gradually  picking  up  given  the  favourable  financing  conditions,  the  need  to
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
modernise capital stock after years of subdued investment and the strengthening of corporate
profitability. Improvements in business confidence and in the production outlook, as reflected in
recent business sentiment surveys, should result in higher investment spending. However, public
investment is below trend in some surplus countries.
Also on a positive note, the risk assessment of the growth outlook is more and more balancing.
Although  we  still  face  some  risks,  in  particular  regarding  the  external  outlook,  political
uncertainties and fragilities have consistently evolved in a positive fashion in Europe since the
beginning of the year.
Available  data  also  point  to  an  improving  external  environment.  Global  economic  activity
indicators  suggest  robust  growth  at  the  start  of  2017,  which  should  further  support  business
investment in the euro area as export demand picks up. One could say we have left behind an
environment of elevated uncertainty in a Knightian sense and progressed to one of calculable
risks.
But in the euro area the balance of risk for inflation is not where the balance of risk to growth lies.
In terms of the labour market, the unemployment rate continues to decline despite growth in the
euro area labour force. Meanwhile, survey data suggest further improvements in labour demand
during the first quarter of this year. While the level of economic slack remains elevated, which
subdues underlying inflation, growth rates are above potential so the output gap will continue to
close over the policy horizon. This should support wage growth and return inflation towards a
level that is close to, but below, 2% over the medium term. Indeed, there are also timid signs of
early pipeline pressure stemming from industrial producer prices.
Against this background, market expectations regarding deflationary risks and further policy rate
cuts by the ECB have faded and focus is beginning to shift towards a normalisation of policy in
the future.
Indeed, as the Governing Council has recalled recently, if the euro area economy recovers and
inflation proceeds further on its path towards the ECB’s inflation aim in a sustained manner, a
discussion  on  policy  normalisation  becomes  warranted  in  the  future.  Any  such  discussion
should, of course, take place in a structured, orderly and appropriately prudent manner and the
Governing  Council  is  convinced  of  the  need  to  continue  an  accommodative  monetary  policy
stance without deviation from the announced measures under implementation to be expected.
But we could examine the interaction of our different policy measures and their functioning in a
new environment of balanced prospects as opposed to the environment of deflationary risks that
prevailed when they were first introduced.
As has been stated, our forward guidance needs to be aligned with an evolving assessment to
underpin both the consistency and credibility of our communication.
Prospects for the banking system
In  this  context,  it  is  imperative  that  the  banking  sector  is  well-positioned  to  foster  sustainable
growth in the coming years as the exceptional levels of monetary policy support will be adjusted
in line with the progress towards our policy objective. A well-functioning, profitable and resilient
financial sector is vital for the long-term economic prospects of the euro area. Allow me, then, to
make three remarks on this topic.
My first remark relates to bank profitability. As I have just discussed, the ECB’s unconventional
monetary policy measures have been successful in fulfilling their intended purpose.
But that is not to say that they did not have any side effects. They have drawn criticism for their
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
negative effects on financial sector profitability. I believe such criticism is somewhat unbalanced.
In  the  absence  of  the  recovery  generated  by  these  unconventional  measures,  unemployment
would have been higher, credit growth lower and a greater proportion of loans would have been
non-performing. All of these things would have weighed on banking sector profitability.
Moreover, while acknowledging that banks face a charge because of the negative rates policy,
internal  data  show  that  this  burden  is  alleviated  by  the  benefits  gained  in  wholesale  funding
markets.  Between  January  and  March  2017,  on  average,  two  thirds  of  overnight  unsecured
funding  was  raised  at  an  average  rate  of  around  –46  basis  points,  essentially  through
counterparties having no access to the ECB facilities. Similar developments were observed in
the secured markets for all collateral types.
Overall, banks recoup on average around 25% of the excess liquidity charge in both secured and
unsecured funding.
It is worthwhile remembering that we set monetary policy to honour our mandate, not to support
financial  sector  profitability.  That  being  said,  I  do  recognise  that  the  longer  unconventional
measures remain in place, the greater the impact they will have on financial sector profitability. It
is important that they are used only for as long as is necessary to achieve an inflation rate in line
with our definition of medium-term price stability.
Moreover,  as  the  Bank  for  International  Settlement  has  recently  found,  there  seems  to  be  an
independent role for nominal interest rates in the transmission process, regardless of the level of
real rates. First, monetary policy transmission could be weakened by the headwinds that arise in
the aftermath of balance sheet recessions. Second, inherent non-linearities could kick in when
interest rates are persistently low and might dampen the interest rates’ impact on spending.
But let us also not forget that profitability is weak in many European banking systems for deeper
structural reasons that predate the crisis and current monetary policy settings. Europe remains
overbanked, insufficient progress has been made on the overhang of non-performing loans since
the crisis and there is increasing competition from FinTech companies and non-banks.
In such an environment, what then can be done to bolster bank profitability? First, there remains
significant  scope  for  domestic  consolidation  in  some  large  countries  and  cross-border
consolidation in Europe. The ratio of banking sector assets to GDP in Europe far exceeds that in
the United States or here in Japan, and individual European banks are on average much more
leveraged. Overbanking results in lower margins, a higher risk of the loans granted eventually
turning sour, and banks operating away from the efficiency frontier with a consequently higher
cost to income margins. During the crisis we witnessed the fracturing of interbank markets along
national lines, and the negative spill-overs between sovereign indebtedness and banking sectors
in a number of countries.
There  are  a  number  of  benefits  from  a  truly  European  banking  system. A  more  consolidated
sector is likely to help overall profitability and boost resilience. Individual banks would be exposed
to a more diversified set of risks, and less vulnerable to downturns in individual countries, helping
to  break  the  link  between  banks  and  sovereigns.  At  the  same  time,  a  Europe-wide  banking
system is an important  step  towards  completing  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  For  a  single
currency area to work effectively, citizens should have faith in money in all its forms, not only in
cash  but  also  in  bank  deposits  held  across  the  whole  region.  We  also  need  a  prudential
approach  that  ensures  both  a  level  playing  field  and  that  no  exemptions  from  the  rules  are
granted to protect zombie banks.
Which leads me to my second remark. In times of low profitability and increased competition, be
it from other banks or from newer start-ups, keeping your customers happy is key to keeping
them as your customers. Therefore, it is important to ensure that customers’ interactions with
banks can be carried out in the manner that most satisfies the customers. As an example, let me
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
discuss briefly the use of cash and the growing shift to newer payment systems.
There  is  now  a  large  range  of  non-cash  payment  options  available,  such  as  credit  cards,
electronic payments, portable wallets and mobile phone payments to name but a few. As more
people adapt to new payment options, there is a risk of disrupting banks’ business models. This
makes it important for banks to remain agile in the face of these changes and to endeavour to
meet their customers’ wishes.
We currently witness frequent lobbying, overt and covert, to abolish cash. I won’t dwell today on
the plausibility of the justifications proposed, except to note that such lobbying fails to respect the
will of the general population: cash remains popular. Recent research for the ECB finds that 80%
of transactions at point of sale are in cash. Even adjusting for the value of transactions, cash still
accounts for the majority. Indeed, the demand for cash currently outstrips the growth in nominal
GDP.
There  are  valid  privacy  reasons  for  maintaining  cash,  and  it  provides  the  general  public  with
direct access to central bank money. For an independent institution like the ECB, maintaining
that link is important, which is why we place great emphasis on ensuring people’s continued trust
in cash. For this purpose, we have overhauled the security features in the euro’s new Europa
series. To date we have released new versions of the lower denominations – up to and including
the 50 euro note. Next year we will introduce stronger and more secure versions of the higher
denomination banknotes. Given this widespread desire to use cash, banks should facilitate rather
than obstruct customers in using their preferred method of payment. Time will tell how the use of
cash will evolve once instant payments are introduced in the near future.
At the same time, while cash remains popular, in some countries there is a move towards newer
payment methods. There is an important role here for financial institutions to facilitate and foster
these newer methods.
Permitting and enabling customers to manage their finances in the manner that most appeals to
them encourages loyalty.
It is still vitally important that any form of payment offers protection to its users and engenders
trust. Such services should have the necessary security and data protection measures in place.
Nonetheless,  banks  should  see  such  developments  as  a  positive  opportunity  to  engage  with
customers, rather than react with protectionist urges. As in other economic areas, protectionism
is rarely welfare enhancing in the long run.
Let me dwell briefly on regulation for my final remark today. Adequate regulatory standards are
vital to maintain trust between financial institutions and to ensure continued market functioning in
the presence of shocks. It also follows that setting global standards is necessary to underpin the
global nature of finance. In the long run, no-one – including financial institutions themselves –
benefits  from  a  regulatory  race  to  the  bottom.  Lobbying  for  particular  special  interests  in
regulation  can,  in  the  end,  be  counterproductive  if  it  succeeds  in  derailing  moves  to  agree
international standards.
Conclusion
The recovery in the euro area is gaining more and more traction. The confirmation of a broadly
balanced risk outlook for growth is within reach.
The extraordinary monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 are bearing fruit. They have
supported price stability in particular by buoying domestic demand, which is now the supporting
pillar of the ongoing recovery.
The  financial  sector  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  supporting  that  recovery  and  ensuring
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
continued resilient growth in the future.
A  well-functioning,  profitable  and  resilient  financial  sector  is  therefore  vital  for  the  long-term
economic  prospects  of  the  euro  area.  There  are  challenges  ahead,  be  they  technological,
regulatory  or  political,  but  the  banking  industry  in  the  euro  area  is  well-positioned  to  foster
sustainable growth in the coming years.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
