William C Dudley: Reforming culture for the long term
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Banking Standards Board, London, United Kingdom, 21 March 2017.
Thank you for your kind welcome.
 I am grateful to the Banking Standards Board for organizing this meeting.  For several years, the
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  and  the  Banking  Standards  Board  have  each  worked  to
improve culture within the financial services industry in the world’s two most important financial
centers.    I  would  like  to  especially  thank  Sir  Richard  Lambert,  Dame  Colette  Bowe,  Alison
Cottrell, and the members of their team—all of whom have traveled several times to New York to
attend  meetings  and  conferences  on  this  issue  of  culture.    I  am  very  pleased  to  have  the
opportunity to reciprocate and to join you today in London.  As always, what I have to say reflects
my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal
1
Reserve System.
This morning, I would like to highlight three issues that are critical to improving culture within the
financial services industry:
First, defining and clarifying purpose, because clear goals are necessary if one is to assess
performance;
Second, measurement of how firms and the industry are performing; and
Third,  whether  incentives  encourage  behaviors  consistent  with  the  goals  one  wishes  to
achieve. 
I  will  then  conclude  by  offering  some  thoughts  on  why  good  culture  is  critical  to  success  in
financial services. 
Let us start with purpose because it is a prerequisite for the other two.  Baroness Onora O’Neill,
a member of the Banking Standards Board, was the keynote speaker at the New York Fed’s third
culture conference, held in October 2016.  Her message to the audience of senior bankers and
regulators was a challenge to think about the purpose of their organizations.  Namely, what are
2
you for?
I  believe  the  question  “what  are  you  for”  can  be  a  litmus  test  for  a  firm  confronted  with
challenges.  Let me give you just one example, from the Salz Review in 2013.  Employees in the
eight divisions of Barclays were asked to state their core values.  Three of the eight divisions did
not rank “customer service” as a core value.  Two of these divisions were retail lines—UK retail
banks  and  the  Barclays  credit  card.    The  third  was  the  firm’s African  subsidiary,  which  also
3
offered retail banking services.
My  intent  here  is  not  to  pick  on  Barclays.  Indeed,  the  firm  should  be  commended  for  first
commissioning  and  then  publishing  the  Salz  Review—Sir  David  Walker  set  an  example  of
leadership  in  his  candor  and  transparency.    Instead,  my  purpose  is  to  make  the  point:  If  you
cannot answer the question “what are you for,” or if your answers do not make sense in light of
your business, then it is time to re-examine your purpose. 
For  any  bank,  a  statement  of  purpose  should  emphasize  sustainable  success,  not  short-run
profit.  This is because of the many important roles that banks play in the economy.  They are
critical intermediaries between savers and borrowers; they provide essential infrastructure; they
support  well-functioning  financial  markets;  and  they  act  as  custodians  of  our  wealth.    These
functions  require  long-term  commitment.    They  should  not  be  erratic  or  ephemeral.    The
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy needs a steady supply of competent, honest, and reliable banking services in order to
function.  That is why any bank should emphasize the long term over the short term.
After  purpose  comes  measurement.    In  the  context  of  culture,  however,  calculating  particular
metrics is less important than the goals of such measurement.  The first goal is to assess how
you are doing compared to what you have set out to do.  In other words, are you fulfilling your
purpose?  The second goal is to assess how you stack up against your peers.  In both ways,
measurement  provides  critical  benchmarking,  without  which  firms  and  the  industry  cannot
assess whether they are making progress. 
Since  the  beginning  of  our  work  on  culture,  my  colleagues  and  I  have  recognized  that
measurement is indispensable to improving bank culture.  We have not been alone in this view. 
At the New York Fed’s first conference on cultural reform, in October 2014, Sir David Walker
encouraged  banking  leaders  to  measure  behavior  within  their  firms  in  order  to  promote
accountability.  Pursuing this theme, several panelists addressed the use of measurement as a
corporate  governance  tool.    They  argued  that  standardized  metrics  could  help  quantify  the
judgment  and  behavior  of  individual  employees,  making  the  behavioral  components  of  annual
performance  reviews  more  objective.    The  same  information  could  also  aid  a  firm’s  senior
leaders in assessing the effectiveness of their communications about how the firm conducts its
business.  For my part, I encouraged the industry to collaborate on a common culture survey that
could serve as a benchmark for behavior.  I also agreed with Sir David that measurement and
4
accountability should not be decoupled.
Last week, the BSB published the results of its industry-wide benchmarking survey on culture. 
This is a critical step forward in the industry’s effort to get better data on how firms are doing on
cultural issues, to identify areas for improvement, and to demonstrate a public commitment to
improvement.  Several facets of the BSB’s report struck me as particularly significant. 
First,  in  addition  to  creating  a  benchmarking  survey—which  generated  approximately  28,000
responses—the BSB conducted focus groups with junior employees and interviews with senior
leaders  to  add  depth  to  what  the  survey  results  indicated.    That  represents  a  significant
investment  of  time  by  the  BSB  and  those  who  participated  in  the  qualitative  review.    That
commitment  is  essential  for  understanding  the  context  and  meaning  of  responses  within
individual firms.
Second,  the  survey  asked  respondents  to  agree  or  disagree  with  a  number  of  statements. 
Those statements were direct and cut to the core of cultural issues in banking.  Some of the
standouts, in my view, included:
“I believe senior leaders in my organization mean what they say.”
“In my organization we are encouraged to follow the spirit of the rules (what they mean, not
just the words).”
“I see people in my organization turn a blind eye to inappropriate behavior.”
“If  I  raised  concerns  about  the  way  we  work,  I  would  be  worried  about  the  negative
5
consequences for me.”
Third, the results suggest that the respondents did not pull their punches.  Nearly 30 percent
answered that they would be worried about negative consequences if they raised concerns at
work.  That shows, perhaps more than any other finding, that there is still a long way to go in
creating a culture for long-term success in banking.  In addition, approximately one quarter of
employees  did  not  affirmatively  agree  that  their  organization  puts  customers  at  the  center  of
business decisions.  That is also of concern if we want an industry that is sustainable over the
long term.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
I encourage you to read the BSB’s report, if you haven’t already.  And let me emphasize that the
report is not intended as a cudgel or to assign blame.  Rather, as I see it, the report gives the
industry an opportunity to improve against a benchmark.  Again, I want to acknowledge the BSB’s
contribution and thank them for all their work.
Now the burden shifts from the BSB to you, the industry.  What will you do with these results? 
We  all  want  to  see  progress  on  culture  and  behavior.    How  will  you—both  within  firms  and
collectively—move the needle on culture and behavior over the next few years? 
I  suggest  that  if  you  want  next  year’s  results  to  be  better  than  this  year’s,  you  might  start  by
focusing on incentives. 
As I have argued before, incentives shape behavior, and behavior drives culture.  If you want a
culture that will support your long-term business strategy, you need to align incentives with the
6
behaviors that will sustain your business over the long haul.
Incentives—compensation  and  promotion,  in  particular—are  powerful  tools  for  communicating
the conduct and culture you desire for your firm.  Of course, the cultures of firms can and should
vary.  But, the culture of every bank should share a common theme: stewardship—a word that
implies  professional  care,  exercised  year  after  year  for  the  benefit  of  the  firm  and  its
stakeholders.  A commitment to the long term must be at the core of banking.  Incentives within a
firm should support that goal, not undermine it.
My  emphasis  on  incentives  is  not  new,  but  it  bears  repeating.    Bad  incentives  were  a  key
contributing  factor  in  the  financial  crisis.    In  the  United  States,  the  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry
Commission  concluded  that  “Compensation  systems—designed  in  an  environment  of  cheap
money, intense competition, and light regulation—too often rewarded the quick deal, the short-
term gain—without proper consideration of long-term consequences.”    This theme applied to all
levels of banking organizations.  One notable example was mortgage brokers, who were paid
8
based on the volume of loans they generated, not their quality.
7
The financial crisis came to a head in the fall of 2008.  Fast forward eight years to the fall of
2016.  Wells Fargo’s chairman and CEO resigned after regulators uncovered what appeared to
be widespread fraud in the retail bank.  Compensation, once again, seems to be at the center of
a  scandal.    Neighborhood  bankers  were  paid  based  on  the  volume  of  new  accounts  opened,
apparently with utter disregard for whether customers wanted them or even knew about them. 
And,  like  mortgage  brokers  in  the  early  2000s,  it  appears  that  job  security  depended  almost
exclusively on meeting targets, regardless of how those targets were met.  There was a serious
mismatch  between  the  values  Wells  Fargo  espoused  and  the  incentives  that  Wells  Fargo
9
employed.
Investigations into what happened at Wells Fargo are continuing, so I will wait before drawing
more definitive conclusions.  For now, though, it is sufficient to note the powerful role—for good
or for bad—that incentives can play in an organization.  I understand that making progress on
culture is difficult.  But, if you want the next round of metrics to look better than the last, use a
powerful lever—use incentives. 
Today’s discussions—here at Mansion House and later at the Bank of England—are evidence
that the issue of culture is important to the private and public sectors alike.  We have to keep
working  on  this.    The  public  sector  must  continue  to  shine  a  spotlight  on  the  issue,  and  the
industry must continue to demonstrate that it is taking responsibility for its culture.  And, culture
cannot be a subject that only receives attention because bad conduct has occurred in the recent
past. 
I am convinced that a good or ethical culture that is reflected in your firm’s strategy, decision-
making processes, and products is also in your economic best interest, for a number of reasons:
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Good culture means fewer incidents of misconduct, which leads to lower internal monitoring
costs.
Good culture means that employees speak up so that problems get early attention and tend
to stay small.  Smaller problems lead to less reputational harm and damage to franchise
value.    And,  habits  of  speaking  up  lead  to  better  exchanges  of  ideas—a  hallmark  of
successful organizations.
Good  culture  means  greater  credibility  with  prosecutors  and  regulators—and  fewer  and
lower fines. 
Good culture helps to attract and retain good talent.  This creates a virtuous circle of higher
performance and greater innovation, and less pressure to cut ethical corners to generate the
returns necessary to stay in business. 
Good culture builds a strong organizational story that is a source of pride and that can be
passed along through generations of employees.  It is also attractive to clients.
Good  culture  helps  to  rebuild  public  trust  in  finance,  which  could,  in  turn,  lead  to  a  lower
burden  imposed  by  regulation  over  time.    Regulation  and  compliance  are  expensive
substitutes for good stewardship.
Good culture is, in short, a necessary condition for the long-term success of individual firms. 
Therefore, members of the industry must be good stewards and should seek to make progress
on reforming culture in the near term. 
Thank you for your kind attention, and thank you again to the Banking Standards Board for inviting
me to speak and to the Lord Mayor for hosting.  I would be happy to answer your questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Sarah Bell, Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone, and Joseph Tracy assisted in the preparation
of these remarks.
Onora  O’Neill, What 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York’s
Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, Oct.
20, 2016.
is  Banking  For?,  Remarks  at 
Anthony Salz, Salz Review: An Independent Review of Barclays’ Business Practices 81 (Apr. 2013).
A summary of the New York Fed’s October 20, 2014, conference on reforming culture in the financial services
industry is available atwww.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/events/banking/2014/1020_2014.
Annual Review 2016/2017: The 2016 Assessment & Evidence, Banking Standards Board, March 2017, available
at www.bankingstandardsboard.org.uk/annual-review-2016–2017/assessment.
William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative—An Interbank Symposium, Jan. 11, 2017.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report xix (Jan. 2011).
Id. at 64.
In re Wells Fargo, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Administrative Proceeding 2016-CFPB-0015 (Sept. 8,
2016) (Consent Order) ¶¶ 8-9 (“Respondent set sales goals and implemented sales incentives, including an
incentive-compensation  program,  in  part  to  increase  the  number  of  banking  products  and  services  that  its
employees  sold  to  its  customers.  Thousands  of  Respondent’s  employees  engaged  in  Improper  Sales
Practices  to  satisfy  sales  goals  and  earn  financial  rewards  under  Respondent’s  incentive  compensation
program.  During  the  Relevant  Period,  Respondent  terminated  roughly  5,300  employees  for  engaging  in
Improper Sales Practices.”).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
