Pre Annual Investment 2017 
pemerintah daerah Opening Remarks 
“Global Economic and Market Outlook 2017” 
(as prepared for Pre Annual Investment Forum 2017) 
24-25 November 2016, Surabaya, Indonesia 
 Honorable, 
  Our esteemed guest speakers, 
o  Mr. Richard Kellly from TD Securities  
o  Mr. Bilal Hafeez and Euben Paracuelles from Nomura 
o  Mr. Jahangir Aziz from JP Morgan 
o  Mr. Andre De Silva from HSBC 
o  Mr. Gundy Cahyadi from DBS 
  My fellow colleagues from Bank Indonesia, 
  Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning, 
1. 
I would like to begin by thanking God the Almighty, Allah SWT who 
has blessed us with the opportunity to meet here in the occasion of 
Bank Indonesia  Pre Annual  Investment Forum 2017. I would like to 
express  my  sincere  appreciation  towards  our  international  guest 
speakers who have travelled a long way to  attend this event. I also 
hope that you can take time to explore the beauty of East Java as part 
of the magnificent Indonesia. 
2.  The  main  agenda  of  this  forum  is  to  discuss  about  the  “Global 
Economic and Market Outlook 2017”. I believe now is a perfect time 
for  such  discussions  to  take  place,  in  the  face  of  heightened  global 
uncertainty. On this note, I encourage all of us here today to actively 
Page 1 of 5 
 Pre Annual Investment 2017 
participate  in  exchanging  views  and  ideas  so  that  we  can  have  a 
spirited discussion filled with fruitful conclusions. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
3.  As  we  all  may  know,  the  financial  market  in  2016,  has  been 
moderately  challenging  compared  to  2015  and  shall  face 
more headwinds ahead. To this date, the global market has been 
filled  with  surprising  “tail  risk”  events  and  outcomes.  The  two  main 
unpredictable events that we can easily recall are Brexit in last June 
and the elected US President, Mr. Donald Trump in last November 8th.  
4.  Aside  from  “tail-risk”  events,  the  main  challenge  we  face  ahead  is 
growth.  The  global  economic  outlook  projection  by  IMF  has  shown 
that  global  economic  recovery  remains  sluggish  as  reflected 
by a more subdued outlook for advanced economies. This becomes 
more evident following the Brexit and weaker-than-expected growth 
in the United States.  
5. 
In  October,  IMF  downgraded  the  outlook  for  growth  in  advanced 
economies, down by 0.2 percentage points in 2016 and unchanged in 
2017. On the other hand, the outlook for emerging markets was raised 
by 0.1 percentage points in 2016 and unchanged in 2017.   
6.  Under  this  backdrop  of  sluggish  growth,  most  central  banks  in 
advanced economies have set an accommodative monetary policy and 
even negative policy rates in order to boost the economy and escape 
the  deflation  trap.  While  there  has  been  a  downward  pressure  on 
global  interest  rates  due  to  slow  growth,  heightened  uncertainty 
following the “trump fever” have led to further volatility that is caused 
by movements in the global capital flow.   
7.  Global investors are  speculating  against  Trump’s expansionary fiscal 
policy that is expected to drive higher economic growth and inflation, 
 Page 2 of 5 
Pre Annual Investment 2017 
beyond the current Fed inflation target. Meanwhile, US Treasuries 10 
year yield has strengthen to its highest level in a week of about 11%. 
Movements  in  global  capital  flow  which  has  a  significant  impact  to 
exchange rate and global financial market volatility will greatly affect 
the way Central Banks manage their reserves.      
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now, allow me to talk about the developments in our domestic market.  
8. 
I  will  start by  highlighting the uniqueness of Indonesia given 
the Indonesia’s national motto, Unity in Diversity. Indonesia is 
the  largest  economy  in  South  East  Asia.  The  world’s  fourth  most 
populous country which approximately 64% of the population are in 
productive age, growing middle class income, and entering a period 
of political consolidation in an open and free democracy. All of which 
has gone hand in hand with positive economic performance. 
9.  We believe the impact of Brexit and the new President of United 
States to the Indonesian economy are relatively limited as the 
economy remains on strong grip. Indonesia’s economy performs 
relatively well in 2016. In the 2nd quarter of 2016, economic growth 
picked up to 5.18%, higher than it was in the 1st quarter of 2016 at 
4.91%. The economic growth of 2016 is expected to be in the range 
of  4.9  to  5.3%.  This  is  supported  by  fiscal  stimulus  to  accelerate 
infrastructure project developments. Private investment is expected to 
rise as well as a result of government policy packages and measurable 
monetary easing. We expect inflation to be within the targeted range 
of 4 ± 1% as well as the current account deficit maintained below 3% 
of GDP. Credit growth is expected in the range of 7-9% supported by 
monetary easing, macroprudential loosening and acceleration of fiscal 
stimulus. 
 Page 3 of 5 
Pre Annual Investment 2017 
10.  Indonesia’s  tax  amnesty  program  is  turning  out  to  be  one  of  the 
world’s most successful repatriation program. A total of nearly 90,000 
people  have  participated  in  the  program.  The  declared  assets  have 
reached  1,030  trillion  rupiahs  with  69%  from domestic  assets,  25% 
from foreign assets not repatriated, and 5% from foreign assets that 
is repatriated. This have well succeeded earlier market expectation of 
30 to 50 billion USD or equivalent to 390 to 650 trillion rupiahs (if using 
exchange rates of 13,000 rupiahs per USD) in declared assets. Most 
economist expect the amounts to be doubled by next March to about 
2,000 trillion rupiahs and create fiscal income ranging around 0.3 to 
0.5% of total GDP. 
11.  I  am  also  delighted  to  share  that  based  on  The  Economist,  Asia 
Business Outlook Survey 2016, Indonesia is among the top three most 
attractive  destination  to  invest  in  Asia  after  India  and  China.  Also, 
according to Japan Bank for International Corporation (JBIC) Survey, 
amongst the ASEAN Countries, Indonesia is the most preferred place 
for business investment. This is in line with the World Bank’s Ease of 
Doing Business (EODB) 2016 survey, whereby Indonesia is ranked at 
number 109, up by 11, for ease of doing business out of 189 surveyed 
countries. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
12.  This Pre Annual Investment Forum is expected to provide our Reserve 
Management  Department  with  valuable  insights  on  the  global 
economic and market outlook of 2017. We hope this forum will provide 
us  with  a  more  comprehensive  overview  on  the  current  and  future 
investment challenges to better manage our reserves in future.  
13.  Therefore, I have high expectations that this forum will bring-in new 
insights on how as an investor we can seize the opportunity for better 
 Page 4 of 5 
Pre Annual Investment 2017 
returns  amidst  higher  volatility,  whilst  maintaining  the  common 
Central Banks principles of safety, liquidity, and profitability. 
14.  Before  we  start  the  discussion,  please  allow  me  to  thank  the 
committee for their hard work in preparing this event. Also, I would 
like  to  thank  all  the  speakers,  respectable  asset  managers  and  my 
colleagues from Bank Indonesia for the willingness and enthusiasm to 
participate in this event. 
15.  With that final note, I hope this forum can continue to have a positive 
impact on our reserve management strategy, specifically in seizing a 
workable  strategy  that  optimizes  our  investment  goals,  while 
minimizing our risk. May The Almighty bless us and lighten our steps 
forward.  
 Thank you. 
  Deputy Governor Bank Indonesia  
 Erwin Rijanto 
  Page 5 of 5 
