Erkki Liikanen: Central banking and the risk management of central
banks - what are the links?
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  Joint  Bank  of
Portugal  and  European  Central  Bank  Conference  on  "Risk  Management  for  Central  Banks",
Lisbon, 26 September 2017.
INTRODUCTION
 About a decade ago we saw the first signs of turbulence in global financial markets. A year later
Lehman Brothers went under. We were faced with a full-blown financial crisis.
Later, it was named the Great Financial Crisis. It led to a both qualitative and quantitative change
in the operations of central banks and was reflected in their balance sheets. The events forced
the central banks to focus on the question what kind of credit they extended, and should extend,
in providing liquidity to private banks. Later, the central banks launched large securities purchase
programs.
The  growth  of  the  central  bank  balance  sheets  since  the  financial  crisis  has  made  central
bankers  pay  more  attention  to  the  management  of  financial  risks.  The  evaluation,  control  and
management of financial risks has become more central than before.
Central Banks are financial institutions, and so their risk management is not totally dissimilar with
other financial institutions such as commercial banks. But there are very important differences.
For central banks, these differences must be understood to perform properly in their policy tasks.
The position and objectives of central banks are different from those institutions that operate on a
for-profit basis. Their responsibilities are different, their powers and capabilities are wider, and
their accountability requirements are broader.
These differences matter for risk management. Today, I would like to talk on these differences
and focus on four aspects of risk management in central banks.
1.  How should the central bank's mandate and responsibilities influence its risk management?
2.  How  should  the  risk  management  function  be  organized  in  relation  to  the  policy  and
investment functions within the bank?
3.  How  should  the  accountability  and  transparency  requirements  be  taken  into  account  in
managing central bank risks?
4.  How can financial regulation help the risk management of central banks?
I  will  conclude  by  collecting  some  lessons  we  have  learned  during  the  turbulent,  but  certainly
instructive years since 2008.
I will concentrate on financial risks in the balance sheets and mostly pass over other important
risks,  such  as  operational  and  cyber  risks.  The  area  of  financial  risks  is  where  the  special
character  and  responsibilities  of  central  banks  probably  matter  most,  making  the  risk  control
problems even more complex and nuanced than is the case in "ordinary" banks.
WHAT IS SPECIAL ABOUT CENTRAL BANKS?
As  policy  institutions,  central  banks  have  objectives  and  responsibilities  that  differ  from  the
financial institutions operating on a commercial basis. To enable the central banks to fulfil their
responsibilities, they also have special powers – especially the monopoly of issuing currency and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
reserve money.
We should resist the temptation to use the special characteristics of central banks as excuses
for not having to implement the best risk management techniques developed elsewhere. The risk
management standard and techniques of "ordinary" banks should serve as an obvious starting
point when discussing risks. There are differences, but they have to be justified in each case.
How do the risks come about? Central banks take on balance sheet risks as a result of their
investment activities (as in holding foreign reserves), their monetary policy operations, and from
time to time as providers of lender of last resort credit to their counterparts.
As investors, central banks have traditionally been conservative. This means that when faced
with trade-offs between risk and return, central banks have traditionally tended to favour assets
with very low credit risk even if the expected returns from such investments have been modest.
Traditionally,  central  banks  have  also  preferred  very  liquid,  short-term  investments.  These
choices have been clearly visible in the way foreign exchange reserves are usually invested.
As policy makers, central banks influence market conditions and market prices in a unique way.
This is the task why central banks exist today, and why they are able to conduct monetary policy.
The  ability,  and  indeed  the  obligation,  to  steer  the  money  markets  in  order  to  deliver
macroeconomic  stability  adds  an  important  extra  twist  to  the  risk  management  problem:  the
central bank is not just price taker in the financial markets, it is a price maker too. This is one of
the features that make them special as investors and lenders.
One may see it as a sort of paradox that central banks, in making policy, themselves seem to
create and control much of the risk they themselves bear as investors and creditors. However,
the central banks do not actually have arbitrary powers to steer the interest rates or other market
prices. They are mandated to exercise their monetary policy powers to pursue specific pre-set
goals: the policy objectives for which they are accountable.
In the Eurosystem for instance, price stability is the overriding objective. Therefore, although the
actions of the central banks may have an impact on their financial risks, these actions are taken
with the requirements of monetary (and financial) policy in view.
So, while the ability to influence market conditions may be important for the risk management
problem of central banks, we should not read too much into this. There is a wide agreement that
central  banks  should  not  use  their  monetary  policy  powers  as  instruments  of  their  own  risk
management.
There is also a broad agreement that any information central banks have on their future policies
should not be used for their own financial gain. In their investment activities and their securities
purchases for monetary policy purposes, the preference of the very best creditworthiness has
been the traditional risk management technique.
In  credit  operations,  the  situation  is  more  complicated.  When  credit  is  granted  to  banks,  in
monetary  policy  operations  or  in  last  resort  lending,  the  most  traditional  and  still  the  most
important method of risk management is collateral policy. To minimize the probability of loss, the
collateral should be safe.
However, since the collateral need not be actually realized except in the case of default of the
borrower,  collateral  requirements  need  not  be  the  same  as  the  eligibility  standards  in  outright
purchases of securities. This can be compensated in other ways. Haircuts are routinely used to
compensate for suspected risks in the value of collateral.
This brings us to an important difference between central banks and other institutions: the role of
central  banks  as  policy  institutions  matters  for  their  collateral  policy  and  can  make  the  policy
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
different from usual, private lenders.
The special nature of central banks' collateral policy was first noted by Walter Bagehot, already
more than 140 years ago. Bagehot was concerned with how the central bank could best support
financial stability. According to the famous Bagehot's rule, in times of crisis central banks should
lend freely against good collateral, at a penalty rate of interest. But what should be taken as "good
collateral"? It is worthwhile to cite Bagehot (1873) word for word:
"If it is known that the Bank of England is freely advancing on what in ordinary times is reckoned
a good security—on what is then commonly pledged and easily convertible—the alarm of the
solvent  merchants  and  bankers  will  be  stayed.  But  if  securities,  really  good  and  usually
convertible, are refused by the Bank, the alarm will not abate, the other loans made will fail in
obtaining their end, and the panic will become worse and worse."
The  key  phrase  in  this  quote  is  "in  ordinary  times".  Bagehot  means  that  the  collateral
requirements of central banks should be set as in a situation where the panic (caused by a run
for liquidity) would not prevail.
The revolutionary point Bagehot made is that the central bank's collateral policy should not view
quality of collateral offered as given. The bank should take into account that its own decisions
about what is eligible will affect the quality of the collateral. The central bank should not only take
the long view, on the quality of the collateral, but also a confident view, taking into account its
power to stem the liquidity crisis.
This rule makes plain the great difficulty of the central bank's risk management problem, which
also is a policy problem, whenever there is market stress. The quality of the collateral "in normal
times" which Bagehot refers to is not what the market deems it to be; and it is not necessarily the
quality that prevailed before a crisis. It is something that will be sustainable in the future.
How  is  this  Bagehot's  recommended  policy  different  from  the  behaviour  of  the  private
participants? When deciding on its lending policy the central bank should take into account the
effects of its own credit decisions on the quality of the collateral. This is Bagehot's point. That is
not easy to do in practice.
The task of the central bank is to assess the quality of the collateral in a future situation after the
crisis will have abated. There cannot be any fixed rules for that. In particular, the market does not
give a firm guidance: if the central bank always followed the market in deciding what collateral is
good, it could not add much to the liquidity of the markets and could not do its job to calm the
situation in the case of market stress or panic. On the other hand, the central bank should not
believe it can make bad collateral good just by pretending that to be the case and lending money
against it.
Bagehot's advice was about collateral policy, reflecting the central banking practices of his time.
It has, however, some relevance also for securities purchases in open market policies as well. It
is  that  the  market  under  stress  is  not  always  right,  not  without  some  guidance  at  least.  One
lesson from the Outright Monetary Transactions, OMT, was that the government bond markets in
the euro area were at that time operating under unjustified doubts about the future of euro. The
OMT programme confidently declared by the ECB succeeded in correcting the mispricing of the
stressed  government  bond  markets,  in  a  way  broadly  similar  to  the  way  in  which  Bagehot
explained the bill market of his time could be pacified.
ORGANIZATIONAL ASPECTS
Turning  to  the  organizational  aspects  of  risk  management,  we  find  both  similarities  and
differences between central banks and other financial institutions.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Starting with the similarities, a generally accepted principle that applies to both is that risk control
functions and risk-taking functions should be separated. As a rule, this separation should reach
the top decision-making level of the organization. The different business and reporting lines, both
those that take risk on behalf of the bank and those that assess and control it, present their views
directly to the decision-making level.
After  the  financial  crisis,  and  the  unpleasant  surprises  which  were  uncovered  in  a  number  of
investment and retail banks, the value of following this principle has been understood even more
clearly than before.
The top management must be responsible for ensuring and overseeing a strong risk governance
framework, and must be able to carry this responsibility. This requires a systematic approach. It
includes a strong risk culture, a well-developed and explicit policy regarding to risk taking and risk
management,  up-to-date  methodologies  for  measuring  financial  risks,  and  well-defined
responsibilities for risk management and control functions.
An  effective  risk  control  function  is  a  key  component  in  the  organization.  This  function  is
responsible for overseeing risk-taking activities across the institution. The important thing is that it
should have the authority it needs. The risk control function should be independent, with sufficient
stature, resources and direct access to the board.
Risk  reporting  to  the  board  requires  careful  design  in  order  to  convey  bank-wide,  individual
portfolio  and  other  risks  in  a  concise  and  meaningful  manner.  Reporting  should  accurately
communicate  risk  exposures  and  results  of  stress  tests  or  scenario  analyses  and  should
provoke  a  robust  discussion  of,  for  example,  the  bank's  current  and  prospective  exposures
(particularly under stressed scenarios).
A balance should be found between the independence of the risk control function, on the one
hand, and smooth horizontal information flows on the other. As emphasized in BIS principles for
risk  management,  for  example,  banks  should  avoid  organizational  "silos"  that  can  impede
effective  sharing  of  information  across  the  organization.  Necessary  cooperation  between  the
functions should of course  never  compromise  the  special  independent  role  of  the  risk  control
function.
In "ordinary", for-profit institutions, the main organizational challenge is to reconcile the business
orientation of the revenue-generating functions with the caution guarded by the risk controlling
function. This balance has to be managed at a high, responsible decision-making level.
A broadly similar, but wider balancing challenge exists also in central banks. Their problem of
organizing risk control and management is more complex than in for-profit institutions.
While the central banks have important investment functions, much like other banks, they also
have  separate  monetary  policy  responsibilities  and  functions.  The  organizational  architecture
must therefore accommodate more distinct functional lines than in an ordinary financial institution
– at least the investment function, the monetary policy preparation and execution, and finally the
risk control function.
The  presence  of  the  monetary  policy  preparation  and  execution  function  is  an  added
complication to risk management that is characteristic to central banks, when we compare them
to  other  banks.  Monetary  policy  planning  and  execution  should  not  be  hampered  by  hidden
considerations of risk or gain.
Likewise,  it  is  necessary  that  monetary  policy  decision  are  taken  with  full  awareness  of  their
expected  financial  consequences  and  the  associated  risks.  Only  then,  with  adequate  risk
information, can the responsible decision makers really discharge their responsibilities.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The idea of a completely independent risk control function had been around at least from 1990's,
but it took the latest crisis to galvanize the central banks to take bigger steps. Before the crisis a
typical  solution  was  to  have  separate  responsibilities  at  the  board  level,  but  not  a  fully
independent business line or unit for risk management and control. This has been changing.
In the Bank, which I know best, the risk control function was reorganized from the beginning of
2009. A separate unit was established with its own reporting line to the board. This reorganization
had  been  in  preparation  for  a  couple  of  years  already  before  the  crisis,  but  the  perception  of
increased riskiness of the environment certainly accelerated the implementation of the change.
Within  the  ECB,  the  audit  committee  has  been  active  in  promoting  enhancements  in  the  risk
management of the ECB and the Eurosystem as a whole. Especially at the Eurosystem level,
the cooperation between member central banks was previously too limited and slow to cope with
the new situation which emerged during the crisis. A much more unified and timely view of the
aggregate risks was needed.
In  September  2010,  a  separate  system-wide  Risk  Management  Committee  was  established.
Previously,  the  system-wide  cooperation  on  risk  management  matters  had  taken  place  in  a
working  group  reporting  to  the  Market  Operations  Committee.  The  creation  of  an  independent
committee signalled increasing weight on risk management and was in line with the principle of
independence of risk management. Within the internal organization of ECB itself, the status of
the  risk  management  function  was  enhanced,  too,  and  it  was  promoted  to  the  level  of  a
directorate in 2012.
These changes have been significant, but it would not be proper to claim that the development of
the risk management organization and its activities in the Eurosystem are now complete. The
assessment and especially the quantification of risks is a task which is always incomplete and
always in need of further development. Nevertheless, I think that significant improvements have
been achieved and the governors, the governing council and the board members have now a
much better overview of the financial risks of their banks and the whole Eurosystem than before.
ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY
The organizational principles that I discussed above relate mainly to sufficient internal information
flows within the institution. However, external information can be strategically just as important as
internal  management  information.  Therefore,  financial  institutions,  both  ordinary  banks  and
central banks need to reconsider from time to time their transparency and communication about
their risks. There are central banks, which have started to report publicly about their risks.
Ordinary,  for-profit  banks  need  transparency  at  least  vis-à-vis  their  customers,  creditors  and
shareholders, as well as their supervisors. All these stakeholders are very interested in the risks
of the bank they are dealing with.
Central  banks  are  in  a  somewhat  different  position.  For  one  thing,  the  set  of  stakeholders  of
central  banks  is  broader.  In  particular,  it  includes  political  decision  makers  (in  governments,
parliaments  etc.)  and  the  general  public  as  citizens,  money-holders,  voters  and  taxpayers.  In
addition to being larger, the interests of these political constituencies in the central bank are more
complex and many-sided than the interest of the stakeholders in a commercial bank.
Communication and transparency about financial risks is of course only one facet of the central
bank's general communication tasks. Another facet is policy transparency. Actually, these two
are closely intertwined: experience shows that it is clearly necessary, in order to maintain public
trust in the central bank's monetary policy and liquidity-supplying operations, to be clear about the
reasons and consequences of the policies. Otherwise, the central bank may even endanger the
necessary public acceptance of its operations.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This has an important implication: The transparency and public reporting of central banking risks
should be embedded in a broader economic perspective. This does not only apply to the content
of the risk information per se, but we should probably develop new ways to present the financial
risk of central banks in their economic context, not only as isolated Value-at-Risk or Expected
Shortfall  numbers  (for  example).  The  increased  transparency  along  the  lines  that  have  been
developed  has  made  a  positive  contribution,  but  still,  it  seems  that  finding  new  ways  of
presenting risks better in context could be very useful.
In the final analysis, the concern about risks has to do with capital adequacy of the central banks.
This  must  be  maintained,  with  a  margin  of  caution,  at  levels  where  the  independence  of
monetary  policy  is  not  endangered.  The  central  banks  must  be  able  to  accumulate  sufficient
reserves  and  provisions  to  safeguard  their  position. As  they  are  public  bodies,  this  is  also  a
matter of public trust and political acceptance, on which central banks depend.
We  might  note  that  the  Eurosystem  and  the  ECB  are  in  somewhat  different  position  in  that
regard than the Federal Reserve, for example. Because of its institutional position, the Federal
Reserve is able to operate with quite small own capital. In Europe, by contrast, the Central Banks
are by construction financially more separated from the governments. This means that they must
be quite self-reliant in terms risk-bearing capacity and of capital buffers.
ON FINANCIAL REGULATION
The changes in central bank's risk management have occurred in parallel with major reform in
banking regulation, globally and especially in the EU. These reforms have been necessary on
general terms, but as a by-product, they also facilitate the central banks' risk management tasks.
First,  better  regulation  will  improve  the  creditworthiness  of  the  central  banks'  monetary  policy
counterparts and thus make risk management easier for central banks. Direct credit risk will be
smaller. Second, better regulation and more solid banks will also reduce the likelihood of market
disturbances  caused  by  shortages  of  liquidity,  or  runs  for  safe  assets.  This  will  reduce  the
central  bank's  burden  in  stabilizing  the  financial  markets,  and  enable  the  central  bank  to
concentrate its attention better on its monetary policy tasks.
The aspects of banking regulation that ease the burden on central banks include better capital
adequacy requirements, stricter liquidity norms, and the general improvement in supervision and
supervisory 
tests.  These  stability-enhancing
developments will help to reduce the dependence of the financial system on central banks.
the  periodic  stress 
information, 
including 
In the euro area, in particular, central bank risk management benefits from the current European
projects to complete the EMU, especially the Banking Union initiatives:
Single  supervisory  mechanism  has  already  improved  supervisory  information  and  the  general
trust on euro area banks, thereby facilitating the ECB's operative tasks. The European Deposit
Insurance Scheme, which I hope will move forward soon, will help stabilize bank liquidity even
under future adverse shocks.
The regulatory framework is not complete even when the projects I mentioned will be finalized. It
is not complete even from the central banks' risk management point of view.
The constantly evolving financial  industry  brings  up  new  challenges  which  must  be  taken  into
account.
Currently, the unregulated segment of financial intermediation ("shadow banks") are a source of
concern. They make the central banks' job of protecting financial stability harder, because they
are not subject to the same monitoring and accounting scrutiny as banks, and as they cannot be
monetary  policy  counterparts  of  central  banks,  their  liquidity  can  be  more  fragile.  The
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
consequences  of  the  activities  of  the  shadow  banking  sector  to  the  volatility  of  the  supply  of
liquidity is a challenge which awaits proper regulatory response.
CONCLUSIONS
The central banks have faced new challenges in their risk management over the last decade.
These challenges are in some respect similar to what other banks have met, but the policy role
of the central banks have made them even more complex.
The central banks must consider not only their own risks but also broader risks in the financial
sector and the macro-economy when they make decisions about what risk to take.
The  challenges  in  organizing  the  risk  management  function  in  central  banks  are  more
challenging  than  in  other  financial  institutions,  because  of  the  interaction  of  their  policy
responsibilities,
To cope with these challenges, it is essential that:
While prioritizing their policy responsibilities, the central banks should take care of their financial
health  (adequate  capitalization)  so  that  they  are  not  vulnerable  to  the  financial  consequences
from their policy tasks.
Central  banks  need  to  ensure  that  the  political  decision-makers  and  the  general  public
understands  what  the  central  banks  are  doing  and  why.  Lack  of  communication  and  lack  of
transparency  can  breed  suspicion  that  the  central  banks  are  taking  risks  that  are  excessive
relative to the benefits achieved with their policies. Deep and coherent participation by the central
banks in the public debate at the national and euro area level are needed.
In terms of financial regulation, the challenges that the central banks' policy responsibilities cause
to their risk-taking capacity are met more easily if the financial health of the banking system is
sound;  if  the  supervisory  information  is  sufficient;  and  if  crisis  management  procedures  and
institutions  are  up  to  their  tasks.  When  those  conditions  are  met,  the  central  banks'  main
financial stability task, the provision of liquidity to fundamentally sound institutions, is easier to
fulfil. The central bank should not be expected to constitute "the only game in town".
In  the  euro  area  in  particular,  I  would  call  for  determined  completion  of  the  banking  union,
including the resolution fund and common deposit insurance, as well as taking the capital market
union  forward  in  order  to  improve  the  resiliency  of  the  European  financial  markets  in  general.
These provide the best prerequisite for central banks to succeed in their work.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
