Benoît Cœuré: Convergence matters for monetary policy
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Competitiveness  Research  Network  (CompNet)  conference  on  "Innovation,  firm  size,
productivity and imbalances in the age of de-globalization", Brussels, 30 June 2017.
 A few years ago, heterogeneity in the euro area was causing people to question the sustainability
of  the  currency  union.  The  global  financial  crisis,  and  later  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  led  to  a
destabilising dispersion in interest rates and, ultimately, in real and nominal economic indicators.
In the summer of 2013, for example, around half of euro area Member States had inflation rates
close to or above our preferred range of below, but close to 2%, while others were flirting with,
and in some cases already showing, negative inflation rates.
Today,  much  of  that  heterogeneity  has  disappeared.  Importantly,  none  of  the  euro  area
economies are now faced with negative inflation rates, nor with negative growth rates. Indeed, as
we at the ECB have highlighted over the past few months, the recovery currently under way in
the euro area is increasingly broad-based, with a marked convergence in national GDP growth
rates.
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
On slide 1 you can see that the dispersion of growth rates across countries and sectors is at its
lowest level since the inception of the euro area – this is a remarkable progress from the episode
I have just referred to. Over three-quarters of national sectors are currently experiencing positive
value-added growth, compared with just a quarter at the height of the crisis. This convergence in
output growth rates is also matched by historically low levels of dispersion in employment growth
and inflation, including core inflation.
The marked fall in heterogeneity is a welcome development for monetary policymakers. Yet, in
my remarks today I will argue that for the euro area to leave the legacy of the crisis truly behind,
we  need  to  see  not  only  reduced  dispersion  in  growth  rates,  but  convergence  in  real  income
levels – that is, we need growth to accelerate in economies where losses from the crisis have
been the largest for real convergence among Member States to take hold. To borrow from the
empirical literature on long-term growth, sigma convergence is not enough and we want to see
1
beta convergence taking place between euro area economies.
For this to happen, I will argue that institutional quality – broadly speaking the range of social and
legal  frameworks  that  shape  the  conditions  in  which  households  and  businesses  operate  –
needs to improve in many Member States so as to unleash new growth forces and set off a new
phase  of  true  convergence.  And  in  doing  so,  I  will  draw  on  the  wealth  of  empirical  findings
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
produced by the CompNet project.
Heterogeneity and monetary policy
Let me start with the first set of observations and respond with two counter-questions: why is a
low  degree  of  heterogeneity  good  for  monetary  policy? And  can  monetary  policy  contribute  to
lowering dispersion?
The simple answer to the first question is that we set policy to ensure that we fulfil our mandate
for the entire euro area. The closer countries are to the euro area average, the more likely it is
that our policy is appropriate for them.
And here we have reason to be optimistic: we have not only seen a growing convergence in GDP
growth rates, but also in economic slack, which is a more relevant gauge for monetary policy
making given the information it conveys on future price pressures. Specifically, on slide 2 you
can see that those countries that had larger output gaps in 2013 have also tended to close them
more rapidly than those with smaller initial gaps.
Much  of  this  fall  in  heterogeneity  is  due  to  our  policy  measures  –  the  answer  to  my  second
question. The wide dispersion of growth rates at the height of the crisis was largely related to the
fragmentation  of  financing  conditions  across  euro  area  countries,  amplified  by  the  bank-
sovereign  “doom  loop”.  In  response  to  this,  we  have  put  in  place  a  range  of  measures,
particularly  the  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTRO  and  TLTRO),  and  announced  our
readiness to conduct outright monetary transactions (OMT). Such measures were specifically
designed to counter the impairment to monetary transmission caused by this fragmentation.
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
You  can  see  on slide 3  that  this  was  naturally  more  beneficial  to  those  economies  that  had
suffered more from financial fragmentation. On the left-hand side (slide 3a) you can see that the
cost of borrowing for non-financial companies (NFCs) in Italy fell by nearly 200 basis points since
May 2014 – that is, since we launched our credit easing package – although the main market
reference rate, the EONIA, only fell by around 60 basis points over the same period. As a result,
the dispersion of bank lending rates among the four largest euro area Member States – and this
you  can  see  on  the  right-hand  side  (slide  3b)  –  is  currently  at  its  lowest  level  since  the
introduction  of  the  euro.  And  with  the  launch  of  banking  union,  the  link  between  banks  and
sovereigns has started to loosen too.
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 One thought-provoking way of illustrating just how far dispersion has fallen across the euro area
is to do a simple exercise: when we compute a standard forward-looking Taylor rule based on
next year’s inflation and output gap projections from the European Commission, it would suggest
2
an interest rate for Germany and Italy that is, by and large, the same.
 Such an exercise is, of course, overly simplistic – there are good reasons why we do not set
policy  according  to  Taylor  rules.  In  particular,  policy  rules  are  overly  mechanistic  and  lack  a
deeper  analysis  of  the  underlying  forces  of  growth  and  inflation,  such  as  whether  inflationary
shocks  are  due  to  supply  or  demand  shocks,  which  is  a  key  aspect  of  our  monetary  policy
strategy. Nevertheless, this simple exercise puts into perspective the view of some observers
that the ECB’s policy is too loose for some Member States and too tight for others.
But  it  also  serves  a  different  purpose.  It  shows  that,  while  the  broadening  of  the  recovery  is
certainly welcome, a persistent convergence of growth rates is not unconditionally a good thing.
For  example,  although  simple  policy  rules  would  prescribe  a  broadly  similar  monetary  policy
stance for Germany and Italy, few would disagree that these two economies should ideally be on
different growth trajectories, so living standards in Italy could catch up with those in Germany.
This, however, is not what we are seeing today. Although the left-hand chart of slide 4shows that
the euro area did not converge to growth rates much lower than those we had seen prior to the
crisis – a process that some academics have coined “superhysteresis” – it also shows that the
distribution  of  growth  rates  is  pointier  with  flatter  right-hand  tails  when  compared  with  its  pre-
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
crisis pattern.
 This implies that, compared to the pre-crisis period, fewer countries are growing at rates faster
than  the  average.  In  other  words,  we  are  seeing  little  evidence  of  lower-income  countries
catching up with higher-income countries. As you can see on the right-hand chart of slide 4, this
is not unique to the euro area – we can see a similar shift in the distribution across states in the
United States.
Of  course,  fat  right-hand  tails  before  the  crisis  reflected,  to  some  extent,  unsustainable
expansions fuelled by lax credit standards, on both sides of the Atlantic. So, while fat right-hand
tails are generally a desirable phenomenon in a currency union as they may signal that a number
of economies are growing at rates faster than the average – and thereby allow a convergence in
income  levels  –  this  faster  growth  also  needs  to  be  sustainable  and  based  on  sound
fundamentals, a point I will come back to later in my remarks.
But the current lack of high-growth economies means that cross-country income differences that
were already large prior to the crisis may also persist, or potentially even widen, in the future.
Hysteresis if you wish. You can see on slide 5 that there has hardly been any convergence –
measured in terms of GDP per capita – since the early 1990s among the 12 euro area Member
States who joined before 2002. And recently we have even seen real divergence – certainly, a
worrisome development for a currency union.
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Convergence and monetary policy
We are faced, then, with two facts: first, cyclical dispersion is close to or at historic lows; and,
second, structural dispersion – that is, differences in real income levels – remains high and may
even be growing.
How should monetary policy respond to such conflicting signals?
The first thing to note is that persistent differences in income levels are not, per se, a problem for
monetary policy in a currency union. After all, there are large and persistent differences in GDP
per capita levels across regions in the United States that are broadly similar to those in Europe.
These differences have not materially affected the Federal Reserve’s ability to conduct monetary
policy at the federal level, nor prevented the attainment of price stability.
Nor  is  convergence,  or  lack  thereof,  and  its  impact  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  a
particularly  new  debate.  It  is  well  known  that  the  euro  area  does  not  meet  all  of  the  classic
requirements of an optimal currency area.  The original Maastricht criteria, and the Stability and
Growth  Pact,  were  put  in  place  to  ensure  some  nominal  and  fiscal  convergence  between
Member States before adopting the euro. Yet none of the original members of the euro area have
met all the Maastricht criteria in every year since its launch, highlighting the tensions between
maintaining desired convergence and potentially centrifugal economic forces.
3
Similarly, and as I argued recently, hysteresis effects – should they materialise and the jury is still
out on this – have the unfortunate consequence of locking in crisis-related income losses and
may result in higher rather than lower inflationary pressures. This is not to say that they are not a
4
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
source of concern, but the answer should be a structural, not a monetary one.
Yet, despite this, I would argue that a lack of real convergence does matter for our union and the
conduct of monetary policy, for three main reasons.
First,  and  most  importantly,  the  lack  of  real  convergence  matters  greatly  for  people  in  lower-
income countries. Without credible prospects of catching up with higher-income countries, some
may  question  the  benefits  of  membership  of  the  currency  union.  In  other  words,  without  real
convergence  we  would  not  deliver  on  the  promise  we  made  when  the  euro  was  introduced,
namely that it would bring prosperity and opportunities.
Worse,  with  the  legacy  costs  of  the  crisis  still  clearly  visible  in  many  Member  States,  above-
average growth in these economies is needed to at least restore a sense of normality and help
bring  down  both  the  overhang  in  debt  levels  and  unacceptably  high  youth  and  long-term
unemployment.  In  a  union  based  on  shared  values,  hardship  in  any  one  country  should  be  a
concern  for  us  all.  And  a  lack  of  market-based  convergence  raises  the  need  for  individual
transfers,  which  exist  at  country  level  but  are  not  part  of  the  social  contract  on  which  our
monetary union is founded.
Second, the lack of real convergence in income levels is, more often than not, the result of a lack
of convergence in institutional quality. Slide 6 shows that there is a clear relationship (albeit not
necessarily  causal)  in  Europe  between  the  quality  of  institutions  and  GDP  per  capita.   Large
differences in institutional quality, in turn, can complicate the conduct of monetary policy.
5
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The reason is that large differences in the way price and wage-setting mechanisms and financial
structures are set up can lead to output and inflation responding to shocks in different ways –
that  is,  it  leads  to  the  type  of  cyclical  heterogeneity  I  mentioned  earlier  that  may,  as  a  result,
cause  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  to  vary  across  the  currency  union.   Such
differences  in  institutional  quality  are  therefore  clearly  sub-optimal  from  a  monetary  policy
perspective.
6
M y third  reason  for  why  real  convergence  matters  is  related  to  the  second  point:  just  as
institutional quality matters for monetary policy and closing income level gaps, so do integration
and risk-sharing. Deeper integration will help smooth consumption through asymmetric shocks,
rather than amplifying those shocks, and will support the process of real convergence.
For example, labour mobility between countries is low and, as we have seen in recent years, is
unlikely to be a major source of adjustment once a crisis hits. Although there was an increase in
labour mobility in crisis-hit countries, the overall adjustment was limited.
Similarly, financial integration has come to a halt.  On slide 7 you can see that the latest level of
the ECB‘s quantity-based financial integration composite indicator is comparable to the level in
2004, and the latest level of our price-based composite indicator is roughly comparable to levels
observed between 2000 and 2004.
7
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a result, and in the absence of large-scale fiscal transfers between regions, the degree of
risk-sharing in the euro area is lower than in other currency unions. One recent estimate finds
that between 1999 and 2014, total risk-sharing through both public and private channels in the
United States smoothed 57% of country-specific shocks, compared with just 29% in the euro
8
area.
This greater degree of risk-sharing derives not just from federal fiscal transfers, but also from
greater  risk-sharing  through  credit  and  financial  channels.  Credit  provision  dried  up  in  certain
countries  during  the  crisis  at  precisely  the  moment  when  it  was  needed  to  smooth  income
shocks. Clearly, deeper financial integration is needed.
And as I said elsewhere, convergence is also a political prerequisite to engage in a discussion on
any new public risk-sharing mechanisms – just like John Rawls pointed out with his concept of
9
the “veil of ignorance”.
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Convergence and the need for efficient economic institutions
All this means that if we want to achieve sustainable economic convergence – if we want to reap
the full potential of our economies – then we also need to strive for convergence towards high
institutional quality and strengthen the integration of our economies and markets. This is also in
the interest of monetary policy as I have just explained.
And I want to be clear here, I am talking about convergence in institutional quality, rather than
convergence  in  institutions.  In  other  words,  what  matters  is  not  the  adoption  of  a  single
institutional model for Member States, but each Member State adopting a model that delivers the
right outcomes while allowing them to find and exploit their comparative advantages in the Single
Market and in the Economic and Monetary Union.
10
This  means  that  institutions  are  needed  that  support  and  nurture  the  convergence  process,
which,  broadly  speaking,  consists  of  two  key  elements:  accumulating  capital  and  absorbing
technological know-how until the frontier is reached. Where institutions are insufficient, there is a
risk that capital, rather than being directed to highly productive firms and industries, instead gets
siphoned off to ones where productivity is low but economic rents are temporarily high.
Some  examples  of  poor  institutions  are  well  known.  Product  market  barriers  that  protect
incumbents from new entrants act as a disincentive to innovate. Low quality education systems
starve the economy of the needed technical skills to carry out research and development. Some
labour market institutions prevent the reallocation of labour to more productive uses and result in
high unemployment and low participation. Supervisory forbearance encourages the evergreening
of non-performing loans to non-profitable companies. Politically connected lending prevents the
allocation of capital to the most productive firms.
More  recently,  work  with  granular  data  at  industry  and  firm  level  has  helped  foster  a  greater
understanding  of  the  interaction  between  institutions  and  firm  behaviour  that  ultimately  lead  to
higher  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth  and  overall  convergence.  For  example,  on slide
8 you can see CompNet data for TFP growth in Italy and Spain between 1999 and 2007. You can
see that TFP growth fell across all main economic sectors, in contrast with the overall gain in the
rest of the euro area.
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  more  granular  data  therefore  challenge  a  popular  hypothesis,  namely  the  one  that  the
aggregate TFP slowdown in these economies was primarily driven by a misallocation of cross-
border  capital  flows  from  higher-income  countries  to  the  least  productive  sectors  of  the
economy, such as construction. If this would be the whole story, why then did TFP growth in the
manufacturing sector fall as well?
The answer has to do with poor institutions. On slide 9 you can see that the dispersion within
sectors  of  the  marginal  product  of  capital  has  increased,  implying  that  capital  was  not  only
allocated inefficiently across sectors, but also within sectors in a number of countries before the
crisis.
 This means that a larger proportion of capital within each narrowly defined industry was
concentrated in firms that were relatively less productive.
11
  12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The misallocation of capital, in turn, likely reflects, among other things, a business environment
that did not allow productive firms to thrive as well as inefficient legal systems and ineffective
government and public administration. This makes one think that, even if capital had flowed to
different sectors, it is not certain that relative productivity growth in these countries would have
been materially better.
Slide 9 also tells another story, however – namely that capital misallocation (as measured by the
dispersion of the marginal product of capital) did not end with the crisis. In fact, in Italy and Spain
it  is  higher  today  than  at  any  point  in  time  before  the  crisis.  In  other  words,  the  process  of
reallocation of resources from unproductive firms to productive firms during recessions – let’s
call it the Schumpeterian creative destruction – was not sufficient to boost aggregate productivity
during the recovery.
This  means  that,  despite  important  reform  progress,  institutional  factors  in  a  number  of
economies with a lower income per capita continue to contribute to protect weaker firms and
constrain the creation or growth of more productive ones. The continued operation of weak firms
that  ought  to  leave  the  market  –  casually  called  zombie  firms  –  causes  a  drag  on  aggregate
productivity,  impairs  the  cleansing  effects  of  a  recession  and  thereby  stands  in  the  way  of
allowing  these  economies  to  embark  on  a  higher  growth  path  that  would  help  narrow  the
prevailing income level gaps.
I  can  already  hear  those  arguing  that  our  low  interest  rate  environment  further  nurtures  the
prevalence of zombie firms. But one has to be careful when assessing chains of causality. Low
interest  rates  are  primarily  caused  by  an  environment  of  slack  in  the  economy,  insufficient
expected  demand  coming  from  credible  structural  and  institutional  reforms  and  low  marginal
product of capital. Monetary policy reacts to this in fulfilment of its price stability mandate. If this
reaction is associated with undesirable side-effects, such as zombie firms, it is more often than
not the lack of proper policies and reforms in other policy areas that are responsible.
Of course, other factors  are  likely  to  have  temporarily  contributed  to  capital  misallocation  and
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
hence  to  poor  productivity  growth.  The  crisis,  for  example,  might  have  restricted  access  to
external  finance  for  financially  constrained  firms,  which  sometimes  are  those  with  high
12
 Indeed, although the international evidence is somewhat mixed on
productivity growth potential.
13
the impact of credit frictions,
 recent work by ECB staff, again using CompNet data, finds that
capital  misallocation  during  the  euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  particularly  increased  among
those firms that are more reliant on bank finance, even when taking their level of productivity into
account.
14
Furthermore, banks typically require loan collateral in the form of tangible assets, such as real
estate,  machines,  etc.  This  may  encourage  firms  reliant  on  bank  funding  to  invest  more  in
tangible assets than they would otherwise do. At the same time, research shows that having a
greater  share  of intangible  assets  is  related  to  a  greater  ability  to  create  and  absorb  new
technology. These two facts together were shown to have led financially weaker firms to reduce
their investment in intangibles assets more than financially stronger firms did during the great
15
recession, and that this effect was greater in countries where credit conditions tightened more.
But, as I have just said, financial frictions are likely to have been only a temporary factor. With
credit  supply  today  no  longer  a  constraining  factor,  the  only  major  impediment  to  stronger
productivity growth and real convergence is subpar institutions. Therefore, opening up protected
sectors, cutting red tape and easing barriers for firm entry would reduce capital misallocation and
foster stronger and more sustainable growth.
Conclusions
With this in mind, let me conclude.
The  recent  broadening  of  the  euro  area  recovery  and  the  marked  drop  in  cross-country
dispersion in a number of economic indicators is an encouraging development. It underscores
that our monetary policy measures have materially reduced financial fragmentation and that their
positive  effects  are  increasingly  spreading  more  evenly  across  the  euro  area.  This  is  a
necessary precondition for inflation to move sustainably to levels closer to 2%.
But  although  growth  rates  have  converged  recently,  there  are  still  large  differences  in  living
standards  across  euro  area  countries  and,  by  some  measures,  they  have  even  increased
recently. To a large extent, these differences reflect the quality of national institutions.
Research on granular data that have only recently become available has helped shed light on the
underlying  microeconomic  processes  and  frictions  that  govern  the  aggregate  relationship
between the quality of institutions and the level of GDP per capita.
That  research  leads  me  to  my  first  policy  conclusion  –  that  we  should  facilitate  the  more
widespread  availability  of  granular  data  to  deepen  our  knowledge  of  how  businesses  are
performing, as in aggregate this equates to overall macroeconomic performance. I am certain
that the insights delivered already by the CompNet project are just the tip of the iceberg.
My  second  conclusion  is  that  reforms  that  aim  to  improve  the  quality  of  institutions  can  help
unlock  the  productive  potential  of  our  economies  and  can  provide  the  basis  for  a  renewed
process  of  real  economic  convergence  –  a  process  that  would  not  only  strengthen  social
cohesion but also the belief in the benefits of our currency union. This is a vitally important goal in
and of itself.
In addition, by promoting flexibility and overall living standards in the euro area, improving and
harmonising the quality of our institutions also increases countries’ ability to cope with adverse
shocks, thereby easing the conduct of monetary policy. And by boosting overall potential output it
can reduce the current debt overhang in some economies and provide space for fiscal policy to
become countercyclical, reducing the overall burden on monetary policy.
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
See Barro, R. and Sala-i-Martin, X. (1992), Convergence, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 100, pp. 223–51.
The European Commission’s 2018 projections for the output gap (relative to potential GDP) in Germany and
Italy are 0.1% and 0% respectively. For HICP inflation, the projections are 1.4% and 1.3% respectively.
For  a  revisitation  of  this  discussion,  see  Bayoumi,  T.  and  Eichengreen,  B.  (2017), Aftershocks  of  Monetary
Unification: Hysteresis With a Financial Twist, IMF Working Paper, WP/17/55, March.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the euro area, Speech at the International Center for
Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May.
See,  for  example,  North,  D.  (1991), Institutions, institutional change and economic performance,  Cambridge
University  Press,  New  York;  Easterly,  W.  and  Levine,  R.  (1997),  Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic
divisions, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No 4, pp. 1203–1250; and Hall, R. and Jones, C.
(1999), Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker than others, The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 114, No 1, pp. 83–116. The possible reverse causality from income levels to institutional quality
is well known and would deserve further investigation at euro area level, although it is likely to be less significant
than  between  advanced  and  low-income  economies.  See  Acemoglu,  D.,  Johnson,  S.  and  Robinson,  J.
(2001), The  Colonial  Origins  of  Comparative  Development: An  Empirical  Investigation,  American  Economic
Review, Vol. 91, No 5, pp. 1369–1401.
Related to this, see Aghion, P., Farhi, E., and Kharroubi, E. (2017),  On the interaction between monetary policy,
corporate balance sheets and structural reforms, presented at the ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, June.
The authors find that the announcement of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) only raised growth in countries
where product market regulation is low.
See European Central Bank (2017), Financial integration in Europe.
Milano, V. and Reichlin, P. (2017),  Risk Sharing Across the US and EMU: The Role of Public Institutions, Luiss
School of European Political Economy.
See Cœuré, B. (2016), Rebalancing in the euro area: are we nearly there yet?, Speech at the Danish Economic
Society, Kolding, 15 January. The case for a new convergence process is made by the Five Presidents’ Report
of June 2015 on Completing Europe‘s Economic and Monetary Union. See also Coeuré, B. (2015), Towards a
political  convergence  process  in  the  euro  area,  Speech  at  the  Interparliamentary  Conference  “Towards  a
Progressive Europe”, Berlin, 16 October.
See  Draghi,  M.  (2014), Stability  and  Prosperity  in  Monetary  Union,  Speech  at  the  University  of  Helsinki,  27
November.
Evidence suggests that labour misallocation did not deteriorate much over time. See, for example, Gamberoni,
E., Giordano, C. and López-Garcia, P. (2016), Capital and labour (mis)allocation in the euro area: Some stylized
facts and determinants, ECB Working Paper No. 1981.
See Guillamón, C., Moral-Benito, E. and Puente, S. (2017), High growth firms in employment and productivity:
dynamic interactions and the role of financial constraints?, Working Papers, No 1718, Banco de España.
See, for example, Barlevy, G. F. (2003), Credit market frictions and the allocation of resources over the business
cycle,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics,  Vol.  50,  Issue  8,  pp.  1795–1818;  Gopinath,  G.,  Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,
Karabarbounis, L. and Villegas-Sanchez, C. (2015), Capital allocation and productivity in South Europe, NBER
Working  Paper  21453.;  Osotimehin,  S.  and  Pappadà,  F.  (2016), Credit  frictions  and  the  cleansing  effect  of
recessions, The Economic Journal, Vol. 127, Issue 602; and Gamberoni et al. (2016) op. cit.
Bartelsman, E., Lopez-Garcia, P. and Presidente, G. (2017), Factor reallocation in Europe, ECB mimeo.
Adler,  G.  et  al.  (2017), Gone  with  the  Headwinds:  Global  Productivity,  IMF  Staff  Discussion  Notes,  17/04,
International Monetary Fund.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
