Yves  Mersch:  Behaving  responsibly 
environment - a central banker's perspective
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  Stiftung  Marktwirtschaft:  Expertentagung  "5th  Kadener  Gespräch", Alveslohe,  10  February
2017.
interest  rate
in  a 
low 
 The  policy  of  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  is  often  said  to  be  at  the  root  of  the  current
problems  in  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  Particularly  in  Germany,  there’s  the  added
accusation of monetary policy “expropriating” savers.
A closer look quickly reveals that such hasty judgements fail to appreciate the complexity of the
matter. Today, therefore, I shall examine carefully the underlying reasons for our monetary policy
action. By focusing on the reasons for our actions we can understand more easily how to get
back to a normalisation of monetary policy.
Low natural interest rates
Why are interest rates so low?
The growth trend has been declining in many mature economies not just since the crisis, but for
several decades. This slowdown in growth has led to lower long-term interest rates.
The  structural  causes  of  this  trend  of  slowing  growth  is  a  subject  of  controversy  among
specialists. Demographic and technological developments are mentioned, as are the effects of
the financial cycle, which may be out of sync with the business cycles. I do not want to pre-empt
this ongoing discussion. Instead, I would like to focus on two issues, which in the current context
are  very  relevant  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective  –  regardless  of  the  structural  causes
underlying the weak economic growth.
First,  the  slowdown  in  growth  in  this  environment  increased  the  risk  of  a  self-reinforcing
downward spiral. For the weak growth dynamics will not go unnoticed by economic actors: their
expectations are worsening. If, for instance, a company expects demand to fall, it will be less
inclined to make big investments.
Secondly, ageing societies, which exist in many mature economies, not only have to cope with a
shrinking labour force, but they also have to save more. This has led to a savings glut and to a
shortage of safe assets. So investments are falling and savings are rising. This weakness of
investment  is  further  reinforced  when  public  authorities  invest  less  than  is  even  needed  to
preserve the capital stock. This is a cause for concern especially where both fiscal space and
demand exist.
This dynamic has led to a reduction in the natural interest rate, i.e. the real rate of interest in
which savings and investments are in equilibrium in an economy operating at its potential, where
there is neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation.
In the current environment, the ECB has brought the market rate below the level of the natural
rate. The key rate since March last year has been at zero and the rate on the deposit facility at –
0.4%.
Had we not done this, constant nominal interest rates amid falling inflation rates would have led
to  higher  real  interest  rates  and  undermined  anaemic  growth  even  more.  This  would  have
significantly increased the risk of deflation. This is just as harmful as accelerating inflation. As
Walter Eucken said: “Deflation distorts the price framework just as much.”1
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thus, price stability for the ECB means that we have to protect European citizens not only from
inflation  rates  that  are  too  high,  but  also  from  a  deflationary  spiral.  This  is  reflected  in  our
quantitative definition of price stability: an inflation rate of below, but close to, 2% in the medium
term.
We therefore acted in order to abide by this symmetrical mandate on price stability.
But  we  are  aware  that  we  cannot  lower  our  interest  rates  to  an  unlimited  extent.  As  from  a
certain level, it becomes more attractive to keep cash – despite the associated costs – than to
pay negative interest rates. And even if this point has not yet been reached, we are bearing in
mind that further rate cuts into negative territory may have non-linear effects. The reactions of
people in extremis cannot be anticipated.
2
But we can also influence market interest rates in other ways. Thus, for example, with our asset
purchases  we  have  pushed  the  yield  curve  down.  And  by  offering  targeted  longer-term
refinancing on favourable terms which reward additional lending, we have made it possible for
banks to cut their interest rates, a move which has led to increased lending.
All these measures in recent years have contributed to the economic recovery in the euro area.
Thus, both the demand for, and supply of, credit is rising.
In the real economy, too, positive surprises have predominated recently. The growth rate in the
fourth quarter of last year rose to 0.5 %. In the euro area, the seasonally adjusted unemployment
rate fell to 9.6% in December. In November it was 0.1 percentage point higher and in December
of the previous year it was still at 10.5%.
Overall, the prospects for economic growth in the euro area are increasingly positive. However,
while  the  data  within  the  monetary  union  is  pointing  to  growth  risks  being  more  and  more  in
equilibrium, uncertainty and the risk of political shocks outside continental Europe have clearly
gone up.
To put it another way: while the economic outlook for the euro area is steadily brightening, dark
clouds are building up on the political horizon beyond the continent.
But of course we shall pay particular attention to how prices evolve. The annual rate of inflation
rose, according to provisional estimates by Eurostat in January, by 0.7 percentage point to 1.8%.
This  sharp  jump  in  the  rate  of  inflation  is  largely  attributable  to  volatile  components,  namely
energy and, to a somewhat lesser extent, food. Core inflation, on the other hand, which excludes
food and energy, remained stable at 0.9%.
For us, the overall inflation rate is the key figure because we protect the purchasing power of
citizens,  albeit  in  the  “medium  term”,  not  on  a  month-to-month  basis.  Given  the  current  high
variability of energy prices,  indicators  of  the  underlying  price  dynamics  say  more  about  future
developments than about the overall inflation rate.
We still assume that, because of energy prices, the overall inflation rate will rise until the middle
of this year – reaching our “comfort zone”. But one swallow doesn’t make a summer. For in the
second half of the year, it is likely to fall again and then reach 1.5% in 2018.
So,  subdued  inflation  will  be  with  us  for  quite  some  time,  but  the  spectre  of  deflation  has
disappeared from the radar of market participants.
For  this  recovery  to  gain  traction,  we  have  to  keep  our  word.  The  adjustments  to  our  asset
purchase  programme  will  be  implemented  as  announced  in  December  –  because,  first,  it
contributes  significantly  to  the  economic  recovery  and  stabilisation  on  the  price  front.  And
second, monetary policy in times of heightened uncertainty must be a guarantor of stability and
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
reliability by being credible.
And yet, at the same time, how much longer can we continue to talk about “even lower rates” as
being a monetary policy option? Considering the importance of credibility for a central bank, as
mentioned,  there  should  be  no  delay  in  making  the  necessary  gradual  adjustments  to  our
communication.
But support from the political dimension is needed too. Structural reforms are required in various
areas as well as fiscal stimulus where budgetary flexibility exists.
And what sounded like a platitude yesterday risks being forgotten today: political stability, the rule
of  law  and  reliability  are  essential  conditions  for  maintaining  our  prosperity.  And  only  open
markets  and  free  trade  make  it  possible  to  boost  this  prosperity.  We  need  to  make  the  cake
bigger, instead of squabbling over the existing portions. Protectionism will only lead to a loss of
prosperity for all.
Impact of monetary policy on banks
We are aware that our measures have side effects and that these become more pronounced the
longer the unconventional measures last. Let me emphasise that these measures are temporary
and are not a permanent part of our active toolbox.
To  mitigate  risks  as  far  as  possible,  we  closely  monitor  the  broader  repercussions  of  our
monetary policy. We carefully watch insurance companies, pension funds and, above all, banks,
which play a key role in the transmission of our monetary policy.
Let’s first of all take a look at the banks: over the longer term abnormally low or negative interest
3
rates, together with a very flat yield curve and negative term premia, can have adverse effects.
Those banks whose business depends heavily on maturity transformation and on deposit-based
refinancing are being hit particularly hard. And as it is difficult to pass negative interest rates onto
retail customers and as the introduction of fees provides only limited remedy, some of the banks
will  have  to  adapt  their  business  models. Also,  consolidation  will  continue  to  be  necessary  to
increase efficiency in the long term.
We are now already seeing that concerns about the future profitability of banks are affecting their
share prices. The euro area bank index fell by around 40% between August 2015 and August
2016.  This  decline  was  driven  by,  among  other  things,  a  worsening  outlook  for  the  global
economy and growing concern about the effects of the low interest rate environment and non-
performing loans. When banks’ share prices fall, their cost of equity increases, which could then
reduce the net return on lending. This may cause banks to become more conservative in their
lending in future and to raise the cost of lending. Internal calculations have shown that a decline
of around 10% in a bank’s share price reduces corporate lending by around 0.5 percentage point.
Allow me, however, to comment on the sometimes severe criticism, especially from Germany,
that we face: the German banking sector is one of the largest in the euro area but at the same
time it’s the least efficient. German banks have a cost-income ratio of 73%, which is much higher
than that of the rest of the euro area. And while other countries have cut the number of banks by
almost a quarter following the financial and economic crisis in order to reduce overcapacity, the
4
corresponding figure for Germany was only 10%.
Traditional business models under review
The current low interest rate environment has not just revealed weaknesses among banks, it has
also called into question the traditional business models of insurance companies and pension
funds.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
For many insurers in Germany, guaranteed returns have become an issue. In the current market
environment, it is becoming increasingly difficult to achieve the guaranteed interest rates of 4%
that  were  commonplace  in  contracts  concluded  in  the  mid-1990s.  The  German  ministry  of
finance has reduced the guaranteed interest rate for the current year from 1.25% to 0.9%. Many
insurance companies are now increasingly turning to unit-linked products.
In  addition,  new  regulatory  requirements  are  increasing  the  demand  for  safe  assets.  German
government bonds alone are yielding negative returns on maturities of up to seven years.
Against  this  backdrop,  discussions  are  under  way  as  to  what  can  be  done  to  counter  this
shortage of safe assets. One suggestion is that market participants create a new kind of safe
asset, known as European Safe Bonds (ESBies) , consisting of the senior tranche of a portfolio
of existing bonds from different euro area countries. The advantage here would be that no joint
liability would exist, as is the case in other proposals of this kind.
5
From a purely academic perspective, this is certainly an interesting idea. But it would be difficult
to counter the public’s assumption that this would be a surreptitious mutualisation of sovereign
debt. The political desire to introduce ESBies in the near future is likely to be very limited.
I therefore don’t see this proposal as being part of the operational agenda but rather as a subject
for long-term study.
Outlook
Let me conclude.
Weakening  global  growth  and  a  generally  lower  natural  interest  rate  are  demanding  very  low,
sometimes negative, market rates so that investment and consumption become more attractive.
In the medium term we are thereby aiming to get inflation back to a level in line with our mandate
to ensure price stability of below, but close to, 2%.
Without our measures, the euro area economy would probably have slipped back into recession,
with  the  risk  of  fully  fledged  deflation.  We  had  to  act  and  have  prevented  things  from  getting
worse. Our measures have proved effective.
Our mandate is clear. It says that in the medium term we have to achieve an inflation rate of
below, but close to, 2%. This is the only goal that our unconventional measures are also bound
by. And price stability is an exclusively internal objective – the ECB does not pursue an exchange
rate policy.
Nevertheless, the longer it takes to achieve this goal, the greater the risk that the side effects of
our measures become stronger, especially of the negative rates. While we are doing what we
can to keep the side effects to a minimum, the financial industry must play its part and adapt as
far as possible.
The recovery has started. However, for it to be sustainable, we must first and foremost address
the causes of this global low interest rate environment. But monetary policy cannot manage this
on its own – not least because our measures are not intended to become a permanent feature of
the system.
The  economic  recovery  cannot  be  sustained  by  monetary  policy  alone;  it  also  needs  support
from politicians. The main objective is to bring about a turnaround in global growth. This involves
stepping up fiscal policy measures where there is scope and need. We also require reforms that
increase productivity.
But even these political measures won’t be effective if the virus of isolationism is rife. Because
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the plague of protectionism only creates losers.
1
2
3
4
5
Eucken, W. (1990), “Grundsätze der Wirtschaftspolitik”, 6th edition, J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tübingen, p. 257.
See Rostagno, M., Bindseil, U., Kamps, A., Lemke, W., Sugo, T. and Vlassopoulos T., (2016), “Breaking through
the  zero  line:  the  ECB’s  negative  interest  rate  policy”,  Brookings  Institution,  Washington  DC,  6  June.  The
presentation is available on the website of the Brookings Institution.
Borio,  C.,  Gambacorta,  L.,  Hofmann,  B.,  (2015)  “The  influence  of  monetary  policy  on  bank  profitability”, BIS
Working Paper October.
Mersch, Y. (2016), “Low interest rate environment – an economic, legal and social analysis”, speech at the
University of Applied Sciences of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Hachenburg, 27 October.
Brunnermeier, M., Langfield, S., Pagano, M., Reis, R., Van Nieuwerburgh, S., Vayanos, D., (2016), “ESBies:
Safety in Tranches“, ESRB Working Paper Series, No 21, September.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
