 News conference 
   Berne, 15 June 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
Introductory remarks by Thomas Jordan 
 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s news conference. I will 
begin by explaining our monetary policy decision and our assessment of the economic 
situation. I will then hand over to Fritz Zurbrügg, who will present this year’s Financial 
Stability Report. After that, Andréa Maechler will review developments on the financial 
markets. Finally, we will – as ever – be pleased to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
Let me begin with our monetary policy decision and the inflation forecast. 
We are maintaining our expansionary monetary policy, with the aim of stabilising price 
developments and supporting economic activity. Interest on sight deposits at the SNB is to 
remain at –0.75% and the target range for the three-month Libor is unchanged at between  
–1.25% and –0.25%. We will remain active in the foreign exchange market as necessary, 
while taking the overall currency situation into consideration. The negative interest rate and 
our willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market are intended to make Swiss franc 
investments less attractive, thereby easing pressure on the currency. The Swiss franc is still 
significantly overvalued. 
The new conditional inflation forecast differs little from that of March. We continue to 
anticipate an inflation rate of 0.3% for the current year. For 2018, the forecast has fallen 
slightly to 0.3%, from 0.4% in the previous quarter. For 2019, we now expect inflation of 
  Page 1/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
1.0%, compared to 1.1% last quarter. The conditional inflation forecast is based on the 
assumption that the three-month Libor remains at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon. 
Global economic outlook 
I would now like to turn to economic developments abroad, as these have a considerable 
bearing on the inflation and economic outlook in Switzerland. 
In line with our expectations, the global economy has strengthened further in recent months. 
Global GDP growth in the first quarter was more robust than in previous quarters. This is due 
in large part to an encouraging upturn in emerging economies. In the euro area, too, economic 
recovery has gained strength. 
Owing to the stronger economic growth, the labour market situation in advanced economies 
has improved further; with full employment now almost reached in the US, Japan, the UK and 
Germany. Across the euro area, unemployment has declined again.  
Despite these positive developments in the real economy, inflation remains modest in most 
advanced economies. Against this background, monetary policy in Japan and the euro area in 
particular is likely to remain very expansionary. In the US, monetary conditions are expected 
to gradually normalise. 
In our new baseline scenario for the global economy, we anticipate that economic 
developments will remain favourable. For 2017, economic growth looks set to be its strongest 
in six years. The improved economic conditions are expected to gradually translate into 
higher inflation only in the course of 2018, especially in the euro area.  
The cautiously optimistic baseline scenario continues to be subject to considerable downside 
risks; this is due to political uncertainty and structural problems in a number of advanced 
economies.  
Swiss economic outlook 
I shall now turn to the economic outlook for Switzerland. 
According to initial quarterly estimates of the national accounts, positive stimuli from abroad 
were again only partially transmitted to the Swiss economy in the first quarter. Although GDP 
growth firmed somewhat, it still remained subdued at an annualised 1.1%.  
What is our assessment of the current economic situation? Overall, available economic 
indicators suggest that the Swiss economy is on the road to recovery. Export figures and 
company surveys alike have pointed to an upturn in manufacturing activity since the 
beginning of the year. Positive developments are also in evidence in significant areas of the 
services sector and construction. We are gratified to see that the more favourable economic 
situation and improved business sentiment are reflected, too, by a greater willingness to 
invest.  
  Page 2/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
However, certain indicators suggest that the recovery has not yet taken hold in all areas of the 
economy. Utilisation of production capacity is unsatisfactory in a number of industries, and 
companies’ profit margins remain tight. These difficulties arise from a combination of 
economic and structural factors. In addition, the strong Swiss franc continues to weigh on 
some industries. 
Momentum in the labour market reflects this mixed picture. Although the situation continues 
to improve, the pace is only moderate. Seasonally adjusted unemployment has again receded 
slightly in the past three months. Companies are nevertheless still cautious about taking on 
new staff. 
For 2017, we continue to expect growth of roughly 1.5%. 
Exchange rates, interest rates and inflation expectations 
I will now review changes to monetary conditions since the beginning of the year. 
The trade-weighted nominal exchange rate for the Swiss franc has remained stable overall in 
the last six months. In the run-up to the French presidential election, there were episodes of 
increased upward pressure. After the decision in France, the franc again weakened somewhat 
against the euro. By contrast, it appreciated slightly against the dollar. In real terms, the franc 
has virtually remained unchanged on a trade-weighted basis over the last half-year and is still 
significantly overvalued. 
Interest rates in Switzerland have remained virtually unchanged in recent months. The interest 
rate differential to the euro area has remained stable as well. Short-term rates in the US, on the 
other hand, have risen slightly, reflecting the tightening of monetary policy there. 
Inflation expectations for Switzerland have increased somewhat over the past half-year. 
Households, companies and financial analysts are now expecting an inflation rate of just 
above zero, also for the short term. In the longer term, meanwhile, expectations are around 
1%. A similar view is substantiated in the company talks conducted by the SNB’s delegates 
for regional economic relations. Inflation expectations are in the range that is consistent with 
the SNB’s definition of price stability. 
Monetary policy outlook  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my key points. Inflation remains very low and 
capacity utilisation continues to be unsatisfactory.  
The Swiss franc is significantly overvalued. In periods of uncertainty, it is still subject to 
increased upward pressure. The two elements of our monetary policy ease this pressure. The 
negative interest rate makes Swiss franc investments less attractive, by at least partially 
restoring the traditional interest rate differential against other countries. Interventions in the 
foreign exchange market supply the market with additional Swiss francs when demand for our 
currency is particularly strong. 
  Page 3/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 15 June 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
Our expansionary monetary policy remains necessary in order to ensure price stability, while 
taking due account of economic developments. 
Newly designed ‘Business cycle signals’ report 
To conclude, I would like to draw your attention to an additional document in the media pack. 
It is the preprint of the ‘Business cycle signals’ report.  
The SNB’s delegates for regional economic relations regularly conduct talks with managers 
of companies throughout Switzerland. These talks provide us with a first-hand account of the 
latest cyclical and structural developments in our economy and are an extremely valuable 
source of information for the Governing Board in its assessment of the economic situation. A 
summary of the information gathered from these talks has been published in a quarterly report 
for some time now.  
We have redesigned this report to coincide with today’s monetary policy assessment. The aim 
of the new design is to allow readers to interpret the results of the talks at a glance. In 
addition, the text is supplemented by charts to enable comparisons over time. A structured 
approach, both with regard to conducting the surveys and to selecting the companies, forms 
the basis for the compilation of such time series. In redesigning the report, we also changed 
the title from ‘Business cycle trends’ to ‘Business cycle signals’.  
I am pleased to be able to present you with the delegates’ new ‘Business cycle signals’ report 
today. It will continue to be published as part of the SNB’s Quarterly Bulletin.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Fritz Zurbrügg, who will present this year’s Financial Stability Report. 
   Page 4/4 
 