Philip R Lane: The European monetary and financial system - the
role of the Central Bank of Ireland
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Irish  Embassy,
Tokyo, 8 May 2017.
 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to address this distinguished audience.
Today, I wish to discuss the role of national central banks in the European monetary and financial
system, with specific reference to the Central Bank of Ireland.
In relation to the monetary system, Ireland was one of the founding members of the euro area in
1999. Monetary policy is formulated and implemented by the eurosystem, which consists of the
European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  in  Frankfurt  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  member
countries.  The  staff  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  actively  participate  in  the  eurosystem
committees that provide advice to the Governing Council of the ECB.
The governors of the national central banks (each in an individual capacity) sit on the Governing
Council, together with the six members of the ECB’s executive board. Accordingly, the ECB’s
monetary policy decisions are a shared responsibility of the members of the Governing Council,
supported by the collective work of the eurosystem’s committees that include participants from
the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks.  In  turn,  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  is
primarily decentralised to the national central banks and the financial operations department of
the Bank conducts liquidity operations and asset purchases as required.
A general lesson from the global financial cycle that generated expansionary conditions in the
financial systems of many advanced economies during 2003–2007 which was followed by costly
reversals is that macroprudential policies are required in order to ensure that the financial system
is resilient in the face of such volatility.
This  lesson  was  deeply  absorbed  in  Europe,  with  a  new  post-crisis  approach  to  financial
regulation,  that  includes  new  frameworks  to  assess  pan-European  systemic  risks  and  the
development of institutional frameworks for macroprudential policy in each country. The Central
Bank of Ireland actively participates in the work of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB)
and I am a member of the General Board of the ESRB.
In addition, we are now the designated macroprudential authority for Ireland. This new mandate
includes the setting of systemic capital buffers for banks, including bank-specific buffers that are
proportional  to  the  systemic  importance  of  each  institution  and  a  common  counter-cyclical
capital buffer (CCyB) which can be adjusted at different stages of the credit cycle. In addition, the
Bank sets borrower-based measures (BBMs), which places ceilings on the level of debt that can
be  incurred  by  individual  households.  Our  current  BBMs  place  ceilings  on  the  loan-to-income
(LTI) and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios in relation to mortgages, which are intended to improve the
resilience of households and banks to withstand future reversals in housing market conditions.
In  relation  to  the  prudential  regulation  of  banks,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in
developing a banking union in Europe. In particular, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) of
the ECB is now responsible for supervision in the euro area and is the direct supervisor for the
largest banks, including the main Irish-resident banks. In practice, the SSM operates through joint
supervisory teams (JSTs), which are led by ECB staff but also include staff from the national
supervisor – in Ireland, we are the national competent authority for supervision of not only banks
but also insurance firms, investment firms and a broad range of other financial intermediaries.
The  supervision  of  non-bank  financial  firms  remains  a  national  responsibility  but  there  is
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
significant coordination through the work of the various European supervisory authorities (ESAs):
the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA);  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions
Authority  (EIOPA);  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets Authority  (ESMA).  The  staff  and
leadership  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  contribute  to  the  policy  discussions  of  the  ESAs,
through committee work and membership of their governing boards.
A  second  element  of  banking  union  is  a  common  EU-wide  approach  to  the  recovery  and
resolution  of  banks,  which  is  laid  down  in  the  Banking  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive
(BRRD). Each country now has a national resolution authority, with a lead role played by the pan-
European Single Resolution Board (SRB). In Ireland, we also have taken on the mandate to act
as the national resolution authority which involves the development and, if required, the execution
of recovery and resolution plans for banks and investment firms.
A third element of banking union is the establishment of a common deposit insurance system.
This is a multi-stage process which remains under discussion. For now, the common EU rule is
that  deposits  are  guaranteed  up  to  a  limit  of  €100,000  but  the  funding  and  management  of
deposit guarantee schemes are a national responsibility: we operate the Irish deposit guarantee
scheme.
Finally, the regulation of the conduct of financial firms and the operation of financial markets is a
vital part of the overall regulatory architecture in order to protect consumers and investors. Within
the general European-level regulatory policy framework, conduct regulation is primarily carried
out  at  the  national  level  and  our  mission  statement  of  “maintaining  stability,  protecting
consumers” conveys the priority attached to consumer protection in the regulatory work of the
Central Bank of Ireland.
I  hope  that  this  brief  overview  gives  you  a  basic  understanding  of  the  post-crisis  European
monetary-financial landscape and the important role played by the Central Bank of Ireland, both
at the national level and through our contributions at the European level.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
