Guy Debelle: How I learned to stop worrying and love the basis
Dinner address by Mr Guy Debelle, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the BIS
Symposium: CIP–RIP?, Basel, 22 May 2017.
 Thanks to Matt Boge for many educative discussions on the basis over the years.
Drawing  on  the  title  of  this  conference,  ‘CIP–RIP?’,  one  possible  opening  line  for  my  speech
tonight is that, unlike Marc Antony, ‘I come to praise the basis, not to bury it’. But instead of a
theatrical inspiration, I will resort to a cinematic one and talk about how I learned to stop worrying
1
and love the basis.
One of the main points that I want to make tonight is that the basis is not something to be always
and everywhere feared. It is not a violation of a fundamental principle of global finance that should
lead to excessive gnashing of teeth and wringing of hands; most of the time.
However, it is useful to ask the question why a non-zero basis exists, that is,  why  is  there  a
deviation from CIP? When should we worry about it? When shouldn’t we?
To answer these questions, it is useful to remember what the basis is. At its simplest, it is a
2
price that clears a market for which there is supply and demand.
Whenever the words supply, demand and price appear in close proximity, the word ‘identification’
immediately  comes  to  mind.  Identification  problems  have  often  been  ignored  in  many
discussions of the basis over the years. The analysis has often been partial, looking at the basis
(the  price)  and  linking  it  to  shifts  in  demand  or  supply,  but  not  both.  Many  factors  are  often
assumed to be exogenous, when in reality they are both endogenous and consequential.
We need to better understand what underpins the supply and demand that determines the basis
and what causes those two curves to shift. Who are the relevant participants and what, if any,
constraints might they have on their behaviour? The CIP assumption of risk-less arbitrage needs
to be questioned. The tendency to focus only on banks needs to be broadened. We need to be
taking into account the various motivations for the cross-border transactions underpinning the
supply and demand.
In addition to that, we need to make sure we are measuring the basis correctly. There is no issue
with measuring the foreign exchange component. Measuring the relative rates of return in the
different currencies is where it gets more complicated. Indeed, even framing the issue in terms
of  relative  rates  of  return,  rather  than  in  terms  of  funding  and  investing  currencies  shifts  the
focus.
The papers at this symposium generally address these issues, coming at them from a variety of
perspectives. A common theme across the papers is that banks aren’t the only players and that
the arbitrage is not risk free, and perhaps at least as important, the arbitrage is not costless. The
manner in which it is not risk free and what and how large the costs are, very much depends on
who you are.
In  my  view,  there  is  not  complete  fungibility  across  all  the  various  funding  sources  or  the
investment opportunities. Not everyone borrows at LIBOR on the one hand, or is willing or able to
take  on  the  credit  risk  of  investing  in  LIBOR  on  the  other  side.  Moreover,  LIBOR  aggregates
across  different  credit  exposures,  not  all  of  which  are  available  to  a  potential  investor  with  a
mandate with credit limits. Beyond that, the composition of LIBOR changes through time as the
borrowing needs of global banks change. So there are measurement problems involving LIBOR,
which is often the interest rate used to measure the basis.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
So, who are the various suppliers and demanders in the market and what are their constraints?
A  useful  taxonomy  is  the  following:  banks,  hedge  funds,  corporates  and  asset  managers/real
money pools, including central banks. Each of these groups has varying degrees of flexibility to
arbitrage the basis. They have varying constraints on how they can use their balance sheets,
varying funding sources and varying credit appetites and limits which constrain the investable
universe. There is a fundamental difference between a bank (or a hedge fund) that needs to fund
itself to arbitrage the basis, compared to a real money investor, which may be naturally long in
the funding currency. On the other hand, real money often has restrictions on the ability to take
on leverage in the way that a bank doesn’t. Real money can often be constrained in their ability to
arbitrage the basis because their mandate doesn’t allow them to.
In my experience, one of the fundamental laws of finance is to never underestimate mandate
constraints.
While the constraints on the various participants in the market vary, so do the potential risks.
The risk that concerns me the most is the combination of maturity and currency mismatch; in
particular, a bank funding a portfolio of foreign currency assets, by swapping its local currency
(for which it has a natural funding base) into the foreign currency with short-dated swaps.
The assets are generally long-dated and not particularly liquid. So we have a dangerous cocktail
of maturity and currency transformation. If the basis gets too wide, then this can quickly become
unprofitable. Even more worryingly, if a quantitative constraint hits the swap market, rather than
just experiencing just an increase in the cost of the swap, a bank funding itself with short-dated
swaps  is  quickly  going  to  find  itself  in  the  equivalent  of  a  sudden  stop.  (Note  this  is  quite  a
different  scenario  from  funding  domestic  assets  with  foreign  currency  swapped  back  into
domestic  currency,  for  which  there  is  ultimately  a  domestic  backstop  in  the  event  of  liquidity
stresses.)
A positive basis is often described as indicative of a US dollar shortage. I don’t find that term very
helpful  at  all.  ‘Shortage’  very  much  implies  a  quantitative  constraint,  rather  than  a  pricing
constraint.  But  in  most  circumstances,  we  are  talking  about  the  latter.  That  is,  the  supply  of
dollars might go down, so the price goes up. There is no shortage, there is just more demand
than supply, and, as with other markets, the price adjusts to equilibrate the market. The market is
functioning effectively and efficiently. The focus of analysis should be on the various factors that
affect demand and supply. The papers at this conference highlight the range of factors that need
to be taken into account.
There are exceptions, most obviously 2008, where there clearly was a dollar shortage. At that
time, there was effectively no market-clearing price and rationing was in effect. But that period
was the exception, rather than the rule.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over the past few years, that has not been the state of the world. The basis has gone up and
down in response to the shifts in demand and supply. As it has moved around, it has in turn
generated  behavioural  responses  from  market  participants.  For  example,  when  the  basis  got
particularly  wide  a  year  or  so  ago,  a  number  of  banks  which  had  previously  found  it
uneconomical to arbitrage the market, re-entered as it was profitable to do so, even given the
balance sheet costs to them of the trade.
In the past, we might have expected wide divergences in money market rates reflected in a large
basis to trigger greater use of central bank standing facilities. We would have thought that was
appropriate as something must have been going wrong. Now, we’re no longer surprised by these
anomalies (be they in FX swaps, repo, etc.) because we are more comfortable with the idea that
an increase in the basis is not always a sign of stress and can be consistent with functioning
markets  (and  seemingly  have  little  implication  for  monetary  policy  transmission).  Nowadays,
monitoring markets for signs of stress requires more knowledge of market dynamics than in the
past.
So most of the time, the basis is not a sign of stress. Understanding what is behind it is a useful
exercise and can identify potential vulnerabilities. But I wouldn’t be losing sleep over it in the way
that I (literally) lost sleep over it in 2008.
Clearly in all of this the speed of equilibration matters. Take the recent US money market reform
as an example. Banks that had previously relied on money market funds to source US dollar
funding could no longer rely on this to the same extent. How they adjusted in part depended on
what  those  US  dollar  activities  were.  If  they  were  simply  arbitraging  the  FDIC  deposit  levy  to
intermediate US dollar funding pools to earn the deposit rate at the Fed, then they could let those
activities run off. This was easy to do because the assets were short dated. They didn’t need to
switch funding to the swap market if it was not profitable to do so. If instead, they were funding
US dollar lending, then they did need to raise funding from other sources and we saw both US
dollar LIBOR and the basis rise as both of those markets were tapped.
Another risk worth contemplating is behaviour that might be induced if the basis gets ‘too’ wide.
While that might entice some participants back into the market to keep a lid on the basis, there is
a risk that it engenders behaviour that might concern us. It can incentivise people to stop hedging
and take on the exchange rate risk. Corporate borrowers or asset managers might decide to run
unhedged foreign exchange positions. While some might argue that the price is leading them to
make the ‘right’ decision, I would be concerned about the different degrees of sophistication in
assessing  the  risk  of  unhedged  FX  positions.  Another  risk  is  that  it  could  also  incentivise
banks/investors to make higher-risk loans/investments to cover the higher cost of hedging.
Let me finish by coming back to the title of my talk and explain why I have learned not to worry
and love the basis.
In  the  current  world  of  low  returns  on  reserve  assets,  for  conservative  asset  managers  like
ourselves at the RBA, the return enhancement offered by the basis is highly beneficial.  We can
still confine ourselves to our conservative investable universe of sovereign assets, but earn the
(often quite substantial) return by swapping from the various reserve currencies that we hold into
yen (where the basis tends to be the widest). In addition to that, we can also swap Australian
dollars, our natural funding currency, into yen for domestic liquidity management purposes. We
can  manage  the  risks  around  these  transactions  with  a  well-articulated  and  conservative
counterparty framework, reinforced by ISDA agreements with daily margining.
3
In  doing  so,  we  can  also  take  comfort  that  we  are  playing  a  useful  role  in  providing  a
counterbalancing flow in the market, thereby limiting the rise in the basis and facilitating hedging
of cross-border flows. Of course, we don’t want everyone to love the basis as much as we do,
otherwise our return enhancement would soon disappear.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
So I hope we can all learn not to worry, most of the time, about the basis. But while we are not
worrying, we should still spend time understanding the various cross-border flows that underpin
the basis. But please can we make sure we look at all the different participants in the market and
the different factors that affect them, as the papers presented at this conference generally do.
Then, on the hopefully rare occasions when we do need to worry about the basis, we are better
placed to respond appropriately.
1
2
3
For those who don’t share my cultural heritage, I am referring to Stanley Kubrick’s Dr Strangelove or: How I
Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb.
The basis is shorthand for the extent of the deviation from covered interest parity (CIP). It is the difference
between the cost of borrowing directly in US dollars (say) and the synthetic cost from borrowing in a foreign
currency and swapping the foreign currency into US dollars. A positive (negative) basis means that the US dollar
interest rate is higher (lower) than the foreign interest rate adjusted for the cost of the swap.
is  covered 
This 
reports/rba/2016/operations-in-financial-markets.html.
in  detail 
in 
the  RBA’s  Annual  Reports: www.rba.gov.au/publications/annual-
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
