KEYNOTE ADDRESS AT THE 25th ANNIVERSARY GALA 
DINNER OF STANBIC BANK BOTSWANA LIMITED 
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor  
 March 23, 2017 
 It  is  an  honour  and,  indeed,  I  am  most  grateful  to  the  Board  and 
Management of Stanbic Bank Botswana Limited for the invitation to 
officiate at this Gala Dinner, celebrating “25 Years of Stanbic Bank 
Moving  Forward”.  This  event  marks  a  significant  milestone  in  the 
history  of  the  bank  in  Botswana,  more  so  coming  shortly  after  the 
commemoration  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana’s  40th  Anniversary  on 
March  31,  2016  and  the  50th  Anniversary  of  our  country’s 
Independence, on September 30, 2016.   
 Distinguished  guests,  allow  me  to  start  by  thanking,  in  particular, 
Standard  Bank  Group  Chief  Executive,  Mr  Sim  Tshabalala; 
Chairman of the Board of Stanbic Bank Botswana Limited, Mr Craig 
Granville;  Chief  Executive,  Mr  Leina  Gabaraane,  and  the  entire 
management  and  staff  of  Stanbic  Bank  for  ensuring  that  we  are 
here, 
today,  celebrating 
the  Silver  Jubilee  of  Stanbic  Bank 
Botswana Limited. The efficiency, effectiveness and safe conduct of 
banking  operations  cannot  and  ought  not  be  taken  for  granted 
because, as many would know, banks are accident-prone entities. It 
is for this reason that the Board, Management and Staff of the Bank 
of  Botswana  congratulate  you,  Mr  Gabaraane,  your  Board  and  the 
entire  team,  for  the  many  achievements  of  your  bank  to  this  day 
and, thus far, having conducted the affairs of the bank in a prudent, 
sound and sustainable manner.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  first  part  of  my  remarks 
this  evening  will  highlight  the  accomplishments  of  Stanbic  Bank 
Botswana  Limited  over 
the 
last  25  years 
in 
the  areas  of 
governance, financial performance, innovation and corporate social 
responsibility.  Thereafter, 
I  will  offer  a  few  perspectives  on 
expectations  relating  to  banking  sector  regulatory  compliance  and 
the role of banks in policy implementation.  
 The entry of Stanbic Bank into the Botswana financial sector should 
be  placed  in  the  context  of  the  major  financial  sector  reforms 
undertaken in the early 1990s. These reforms were informed by the 
report  entitled  “Botswana  -  Financial  Policies 
for  Diversified 
Growth”,  derived  from  a  study  by  Government  with  the  assistance 
of the World Bank.  
 The key elements of these reforms included deregulation of interest 
rates,  adoption  and  use  of  indirect  instruments  of  monetary  policy, 
introduction  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana  Certificates  to  influence 
liquidity  in  the  banking  system  and  manage  short-term  interest 
rates,  liberalisation  of  banking  licensing  requirements  to  spur 
competition 
in 
the 
financial  sector  and  enhanced  prudential 
supervision  of  banks.  Hitherto,  there  were  only  three  commercial 
banks  operating  in  Botswana.  In  1991,  two  additional  commercial 
2 
 banks were licensed, namely, ANZ Grindlays Botswana Limited and 
Zimbank  Botswana  Limited.    A  year  later,  in  1992,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana  granted  UnionBank  Botswana  Limited,  a  subsidiary  of 
Standard  Bank  of  South  Africa,  a  banking  licence,  making  it  the 
sixth licensed commercial bank in the country. Shortly thereafter, in 
the  same  year,  UnionBank  merged  with  ANZ  Grindlays,  each  with 
an initial capital of P10 million, to form the bank we know today as 
Stanbic Bank Botswana Limited. 
 Director of Ceremonies, today, 25 years on, Stanbic Bank is ranked 
4th  among  the  10  commercial  banks  operating  in  the  country,  in 
terms  of  staffing,  branch  network,  capital  and  deposit  liabilities. 
From a modest beginning, with only 24 employees in 1993, Stanbic 
Bank  currently  employs  over  600  staff  members  across  10 
branches,  and  serves  in  excess  of        80  000  retail  and  business 
customers. The bank asset base has grown significantly, from P138 
million in 1993 to P12 billion as at December 31, 2016. During the 
same  period,  the  bank  has  also  consistently  made  profits;  with  its 
net  income  after  tax  increasing  from  P2.2  million  in  1993  to  P192 
million in 2016. At present, Stanbic Bank is regarded as one of the 
systemically important domestic banks operating in Botswana, with 
a  15  percent  market  share  of  total  banking  industry  assets  and 
deposits.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  Stanbic  Bank  offers  a  wide  range  of 
traditional and innovative corporate, retail and investment products 
3 
 and  services  including,  more  recently,  like  some  of  its  peers,  the 
introduction of on-line and mobile banking services. I have no doubt 
that  these  technology-based  platforms,  products  and  services  will 
enable  Stanbic  Bank  to  continue  to  be  a  significant  player  in  the 
industry and broader economy, as well as adapt to the emergence 
of  financial  technology  (Fintech)  operators  for  the  benefit  of 
customers  and  the  economy  at  large.  Somewhat  uniquely,  while 
embracing  technology-based  banking,  Stanbic  Bank  continues  to 
reinforce its position in corporate and investment banking. Amongst 
other Awards in the recent past, it was named the best investment 
bank  in  Botswana  in  the  2016  Europe,  Middle  East  and  Africa 
(EMEA)  Finance  African  Banking  Awards.  Congratulations,  once 
again.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  another  highlight  is  the 
evolution  of  leadership  and  governance  at  Stanbic  Bank.  Notably, 
the  Chief  Executive  position  was  localised  in  2008  with  the 
appointment  of  Mr  Gabaraane,  while  the  majority  of  the  bank’s 
Board  members  (six  out  of  10)  and  80  percent  of  the  senior 
management  staff  of  the  bank  are  citizens.  These  are  significant 
developments  in  two  respects:  first,  they  reflect  the  attention  given 
to staff development and enhancement of relevant skills across the 
spectrum  of  banking  operations;  and,  second,  the  alignment  of 
leadership,  management  and  operational  processes  to  the  local 
context,  in  order  to  better  serve  the  domestic  economy.    I  can 
confidently  state 
that,  based  on 
the  latest  statutory  returns 
4 
 submitted monthly and quarterly to the Bank of Botswana, the bank 
is solvent, profitable, well governed and prudently run, in the main, 
by Batswana.  
 Director  of  Ceremonies, 
in 
the  area  of  corporate  social 
responsibility,  Stanbic  Bank  has  a  long-standing  relationship  with 
the  Cheshire  Foundation;  it  donated  therapeutic  equipment  to  the 
Rehabilitation  Centres;  mosquito  nets  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  to 
fight  malaria;  and  a  mobile  clinic  for  the  Shakawe  community  and 
surrounding  areas.  I  am  informed  that  the  bank  also  supports 
vulnerable  groups,  such  as  orphans  and  underprivileged  children, 
through  various  initiatives,  including  a  partnership  with  SOS 
Children’s  Village,  St  Peters  Day  Care  Centre,  Metsimotlhabe 
Recreational  Centre  and  Kagisano  Women’s  Shelter,  as  well  as 
promoting culture, arts, health and wellness.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  there  is,  however,  one  missing  part  of  this 
good story, namely that, unlike its peers, Stanbic Bank is not listed 
on  the  Botswana  Stock  Exchange.  To  be  clear,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana does not prescribe that the shares of banks operating in 
Botswana  be  listed  on  the  domestic  stock  exchange.  This  is 
consistent  with  accepted  best  practice  and  governance  norms  that 
the Board and Management of individual firms should be allowed to 
determine  the  appropriate  capital  structure  and  economic  capital 
management  for  a  bank,  subject,  of  course,  to  meeting  the 
minimum  thresholds  for  prudential  regulatory  capital  adequacy 
5 
 requirements. That said, the non-existence of Stanbic Bank on the 
domestic bourse could be misinterpreted to mean lack of long-term 
commitment  and  willingness 
to  have 
the  Botswana  public 
participate  in  the  ownership  of  the  bank.  This  point  assumes 
particular  significance  in  the  context  of  a  country  where  all  the  10 
licensed  commercial  banks  are  subsidiaries  of  foreign-owned 
entities.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Stanbic  Bank  is  a 
wholly owned subsidiary of Standard Bank Group, the largest Pan-
African  banking  group  by  assets  amounting  R1.95 
trillion; 
equivalent to approximately P1.6 trillion or 154.5 billion US dollars.  
Therefore, Stanbic Bank Botswana is supported by a strong parent 
and  a  well-recognised  franchise,  regionally  and  globally.    This 
presents  both  opportunities  and  challenges. 
  As 
regards 
opportunities, the Standard Bank Group is a Pan-African bank that 
also  has  significant  representation  in  other  international  markets. 
This  places  the  Group  in  an  advantageous  position  to  fill  the  gap 
that  may  be  left  by  some  of  the  global  banks  as  they  decide  to 
move  out  from  certain  markets,  a  process  euphemistically  referred 
to  as  “regulatory  deconsolidation”  or  “global  de-risking”  and,  in 
certain  cases,  withdrawal  of  correspondent  banking  services,  for  a 
variety  of  reasons.    In  contrast  to  such  disengagement,  as  we 
witnessed  recently,  Stanbic  Bank  played  a  leading  role  in  the 
syndicated  facility  for  the  financing  of  the  Morupule  Power  Station 
project.    I  hasten  to  add  that,  as  an  internationally  active  financial 
6 
 conglomerate,  with  appropriate  risk  management  and  governance 
structures,  resources  and  expertise,  Standard  Bank  Group  is  well 
positioned 
to  support  regional  businesses  and 
infrastructure 
projects through the provision of long-term finance.  
 Distinguished Guests, this leads me to my second sub-theme; and I 
wish  to  offer  some  thoughts  on  ‘Moving  Forward’  in  the  next  25 
years and beyond, with a special focus on the Bank of Botswana’s 
expectations regarding Stanbic Bank and other banks from a policy 
and  regulatory  perspective.  The  global,  regional  and  domestic 
economies  are  projected  to  grow  modestly  in  the  years  ahead, 
constrained  by  a  number  of  factors,  including  policy  uncertainty, 
change  of  growth  models 
in  China, 
low  commodity  prices, 
slowdown  in  global  trade  and  potential  event  risks  emanating, 
especially, from the Brexit negotiation process and some European 
countries electoral outcomes in 2017.  
 Distinguished Guests, notwithstanding the foregoing, the agenda for 
transformation of Botswana’s economy, from a resource-based to a 
well-diversified economy, supported by good public infrastructure, a 
sound  macroeconomic  environment  and  a  vibrant  financial  sector, 
must continue.  As indicated in the 2012 - 2016 Botswana Financial 
Sector  Development  Strategy,  “a  healthy  and  vibrant  financial 
sector  is  crucial  for  the  future  of  Botswana.    Financial  institutions 
and markets safeguard savings, provide the financing required for a 
growing  private  sector,  and  make  an  important  and  growing  direct 
7 
 contribution  to  employment  and  economic  growth”.    It  is  in  this 
context  that  the  presence  of  Stanbic  Bank  and  its  parent  bank, 
Standard  Bank  Group,  in  banking,  insurance  and  other  forms  of 
financial services in Botswana becomes critically important.  
Distinguished  Guests,  banks  are,  by  definition,  risk  traders  and, 
invariably,  should  be  compensated  for  taking  such  risks.  However, 
in the context of economies, such as Botswana, there is a tendency 
for some large banking groups to engage in some form of “cherry-
picking” of best corporates and wealthy customers for credit support 
to  the  exclusion  of  SMMEs,  non-salaried  persons,  low  income 
groups  and  other  underserved  segments  of  society.  In  order  to 
continue 
to  contribute  positively 
to  sustainable  economic 
development,  the  Botswana  banking  system  should  be  more 
inclusive.  Banks  ought 
to 
invest  more 
in  risk  management 
infrastructure  (staff  and  systems)  to  be  able  to  tap  into  new 
resources  and  opportunities,  including  identifying  and  funding 
bankable  projects  originating  from  low-income  groups  and  small 
enterprises, and, I must add, in a safe and prudent manner.  In the 
long-term,  failure  to  do  so  could  marginalise  banks,  as  we  know 
them  today,  as  fintechs  and  block  chain  technologies  increasingly 
satisfy  the  demand  for  financial  services  in  more  innovative  and 
cost-effective ways. 
 According  to  the  World  Economic  Forum  Global  Competiveness 
Report of 2016/17, the Botswana financial sector’s overall ranking is 
66  out  of  138  countries,  representing  a  slight  deterioration  from  a 
8 
 ranking  of  63  in  2015/16.    According  to  the  Report,  “this  is  largely 
due  to  weak  performance  in  the  soundness  of  banks,  (ranked  68), 
and  ease  of  access  to  loans,  (ranked  69)”;  these  aspects  were 
ranked  55  and  56, 
respectively, 
in 
the  2015/16  Global 
Competitiveness Index”.  It is also a matter of public policy concern 
that  the  ratio  of  private  sector  credit  to  GDP  has  increased  only 
marginally,  from  25  percent  in  2011  to  31.8  percent  in  2016.  
Furthermore,  the  proportion  of  mortgage  loans  to  total  GDP  has 
been, on average 5.2 percent in the last five years.  This compares, 
for  example,  with  a  ratio  of  69.3  percent  for  Norway,  67.6  percent 
for  the  United  Kingdom  and  84.3  percent  for  Sweden.  Overall, 
therefore,  these  particular  financial  indicators  for  Botswana  are 
below international norms and suggest that it may be true that lack 
of  cost-effective  access  to  appropriate  finance  and  credit  is  a 
constraining factor towards a more diversified economy.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  post  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  and  other  international  standards-setting  bodies 
have been spearheading regulatory reforms aimed at enhancing the 
resilience  of  banking  systems,  globally.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana has demonstrated foresight with respect to the minimum 
prudential capital requirements for banks, which has been set at 15 
percent  of  risk-weighted  assets,  compared  to  the  international 
benchmark  of  8  percent,  since  1997.    As  some  will  be  aware, 
effective  January  1,  2016,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  implemented 
those elements of the revised International Convergence of Capital 
9 
 Adequacy  Measurement  and  Capital  Standards,  called  Basel  II, 
deemed  relevant  and  proportionate  to  the  nature  of  the  risk  profile 
of  banks,  as  well  as  the  structure  and  the  needs  of  the  Botswana 
economy.  Furthermore, the Bank of Botswana is, along with other 
stakeholders, taking steps to strengthen the framework for banking 
sector safety nets and system-wide crisis management. This project 
requires  all  systemically  important  domestic  banks  to  develop 
recovery plans in conjunction with their parent banks.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  recently  issued  a 
guidance  note  on  cybercrime  risk,  imploring  banks  to  put  in  place 
effective  risk  management  systems  and  maintain  sound  internal 
controls, specifically designed to counter the growth of increasingly 
sophisticated  cyber-attacks  and  other  forms  of  financial  crimes.  
Furthermore,  there  continues  to  be  a  worrisome  upward  trend  of 
cases of fraud, in the form of identity theft, scanning and cloning of 
bankcards  and  unauthorised  cash  withdrawals  from  Automated 
Teller  Machines  (ATMS)  by  individuals  and  organised  crime 
syndicates.  Cybercrime, fraud and other forms of criminal activities, 
including  money  laundering  and  the  financing  of  terrorism,  impose 
heavy financial and economic costs on society as banks, customers 
and  regulators  have  to  allocate  large  amounts  of  resources  on 
preventive  measures.  Moreover,  these  forms  of  crime  have  the 
potential  to  undermine  public  confidence  and  trust  in  the  banking 
system. Given the nature of these operational risks, there is a need 
for  sound  leadership  and  governance  of  banks,  both  individually 
10 
 and  on  a  consolidated  basis.  For  banking  regulators  and 
supervisors, 
these  developments  call 
for  smarter  and  more 
responsive  supervisory 
frameworks,  as  well  as  effective 
collaboration, cooperation and communication across jurisdictions.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  despite 
these 
challenges,  banking 
institutions,  such  as  Standard  Bank  Group  and  its  subsidiaries,  in 
Botswana  and  elsewhere,  should  remain  strong,  continuously 
evolving  operating  environments,  agile  in  decision  making  and 
adapting  as  necessary  to  provide  the  much-needed  financial 
resources for economic development and job creation.  There is no 
doubt,  in  my  mind,  that  technology  is  the  future  of  banking, 
particularly  in  a  sparsely  populated  country  such  as  Botswana.  
However,  weak,  ineffective  and  inappropriate  governance  and  risk 
management  infrastructure  may  compromise  the  safe  conduct  of 
banking business.  You will agree that for a large Pan-African bank, 
such  as  Standard  Bank  Group,  any  deficiencies,  in  this  regard, 
could be far reaching, and have an adverse impact on business and 
economic performance in several countries, including those that are 
anchors of regional growth.   
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, as I mentioned recently at the 
launch  of  the  2017  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  the  Bank  of 
Botswana’s  primary  objective  is  to  achieve  price  stability  and 
safeguard the stability of the financial system.  I also indicated that 
a sound and stable financial system is potentially more effective in 
policy  transmission.    Put  slightly  differently,  banks  in  distress,  as 
11 
 well  as  unsound  and 
imprudent  behaviour,  can  undermine 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  signals,  macroeconomic  stability 
and  economic  performance.    To  be  absolutely  clear,  however,  let 
me note that the Botswana banking system, of which Stanbic Bank 
is  a  significant  player,  complies  satisfactorily  with  the  minimum 
prudential  requirements,  which  is  indicative  of  a  generally  healthy, 
sound and stable financial system.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  effective  monetary  policy 
transmission 
is  also  premised  on  wider 
financial 
inclusion. 
Therefore,  the  leadership  of  the  financial  sector  and  policy  and 
regulatory authorities need to continue to work together to broaden 
financial  inclusion,  and  bring  more  unbanked  enterprises  and 
households  into  a  bankable  population.    It  is  only  when  there  is  a 
formal  economic 
relationship  between  a  great  majority  of 
businesses  and  individuals  and  the  banks  that  changes  in  interest 
rates, for example, can affect saving and borrowing decisions on a 
large  scale  and,  therefore,  have  the  anticipated  effect  on  price 
developments, economic activity and employment creation.  
 From  the  Bank  of  Botswana’s  perspective,  it  is  important  that  the 
formulation of monetary policy and effective discharge of the central 
bank’s primary mandate are not constrained by perennial concerns 
about  the  health  of  banks;  and,  in  turn,  that  banks  are  not  so 
encumbered  by  internal  weaknesses  that  they  are  unable  to 
12 
 respond to, and effect, changes in the Bank Rate, that is, implement 
a policy decision.  
 As  I  conclude,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  wish  once 
again, to recognise the role of Stanbic Bank in supporting economic 
development  through  involvement  in  savings  mobilisation,  prudent 
lending,  provision  of  payments  and  risk  mitigation,  as  well  as 
participation in community initiatives in Botswana.   
 Honourable  Cabinet  Ministers,  Distinguished  Ladies  and 
Gentlemen, I wish Stanbic Bank prosperity as it moves forward and, 
together  with  other  players  in  the  financial  sector,  foster  economic 
activity and wealth creation in Botswana.  
 I thank you for your kind attention. 
13 
 