Michael Held: Risk management
Remarks  by  Mr  Michael  Held,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Legal  Group  of  the  Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing,
China, 18 May 2017.
 It is an honor to join you at the University of International Business and Economics in Beijing.
Thank  you  for  inviting  me.  As  always,  the  views  I  will  express  are  my  own.  They  are  not
necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  or  the  Federal  Reserve
System.  “Federal Reserve Bank of New York” is a lot to say. From now on, I’ll just call it the
“New York Fed.”
1
My topic today is the role of lawyers in what is called “risk management.” I am not sure how
familiar  the  term  will  be  to  you.  We  certainly  did  not  cover  it  in  law  school—although,  in
retrospect,  many  of  the  principles  I  learned  might  be  rephrased  in  the  language  of  risk.  Risk
management is, however, a daily feature of my practice as a lawyer at the New York Fed.
“Risk”  is  the  possibility  of  injury  or  failure.  It  is  a  component  of  most  decisions  in  life—big  or
small. Opportunities for growth or gain tend to entail some risk of failure.
“Risk management,” therefore, does not always mean eliminating all risk. To do so would mean
that one is also eliminating all opportunity. Instead, risk management is the art of distinguishing
the risks you accept from the risks you deem unacceptable, and deciding how best to avoid,
reduce, or eliminate those risks. Prudent risk management also includes plans for recovering
from risks that materialize.
Your characterization and assessment of risk—acceptable or unacceptable, large or small—and
your strategy for dealing with risk will depend on your broader purpose and goals. This is what is
called a “risk appetite.” How much risk is, for you, too much risk? Or, perhaps more important,
what type of risks should you avoid?
In this talk, I will share my own experience in helping to manage risks at the New York Fed. I will
also  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  role  lawyers  should  play  in  any  financial  institution’s  risk
management. I will focus on lawyers for two reasons—it’s what I know, and it’s what many of you
are studying at the University of International Business and Economics.
First, though, a caveat: I understand that the issues surrounding risk management in the financial
system are of great interest in China today as well as in the United States. But I am not an expert
on Chinese law, culture, or history. My experiences may not fully resemble your own, and the
lessons I share today may have only partial relevance to your lives and careers. At the very least,
I hope there may be value in learning about someone else’s experience and perspective. And, at
the end of these remarks, I hope you will share your perspectives with me. After all, the primary
purpose of my visit to China is to listen.
Background on the Federal Reserve System
Some of you may be familiar already with the Federal Reserve System and the New York Fed.
For those of you who are not, I would like to provide some background.
The  central  bank  of  the  United  States  is  known  as  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  There  is,
however, no single entity that goes by that name. The central bank comprises, instead, three key
components:  the  Board  of  Governors,  which  is  an  independent  government  agency;  twelve
regional Federal Reserve Banks, which operate under the supervision of the Board of Governors;
and the Federal Open Market Committee. The United States Congress ultimately oversees the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Federal Reserve System and its entities.
You may be familiar with the names Janet Yellen, Ben Bernanke, and Alan Greenspan. Dr. Yellen
is  the  chair  of  the  Board  of  Governors  and  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  Her
predecessors in those roles were Dr. Bernanke and Dr. Greenspan. You may also be familiar
with the name Bill Dudley. He is the president and chief executive officer of the New York Fed—in
other words, my boss. He visited China earlier this month.
Broadly  speaking,  the  responsibilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  include  setting  and
implementing monetary policy, regulating and supervising certain financial institutions, acting as
fiscal agent for the United States Treasury, and helping to maintain financial stability. Not every
responsibility is shared by each component of the Federal Reserve System. For example, the
Board of Governors regulates financial institutions. The Federal Open Market Committee sets
monetary policy. And the New York Fed serves as a fiscal agent for the United States Treasury.
But, collectively, these are the functions of the central bank of the United States.
The New York Fed, where I serve as general counsel, is one of the twelve regional banks. Its
district includes New York City—the financial center of the United States.
The New York Fed implements monetary policy pursuant to the directives of the Federal Open
Market  Committee.  Monetary  policy  refers  to  the  actions  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to
influence the availability and cost of money and credit to help promote economic goals. The New
York  Fed  helps  to  accomplish  these  goals  by,  among  other  things,  purchasing  and  selling
securities. And, like other Federal Reserve Banks, we make loans to commercial banks and pay
interest on deposits by commercial banks.
In addition, the New York Fed manages the operation of wholesale payment services—known as
Fedwire®  Services—on  behalf  of  the  other  Federal  Reserve  Banks.  The  New  York  Fed  also
participates in the regional and international distribution of United States currency and coins.
Pursuant to authority delegated by the Board of Governors, the New York Fed plays a significant
role in the supervision of some of the largest financial institutions in the United States and most
of the foreign banks that do business in the United States. Supervision means the monitoring,
inspecting,  and  examining  of  financial  institutions  to  ensure  that  they  comply  with  rules  and
regulations,  and  that  they  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.  Supervision  of  financial
institutions is tailored based on the size and complexity of the institution.
The New York Fed also participates in much of the Federal Reserve’s work in the international
arena. We manage the foreign reserves of the Federal Reserve System and the United States
Treasury. We offer deposit and custody accounts, and provide related services, to foreign official
institutions,  including  other  central  banks. And  we  maintain  a  current  understanding  of  foreign
markets and laws. Our analysis helps us to carry out our responsibilities and to assess the risks
posed by an increasingly interconnected global financial system.
Risk in banking
Now that you have some idea of what the New York Fed does, I will share some thoughts on the
roles of risk in banking.
For  starters,  and  to  state  the  obvious,  risk  is  inherent  in  banking.  Economic  growth  requires
taking chances. Taking risks is part of what banks do.
When depositors leave their money in a bank, they are actually lending it to the bank. There is a
risk the bank will fail and be unable to repay its debts to depositors. Similarly, when a bank lends
money to buy a home or start a business, there is a risk that the borrower will default.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the United States, these risks are mitigated through a combination of public laws and internal
controls, including deposit insurance and lending guidelines that, since the financial crisis, have
become more stringent.
Those are simple examples of risks taken by banks, and there are relatively straightforward ways
to mitigate those risks. But the more complex banking activity becomes, the more difficult it is to
identify and manage risks. And the more connections exist in a global financial system, the more
risk  can  be  distributed  or  amplified,  and  the  greater  the  opportunity  for  new  systemic  risks  to
2
emerge.
Banks can face risks from employees, some of whom are located in offices in financial centers
around  the  world.  Some  risks  are,  again,  inherent.  We  are  all  human,  which  means  we
sometimes make honest mistakes. There is also a risk from intentional employee misconduct.
For example, a trader may seek personal gain by taking undue risks in investing someone else’s
money. An analyst may disclose confidential information without permission. Or, more simply, in
an institution that deals with money, some people may decide to take some for themselves.
In some of these cases, the bank may be the victim of the crime. In other cases, the laws in the
United States will treat a bank as the perpetrator. That is because, as an employer, the bank may
be legally responsible for the actions of its employees. So a bank could risk losing money in two
ways: theft or fines. And, more important, a bank may risk losing its good name or reputation for
trustworthiness. Now consider, hypothetically, a bank that employs 100,000 people. That bank
may have a 99.9 percent record of good conduct—almost perfect. Even then, there will still be
100  employees  whose  misconduct  could,  under  the  right  circumstances,  damage  the  bank’s
reputation or balance sheet or harm its customers.
Banks face risks from third parties too. Vendors or other service providers may expose a bank to
additional risk. For example, if a bank gives a software vendor access to its network, the bank
may take on risks in the vendor’s cyber security. Cyber risk is not limited to software vendors. It
actually could be any vendor. The vendor that opened the gate for a cyber attack on a chain of
retail stores in the United States was an air conditioning contractor using an electronic vendor
invoicing system.
Here is another example of risk from third parties. A newer, faster means of executing or settling
transactions may draw such a significant share of a market that it creates a concentration risk
that previously did not exist. If that connection fails, an entire market could shut down.
Banks can also face risks from their customers. I mentioned one example earlier. A borrower
may not repay a loan. Prudent lending standards—like securing good collateral and identifying
credit-worthy borrowers—can help mitigate that risk. Here is another example. A depositor may
use a bank account to hold, transfer, or obscure the proceeds of a crime. This is more difficult to
determine, especially when deposits are received from half way around the world.
Third-party service providers and customers are examples of risks from outside the bank that
are  unavoidable  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business.  These  third-party  risks  are  not  purely
hypothetical.  They  featured  in  recent  cases  of  attacks  on  the  global  correspondent  banking
network.  My  colleague  Richard  Dzina  runs  Fedwire®,  the  payments  system  that  I  mentioned
earlier. Here is how he described some of the risk that he faces:
Historically, and understandably, market infrastructures have operated on the presumption that
endpoint  security  is  principally  the  responsibility  of  the  endpoint,  and  infrastructure  security  is
principally  the  responsibility  of  the  operator.  Increasingly,  reflecting  the  elevated  cyber  threat
landscape,  this  distinction  is  not  so  clear,  especially  as  endpoint  security  breaches  can
potentially  have  implications  for  public  confidence  in  the  network  as  a  whole,  even  in
circumstances when the operator’s infrastructure, applications, and security perimeter have not
3
been compromised.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  also  worry  that  some  risk  management  practices  can  themselves  create  risk. Advances  in
technology  have  enabled  more  sophisticated  economic  modeling,  on  which  many  financial
institutions rely to assess and manage their risk. This can, unfortunately, lead a bank to conclude
that it has reduced one set of risks and can therefore afford to take on an additional set of risks.
But  what  if  the  technology  was  imperfect,  and  the  sophisticated  models  were  flawed?
Overconfidence in risk models can itself become a significant risk.
Risk and responsibility
There is a popular phrase in the United States among risk management professionals who want
to be clear about accountability for risk. We often say that a person, or division, or firm “owns the
risk.”
Let me explain what I think that phrase means, at least in some contexts. When a business line
manager  understands  that  she  “owns  the  risk”—and  not,  say,  the  lawyers,  compliance
professionals, or anyone else—it means that she is accountable to a more senior manager and
to the firm for the risk. Presumably, that means she will bring an appropriate focus and attention
to issues of risk management. She will not assume that risk management is somebody else’s
problem.
Sometimes I worry, however, that this phrase—“own the risk”—has become overused and can
itself give rise to risk.
To  be  clear,  clarity  of  roles  and  responsibilities  with  respect  to  risk  management  is  critical.
Business  managers  should  not  be  able  to  outsource  accountability  for  risk  management  to
others. Still, I wonder if it is time to retire the phrase “own the risk” or at least be more thoughtful
about its use.
If a business manager is told that she “owns the risk,” she may feel empowered to ignore or
otherwise shut out other key stakeholders and control functions. After all, if she truly owns the
risk, then why does she have to listen to anyone else? This is obviously wrong. Lawyers and
compliance  professionals,  for  example,  should  be  part  of  an  ongoing  conversation  about  risk
management. Or, conversely, if those lawyers and compliance professionals do not themselves
share some stake in the risk, they may not feel that speaking up or challenging a position by the
business  line  is  worth  it. After  all,  the  business  line  “owns  the  risk”  and  they  (the  lawyers  or
compliance officers) do not.
What’s more, certain types of risks, in certain types of contexts, do not fit neatly into the “own the
risk”  model.  Reputational  risk  is  an  example.  Firms  often  discover,  to  their  dismay,  that
reputational  risk  cannot  be  neatly  contained  within  one  business  line,  or  even  within  one
organization.  In  a  sense,  it  would  be  better  to  think  of  certain  types  of  risks  as  shared,  with
shared accountability, rather than owned.
In short, it is important to remember that risk management is a means to an end. Who “owns the
risk” is not as important as clearly understanding how that risk may inhibit an organization from
fulfilling  its  purpose  or  achieving  its  goals,  and  clearly  understanding  how  that  risk  is  being
managed.  That  does  not  mean  that  responsibility  should  be  unattributed  or  entirely  diffuse.
Rather, responsibility for risk should not be parsed so finely that employees forget the purpose of
managing risk in the first place.
Understanding the client
I promised at the outset that I would talk about the role of lawyers in risk management. First and
foremost, lawyers must advise on the law. A colleague of mine likes to say that lawyers must
always  remember  the  reason  why  they  are  in  the  room—to  advise  on  the  law.  To  do  so,  of
course, lawyers must know what the law says.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
But that advice is most effective if it is formulated with an understanding of the client’s objectives
and  challenges,  and  in  light  of  the  broader  business  context  or  market  in  which  the  client
operates.
So, when I speak with my colleagues about the New York Fed’s risk, I try to think first, but not
only, about legal risk. The Federal Reserve System exists because the public trusts it to serve
the national interest. So, I also consider how decisions will affect the public’s trust, and how the
New York Fed can best demonstrate that it is worthy of that trust. Managing legal risk is one
aspect of trustworthiness, and it is my specialty. But, as an officer of the New York Fed, I have a
responsibility to think more broadly about its good name. I want to avoid the mistakes of lawyers
for  other  organizations  who  “saw  their  role  in  very  narrow  terms,  as  an  implementer,  not  a
4
counselor.” 
I  also  take  steps  to  improve  my  understanding  of  the  New  York  Fed’s  operations—even  after
nearly twenty years working there. In my current role, I try to maintain regular communication and
strong relationships with the heads of other groups within the New York Fed. I don’t just talk to
them about legal risk. I do an awful lot of listening too, with the hope of better understanding the
work they are doing and the issues that concern them. And I think about ways that input from
lawyers might help. In those unfortunate instances when legal disputes arise, I look for lessons
that I might report back to those colleagues—insights relevant to their primary concerns. This
type of information sharing is essential to an organization that seeks to maintain a high degree of
public trust in an increasingly complex field of coexisting and interrelated risks.
I also believe that lawyers need to reign in their tendency to want to reduce risk—especially legal
risk—to zero at the expense of potentially more important goals. Lawyers are worriers. We tend
to see what can go wrong. This is a product of training and disposition. And it is part of the value
that we contribute to an organization. We must remember, though, that the point of reducing risk
must be to aid some broader corporate purpose. And so, if the reduction of risk starts to impede
a more fundamental reason for being, risk management has gone too far.
Lawyers have to point out legal risks and other risks to their clients. That is our job. But if all we
ever tell our clients is “no,” they will at some point stop asking for our advice. So it is important
that lawyers consider why a client is facing a decision, what they want to achieve in the near
term and in the long term, and how their decision may affect others. Lawyers serve their clients
well by pointing out assumptions, gaps in reasoning, and unforeseen, collateral consequences.
We should help our clients see the range of issues confronting them and options available to
them.
Moreover, how a lawyer gives this advice is often as important as the content of that advice. A
lawyer  must  not  only  be  right,  he  must  also  be  persuasive.  My  advice  is  worthless  if  no  one
listens to it. We are judged by our results not how hard we try. Let me share with you, as law
students, some advice on how to be heard.
Advice to law students
First, speak up! This is part of a lawyer’s training in the United States. We are called on in class
to explain cases in front of our peers. We participate in appellate and trial advocacy competitions.
And we are required to study not only the court opinions that decide a case, but the dissenting
opinions that did not. We read and study and admire the great dissenters: John Marshall Harlan,
Harry Blackmun, and Antonin Scalia, among others—even though we may not always agree with
their views.
This  training  is  important  because  speaking  up  is  not  always  easy.  Every  lawyer  will  likely
encounter  a  situation  in  which  you  simply  need  to  be  courageous  in  stating  a  divergent  or
unpopular viewpoint. In these circumstances, remember that you are part of a profession, not
just part of a firm or a company. Professional courage is expected of you by your fellow lawyers,
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and you should count on their support. The New York City Bar has called professional courage
“the indispensable element” of lawyering. “The essential need is for lawyers . . . not to waver
when the advice is unwelcome, no matter how important the client or how powerful the officer or
5
director resisting the advice.”
Second,  be  on  the  lookout  for  what  is not  being  considered.  Ask  yourself,  “What  are  we
missing?” This is a critical question in good risk management. In-house lawyers are often well-
positioned to spot problems that others might miss. These issues become apparent only with a
certain perspective—one that looks across an organization with both independent judgment and
inside knowledge. Lawyers can offer both.
Third and finally, try to promote diversity and inclusiveness in the organizations where you work. I
have seen too many examples of supervised banks that managed their risks poorly because they
approached decisions with limited experience, insight, and perspective.
In my few months so far as General Counsel at the New York Fed, I am increasingly mindful of
the  value  of  cognitive  diversity  and  inclusiveness  within  the  Bank’s  Legal  Group.  Former
prosecutors  may  view  an  enforcement  matter  differently  than  former  defense  lawyers.  A
regulatory lawyer who studied economics might not have the same insight as a lawyer whose
background is in political science. A compliance officer may spot a problem in our policy that a
regulatory lawyer would not have considered. Managers—myself included—whose tenure at the
Bank  spans  decades,  may  not  see  shortcomings  in  communication  or  organization  that  are
glaring to newer arrivals.
When different views are brought to the table, risks are better understood and better decisions
get made. As you progress in your careers, I encourage you to seek out other views. One way to
do this is to expand your professional network to lawyers in other countries. We are likely to face
similar problems and it can be enlightening, as my meetings this week in Beijing have been, to
learn from each other about possible solutions.
Conclusion
The  circumstances  of  modern  corporate  practice  demand  increased  attention  to  risk  and
professionals  mindful  of  managing  risk  with  a  view  to  promoting  broader  organizational  and
public purposes. Whether or not you practice law, the virtues of issue spotting, listening to your
clients,  and  speaking  up  will  serve  you  well  in  your  professional  careers.  They  are  invaluable
tools for the task of risk management—a shared task of corporate officers, and one that extends
beyond  professional  bailiwicks.  I  wish  you  all  the  very  best  of  luck  as  you  embark  on  your
careers.
I would be happy to take a few questions.
1
2
3
4
5
James Bergin, Erin Kelly, Lev Menand, Thomas Noone, Brett Phillips, Joseph Sommer, Joseph Tracy, Shawei
Wang and Jennifer Wolgemuth assisted in preparing these remarks.
See Michael Power, The Risk Management of Everything: Rethinking the Politics of Uncertainty (2004), 37–38
(“A functional explanation for the phenomenon suggests that the emergence of a systematic, generic and broad
approach  to  risk  management  is  a rational  response  to  the  fact  that  the  environment  of  individuals  and
organizations, indeed the world, has become genuinely ‘more risky.’”).
Richard Dzina, Advancing the Fed’s Wholesale Services in an Era of Unprecedented Challenge and Change,
Remarks  at  Securities  Industry  and  Financial  Markets Association’s  Operations  Conference  and  Exhibition
2017, Boca Raton, Florida, May 9, 2017.
Final Report of Neal Batson, In re Enron Corp., No. 01–16034 (S.D.N.Y. Bankr. Nov. 4, 2003), at 115.
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, “Report of the Task Force on the Lawyer’s Role in Corporate
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Governance” (2006), 95.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
