Ravi Menon: Global economic outlook - renewed optimism, higher
uncertainty
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the UBS'
Wealth Insights Conference, Singapore, 16 January 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
The global economy in 2016 – resilient but uninspiring
2016 was an eventful year for the global economy. 
If  you  recall,  we  began  the  year  with  anxiety  over  China’s  financial  markets  but  breathed
easier  over  the  course  of  the  year  as  China  steadied  its  economy  and  avoided  the  hard
landing feared by many. 
We saw economic momentum in the US slip, and then pick up towards the end of the year,
which also saw the second rate hike by the Fed in 10 years and an unexpected presidential
election outcome.
The EU economy was stirred but not shaken by the shock of the Brexit vote in June, with
accommodative  monetary  policy  providing  support  while  domestic  demand  gradually
improved.
Japan saw further innovations in monetary easing – with negative interest rates and yield
curve control – with some but not decisive improvement in growth outcomes.
In  the  ASEAN  economies,  growth  was  respectable  but  below  potential,  as  a  pick-up  in
private consumption was offset by weaker investment and exports.
Overall, I would say the global economy in 2016 was resilient but uninspiring.
Economic growth was sustained in the face of shocks but remains sub-par.  
Global GDP growth has averaged between 3.0 and 3.5% – a sub-trend outcome that we
have not been able to break out of since 2011.
This  is  significantly  lower  than  the  average  of  3.8%  that  we  witnessed  before  the  global
financial crisis, between 1990 and 2007.
There are some broad themes that have shaped economic outcomes during the last five years.
there  are  accommodative  monetary  policies, 
the  advanced  economies, 
In 
consolidation, and deleveraging.
In the emerging economies – a shift toward domestic demand, credit expansion, and a build-
up in debt.
In both advanced and emerging economies, we have seen slower growth in the key drivers
of long-term prosperity – namely trade, investment, and productivity.
Everywhere, the pace of structural reforms has been slow.
Outlook for 2017 – renewed optimism, higher uncertainty
fiscal
What does 2017 hold for the global economy?
Let us consider first what financial markets are saying.  Since late last year, the markets have
been pricing in higher growth, higher inflation, and higher interest rates.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Long-term bond yields have risen sharply in the advanced economies.
Equity prices have surged.
This reflation story has been particularly accentuated in US stock and fixed income markets.
Reflecting  this,  the  US  Dollar  has  appreciated  sharply,  rising  to  its  strongest  level
against the major currencies since 2003.
The market narrative goes something like this:
The new Administration in the US will inject a substantial fiscal stimulus – based on reduced
corporate taxes and higher infrastructure spending.
There will be significant deregulation of the economy – in key sectors like financial services,
healthcare, and energy – unleashing animal spirits and new investment.
The  disinflationary  drags  from  oil  and  commodity  prices  will  fade  and  lift  producer  prices
while a tightening labour market will feed faster wage increases.
In response to higher growth and higher inflation, the US Fed will hike interest rates faster
than previously forecast.
The US Dollar will strengthen against most major currencies.
The most recent data give some support to the reflation story.
The OECD’s monthly leading indicators for October show signs of rising growth momentum
– not just in the US but in other advanced economies as well.
We are seeing an incipient upswing in the global manufacturing cycle.
Inventories have been drawn down significantly.
Purchasing managers’ indices have recorded sharp improvements in many countries.
But how realistic or sustainable is the growth resurgence scenario?  The broad elements appear
probable – there are indeed grounds for some optimism.  But there is considerable uncertainty
over the details, and there are several risks on the horizon.  The market’s exuberance in recent
months does not seem to have accounted for these uncertainties and risks.  Perhaps realising
this, the market has begun to retrace some of its steps in more recent weeks.
So, instead of providing forecasts – a risky enterprise that I will leave to the expert speakers at
this conference – let me set out what I think will be the key driving forces for the global economic
outlook and examine their implications:
First,  fiscal  policy  is  on  the  rise,  chiefly  in  the  US  but  also  in  the  other  major  advanced
economies.
Second, monetary dominance is giving way to monetary divergence and financial conditions
are tightening globally.
Third, the challenge of balancing growth and stability will become more acute in China and
emerging Asia.
Fourth, a rise in trade protectionism and, more broadly, a pushback against globalisation,
can seriously undermine growth prospects not just in 2017 but also over the medium-term.
The rise of fiscal policy
Let  me  begin  with  the  new  kid  on  the  block  –  fiscal  policy.    Since  the  global  financial  crisis,
across  the  advanced  economies,  monetary  policy  used  to  be  the  only  game  in  town  as
governments struggled to restore debt sustainability.  Fiscal policy is now, for the first time since
2009, turning more expansionary.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
According  to  the  BIS,  estimated  cyclically  adjusted  primary  balances  in  the
advanced economies turned slightly negative in 2016. 
This is likely to continue in the years ahead.
What is behind this shift in the balance of the policy mix?
First,  policymakers  are  increasingly  recognising  the  limits  to  unconventional  monetary
policies and the associated financial stability risks.
Second, public dissatisfaction with the economic status quo is forcing governments to re-
consider fiscal policy, especially public spending and tax reforms that can potentially boost
the economy’s productive capacity.
It is in the US that the nascent rise of fiscal policy has attracted most interest. 
Historically, a clean sweep of Congress and the White House has led to expansionary fiscal
policy.
But the size of the fiscal stimulus will depend on the balance that will be struck between the
ambitious spending plans of the White House and concerns about debt sustainability among
House Republicans.
There is considerable uncertainty over not just the size of the fiscal package but its composition.
There appears to be broad consensus on reducing corporate and personal income taxes,
broadening  the  tax  base,  and  offering  a  one-time  tax  holiday  on  repatriated  overseas
corporate profits.
But there is no clarity on the details and hence the size of the fiscal impact.
On  plans  to  increase  defence  and  infrastructure  spending,  there  is  currently  less
consensus.
It is also not clear how these spending increases will be financed.
Besides uncertainty over the size of the fiscal stimulus, there is also uncertainty over the impact
of a given stimulus on growth.
This impact will depend on how much slack there is in the economy.
Signs are that the US economy is close to full employment.
Unemployment is at or near the natural rate and wages are increasingly healthy.
If  the  economy  is  close  to  its  underlying  potential,  a  fiscal  stimulus  will  end  up  mostly  in
inflation rather than growth.
This  brings  us  to  the  next  broad  theme  of  2017:  the  return  of  inflation  and  the  tightening  of
financial conditions globally.
The normalisation of US monetary policy
Global inflation, which was weighed down by the fall oil prices during the past two years, has
started to gradually pick up again. 
Energy prices have rebounded off their lows and commodity prices appear to have bottomed
out.
On a global basis, producer prices have started to rise since early 2016, in tandem with the
recovery of commodity and industrial input prices.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Even in China, producer prices have turned positive, following 4 years of deflation.
Globally,  we  could  see  a  stronger  pass-through  from  producer  prices  to  inflation  in
2017.
In the US, to the extent that fiscal stimulus boosts demand and lifts inflation towards the Fed’s
target, it could precipitate a faster pace of interest rate normalisation than currently priced in.
The normalisation of monetary policy is a good thing and is to be welcomed.
It would be in line with stronger economic growth and waning deflation risks. 
Faster growth in the US will be good for emerging Asia.
A gradual rise in interest rates away from the zero lower bound will also be good for financial
stability, helping to stem the build-up in debt and cool inflated asset prices.
But interest rate normalisation in the US is not without its challenges. 
First, it amounts to a de facto tightening of global financial conditions.
Second, it accentuates a divergence in monetary policies among the advanced economies.
The tightening of financial conditions will have a dampening effect on spending in both advanced
and emerging economies.
Such is the strength of US monetary policy dominance that the recent back-up in long-term
interest rates in the US has lifted bond yields everywhere – including in the EU, despite the
ECB’s ongoing asset purchase programme.
Higher  growth  in  the  US  will  provide  some  support  to  emerging  Asia  through  the  trade
channel.
Asian exports should benefit, especially if corporate investment picks up in the US.
But the increase in US interest rates will weigh down on emerging Asia’s prospects through
the financial channel.
Higher  interest  rates  will  squeeze  the  debt  servicing  capacities  of  corporates  and
households in Asia, which have taken on more leverage in recent years amid the low
interest rate environment.
The trajectories of economic growth, inflation and monetary policy between the US and the rest
of the world are expected to diverge further.
Headline and core inflation rates in the US are well above those in the Eurozone and Japan.
While demand is expected to pick up slightly in the Eurozone and Japan this year, inflation
will remain well below target.
Monetary policies are therefore expected to remain ultra-easy.
The  divergence  in  monetary  policies  could  mean  considerable  movements  in  exchange  rates
and capital flows.
This sets the stage for the third broad theme driving the global economy in 2017: the growing
tensions in emerging Asia between growth and financial stability.
China and Emerging Asia: Balancing growth and stability
Let me illustrate these tensions using China.  For the past few years, China has been managing
a difficult trade-off: sustaining economic growth versus reducing financial vulnerabilities.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The source of the trade-off lies in the high level of debt in the Chinese economy.
Pursuing economic growth through credit and fiscal expansion adds to the debt burden and
impinges on financial stability.
Reducing  debt  levels  requires  painful  structural  reforms  and  risks  slowing  down  the
economy sharply.
China’s policymakers have managed this trade-off reasonably well these past few years. 
In  2016,  they  managed  to  keep  growth  and  employment  on  an  even  keel,  using  the  old
formula of fiscal stimulus and credit easing.
While  this  has  added  to  overall  debt  levels,  there  has  been  some  progress  in  reducing
financial vulnerabilities.  Steps were taken to
curb lending to unviable enterprises
cool the property market in tier-1 cities, and
reduce over-capacity in the heavy industry sectors.
But with heightened expectations of global financial tightening and US Dollar strength, the trade-
offs and tensions in China are likely to become more stark this year. 
As US interest rates rise, resident investors in China have been recalibrating their relative
expected returns, thus adding to pressures on China’s capital account and the exchange
rate.
Tightening domestic liquidity to stem the pressure on the RMB would lead to higher interbank
lending rates.
This could potentially dampen investment spending and economic growth
China has taken a balanced approach to these challenges: combining some degree of exchange
rate  flexibility,  some  controls  on  capital  flows,  and  some  amount  of  domestic  tightening. 
Navigating the treacherous waters of international financial markets this year will require a fair
amount of policy dexterity.
The rest of emerging Asia is also confronted with headwinds from financial tightening and US
Dollar appreciation.
The low interest rate environment since the global financial crisis has led to a dramatic build-
up in debt among many Asian corporates and households.
Over-extended  borrowers  face  the  double  whammy  of  an  increase  in  interest  servicing
costs and a rise in the foreign currency risks of unhedged debt.
This  could  pose  not  just  a  threat  to  financial  stability  but  also  a  drag  on  investment  and
consumption.
That  said,  emerging  Asia  is  on  a  stronger  footing  to  cope  with  the  risks  of  global  financial
tightening.
Asian economies have been proactive in implementing macro-prudential measures to limit
the build-up of financial vulnerabilities.
While  there  are  several  pockets  of  weaknesses,  the  household,  corporate,  and  banking
sector  balance  sheets  are,  on  the  whole,  strong  enough  to  ride  through  the  coming
turbulence.
The big unknown: whither global trade?
Finally, the big unknown: the future of global trade and economic integration.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Trade  has  been  facing  a  combination  of  structural  and  cyclical  headwinds  since  the  global
financial crisis:
The global merchandise trade-to-income ratio has stagnated since 2010.
China’s  imports  of  intermediate  goods  is  growing  at  below  10%,  compared  to  more  than
20% in the early 2000s, creating a drag along supply chains across Asia.
This is partly cyclical, reflecting slower growth in China.
But it is also structural – reflecting a reconfiguration of supply chains and China’s increasing
insourcing of intermediate inputs.
As if these cyclical and structural headwinds are not enough, we are now facing the uncertain
prospect of policy measures against free trade, especially in the US.
There is talk of:
rejecting TPP and re-negotiating or even repealing NAFTA and other FTAs;
imposing a border tax adjustment that would in effect impose the corporate tax rate on
imports; and
labelling  major  trade  partners  as  currency  manipulators  and  imposing  hefty  tariffs  on
them.
Some of these actions may well attract retaliatory measures, leading to trade conflicts with
disastrous consequences for the global economy.
In all likelihood, it may not be that bad.
The contours of the incoming US Administration’s trade policies are highly uncertain.
There remains within various arms of the US establishment a strong belief in the benefits of
an open global trading system and the risks of punitive trade restrictions.
But  there  could  be  some  limited  anti-trade  measures  such  as  targeted  tariffs  on  selected
products or industries. 
But  even  these  could  spread  more  widely  through  global  supply  chains  and  dampen  any
uptick in demand-driven trade flows.
They could even backfire on the US given how integrated production networks are across
countries.
In short, the growth spill-over from the US to the rest of the world will depend on the balance
between fiscal stimulus on the one hand, and financial tightening and trade restrictions on the
other.  The current consensus is that the former will outweigh the latter.  We will have to see.
Conclusion
On balance, chances are that global growth will be slightly higher this year compared to the last. 
Hope and confidence are important factors and recent improvements in business and consumer
sentiments may well translate into higher investment and consumption.
A  shift  in  the  macro  policy  mix  in  the  US,  away  from  excessive  reliance  on  monetary  policy
towards a bigger role for fiscal support, is to be welcomed. 
A well-designed fiscal policy can provide some modest stimulus in the short-term but more
importantly help to augment the productive capacity of the economy in the long term.
A successful outcome could encourage other advanced economies to seek a better balance
between monetary and fiscal policies.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some caution though is warranted.
There remains considerable uncertainty as to the actual policy changes in store. They may
not pan out as expected.
There are serious downside risks on immigration and trade policies.
Political uncertainties are on the rise, especially in the EU, which has to contend with Brexit
negotiations and elections in France and Germany.
Populist movements are on the rise in many parts of the world. 
They  could  precipitate  a  more  radical  shift  in  policies  that  could  in  turn  dampen
confidence and investment.
Finally, I have not said anything about the Singapore economy.  I will leave that to MTI’s Annual
Economic  Survey,  the  report  of  the  Committee  on  the  Future  Economy,  and  the  Budget
Statement – all happening next month.
Suffice to say:
The Singapore economy is expected to continue on its modest pace of expansion this year. 
GDP growth is likely to come in the 1-3% range.
Modern services – including  finance,  business,  and  ICT  –  will  be  supported  by  continued
growth in the region and our growing status as a hub.
Our  trade-oriented  industries  should  benefit  from  the  mild  upturn  in  global  and  regional
electronics.
In fact, the strong showing in the last quarter of 2016 indicates that the Singapore economy
retains the capacity to ride on cyclical upswings in demand for our exports.
That is not to say that all is well.  Economic restructuring remains work-in-progress and we need
to do more to raise productivity growth.  Singapore will not be immune to the global tightening of
financial  conditions,  volatility  in  capital  flows,  and  potential  stresses  in  the  regional  corporate
sector. 
But our macro fundamentals are sound and we will weather these storms.  And as we continue
to invest in the future – in skills, in technology, and in infrastructure, we will emerge a stronger
and more dynamic economy.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
