  November 29, 2017 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
 
 New Frontier of Macroprudential Policy: 
Addressing Financial Institutions' Low Profitability 
and Intensified Competition 
Speech at the Kin'yu Konwa Kai 
(Financial Discussion Meeting) Hosted by the Jiji Press 
Hiroshi Nakaso 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 I. 
Introduction 
Japan's financial crisis was reaching its climax 20 years ago in 1997. In November of that 
year,  four  financial  institutions,  including  a  major  one,  failed  in  succession  in  a  single 
month, a period later referred to as Dark November.1  I clearly remember that this was when 
Japan's financial system was on the verge of a meltdown. Since the comprehensive safety 
net  for  financial  system  stability  was  underdeveloped  at  that  time,  which  is  not  the  case 
today, the Bank of Japan bore the heavy load of taking measures to stabilize the financial 
system, including the so-called Tokuyu (special loans). While we barely managed to avert a 
financial  meltdown,  the  Bank  suffered  credit  losses  of  about  200  billion  yen  from  the 
Tokuyu. Following this painful experience of the bursting of the bubble in the 1990s, Japan's 
safety  net  has  developed  greatly,  and  it  now  protects  financial  system  stability  against 
failures  of  not  only  deposit-taking  financial  institutions  but  also  securities  companies, 
insurance companies, and financial holding companies. 
Thus, in Japan, crisis management tools have been expanded based on the lessons learned 
during the financial crisis. At the same time, the importance of having a policy to prevent a 
financial  crisis  from  materializing  by  detecting  the  accumulation  of  financial  imbalances 
became  recognized.  In  order  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  it  is  not 
necessarily  sufficient  to  adopt  measures  based  on  the  microprudential  perspective  of 
identifying risks borne by individual financial institutions and encouraging improvement in 
their business activities. It is also important to take measures based on the macroprudential 
perspective of assessing risks of the whole financial system with due consideration to the 
interconnectedness  of  the  real  economy,  financial  markets,  and  behavior  of  financial 
institutions. Such importance of macroprudential policy became widely recognized around 
the globe when the global financial crisis jolted the world economy 10 years after Japan's 
financial  crisis.  Today,  I  will  talk  about  macroprudential  policy  and  its  challenges  while 
touching on the Bank's experiences thus far and the recent situation of Japanese financial 
institutions. 
Financial crises do not always emerge in the same form. Thus, we should bear in mind that 
signs  of  financial  crises  will  lurk  in  various  forms  depending  on  economic  and  financial 
                                                  
1  In November 1997, four financial institutions -- namely, Sanyo Securities, Hokkaido Takushoku 
Bank, Yamaichi Securities, and Tokuyo City Bank -- went bankrupt in succession. 
1 
 conditions of the time. It is important to accurately assess such potential vulnerabilities of 
the  financial  system  from  a  macroprudential  perspective  and  take  appropriate  policy 
measures. Even if these measures are extraordinary or unconventional based on historical 
standards, the Bank should take these measures when necessary to ensure financial system 
stability. 
At present, Japan's financial system is maintaining stability, but I think that attention should 
be  paid  to  the  potential  vulnerabilities.  That  is  what  I  will  talk  about  today;  more 
specifically,  the  problem  of  financial  institutions'  low  profitability  and  intensified 
competition, with a main focus on regional financial institutions. This problem is closely 
related to Japan's structural problems, such as a decline in population and the number of 
firms,  and  it  is  a  phenomenon  that  advanced  economies  have  never  experienced  before 
(Chart 1). In this sense, the impact of financial institutions' low profitability and intensified 
competition arising from the decline in population and the number of firms is a financial 
vulnerability that takes a totally different form from the past. Regional financial institutions 
need  to  appropriately  address  this  issue  in  order  to  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in 
supporting the regional economy. The Bank also has to explore a new frontier of prudential 
policy by itself. 
 II.  Assessment of Systemic Risk 
Before  going  into  a  detailed  explanation  about  the  potential  vulnerabilities  of  Japan's 
financial system, let me first talk about macroprudential policy. 
If  the  financial  cycle  becomes  large  in  magnitude  or  many  financial  institutions  become 
more  interconnected  by  increasing  common  exposure  or  forming  mutual  asset-liability 
arrangements,  systemic  risk  will  emerge  and  spread  within  the  financial  system.  The 
objective of macroprudential policy is to strengthen the resilience of the financial system 
and contain systemic risk. 
In  order  to  implement  macroprudential  policy,  we  first  need  to  assess  systemic  risk. 
Specifically,  the  assessment  is  composed  of  two  main  parts.  The  first  is  to  assess  the 
financial cycle. We examine whether the current conditions are in an expansion phase or a 
contraction phase of the cycle, considering the outlook. The second is to identify sources of 
2 
 systemic risk, or potential financial vulnerabilities, and to diagnose the financial system's 
resilience to the stress. For example, we conduct stress testing to assess whether financial 
institutions have sufficient capital and liquidity under stress events. 
Assessment of Financial Cycle and Results of Stress Testing 
The Bank publishes the Financial System Report (FSR) semiannually, with the objective of 
assessing systemic risk. Regarding the financial cycle that is the first part of the assessment, 
on the whole no imbalances in financial and economic activities can be observed while the 
funding conditions for firms and households have been highly accommodative. With banks' 
very active lending stances, the real estate market seems overheated in some areas; however, 
our aggregate financial cycle indicator estimated from major financial activity indexes has 
shown no significant imbalances recently (Chart 2).2 
Moreover,  with  regard  to  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  against  the  stress  that 
concerns the second part of the assessment, the results of stress testing indicate that capital 
adequacy  ratios  at  financial  institutions  remain  above  the  regulatory  requirements  on  the 
whole  even  when  a  tail  event  comparable  to  the  Lehman  shock  occurs.  While  regional 
financial institutions have actively stepped up their risk taking in recent years by increasing 
their real estate loans and investments, the adverse shocks in the real estate markets seem to 
exert  only  a  limited  impact  on  the  financial  system  from  a  macroprudential  perspective, 
partly because real estate-related markets have not boomed as much as they did during the 
real estate boom from 2006 through 2007.3 
In other words, as the peak of the current financial cycle is not high, even if the cycle starts 
to contract, the trough is unlikely to be deep. Also, even when the trough is as deep as the 
level observed during the Lehman shock, financial institutions maintain sufficient capital to 
                                                  
2  Looking at Chart 2 in detail, during the bubble period in the late 1980s, the financial expansion 
had led to the economic expansion. In the early 1990s after the burst of the bubble, the financial 
contraction had caused the economic downturn. Afterward, the real economy went through several 
business  cycles  with  short-lived  recovery  phases,  as  the  balance  sheet  adjustment  at  firms  and 
financial institutions continued; in other words, the financial cycle remained in a stagnation phase. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  2000s,  the  adjustment  of  excess  debt  by  firms  and  the  disposal  of 
nonperforming  loans  by  banks  have  run  their  course  and  the  financial  cycle  has  entered  into  a 
recovery  phase,  and  thus  the  economic  recovery  has  lasted  a  long  time.  Later,  the  real  economy 
deteriorated significantly due to the Lehman shock but recovered relatively quickly as no significant 
financial imbalances were accumulated. 
3  For details, see Chapter V in the April 2017 issue of the FSR. 
3 
 withstand that stress. Thus, there is no concern about large-scale systemic risk at present, 
and it can be judged that Japan's financial system has been maintaining stability. 
Warning from the Stock Market 
Nonetheless,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  financial  system  can  continue  to  maintain 
stability in the future. The stock market seems to send us a critical signal on this point. The 
expected  default  frequency  (EDF)  for  financial  institutions  extracted  from  stock  price 
movements has been rising recently, mainly for regional banks (Chart 3).4  The short-term 
EDF has been more or less unchanged, albeit with some fluctuations such as a temporary 
rise  following  the  Bank's  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy  in  early  2016. 
Meanwhile, the medium- to long-term EDF has been following a moderate upward trend 
since even before the introduction of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) 
in 2013 and the negative interest rate policy. 
So,  will  regional  financial  institutions  give  rise  to  systemic  risk  that  poses  threats  to  the 
stability of the financial system? In Japan, no regional financial institutions are designated 
as  either  Global  Systemically  Important  Banks  (G-SIBs)  or  Domestic  Systemically 
Important  Banks  (D-SIBs).  Although  regional  financial  institutions  are  not  individually 
systemic  institutions,  they  can  be  "systemic  as  a  herd"  if  many  of  them  hold  common 
exposure and show similar behavior. From a macroprudential perspective, it is important to 
look at regional financial institutions as a whole and pay attention to whether the similarity 
of individual financial institutions' behavior will lead to the emergence of systemic risk. 
Due to Japan's financial crisis in the 1990s, almost 180 small and medium-sized financial 
institutions  including  shinkin  banks  and  credit  cooperatives  failed.  Such  financial 
institutions were not individually systemic institutions, but they held common risk exposure 
through  the  extension  of  real  estate  loans.  Thus,  as  a  failure  of  one  bank  reminded  the 
people of a default risk of another bank, a systemic risk associated with a chain of bank runs 
was recognized. To avoid the materialization of such risk, the government set forth blanket 
guarantees  for  all  forms  of  bank  liabilities  including  deposits.  Based  on  this,  the  Bank 
                                                  
4  Moody's EDF is defined as a measure of the probability that the market value of a firm's assets 
will fall below its liabilities payable over a specified period of time, which is estimated based on a 
firm's stock price information. 
4 
 provided  individual  financial  institutions  that  were  on  brink  of  bankruptcy  with  loans  to 
maintain the stability of the financial system (the so-called Tokuyu).5 
A key issue that these experiences raised about prudential policy is whether a future stress 
event  will  result  in  business  instability  of  only  the  specific  financial  institution  or  in 
simultaneous  (or  a  chain  of)  business  instability  of  many  financial  institutions  that  hold 
common exposure. In the former case, a financial institution with business instability can be 
barred  from  the  financial  system.  In  the  latter  case,  however,  there  is  a  concern  that  the 
impact will spread across the entire financial system and develop into systemic risk. The 
stock market sends us a critical signal on this point as well. The CoVaR, which is a widely 
used  systemic  risk  indicator  measured  based  on  developments  in  the  stock  market 
capitalization  of  regional  banks,  has  shown  an  upward  trend  recently  against  the 
background of the heightened comovement between the stresses faced by individual banks 
(Chart 4).6  Thus, the indicator extracted from the stock market implies the possibility that 
business  conditions  will  become  unstable  simultaneously  at  many  regional  financial 
institutions that have common exposure. 
While  the  EDF  and  the  systemic  risk  indicators  have  been  rising,  regional  financial 
institutions  have  sufficient  capital  and  liquidity  at  present.  Thus,  there  are  no  immediate 
threats to the stability of the financial system. As I mentioned earlier, our stress testing also 
confirms  this  point.  Then,  how  should  we  interpret  the  difference  between  the  results  of 
stress testing and market signals? The results of stress testing show that Japan's financial 
system has resilience to "acute" stresses comparable to the Lehman shock. However, even 
though financial institutions have sufficient capital at present, the stability of the financial 
system will not be guaranteed in the future if "chronic" stresses weigh persistently on many 
financial institutions' profits. If they fail to secure returns that meet their cost of capital for a 
                                                  
5  More  specifically,  the  Bank  provided  troubled  financial  institutions  with  funds  needed  to  repay 
deposits  through  the  Tokuyu.  After  these  financial  institutions  failed,  the  Bank  received  full 
repayment of the Tokuyu from funds provided by the Deposit Insurance Corporation (DIC) to these 
institutions in accordance with the Deposit Insurance Act amended in 1996. In principle, the Tokuyu 
is  an  uncollateralized  loan,  but  under  such  scheme,  the  Bank  was  not  exposed  to  credit  risk  in 
extending the Tokuyu to deposit-taking financial institutions. (Meanwhile, the Bank bore credit costs 
in providing the Tokuyu and capital to securities companies.) 
6  Using  stock  market  data,  the  CoVaR  measures  the  size  of  stress  in  the  financial  system,  which 
comprises  the  following  two  factors:  the  stress  faced  by  individual  banks  and  the  comovement 
between the stresses faced by individual banks. 
5 
 prolonged period due to common and chronic stresses, we cannot exclude a possibility of 
simultaneous (or a chain of) impairment of capital held by many of the financial institutions 
that  hold  common  exposure.  With  a  price-to-book  (P/B)  ratio  of  less  than  one,  the  stock 
market  seems  to  be  sending  us  a  warning  about  the  impact  of  "chronic  and  common" 
stresses (Chart 3).7 
 III.  Background of Regional Financial Institutions' Low Profitability 
Now,  let  me  touch  on  the  characteristics  of  the  structure  of  financial  institutions'  profits 
before identifying "chronic and common" stresses that exert downward pressure on regional 
financial institutions' profits. 
International Comparison of Financial Institutions' Profitability 
The recent decline in financial institutions' profits is a phenomenon that can be observed not 
only  in  Japan  but  commonly  in  advanced  economies,  where  the  low  interest  rate 
environment has prevailed. However, even in this situation, the low profitability of Japanese 
financial  institutions  is  striking  from  an  international  perspective  (Chart  5).  Regional 
financial institutions in particular have lower gross operating profits per employee than U.S. 
and European financial institutions of a similar size. Such low profitability is due not only 
to Japanese financial institutions' low net interest income that is susceptible to interest rate 
developments  but  also  to  low  net  non-interest  income  that  is  not  susceptible  to  these 
developments.8 
Since the 2000s, Japanese financial institutions have been making efforts to expand their fee 
and  commission-based  business  with  the  aim  of  diversifying  their  profit  sources,  but  the 
share  of  net  non-interest  income  in  gross  operating  profits  (the  net  non-interest  income 
                                                  
7  Based on a stock yield model, the equation "P/B ratio = ROE (return on equity) / COE (cost of 
equity)" can be obtained after simplification. A P/B ratio of less than one implies that stock market 
participants expect that banks will not be able to make returns higher than their cost of capital. 
8  Net interest income is interest income such as loan interest income and security interest income net 
of interest expenses such as deposit interest expenses. Net non-interest income is mainly composed 
of  the  fees  and  commissions  for  services  provided  by  banks  such  as  funds  transfer  services, 
deposit-taking  and  lending  services,  and  securities  sales  net  of  the  fees  and  commissions  paid  to 
other banks (net fees and commissions). 
6 
 ratio) nevertheless is generally small from an international perspective (Chart 6). By size, 
whereas the net non-interest income ratio of major financial groups is on par with that of 
their U.S. counterparts, regional financial institutions' net non-interest income ratio is only 
around  10  percent,  which  is  much  lower  than  that  of  U.S.  and  European  financial 
institutions of the similar size. 
For  U.S.  and  European  financial  institutions,  net  non-interest  income  represents  an 
important  profit  source  as  they  increase  opportunities  to  obtain  various  fees  and 
commissions  by  meticulously  setting  the  content  of  services  based  on  characteristics  and 
preferences  of  their  clients.  For  example,  in  Europe,  financial  institutions  secure  a  profit 
source by charging a reasonable fee for the issuance and use of debit and credit cards and 
providing bespoke solutions for high net worth individuals. Moreover, due to the spread of 
Internet  banking,  they  also  have  started  to  impose  fees  for  services  such  as  paper-based 
balance  statements.  In  the  United  States,  fund  management  services  that  meet  firms' 
outsourcing needs have been established as paid-for services. On the other hand, in Japan, 
there are more than a few examples where financial institutions do not impose any fees on 
financial  services  that  incur  a  reasonable  amount  of  costs,  such  as  services  related  to 
account maintenance and management. 
These differences in the stance regarding the setting of fees and commissions for financial 
services  in  Japan  and  abroad  also  show  up  clearly  in  the  composition  of  household 
consumption  expenditure.  The  item  composition  of  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  in 
various countries shows that the weight of financial services in Japan is much lower than in 
the United States and Europe (Chart 7). Furthermore, in contrast to the United States and 
Europe, where the prices of financial services have been rising at an annual rate of about 2 
percent, in Japan, the prices of financial services have for a long time essentially remained 
unchanged. These facts mean that whereas for financial institutions in the United States and 
Europe,  fee  and  commission  income  from  households  forms  a  stable  source  of  profits, 
Japanese financial institutions lack such profit source. 
Intensified Competition among Banks 
I have pointed out that financial institutions in Japan have lower gross operating profits per 
employee than their U.S. and European peers, and the breakdown showed that not only their 
7 
 net  interest  income  but  also  their  net  non-interest  income,  which  is  not  susceptible  to 
interest  rate  developments,  is  low  (Chart  5).  These  observations  suggest  that  Japanese 
financial institutions' low profitability is due not only to persistent low interest rates but also 
to other structural factors. Specifically, one likely factor is that competition among financial 
institutions  has  continued  to  intensify  for  a  long  time.  Looking  at  an  international 
comparison of the number of financial institutions' branches that actually provide financial 
services, the number of financial institutions' branches per capita in Japan appears relatively 
low; however, if the number of post office branches, which provide bank agency services, is 
included,  the  figure  is  about  the  same  as  that  in  some  European  countries,  which  are 
regarded as being overbanked (Chart 8).9  Additionally, the number of financial institutions' 
branches per habitable land area is conspicuously large in Japan. Of course, this is also due 
to the high population density of Japan. But if financial institutions' branches are densely 
crowded in a small area, depositors and firms will have a number of branches to choose 
from. Thus, the state of competition among them will intensify.10 
In particular, in terms of attracting deposits, financial institutions in Japan were competing 
intensely with each other, as well as with the postal savings system, from before World War 
II  until  recent  years.  Because  deposit  and  lending  margins  were  sufficiently  large  when 
interest rates were regulated, opening branches and collecting as much deposits as possible 
was  rational  behavior  which  would  directly  lead  to  profit  growth  for  private  financial 
institutions. For this reason, and partly due to competition from the postal savings system, it 
was difficult for private financial institutions to adopt a strategy of charging deposit-related 
fees. Even after deposit and lending margins narrowed against the backdrop of interest rate 
liberalization and the low interest rate environment, the fierce competition among financial 
institutions continued. Banks were fully aware that if only they started charging fees, it was 
highly  likely  that  deposits would flow  out  to  other  banks  or the  post office.  Under  these 
circumstances,  a  business  model  premised  on  not  charging  deposit-related  fees  seems  to 
become  entrenched  at  financial  institutions.  Thus,  as  financial  institutions  have  little  net 
non-interest  income  and  greatly  depend  on  net  interest  income  for  profits,  a  decline  in 
population and the number of firms spurs lending competition among financial institutions, 
                                                  
9   With  regard  to  overbanking  in  Europe,  see  European  Systemic  Risk  Board,  "Is  Europe 
Overbanked?" June 2014. 
10  For details, see Chapter VI in the October 2017 issue of the FSR. 
8 
 pushing down net interest income in a structural manner. 
To sum up, the true identity of "chronic and common" stress that exerts downward pressure 
on regional financial institutions' profits is a persistent decline in population and the number 
of  firms  observed  in  almost  all  regions  of  Japan  under  the  fierce  competition  among 
financial institutions (Chart 1). Our estimation results show that structural factors such as 
population decline, in addition to a decline in market interest rates due to monetary easing, 
have  largely  contributed  to  the  shrinkage  of  deposit  and  lending  margins  of  regional 
financial institutions over the past decade (Chart 9).11  While the forecast over the next 10 
years  will  change  depending  on  the  future  path  of  market  rates,  chronic  stresses  such  as 
population  decline  are  expected  to  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  deposit  and 
lending margins. That is, even if market rates rise and funding costs increase, loan interest 
rates will not be raised sufficiently due to intensified competition caused by chronic stresses. 
Thus, there is a possibility that deposit and lending margins will not improve very much. 
 IV.  Competition among Banks and Macroprudential Policy 
Going  forward,  the  problem  of  financial  institutions'  low  profitability  is  expected  to  be 
exacerbated, given the structural changes to the business environment, such as the shrinking 
regional population and business base. Next, I will go over how this will affect the financial 
system. 
Impact on Financial System Stability 
The decline in population and the number of firms, which is a structural factor underlying 
the  intensified  competition  among  financial  institutions,  is  not  an  idiosyncratic  shock 
occurring in certain areas, but a common shock occurring across Japan (Chart 1). Moreover, 
this common shock is not a temporary one but is expected to remain in the future. If such 
chronic  stresses  continue  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  regional  institutions'  profits,  it 
becomes highly likely that financial institutions will engage in excessive risk taking. For 
                                                  
11  Not only the effects of monetary easing but also a decline in the natural rate of interest associated 
with changes in demographic profile has contributed to a decline in market interest rates. Given this 
point,  chronic  stresses  such  as  population  decline  may  more  significantly  affect  the  long-term 
downward trend of financial institutions' deposit and lending margins. 
9 
 example, they may take on market risk associated with securities investment without proper 
risk management, or they may take on excessive credit risks in lending -- that is, extend 
loans at an interest rate that is not high enough to cover credit costs. 
At present, regional financial institutions do not take on excessive market and credit risks 
relative to their capital.12  However, the point is on how chronic stresses will have an effect 
in the future, and a warning from the stock market seems to address this point. In particular, 
because  Japanese  regional  financial  institutions'  provision  of  non-interest  services 
accompanying  lending  transactions  is  limited  compared  to  their  U.S.  and  European 
counterparts and Japanese major banks, the degree of differentiation in lending transactions 
is  low,  and  they  tend  to  engage  in  interest  rate  competition  (Chart  6).  In  fact,  financial 
institutions' lending stances have been as active recently as during the bubble period, while 
their lending margins tend to be narrower than planned under intensified competition among 
financial  institutions  (Chart  10).  In  other  words,  as  demand  for  loans  has  been  sluggish 
under  the  chronic  stress  of  a  decline  in  population  and  the  number  of  firms,  financial 
institutions  have  increased  common  exposure;  namely,  a  decline  in  net  interest  income 
resulting from lending competition among financial institutions. 
I mentioned earlier that the CoVaR, a systemic risk indicator of regional banks, has been 
rising recently due to an increase in the comovement between the stresses (Chart 4). This 
seems  to  reflect  the  effects  of  an  increase  in  common  exposure  caused  by  intensified 
competition. 13   Many  regional  financial  institutions  are  not  necessarily  individually 
systemic institutions. Nonetheless, there are more than 500 regional banks, shinkin banks, 
and credit cooperatives in total, and these institutions face the chronic and common shock 
of a decline in population and the number of firms, and they hold common exposure of a 
decline  in  net  interest  income  resulting  from  intensified  competition.  Therefore,  regional 
financial institutions taken as a whole are systemic as a herd, and chronic stresses that they 
share  in  common  could  greatly  affect  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  through 
intensification of competition. 
                                                  
12  For details, see Chapter IV in the October 2017 issue of the FSR. 
13  The FSR released in October 2017 empirically shows that intensified competition among regional 
financial institutions raises systemic  risk.  For details,  see Box 3  in the  October  2017 issue of  the 
FSR. 
10 
 Impact on Financial System Efficiency 
Chronic  stresses  may  affect  not  only  the  stability  but  also  the  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system. The intensified competition among financial institutions amid the decrease in the 
number of firms has started to have an effect on the business relationships between financial 
institutions and firms. The average number of financial institutions that each firm transacts 
with  across  branches  has  been  on  an  uptrend  (Chart  11).  As  the  number  of  firms  within 
business  areas  is  decreasing,  financial  institutions'  efforts  to  look  for  new  transaction 
opportunities  and  boost  their  corporate  business  seem  to  have  led  to  an  increase  in  the 
number of financial institutions that each firm transacts with. 
For firms, this means that they have been able to obtain more favorable loan conditions by 
increasing the number of financial institutions that each of them transacts with. However, if 
it  becomes  common  for  firms  to  choose  the  financial  institution  offering  the  lowest  loan 
interest rate among a number of financial institutions when taking out a loan, regardless of 
whether  the  financial  institutions  have  any  transaction  history  or  capacity  to  support 
businesses,  business  relationships  between  firms  and  their  main  bank  will  weaken.  This 
may lower the efficiency of financial intermediation. 
Under  relationship  banking,  financial  institutions  accumulate  soft  information  that  is 
difficult  to  quantify,  such  as  a  manager's  talent  and  a  project's  future  business  value,  by 
monitoring  client  firms  through  long-term  business  relationship.  Based  on  this  soft 
information, they can provide financial services including lending business. The following 
two advantages have been pointed out with regard to such relationship banking. First, by 
accurately assessing the future value of firms, financial institutions can encourage firms to 
engage in profitable investment projects while keeping firms  away from inefficient ones. 
Second, if firms face funding difficulties due to external shocks, financial institutions that 
are well aware of the firms' future value can provide liquidity assistance. That is, for firms, 
they  purchase  liquidity  insurance  by  paying  a  reasonable  amount  of  loan  interest  rates. 
These  two  advantages  contribute  to  the  efficient  allocation  of  funds  across  the  entire 
economy. However, as lending margins narrow significantly due to intensified competition 
among  financial  institutions,  they  eventually  will  lose  their  incentives  to  engage  in 
information  production  activities  that  are  costly,  such  as  the  assessment  of  a  manager's 
talent and a project's future business value. If financial institutions do not have sufficient 
11 
 information about their client firms, extended funds may be used for inefficient investment 
activities.  Financial  institutions  may  also  become  cautious  about  extending  loans  at  their 
own risk to firms that face stresses. If financial institutions lose their information production 
capacity, they may try to obtain guarantee by credit guarantee corporations to loans to small 
and medium-sized firms, and may increase their incentive to shift their credit risks to the 
public sector.14 
On the other hand, firms may prefer to transact with financial institutions that offer lower 
loan interest rates in normal times while they may depend more on emergency measures by 
the government or public finance in times of stress. This would generate a moral hazard. In 
the  end,  in  the  case  of  public  finance  with  solid  support,  excessive  lending  competition 
among banks could undermine firms' incentives to raise their productivity. This could result 
in inefficient resource allocation across the entire economy, or hamper the economic natural 
selection mechanism. 
At  present,  firm-bank  relationships  have  not  weakened  to  this  extent.  However,  if  the 
competition among banks continues to intensify due to chronic stresses, how this will affect 
the efficiency of the financial system going forward warrants attention. 
 V.  Macroprudential Approach to Chronic Stresses 
I  have  explained  that  the  chronic  and  common  stress  of  a  decline  in  population  and  the 
number of firms has exerted downward pressure on financial institutions' profits, adversely 
affecting  both  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  by  creating  a  highly 
competitive  environment.  This  is  a  serious  problem  from  a  macroprudential  perspective. 
How should we tackle this problem? 
                                                  
14  This  problem  can  be  understood  in  the  context  of  "market  failure."  Asymmetric  information 
between a firm as a borrower and a bank as a lender can be resolved by long-term relationship and 
banks' information production capacity. However, if banks' loan interest rates decline to a level that 
cannot compensate for their information production costs, firm-bank relationships will weaken. In 
other  words,  the  poor  functioning  of  the  loan  market  will  leave  the  market  failure  arising  from 
asymmetric  information  unresolved.  On  the  other  hand,  if  a  bank  ultimately  can  transfer  a  firm's 
credit  risk  to  the  public  sector,  the  bank  may  be  able  to  continue  extending  loans.  In  this  case, 
however, taxpayer money will be used to bear the firm's credit cost in the end. Therefore, lending by 
banks  that  do  not  engage  in  information  production  activities  entails  negative  externalities.  This 
situation also causes a market failure. 
12 
 it 
the 
to  solve 
is  difficult 
this  problem  by  utilizing 
Unfortunately, 
traditional 
macroprudential  policy  tools.  If  further  bullish  expectations  of  firms  and  households  and 
banks' risk-taking operated in tandem and a higher degree of overheating was observed in 
the financial cycle, capital regulation such as the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) and 
credit regulation such as the loan to value (LTV) limit would be effective.15  However, as I 
have  already  mentioned,  we  do  not  face  such  a  situation  at  this  moment  (Chart  2).  In 
addition, in the case where financial institutions' low profitability is caused by chronic and 
common  stresses,  capital  regulation  that  requires  banks  to  accumulate  capital  is  not  an 
appropriate  prescription.  As  accumulation  of  capital  under  such  measures  is  expected  to 
further reduce the profitability (ROE), it seems difficult for financial institutions with low 
profitability to increase their capital in the financial market.16 
Microprudential Approach that Incorporates a Macroprudential Perspective 
In order to contain systemic risk among regional financial institutions, enhancing off-site 
monitoring  and  on-site  examinations  is  the  first  important  step.  Off-site  monitoring  and 
on-site  examinations  are  primarily  regarded  as  a  microprudential  measure.  By  carrying 
them  out  from  a  macroprudential  perspective  in  an  industry-wide  and  collective  manner, 
however, they are capable of producing effects as a form of macroprudential policy.17   
                                                  
15  The  CCyB  indicates  a  variable  capital  surcharge,  one  of  the  Basel  III  capital  adequacy 
requirements.  Capital  reserves  are  required  for  materialization  of  potential  losses  in  the  banking 
sector, when risks in the financial system are expected to increase due to excessive credit extension. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  restriction  on  the  LTV  ratio  is  concerned  with  the  ratio  of  loans  to  the 
collateral  market  value  in  extending  real  estate  loans.  When  risks  in  the  real  estate  industry  are 
expected to increase, lowering the LTV ratio would contain further credit expansion. 
16  When  the  tighter  capital  adequacy  ratio  is  applied,  banks  have  the  following  two  options:  (1) 
increasing their capital (an action affecting the numerator) and/or (2) reducing their risky assets (an 
action affecting the denominator). If it is difficult to increase their capital, financial institutions will 
refrain from extending loans. Thus, there is a possibility that competition among them will become 
less  intense.  Depending  on  how  much  the  capital  adequacy  ratio  will  be  added,  however,  this 
measure can be a "powerful drug" that forces financial institutions with relatively weak capital bases 
to leave, and this does not seems a realistic option -- at least, this is not suitable for the first line of 
defense. 
17  In this regard, the Federal Reserve seems to have a similar awareness of the issues. Members of 
the Financial Stability Subcommittee of the Conference of Presidents (COP) of the Federal Reserve 
Banks  conducted  a  macroprudential  tabletop  exercise  in  June  2015.  The  results  of  the  exercise 
indicated that supervisory guidance and stress testing are more effective than capital regulation (such 
as leverage ratios and CCyB), liquidity regulation (such as liquidity coverage ratio and net stable 
funding ratio), and credit regulation (such as caps on LTV ratio). For details, see Tobias Adrian, et al., 
"Macroprudential Policy: Case Study from a Tabletop Exercise," Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Staff Reports, No. 742 (2015). 
13 
 For  example,  a  medium-  to  long-term  simulation  of  financial  institutions'  profits  is  a 
valuable tool for communication with financial institutions. Based on line sheet review, the 
Bank  specifically  ascertains  the  actual  situation  of  regional  economies  and  changes  in 
behaviors of financial institutions and then estimates the future prospects of profits while 
taking  account  of  how  much  chronic  stresses  the  future  decline  in  population  and  the 
number of firms will exert in each business area.18  Stress testing is certainly important, but 
as many regional financial institutions currently have sufficient capital, most of their capital 
adequacy ratios are above the regulatory requirements even under the acute stress. What is 
significant  to  avoid  systemic  risk  arising  from  chronic  stress  is  not  regional  financial 
institutions'  "current"  solvency,  but  rather  their  "future"  solvency.  Therefore,  in  the  case 
where  a  medium-  to  long-term  forecast  of  profits  based  on  the  current  business  model 
shows a difficulty in maintaining highly sustainable profits and an adverse effect on future 
solvency and loss-absorbing capacity, even if financial institutions currently have enough 
capital,  it  seems  relevant  to  ask  them  to  enhance  their  business  performances  toward 
improving their profitability. 
To earn profits in a sustainable manner under a highly competitive environment, financial 
institutions need to differentiate the financial intermediation services they offer and make 
efforts  to  utilize  their  core  competence.  When  formulating  their  business  plans,  it  is 
important for them to (1) accurately analyze and identify the needs for financial services of 
the  customers  within  their  business  areas  and  (2)  develop  and  offer  services  that 
meticulously  address  customers'  needs.  Moreover,  (3)  another  option  to  provide  such 
services  could  be  through  the  review  of  the  efficiency  of  their  branch  configuration  and 
allocation of employees, as well as the thorough management of profitability including fair 
price setting. 
Toward an Appropriately Competitive Environment 
Many  regional  financial  institutions  seem  to  have  already  recognized  the  importance  of 
                                                  
18   Specifically,  during  the  line  sheet  review,  the  Bank  ascertains  and  confirms  business 
environments for borrowers such as developments in regional economies and industries, as well as 
credit exposure managements by conducting face-to-face meetings with branch managers based on 
the  documents  ("line  sheets")  that  contain  information  about  the  selected  individual  borrowers, 
including changes in financial situations, changes in borrowing and repayment, their future prospects, 
financial institutions' self-assessment results, and policies for lending. 
14 
 enhancing  business  performances,  but  under  the  highly  competitive  environment,  some 
have pointed out the difficulty in making efforts to steadily improve business performances. 
If  competition  among  financial  institutions  leads  to  a  decline  in  each  other's  profits, 
financial institutions are thought to be caught in the "prisoner's dilemma." Many of them 
mention that, if they mutually avoided the "excessive" interest rate competition, then they 
could maintain their profits. On the other hand, if only one institution left the competition, 
the customers would go to other institutions, resulting in the institution being an only loser. 
In  such  a  situation,  it  becomes  more  difficult  to  leave  the  interest  rate  competition. 
Regarding the relationship between competition among banks and their business stability, 
"moderate"  competition  will  lead  to  their  business  stability.  However,  if  competition 
becomes  fierce  beyond  a  certain  threshold,  bank  business  will  become  rather  unstable 
(Chart  12).19  In  Japan,  many  regional  financial  institutions  seem  to  have  already  been 
caught in the prisoner's dilemma. 
How should we address the prisoner's dilemma caused by fierce competition among banks? 
One effective option is consolidation and reorganization among financial institutions. As the 
number  of  firms  and  population  continue  to  decline,  the  highly  competitive  environment 
will not relax unless there are changes in supply capacity, such as a decline in the number of 
financial  institutions,  their  branches,  and  their  employees.  From  a  macroprudential 
perspective,  Japanese  financial  institutions  have  overcapacity  relative  to  financial  service 
demand,  which  is  determined  by  population  and  the  number  of  firms.  Consolidation  and 
reorganization  that  could  lead  to  the  improvement  of  such  a  situation  seem  effective  in 
enhancing the stability and efficiency of the financial system.20 
                                                  
19  There  are  two  views  with  regard  to  the  relationship  between  the  competitive  environment  that 
financial institutions face and their business stability. The first is the "competition-stability view," 
which  holds  that  competition  among  banks  increases  their  business  stability.  The  second  is  the 
"competition-fragility  view,"  which  holds  that  competition  among  banks  lowers  their  business 
stability.  The  former  argues  that,  as  banks  compete  with  each  other  and  loan  interest  rates  fall, 
borrowing  firms'  probability  of  default  declines,  raising  banks'  business  stability.  Conversely,  the 
latter  argues  that,  as  competition  intensifies  and  banks'  profit  margins  continue  to  tighten,  their 
capacity to absorb losses due to external shocks, such as an increase in credit costs, decreases and/or 
they take more risks, so that banks' business becomes unstable. For details, see Box 6 in the April 
2017 issue of the FSR. 
20  In the non-financial private sector, competition policy mainly focuses on efficiency (competitive 
pricing).  Meanwhile,  in the  banking  sector, competition policy  focuses  on  not  only  efficiency but 
also  stability  (prevention  of  systemic  risk).  For  details,  see  International  Monetary  Fund,  "Key 
Aspects of Macroprudential Policy -- Background Paper" (2013). 
15 
 Nevertheless, I think that it is most important for individual financial institutions to make 
the time horizon of maximizing their profits longer.21  Financial institutions' pursuit of profit 
in a myopic manner would lead to excessive interest rate competition. This would not only 
exert downward pressure on profits of individual financial institutions but also undermine 
the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system,  adversely  affecting  both  regional  and 
nationwide  economies  in  Japan.  Consolidation  and  reorganization  are  indeed  one  of  the 
options to improve future profits, but this is not all. Even if individual financial institutions 
did  not  choose  consolidation  and  reorganization  but  instead  focused  on  maintaining 
medium- to long-term profits in the future, they would find it more desirable to enhance 
information  production  capacity  about  client  firms  and  construct  a  business  model  that 
differentiates the financial intermediation services they offer, rather than continue to engage 
in excessive interest rate competition. Such behavior of financial institutions will contribute 
to  the  improvement  of  both  the  stability  and  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  and 
positively affect the economy over the long run.22 
It is important to secure profits for each fiscal year. However, what is needed as a response 
to  chronic  stresses  is  tireless  efforts  to  improve  future  profits,  such  as  differentiation  of 
financial  services.  Individual  financial  institutions  should work  for  a business  model  that 
makes  the  time  horizon  of  maximizing  their  profits  longer.  The  Bank  attaches  great 
importance  to  the  medium-  to  long-term  forecast  of  profits  in  its  off-site  monitoring  and 
on-site examinations, because a competitive environment and the time horizon to maximize 
financial  institutions'  profits  are  closely  related.  By  carrying  out  off-site  monitoring  and 
on-site  examinations  in  an  industry-wide  and  collective  manner,  the  Bank  would  like  to 
encourage  financial  institutions  to  appropriately  recognize  their  competitive  environment 
and establish their business plans and models over a longer time horizon to maximize their 
profits. We consider this to be a new type of macroprudential policy. 
                                                  
21  In game theory, if each player's discount factor is large enough -- that is, he/she focuses not only 
on this term's profits but also on future profits -- repeated games resolve the prisoner's dilemma. 
22  Long-term forecast in Chart 9 assumes that estimation parameters will remain unchanged from 
the ones estimated based on the past data. However, the parameters would change if the competition 
environment  changed  due  to  the  progress  in  differentiation  of  financial  services  provided  by 
financial  institutions  and  consolidation  and  reorganization  among  them.  In  this  case,  even  if  the 
outlook for explanatory variables was unchanged, the impact of chronic stresses such as a decline in 
population on deposit and lending margins would diminish. 
16 
 How to Deal with the Social Norm for Services in Japan 
In order to avoid systemic risk arising from financial institutions' low profitability, there is 
one  more  issue  that  needs  to  be  resolved,  in  addition  to  establishing  an  appropriately 
competitive  environment.  That  is,  to  obtain  the  understanding  of  clients  about  fair 
compensation for the financial intermediation services. Presumably, many Japanese do not 
recognize  that  Japanese  financial  institutions  continue  to  provide  settlement  services 
without obtaining an appropriate amount of compensation. 
Banks provide their depositors with financial intermediation services including settlement 
services,  and  in  return  they  receive  implicit  fees  in  the  form  of  deposit  spreads  (market 
interest rates - deposit interest rates). It is interpreted in standard economics that, instead of 
investing  in  government  bonds  and  other  assets  in  the  financial  markets,  households  and 
firms purchase settlement services from the banks by making a deposit with lower interest 
rates and paying opportunity cost of deposit spreads to the banks. Setting the fair price of 
settlement services by combining these deposit spreads with explicit fees such as account 
maintenance and funds transfer fees is the banks' standard business model. 
In Japan, however, deposit spreads fell to almost zero in the mid-1990s due to a decline in 
market  interest  rates  after  the  bubble  burst  and  the  liberalization  of  deposit  interest  rates 
(Chart 13). This happened about 20 years before the introduction of the Bank's QQE and the 
negative  interest  rate  policy.  In  other  words,  Japanese  financial  institutions  that  do  not 
impose  any  account  maintenance  fees  have  provided  settlement  services  for  almost  free 
over the last 20 years. 
They had an option to charge account maintenance fees when deposit spreads reached zero, 
but it was impossible in reality. There were two reasons. As I mentioned earlier, one was 
competition among financial institutions including the postal savings system. The other was 
the social norm for services in Japan.23 
I think that the Japanese social norm for services has developed in a unique way compared 
to  other  countries.  For  example,  when  we  look  up  the  word  "service"  in  a  Japanese 
                                                  
23  The another possible reason was that financial institutions were short of capital as a result of the 
disposal  of  nonperforming  loans  after  the  bubble  burst,  and  they  received  public  funds.  In  this 
situation, it was not socially acceptable to receive more fees from the Japanese people. 
17 
 dictionary,  we  find  explanations  such  as  "dedication,"  "discount,"  and  "a  free  gift."  For 
Japanese people, an expression like "family service," where the word "service" in Japanese 
is  used  as  a  synonym  of  family  "duties"  in  English,  sounds  very  familiar.  "Overtime 
service"  --  meaning  volunteer  overtime  work  --  and  "we  offer  you  some  services!"  -- 
meaning that we offer customers services at a discount -- also sound familiar in Japan. As is 
evident from these examples, the Japanese word "service" implies the concept of "free of 
charge." On the contrary, no such meaning can be found in an English dictionary. 
As represented by the Japanese word omotenashi, which can be roughly summed up as "the 
spirit  of  selfless  hospitality,"  offering  services  without  requiring  any  pecuniary 
compensation  in  return  is  considered  a  Japanese  virtue.  The  low  productivity  of  the 
Japanese  service  sector  including  the  financial  sector  by  international  standards  does  not 
seem to be unrelated to the social norm for services that is peculiar to Japan. The weight of 
financial services in household consumption expenditure is extremely low in Japan from an 
international  perspective  (Chart  7).  On  the  flip  side  of  the  coin,  Japanese  financial 
institutions' net non-interest income ratio is also low (Chart 6). I think that these cannot be 
explained solely by competition among financial institutions. 
Currently, there are about 1.1 billion personal accounts at financial institutions across Japan. 
The  number  of  bank  accounts  per  capita  amounts  to  about  10,  and  this  is  quite  a  large 
number on the basis of an international comparison (Chart 14). The reason the number of 
bank accounts is high seems to be largely because account maintenance fee is free in Japan. 
Banks incur massive costs to maintain such a large number of bank accounts. They even 
have to manage accounts that have no transactions for 10 years from the last transaction was 
made. As the system maintenance burden for these accounts incurs fixed costs, banks that 
are  capital-intensive  industry  eventually  fall  into  a  vicious  cycle  where  competition 
intensifies to achieve economies of scale. 
Maintaining bank accounts that do not contribute to economic transactions with heavy cost 
is socially inefficient. Moreover, it is likely to become more difficult for banks to continue 
providing  settlement  services  without  asking  for  fair  compensation  to  maintain  bank 
18 
 accounts.24  Probably, the social norm in Japan is something along the lines of "there is no 
way that fees are charged on hard-earned money deposited in a bank," but I think the time 
has come for the Japanese people to discuss fair compensation for financial intermediation 
services. 
Many of you may wonder why the assessment of fair compensation for services is related to 
macroprudential policy. However, the people's understanding regarding fair compensation 
for  financial  intermediation  services  is  essential  in  order  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system  in  the  future.  This  is  because  (1)  there  is  a  risk  that  the  vicious 
compounding  of  banks'  low  profitability  and  excessive  competition  among  banks  will 
destabilize the financial system, (2) banks' low profitability is partly due to their low net 
non-interest income, and (3) this is related to the social norm for services. Raising such an 
issue  is  unconventional  from  a  macroprudential  perspective,  but  I  believe  that  this  is  an 
inevitable challenge to address. 
It should be noted, however, that we need to make various efforts to promote a discussion at 
the national level about fair compensation for financial intermediation services. First, the 
financial sector as a whole, including the Bank of Japan, needs to fully explain and gain the 
people's understanding of the fact that costs to provide settlement services are not balanced 
with  profits.  Second,  needless  to  say,  individual  financial  institutions  need  to  conduct 
reforms to improve their profits. If there was room for cutting costs and making profits, the 
public  would  not  fully  recognize  the  need  for  fair  compensation.  In  this  regard,  regional 
financial  institutions  need  to  reduce  overcapacity  by  appropriately  allocating  business 
resources  through  Business  Process  Reengineering.  Moreover,  if  financial  institutions 
provide excessive services that do not necessarily match clients' needs, they may need to 
review the content of their services.25  And third, financial institutions need to gain better 
understanding  from  the  people  by  providing  new  value-added  in  financial  intermediation 
services  based  on  the  new  technological  environment,  including  FinTech.  If  financial 
                                                  
24  Even if the number of bank accounts per capita is appropriate, the provision of settlement services 
entails  costs.  Settlement  in  demand  deposits  incurs  costs  to  develop  and  maintain  a  stable  and 
efficient system. Teller windows at branches involve indirect costs associated with identification and 
payment/receipt of cash. Moreover, issuance of a bankbook also exerts upward pressure on costs. 
25  In addition, if the profitability of similar services is different depending on supply channels, it 
will  be  necessary  to  build  a  fee  structure  that  encourages  clients'  transactions  to  shift  from  a 
unprofitable  channel  to  a  profitable  one;  for  example,  to  shift  from  bankbook-  or  paper-based 
transactions to Internet banking. 
19 
 institutions could further improve the efficiency and safety of financial services and receive 
compensation  that  meets  clients'  satisfaction,  their  productivity  and  profitability  would 
increase.  Conversely,  if  they  did  not  engage  in  such  efforts  and  only  charged  more 
compensation,  there  would  be  disintermediation  amid  an  increased  presence  of  FinTech 
firms. Thus, this point warrants careful vigilance. 
 VI. Concluding Remarks 
Today, I have explained the prudential policy approach to financial vulnerabilities arising 
from chronic stresses. As advanced economies have never before been confronted with the 
chronic  stress  of  a  persistent  decline  in  population  and  the  number  of  firms,  how  to 
overcome this stress is a considerable challenge. However, I believe that the wisdom and 
foresight of those in the financial institutions' top management who have overcome various 
challenges  surely  will  find  a  breakthrough.  At  the  same  time,  we  at  the  Bank  of  Japan, 
which is responsible for the stability of the financial system, have to explore a new frontier 
of prudential policy by ourselves. 
Nonetheless,  no  matter  how  hard  we  try  to  explore  a  new  frontier,  there  is  a  limit  to 
achieving  financial  stability  by  utilizing  prudential  policy  alone.  Chronic  stress  in  the 
financial system can be regarded as a decline in Japan's growth potential or the natural rate 
of  interest.26  Banks  have  been  unable  to  receive  fair  compensation  for  the  provision  of 
settlement services due to the narrowing of deposit spreads. The underlying reason behind 
this seems to be a decline in the natural rate of interest that has caused a significant decline 
in nominal interest rates (Chart 13). Among the banks' two main businesses of settlement 
services  and  lending  services,  banks  have  been  able  to  gain  profits  only  from  the  latter 
business  and  have  engaged  in  more  intense  interest  rate  competition.  As  market  interest 
                                                  
26  The natural rate of interest is an interest rate that balances savings and investment. It refers to the 
real  interest  rate  that  can  be  achieved  when  the  real  economy  grows  at  its  potential  growth  rate. 
Looking back at the saving-investment balance, excess saving in the household sector has narrowed, 
reflecting the aging population, while saving has been exceeding investment in the corporate sector 
since around the end of the 1990s. This seems to be because a persistent decline in the number of 
firms  has  led  to  a  reduction  in  investment  in  the  corporate  sector  as  a  whole,  and  a  decline  in 
population has restrained investment through a decline in the expected growth rate. The natural rate 
of interest declined toward the mid-1990s and has not recovered from a low level since then. This is 
due  to  a  change  in  the  saving-investment  balance  that  has  led  to  chronic  stress  and  affected  the 
financial system. 
20 
 rates have remained at low levels since the mid-1990s, the shrinkage of lending margins as 
a trend has been significantly affected by a decline in the natural rate on interest under such 
intensified completion. 
Based on such thinking, it is important to minimize the size of chronic stresses in order to 
maintain  financial  stability.  Of  course,  it  is  essential  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  chronic 
stresses on the financial system by utilizing prudential policy. However, if chronic stresses 
remained severe, prudential policy would not easily take effect. The measures to minimize 
the  size  of  chronic  stresses,  or  the  government's  growth  strategy  to  raise  the  potential 
growth rate and the natural rate of interest, play a vital role in fostering financial stability. 
Lastly, let me briefly touch on the effects of monetary policy on the stability of the financial 
system.  The  continued  monetary  easing,  in  addition  to  the  chronic  stress  of  a  decline  in 
population and the number of firms, is one of the factors that have intensified competition 
among financial institutions and exerted downward pressure on their profits. At the same 
time, monetary easing so far has encouraged the banks' more active lending and contributed 
to  the  improvement  of  firms'  business  performances. 27   This  has  manifested  as  an 
improvement  in  economic  conditions,  contributing  to  financial  institutions'  profits;  for 
example,  as  seen  in  a  decline  in  credit  costs  and  an  increase  in  returns  on  securities 
investment. The financial system constitutes a transmission channel of monetary policy, and 
its  stability  forms  the  basis  for  the  sustainable  economic  growth.  It  is  necessary  that  the 
Bank  continue  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  an  appropriate  manner,  taking  account  of 
developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.28 
Looking back, both monetary policy and prudential policy have made great progress in the 
past 20 years.29  When the Bank was responding to Japan's financial crisis in the 1990s, I 
felt despondent even about the next day, but we roused ourselves with the slogan "never 
cause  a  financial  contagion  from  Japan."  Japan's  safety  net  has  gone  through  a  long 
                                                  
27  For details, see Box 2 in the April 2017 issue of the FSR. 
28  For  details  regarding  how  to  incorporate  a  macroprudential  perspective  into  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy, see Hiroshi Nakaso, "Challenges toward Financial Stability and the Policy Frontier: 
Unconventional  Monetary  Policy,  Macroprudence,  and  Financial  Institutions'  Low  Profitability," 
speech at the IVA-JSPS Seminar in Stockholm (March 21, 2016). 
29  For  details  regarding  how  the  Bank's  monetary  policy  has  evolved,  see  Hiroshi  Nakaso, 
"Evolving  Monetary  Policy:  The  Bank  of  Japan's  Experience,"  speech  at  the  Central  Banking 
Seminar hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (October 18, 2017). 
21 
 the  day  when 
improved  dramatically  since 
challenging  period  and 
the  word 
"macroprudence"  did  not  exist  and  we  lacked  the  experience  of  and  tools  for  crisis 
management.  As  I  have  talked  about  today,  knowledge  regarding  macroprudential  policy 
has been accumulated and the remaining issues to be tackled have become clearer. We really 
have  come  a  long  way.  It  might  be  a  little  late,  but  I  would  like  to  express  my  deepest 
appreciation  to  all  colleagues  and  friends  who  have  devoted  all  of  their  knowledge  and 
efforts  toward  achieving  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  during  the  difficult  times. 
Today  marks  20  years  since  Dark  November.  On  this  day,  I  would  like  to  conclude  my 
speech by reiterating the Bank's unwavering determination as a central bank to guard the 
stability of Japan's financial system. Thank you very much for your attention. 
22 
New Frontier of Macroprudential Policy:
Addressing Financial Institutions'
Low Profitability and Intensified Competition
November 29, 2017
Speech at the Kin'yu Konwa Kai (Financial Discussion Meeting)
Hosted by the Jiji Press
Hiroshi Nakaso
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan
Chart 1
Decline in population and the number of firms
Number of firms 
and population
Changes in the number of firms
from 2004 to 2014
(by municipality)
Changes in population 
from 2015 to 2025
(by municipality, forecast)
600
550
500
450
400
350
ten thou.
mil.
130
125
120
115
Number of firms (lhs)
Population (rhs)
80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15 20 25
300
CY
Note: 1. The number of firms is that of privately owned establishments, which cover single-unit establishments and head offices (headquarters
and main offices). The "Establishment and enterprise census" is used in and before 2006, and the "Economic census for business frame
and business activity" in and after 2009.
110
2. The dashed line in the left-hand chart represents forecasts. 
3. The rates of change in population for municipalities in Fukushima Prefecture are substituted by the average rate of change in population 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism; National Institute of Population 
for the prefecture.
and Social Security Research.
Chart 2
Financial cycle
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
CY
85
Financial cycle (lhs)
Business cycle (output gap, rhs)
90
95
00
05
10
15
 8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
Note: Financial cycle is an indicator that aggregates 14 Financial Activity Indexes (FAIXs) shown in the Financial System Report, using time-
varying weights that take the cross-correlation between these indexes into account. The indicator approaching +1 is a sign of "financial
overheating" and approaching -1 is a sign of "financial contraction." Latest data as at the April-June quarter of 2017.
Source: BOJ.
Chart 3
EDF and P/B ratio of regional banks
Short-term EDF
Medium- to long-term EDF
P/B ratio
 25th-75th
percentile range
Median
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
 25th-75th
percentile range
Median
6
5
4
3
2
1
times
25th-75th
percentile range
Median
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
CY
00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
0
CY
00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
0.0
FY
95
00
05
10
15
Note: 1. The expected default frequency (EDF) and price-to-book (P/B) ratio cover 56 and 35 regional banks, respectively.
2. The short-term EDF is 1-year EDF, and the medium- to long-term EDF is 5-year forward EDF. Latest data as at end-September 2017.
3. Latest data as at end-fiscal 2016 for P/B ratio.
Source: Bloomberg; Moody's; BOJ.
Chart 4
Systemic risk indicators of regional banks CoVaR
CoVaR
Individual risk (VaR)
Comovement ()
% pts
25th-75th
percentile range
Median
96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
5
4
3
2
1
0
FY
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
FY
% pts
25th-75th
percentile range
Median
96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
FY
25th-75th
percentile range
Median
96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10 12 14 16
Note: 1. Using stock market data, Conditional Value at Risk (CoVaR) measures the size of stress in the financial system, which comprises the
following two factors: the stress faced by individual banks (VaR) and the comovement between the stresses faced by individual banks
(). The following relation holds among the indicators: CoVaR =   VaR.
2. Covers 56 regional banks. Latest data as at fiscal 2016.
Source: Bloomberg.
Chart 5
International comparison of FIs' profits
Net interest income and net non-interest income per employee
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
mil. yen
mil. yen
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Japan U.S. Europe
Group 1
Japan U.S. Europe
Group 2
mil. yen
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
mil. yen
25
20
15
10
5
0
Japan U.S. Europe
Japan U.S. Europe
Group 3
Group 4
Smaller-scale institutions
Larger-scale institutions
Net interest income (weighted average)
Net non-interest income (weighted average)
Net interest income (median)
Net non-interest income (median)
Note: 1. Covers 370 Japanese financial institutions (consisting of major banks, regional banks, and shinkin banks), 686 U.S. financial institutions,
and 491 European financial institutions from the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Switzerland. Data are basically on a consolidated
basis. Financial institutions in each region are classified into 4 groups based on quartiles of gross operating profits of Japanese financial
institutions. For details, see the October 2017 issue of the Financial System Report.
2. The figures are the averages for the period from fiscal 2014 to fiscal 2016. The figures for U.S. and European financial institutions were
converted into yen using purchasing power parity exchange rates (obtained from the OECD) for the period.
Source: OECD; published accounts of each bank; S&P Global Market Intelligence; BOJ.
Chart 6
International comparison of net non-interest income ratios
net non-interest income / gross operating profits, %
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
75th-90th
percentile
range
25th-75th
percentile
range
10th-25th
percentile
range
Weighted
average
Median
Japan U.S. Europe Japan U.S. Europe Japan U.S. Europe Japan U.S. Europe
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
Smaller-scale institutions
Larger-scale institutions
Note: The figures are the averages for the period from fiscal 2014 to fiscal 2016.
Source: OECD; S&P Global Market Intelligence; BOJ.
Chart 7
Share of financial services in household expenditure
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Weights of financial services in the CPI
%
1.31 
1.20 
0.99 
0.88 
0.78 
0.66 
0.42 
0.23 0.27 
0.01 
  S
U
n
a
p
a
J
e
c
n
a
r
F
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i
w
S
s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
  K
U
l
y
a
t
I
1
3
A
E
E
a
d
a
n
a
C
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
CY
Price indices for financial services in the CPI
CY2005=100
Japan
U.S.
Canada
EEA31
Switzerland
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
16
Note: 1. Weights in the CPI are on a 2015 basis. The latest data in the right-hand chart are as at July 2017.
2. EEA31 refers to the European Economic Area member countries, which cover 28 EU member states, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Norway.
Source: Haver Analytics; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
Chart 8
International comparison of the number of FIs' branches
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Number of financial institutions' 
branches per habitable area
number of branches
Number of financial institutions' 
branches per capita
number of branches
67 
57 
53 50 48 47 
44 42 41 
36 
32 
25 24 
18 17 
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
11 
1,000
i
m
u
g
e
B
l
  S
U
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i
w
S
i
n
a
p
S
e
c
n
a
r
F
l
y
a
t
I
a
i
r
t
s
u
A
l
a
g
u
t
r
o
P
s
e
c
i
f
f
o
  
t
s
o
p
+
 
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
s
e
c
i
f
f
o
  
t
s
o
p
+
n
a
p
a
J
   K
U
n
a
p
a
J
e
c
e
e
r
G
n
e
d
e
w
S
s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
0
s
e
c
i
f
f
o
n
a
p
a
J
  
t
s
o
p
+
n
a
p
a
J
 s
e
c
i
f
f
o
  
t
s
o
p
+
 
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
i
m
u
g
e
B
l
e
c
n
a
r
F
i
n
a
p
S
a
i
r
t
s
u
A
l
y
a
t
I
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i
w
S
l
a
g
u
t
r
o
P
s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
  K
U
e
c
e
e
r
G
  S
U
n
e
d
e
w
S
Note: The number of branches is per 100,000 population in the left-hand chart and per 10,000 km2 habitable area in the right-hand chart. 
Basically, data as at end-2015 (data for Japan as at end-fiscal 2015).
Source: CUNA; ECB; Eurostat; FAOSTAT; FDIC; FSA; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; published accounts of each entity; SNB; 
U.S. Census Bureau; BOJ.
Chart 9
Regional FIs' deposit and lending margins
Results over the past 10 years
cumulative changes from FY2006, % pts
Forecast over the next 10 years
cumulative changes from FY2016, % pts
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
Credit risk factor
Market interest rate factor
Structural factors (incl. population growth)
Deposit and lending margins
12
07
08
09
10
11
14
13
FY
06
Structural factors (incl. population growth)
Deposit and lending margins (recovery scenario)
Deposit and lending margins (stagnation scenario)
26
17
24
18
19
21
22
20
23
25
16
15
16
FY
Methodology for decomposing and forecasting deposit and lending margins
A panel estimation is conducted from fiscal 2001 to 2016 for regional financial institutions (FIs, covering 105 regional banks and 255 shinkin banks),
regressing deposit and lending margins on the following explanatory variables:
Market interest rate: Due to the zero lower bound on deposit interest rates, a decline in the market interest rate leads to the narrowing of deposit and
lending margins. Moreover, when government bond yields decline, FIs further compete on loan interest rates to increase their loans. We use 5year
JGB yields, taking into account the average maturity of bondholdings by regional FIs. 3year backward moving average is taken for the market interest
rate to match the fact that both the deposit interest rate and the loan interest rate are calculated based on the amount outstanding.
Population growth in business areas of each FI: When the population declines, sales of and loan demand from small enterprises (especially non
manufacturing ones) are expected to decline, which exerts downward pressure on the loan interest rate.
Population aging in business areas of each FI: In areas where the population is aging, deposits tend to increase while the demand for housing loans
decreases. This leads to the intensification of competition among FIs, lowering the loan interest rate.
Number of branches in business areas of each FI: The higher the number of branches in the business area, the lower the deposit and lending margins.
Nonperforming loan ratio of each FI: FIs with high nonperforming loan ratios tend to offer higher loan interest rates, reflecting their higher credit costs.
Two different scenarios of the future market interest rate
Market interest rate (5year JGB yields) is regressed on the nominal GDP growth rate, and using the estimated results, we assume that the market
interest rate is 1.6% when the nominal growth rate is 2%, and 0.8% when the nominal growth rate is 1%.
Recovery scenario: The economy follows a sustainable growth path with a nominal growth rate of 2% from fiscal 2019, and the market interest rate
gradually rises to 1.6%.
Stagnation scenario: The nominal growth rate remains lackluster at around 1%, and the market interest rate rises only to 0.8%.
Note: 1. Contributions of population growth effect, population aging effect, and number of branches effect are put together as "structural factors."
2. As for population growth and population aging, forecasts by the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research are used. It is
assumed that the nonperforming loan ratio and number of branches in business areas are constant throughout the forecast period.
Chart 10
Lending attitudes of FIs
DI of lending attitudes of financial institutions
% pts
Accommodative
Original series
Trend
Severe
80
85
90
95
00
05
10
15
50
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
CY
DI for lending margins: plans and results
(Loans to small firms)
% pts
Results over the past 3 months
Plans for the next 3 months
Narrowing margins
Widening margins
06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
15
10
5
0
-5
-10
CY
Note: 1. Covers all firm sizes and all industries. Latest data as at the
Note: 1. Latest data as at July 2017. 4-quarter backward moving averages.
July-September quarter of 2017.
2. The trend is calculated from the historical average. Shaded
areas indicate the root mean square of the deviation from
the trend.
Source: BOJ, "Tankan."
2. Based on the proportion of responding financial institutions 
selecting each given choice, the DI is calculated as follows:
DI = "narrowing considerably" + 0.5  "narrowing somewhat"  
 0.5  "widening somewhat"  "widening considerably."
Source: BOJ, "Senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices 
at large Japanese banks."
Chart 11
Number of FIs that each firm transacts with
Distribution of the number of financial 
institutions that each firm transacts with
Average number of financial institutions 
that each firm transacts with
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
frequency, %
FY2005
FY2015
1
2
3
6
number of financial institutions
4
5
number of financial institutions
96
98
00
02
04
06
08
10
12
14
3.0
2.9
2.8
2.7
2.6
2.5
FY
Note: The left-hand chart covers approximately 700,000 firms for which data for the entire observation period are available from fiscal 2005, and
the right-hand chart covers approximately 450,000 firms for which data for the entire observation period are available from fiscal 1996. The
latest data in the right-hand chart are as at fiscal 2015.
Source: Teikoku Databank.
Chart 12
Competition among FIs and their business stability
Relationship between competition index and 
business stability (Z-score)
Distribution of competition index
among regional financial institutions
Z-score
More intense
competition
Less intense 
competition
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
2.4
competition index (P-MC), % pts
2.0
1.6
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
density, %
More intense 
competition
0.0
0.4
0.8
Less intense
competition
FY1990
FY2000
FY2015
1.2
2.4
competition index (P-MC), % pts
2.0
1.6
Note: 1. Z-score is an indicator that measures a financial institution's business stability and is defined as the ratio of a financial institution's loss-
absorbing capacity to the volatility of profits.
2. The left-hand chart shows the cumulative effects of markup (P-MC) changes on the Z-score, by using the following estimated equation:
Z-score = (30.18  (P-MC)  11.52  (P-MC)2) / (1  0.84).
3. The shaded area indicates the range over which a decline in the competition index (P-MC), suggesting more intense competition among
financial institutions, leads to a decline in the Z-score and hence lowers a financial institution's business stability.
4. Density in the right-hand chart is estimated by using the Gaussian kernel function.
5. For details, see the April 2017 issue of the Financial System Report.
Chart 13
Natural rate of interest and deposit and lending margins
Natural rate of interest and 
nominal interest rates
Decomposition of deposit and 
lending margins
 10
8
6
4
2
0
Loan interest rate (A)
Market interest rate (B)
Deposit interest rate (C)
Natural rate of interest
 10
8
6
4
2
0
Lending spread (A-B)
Deposit spread (B-C)
Deposit and lending margins (A-C)
-2
CY
85
90
95
00
05
10
15
-2
CY
85
90
95
00
05
10
15
Note: 1. Loan interest rate is an average contract interest rate on short-term loans outstanding. Aggregate of domestically licensed banks. Market
interest rate is the 1-year government bond yield. Latest data as at the July-September quarter of 2017.
2. Natural rate of interest is estimated following Laubach and Williams (2003). Latest data as at the April-June quarter of 2017.
Source: Bloomberg; Ministry of Finance; BOJ.
Chart 14
Number of bank accounts per capita: international comparison
Number of settlement accounts (excluding savings accounts)
based on internationally comparable statistics
number of accounts
 3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
n
a
p
a
J
i
m
u
g
e
B
l
s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N
  K
U
e
c
n
a
r
F
l
y
a
t
I
y
n
a
m
r
e
G
(*) Covers only demand deposit accounts held at all financial institutions (excluding the Japan Post Bank). Including time and savings 
deposit accounts and accounts held at the Japan Post Bank, etc., the number of personal accounts per capita amounts to about 10.
Note: Data as at end-2011 for U.K., as at end-fiscal 2015 for Japan, and as at end-2015 for other countries.
Source: BIS, "Red Book."
