Vítor Constâncio: Growth in a more resilient Euro area
Remarks  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  a  panel
entitled  "The  Global  Economy:  Prospects  for  Broad-Based  Growth",  at  the  32nd Annual  G30
International Banking Seminar, Washington DC, 15 October 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to be part of such a distinguished panel. In my remarks today, I would like to
reflect on the euro area’s recent economic developments and prospects. In doing so, I will outline
the role monetary policy has played – and will continue to play – in supporting the recovery, while
also  touching  upon  some  of  the  additional  policies  required  to  firmly  secure  a  self-sustained
recovery.
The main message I would like to convey is that the euro area economy is experiencing a broad-
based,  robust  and  resilient  recovery,  which  is  underpinned  by  the  monetary  policy  measures
introduced  by  the  ECB  since  June  2014.  Despite  this  favourable  growth  dynamics,  inflation
developments have been subdued. We remain confident that the continued closing of the output
gap will lead inflation to return to our medium-term objective, yet this return remains conditional
on a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
Looking beyond monetary policy, considerable reforms have been implemented and institutional
progress  has  been  achieved  since  the  crisis,  but  supply-side  policies  are  still  required  at  the
national level to boost potential growth, while at the euro area level, further institutional reforms
are needed to enhance the functioning of EMU.
Recent economic developments and prospects
In the second quarter of 2017, euro area real GDP expanded for the 17th consecutive quarter,
growing by 2.3% year-on-year and exceeding our expectations from earlier in the year. Growth is
also  becoming  more  broad-based  across  euro  area  countries,  showing  the  lowest  dispersion
since the beginning of the monetary union. The flow of survey data in the third quarter has been
encouraging and bodes well for continued growth momentum in the period ahead.
Robust  economic  activity  is  also  being  translated  into  a  substantial  amount  of  job  creation.
Almost 7 million more people are now employed in the euro area than in mid-2013, which implies
that  all  of  the  employment  losses  recorded  during  the  crisis  have  been  offset.  The  improving
labour  market  combined  with  increasing  household  wealth,  strong  consumer  confidence  and
favourable  financing  conditions  should  all  support  continued  robust  private  consumption.
Investment prospects also look promising, which reflects both the need to make up for forgone
investment in previous years as well as the highly accommodative financing conditions which
have been passed through to lower borrowing costs for euro area firms.
The resilience of the recovery reflects the strength of domestic demand which in turn, is being
supported  by  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  stemming  from  the  monetary  policy
measures introduced since June 2014 (see Chart 1).
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
Source: Bloomberg, ECB, ECB calculations.
ECB  staff  counterfactual  simulations  indicate  that  absent  our  measures,  GDP-weighted  euro
area 10-year government bond yields would, at present, be about 154 basis points higher and
lending  rates  to  NFCs  about  68  basis  points  higher.  ECB  staff  estimates  indicate  that  our
measures are contributing to an increase in euro area GDP of around 1.7%, cumulatively over
the  period  2016–2019  (see  Chart  2)  –  well  above  monetary  policy’s  contribution  to  the  two
previous euro area recoveries in 2003Q2-2006Q4 and 2009Q3-2011Q3.
2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 3 / 7
2
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
Sources: ECB computations, SAPI Task Force, September 2017 MPE, BMEs.
Looking ahead, the latest ECB staff projections continue to expect domestic demand to remain
the key driver of euro area growth. Annual real GDP is projected to increase by 2.2% in 2017,
1.8% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019. The risks to the growth outlook are broadly balanced. According
to the latest IMF WEO projections, euro area real GDP is expected to grow by 2.1% in 2017
before moderating to 1.9% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019, which is in line with the ECB projections.
3
There are reasons to believe that the strengthening of economic activity, which so far has been
significantly  supported  by  accommodative  monetary  policy,  will  progressively  be  supported  by
more structural factors. Euro area governments have undertaken substantial policy actions and
reforms  to  redress  pre-crisis  related  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  increase  economic
resilience.   For  instance,  euro  area  countries  which  had  previously  experienced  large  current
account deficits are now in surplus. Moreover, both ECB staff and IMF estimates indicate that the
largest  driver  of  this  adjustment  is  non-cyclical  in  nature,  which  implies  a  higher  likelihood  of
sustainability  as  the  recovery  continues.  Additionally,  business  cycle  synchronisation  across
euro area countries has increased in recent years.  Finally, most countries that had large budget
deficits have now positive primary surpluses. In sum, the euro area is now in a better state to
withstand future economic or financial shocks.
4
Despite robust growth dynamics, inflation developments have been subdued. Euro area headline
inflation  stood  at  1.5%  in  September  2017,  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate  and  is
expected to temporarily decline towards the turn of the year owing to energy-related base-effects.
Measures of underlying inflation have not yet showed convincing signs of a sustained upward
trend (see Chart 3).
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
Sources: Eurostat and ECB calculations .
Looking further ahead and according to the latest ECB staff projections, inflation is expected to
rise  to  1.5%  in  2017,  1.2%  in  2018  and  1.5%  in  2019.  There  are  uncertainties  clouding  the
medium-term outlook for price stability, most notably the recent exchange rate volatility, which
requires  monitoring  with  regard  to  possible  implications  for  inflation  dynamics.  The  inflation
outlook from the recent IMF WEO depicts inflation at 1.5% in 2017 and 1.4% in 2018, which is
broadly in line with ECB projections.
The apparent disconnect between strong economic activity, on the one hand, and low inflation
6
 From a
and wages on the other, is one of the stand-out characteristics of the ongoing recovery.
policymaker’s  perspective,  a  predictable  relationship  between  slack  and  inflation  represents  a
key monetary policy transmission mechanism through which central banks exert their effect on
inflation dynamics.
While there is no agreed upon approach to estimating a Phillips curve linking inflation to slack, on
the  whole  empirical  estimates  indicate  that  the  slope  is  currently  flatter  than  in  the  period
preceding the crisis, with several explanations as to why this might be the case. One reason
relates to the choice of slack measurement, as the crisis may have led to structural changes in
the  labour  market.  For  example,  when  a  broader  measurement  of  unemployment  is  used
(Unemployment  6,  currently 
the  narrower  definition
(Unemployment 3, standing at 9.1%), the slope of the euro area Phillips curve appears to have
become  steeper  in  recent  years.  Other  reasons  proposed  include:  external  factors  including
globalisation, the enhanced role of adaptive expectations in influencing wage and price decisions,
anchored  by  central  bank  targets,  and  finally,  non-linearities  and  time-varying  behaviour  of
just  below  18%)  as  opposed 
to 
7
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
different Phillips curve coefficients. 
Overall, a steepening Phillips curve provides confidence that the continued closing of the output
gap will gradually lead inflation to return to our medium-term objective. Yet, this return remains
conditional on a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
It is against this background that the Governing Council will decide over the autumn period on a
re-calibration of its instruments, with a view to safeguarding the monetary policy impulse that is
still  necessary  to  secure  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  in  a  way  that  is
consistent with our monetary policy aim.
Other policies
Notwithstanding the strength of the ongoing recovery, supply-side policies as well as institutional
reforms are required in order to firmly secure a self-sustainable recovery and a better functioning
euro  area.  Country  level  policies  should  be  aimed  at  increasing  productivity  and  facilitating
innovation and business investment. Turning to Europe and European reforms, the most relevant
ones concern the completion of Banking Union, meaningful progress in the Capital Markets Union
and the creation of an additional budgetary stabilisation function for the euro area. Both the Five
Presidents  Report  on  “Completing  Europe’s  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”  (2015)  and  the
recent EU Commission paper on the “Deepening of the Economic and Monetary Union” (2017),
provide sufficient guidance on the way to proceed towards a stronger monetary union.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Notes: The impact of credit easing is estimated on the basis of an event-study methodology which focuses on
the announcement effects of the June-September package; see the EB article “The transmission of the ECB’s
recent  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures”  (Issue  7  /  2015).  The  impact  of  the  DFR  cut  rests  on  the
announcement  effects  of  the  September  2014  DFR  cut.  APP  encompasses  the  effects  of  January  2015,
December 2015, March 2016, and December 2016 measures. The January 2015 APP impact is estimated on
the basis of two event-studies exercises by considering a broad set of events that, starting from September
2014, have affected market expectations about the programme; see Altavilla, Carboni, and Motto (2015) “Asset
purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area” ECB WP No 1864, and De Santis
(2015), “Impact of the asset purchase programme on euro area government bond yields using market news”,
ECB WP No. 1939. The quantification of the impact of the December 2015 policy package on asset prices rests
on  a  broad-based  assessment  comprising  event  studies  and  model-based  counterfactual  exercises.  The
impact of the March 2016 measures and the impact of the December 2016 measures are assessed via model-
based counterfactual exercises. Lending rates refer to rates to NFCs. *Changes in lending rates are based on
monthly data, the reference period for which is May 2014 to August 2017. Latest observation:4 October 2017.
Notes: HICP inflation and real GDP growth are based on the September 2017 MPE; the median and range
reflect estimates of HICP inflation and real GDP growth over the projection horizon in the absence of monetary
policy support; these estimates are obtained from three different exercises: BMEs, the SAPI Task Force and the
Expert Group. Latest observation: 2017 Q2 for real GDP and 2017 Q3 for HICP.
See remarks by V. Constâncio, “Growth, adjustment and resilience in the euro area” at the Forum Villa d’Este,
Cernobbio, 1 September 2017.
Bayoumi,  T.  and  B.  Eichengreen  (2017),  “Aftershocks  of  monetary  unification:  Hysteresis  with  a  Financial
Twist”, IMF Working Paper No. 17/55.
Notes: The dynamic factor model (U2 Core) is based on the full 93 HICP items from each of 12 countries.
Super-core is based only on those items in HICP excluding food and energy that are sensitive to slack as
measured by the output gap. The range includes exclusion-based measures, trimmed means and a weighted
median. Latest observation: August 2017 and September 2017 for HICP excluding food and energy. Latest
observation: August 2017 and September 2017 for HICP excluding food and energy.
For more details see remarks by V. Constâncio, “Understanding and overcoming low inflation” at the ECB
Conference on “Understanding inflation: lessons from the past, lessons for the future?”, Frankfurt am Main, 21
and 22 September 2017
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
ibid , for a detailed discussion
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
