Mugur Isărescu: Romania, the EU and the euro area
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the "The
Future of the Euro Area and its Enlargement" Conference, Bucharest, 17 October 2017.
 Professor Sapir,
Ladies and gentlemen,
The National Bank of Romania’s Board and I are honored to extend a warm welcome to all of our
distinguished  guests  attending  the  conference  this  morning.  Allow  me  to  wholeheartedly
welcome  our  speaker,  Professor  André  Sapir.  It  has  become  quite  a  tradition  here,  at  the
National Bank of Romania to invite well-renowned lecturers to address the audience on important
topics of the day.
This morning, we are privileged to listen to Prof. Sapir’s lecture on The Future of the Euro Area
and its Enlargement.
Please, allow me to briefly introduce to you Prof. André Sapir. He is a well-known name among
European  economists.  He  is  an  active  member  and  Senior  Fellow  of  Bruegel  Institute  in
Brussels.  Prof.  Sapir  has  a  rich  academic  career  and  important  contributions  in  the  field  and
study  of  economics.  I  wish  to  express  my  appreciation  for  his  diligent  work  dedicated  to  the
strengthening  of  the  conceptual  underpinnings  of  the  European  Union  and  the  Euro  Area’s
economic and financial systems.
For  those  of  you  who  are  not  familiar  with  Bruegel  Institute  in  Brussels  let  me  pinpoint  a  few
facts.
Bruegel was set up in 2005 and has emerged as an important independent and non-doctrinal
European  think  tank  focused  on  economics. According  to  their  mission  statement,  it  aims  to
improve the quality of economic policy with open and fact-based research, analysis and debate,
targeted at improving the quality of economic policy.
At  the  same  time,  we  are  proud  that  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  has  been  a  member  of
Bruegel think tank since 2016.
Returning to our guest speaker:
André  Sapir  is  a  Professor  at  the  Université  Libre  de  Bruxelles  (ULB),  he  also  teaches
“International Economics and European Integration” at the Solvay Brussels School of Economics
and Management. Prof. Sapir has a PhD from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, where he
studied  with  the  famous  trade  economist  Bela  Balassa.  He  was  elected  Member  of  the
Academia Europaea and of the Royal Academy of Belgium for Science and the Arts. He was a
Visiting  Fellow  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  the  World  Bank  and  the  World  Trade
Organization.
Prof.  André  Sapir  has  written  extensively  on  international  economics  including  European
integration, monetary union, international trade, international policy coordination and globalization.
He  worked  for  the  European  Commission  as  Economic  Advisor  to  the  Director-General  for
Economic  and  Financial  Affairs  (1990–2001),  then  he  was  Economic  Advisor  to  President
Romano Prodi and also headed his Economic Advisory Group (2001–2004). From 2005 to 2009
he  was  External  Advisor  to  President  José  Manuel  Barroso.  From  2011  to  2015  he  was
successively  Vice-Chair  and  Chair  of  the  Advisory  Scientific  Committee  and  Member  of  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
General  Board  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  Europe’s  financial  stability
oversight body. I have mentioned his work outside the academic work to emphasize his extended
experience and wholesome view on Europe and the Euro Area.
And  now,  a  few  considerations  about  the  Euro  Area  and  Romania  in  the  European
context:
The  European  financial  environment  has  faced  the  need  for  thorough  reforms.  The  financial
crisis and the difficulties within the Euro zone have led to rethinking the assumptions behind the
Euro zone governance and the links between the European Union’s euro and non-euro member
countries.
The National Bank of Romania maintains a deep interest in reforms of the EU governance that
enhance  its  strength  and  resilience,  in  regional  cohesion,  nominal  and  real  economic
convergence, for the larger objective of Euro currency adoption and Euro Area accession. Euro
area accession represents a strategic target for Romania, which needs a healthy economy in
order to join it on favorable terms.
However, we are facing great challenges with respect to the functioning of the Euro Area and the
European Union in general. The euro area is an evolving target, one that changes and transforms
overtime and, therefore, we are all asking ourselves what the Euro Area’s future will look like and
what we are heading to. Romania can and should play a role in the ongoing debate on the future
of the EU and even of the euro area.
In this context, I am grateful to André for the opportunity to facilitate this exchange of ideas. I invite
our  guest  to  share  his  vision  on  aspects  such  as  economic  policies  development  in  Europe,
economic  and  social  trends,  euro  convergence  and  the  reform  steps  needed.  His  lecture  will
provide an excellent occasion for all of us to get a better grasp on what lies ahead for the Union
and for the Euro Area.
I hope that Prof. Sapir’s lecture will offer each of you a better view of what lies ahead. I am sure
he will willingly answer your questions.
I invite Professor André Sapir to take the floor and I wish you a rewarding debate.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
