Theodore Mitrakos: Normalisation of the monetary policy of major
central  banks  and  possible  implications  for  the  Club  members'
economies - the case of Greece
Speech by Mr Theodoros Mitrakos, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 38th meeting
of the Central Bank Governors' Club of the Central Asia, Black Sea Region & Balkan countries,
Bank of Russia, Moscow, 29 September 2017.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to exchange
thoughts  on  the  potential  impact  of  the  normalisation  of  monetary  policy  in  our  respective
economies. My intervention comprises three parts. Part I provides an overview of non-standard
monetary policy measures across the major central banks and looks at alternative paths to the
normalisation  of  monetary  policy.  Part  II  sketches  the  benefits  for  Greece  from  the
accommodative monetary policy. Part III presents the recent economic developments in Greece
and some thoughts on the potential impact of monetary policy normalisation.
Part I: Normalisation of monetary policy across the major central banks
I.1 An overview of non-standard monetary policy measures
It  has  been  almost  10  years  since  major  central  banks  were  forced  to  confront  a  worldwide
financial  crisis  that  ushered  them  into  a  new  world  of  central  banking.  In  response  to  the
extraordinary  environment,  central  banks  have  engaged 
range  of  ambitious
unconventional/non-standard  monetary  policy  measures,  unprecedented  in  nature,  scope  and
magnitude, including:
in  a 
large-scale asset purchases of government and private sector assets; 
near-zero or negative policy rates; 
forward guidance on both.
Asset purchases have resulted in a huge expansion of central bank balance sheets. Since the
onset of the crisis in 2007, the Bank of England’ s (BoE) balance sheet has grown seven-fold;
the Federal Reserve’s (Fed) five-fold, while that of the European Central Bank (ECB) has more
than tripled. Combined, the balance sheets of the Fed, the Bank of England and the ECB now
exceed $15 trillion, equivalent to almost 45 percent of their GDP.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
I.2 ECB measures: Quantitative easing and other programmes
The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  began  its  large-scale  purchases  of  assets  later  than  its
peers.  In  March  2015,  the  ECB  increased  the  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  by
adding  public  sector  securities  to  its  purchase  programmes  (PSPP),  which  at  the  time
encompassed  covered  bonds  (CBPP3)  and Asset-Backed  Securities  (ABSPP).  In  2016,  the
programme was extended to include corporate bonds (CSPP).
Purchases of marketable debt instruments through the expanded asset purchase programme
(EAPP) amounted, at the end of August 2017, to € 2.1tn. The largest part (€ 1.7 tn) is attributed to
the public sector purchase programme (PSPP), while the amounts attributed to the third covered
bond purchase programme (CBPP3), the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP) and
the asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP) stood at € 227 bn, € 107 bn and €
24 bn, respectively.
Furthermore, to stimulate bank lending to the real economy, the ECB also conducted a series of
Targeted Longer-Term Refinancing Operations (TLTROs). The take-up in the two series of the
TLTRO operations has also been significant: total TLTRO drawings from euro area banks now
stand at about €760 bn.
Looking  at  the  breakdown  of  debt  securities  under  PSPP  by  country,  60%  of  the  cumulative
monthly net purchases are accounted for by Germany, France and Italy. Also, around 11% of
total purchases concern supranational bonds.
Regarding the effectiveness of the ECB stimulus programmes, they have:
- Contributed to a robust and rather broad based recovery:
Eurozone  growth  is  projected  to  reach  2.2  percent  this  year,  its  fastest  rate  in  10  years.
Economic expansion has been ongoing for 17 consecutive quarters. 
The recovery is having a profound effect on the labour market: around 6.4 million jobs have
been created since 2013.
- Added strong downward pressures on financing costs
Rates have fallen steeply across asset classes, maturities and countries, as well as across
different categories of borrowers.
- Lowered cross-country heterogeneity
Dispersion of GDP and employment growth rates among euro area member states have
fallen to record lows.
Nonetheless, the economic recovery has yet to translate into higher inflation:
Euro area inflation has undershot 2 percent for the fifth consecutive year. 
It is expected to continue to undershoot the ECB target for some time — possibly through
2019. 
Measures of underlying inflation remain overall subdued and have yet to show convincing
signs of a pick-up. 
The stronger euro is also exerting downward pressure on consumer prices. Since the start
of the year, the euro has risen by about 14 per cent against the dollar.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
 I.3 Alternative paths to normalization and potential impact
Overall, the policies aiming to contain deflationary pressures have been effective in stabilising the
financial system and thereby preventing a deep economic downturn.
Some ten years later, the world economy has entered a synchronised growth phase. All three of
the world’s economic powerhouses – North America, Europe and China – are growing in unison.
With the global recovery firming up and global inflation rising, some major central banks might
now  be  looking  to  gradually  reverse  course.  The  key  challenge  for  monetary  policy  is  how  to
unwind  this  accommodation  in  the  least  disruptive  manner  in  terms  of  inflation,  output  and
financial market stability.
In  terms  of  the  broader  alternative  strategies  to  normalisation,  the  following  paths  could  be
envisaged:
First  seeking  to  guide  policy  rates  higher,  before  initiating  downward  balance  sheet
adjustments (as in the United States); 
Starting to downsize the balance sheet before initiating a tightening of interest rates; 
Undertaking both in tandem.
The sequence in the implementation of balance sheet and interest rate measures, as well as the
relative weights, could have a differing impact on the domestic economies, as well as cross-
border spillovers, including through exchange rates and other financial channels.
Looking at specific central banks, the continued discrepancy between strengthening economic
activity and subdued inflation dynamics poses a puzzle for the monetary policy of the ECB. In the
absence of sufficient evidence of progress towards a durable and self-sustaining convergence in
the path of inflation, a scaling-back of the exceptional degree of monetary policy accommodation
is not warranted. Deliberations on the future course of the ECB monetary policy are ongoing,
especially regarding considerations about its asset purchase strategy beyond December 2017.
Adjustments in the monetary policy stance should be prudent and gradual, so as to ensure that
any withdrawal of stimulus does not undermine the recovery amid the lingering uncertainties. In
this vein, clear and timely communication of the Governing Council’s assessment is of utmost
importance. Given that markets can be sensitive to incoming information, timely communication
is  key  to  avoiding  an  extreme  reaction,  or  “taper  tantrum",  as  experienced  following  the  first
announcements  by  the  FED  that  it  would  taper  its  QE  purchases  back  in  2013.  The  recent
experience  warrants  caution.  Even  hints  at  policy  normalisation  may  cause  an  unwarranted
tightening  in  financial  conditions,  as  evidenced  by  the  market  movements  after  the  speech  of
President Draghi in Sintra on 27 June 2017.
Across the Atlantic, the Federal Reserve, has advanced in normalisation with four rate rises in
18 months, which have brought the target rate on the federal funds to 1.25 per cent, from a target
of  0-0.25  per  cent  in  the  seven-year  period  to  December  2015,  and  an  announcement  to
cautiously start the normalisation of its balance sheet already in October this year.. Despite the –
somewhat reluctant– tightening of the Fed, the US monetary policy could actually be assessed
as still being rather loose. The global capital flows from the emerging markets that are invested in
the US contribute to this easing.
Turning now to the Bank of England, in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum (summer 2016),
the Bank cut its interest rate to a record low of 0.25% after more than 7 years of static interest
rates. It also boosted its QE scheme, while committing extra funds to encourage banks to lend.
The rhetoric however has become more aggressive over the past few months, notably due to
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
surging  inflation  –  brought  on  by  the  weakened  pound  since  the  referendum  –  despite  a
slowdown in the economy as the country prepares to leave the European Union. With respect to
normalisation strategy, the Bank of England has in the past given indications that rate rises would
precede any asset sales. According to Governor Carney back in 2013, the first move would be to
tighten  conventional  monetary  policy,  for  some  time,  or  to  some  degree,  before  considering
adjustments to the size of the balance sheet.
Overall, in the context of the ongoing global economic recovery, the major central banks can
adjust  the  parameters  of  their  policy  stance  at  a  rather  small  cost  in  terms  of  market
disruption/dislocation.  As  markets  anticipate  the  first  tightening  steps  from  the  major  central
banks, a channel that is likely to show some volatility is the exchange rate channel. This adds to
uncertainty, as –among other things- it has implications for the medium-term outlook for price
stability.  In  addition,  a  possible  overshooting  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  could  lead  to
fluctuations  in  the  trade  imbalances,  including  those  of  the  euro  area.  The  outcome  of  the
normalisation process is likely to be determined by the interplay and the relative stance of the
policies  of  major  central  banks  as  they  move  towards  a  less  accommodative  stance  in  the
coming years, as well as by several structural features of the different economies. In any case,
appropriate communication is vital to limiting any possible disruptions in the markets. 
Part II: The benefits for Greece from the accommodative monetary policy
In  Greece,  the  transmission  mechanism  had  become  fragmented  and  the  accommodative
monetary policy was not being transmitted fully. In part, the transmission problems reflected the
significant liquidity squeeze that Greek banks experienced as they lost access to international
markets and found the value of their collateral falling, as yields on Greek government bonds rose
and collateral rules were tightened on a number of occasions. Furthermore, given the specific
circumstances prevailing in the Greek economy, Greek government bonds are not eligible for the
the purchase programme of public sector securities (PSPP ). Purchases of Greek private sector
assets  that  could,  in  principle,  be  eligible  for  the  Covered  Bonds, ABS  and  Corporate  Sector
purchase programmes have so far been close to zero due to constraints relating to the rating of
the available assets.
Nonetheless, Greece benefited indirectly. Positive spillovers from the accommodative monetary
policy have been at play, and have worked through various transmission channels:
The  signalling  channel:  forward  guidance  by  the  ECB  to  maintain  low  interest  rates  and
purchase  assets  into  the  future  has  helped  lower  overall  interest  rates  that  influence  the
financing cost of businesses and households. 
The portfolio rebalancing channel: the sellers of sovereign bonds to the ECB may replace
these bonds with other securities (for example debt of other sovereigns or bank / corporate
debt) resulting in lower yields for a broader range of riskier assets not participating in the
programme.  This  includes  Greek  assets,  and  is  illustrated  by  the  recent  successful
issuance of a Greek government bond as well as of bonds of several corporates. 
The confidence channel: the decisive and unprecedented interventions across markets by
the  ECB  improved  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  the  euro  area,  leading  to  a  steep
decline  of  tail  risks.  By  safeguarding  the  euro,  the  policies  have  provided  an  anchor  of
economic as well as social stability in Greece.
Specifically, Greece benefited from:
Low  interest  rates  and  forward  guidance  have  served  the  Greek  banks  and  the  Greek
economy. 
Besides  the  regular  monetary  policy  operations,  Greek  banks  also  participated  in  the
TLTROs (targeted longer-term refinancing operations) incentivising banks to lend to the real
economy. TLTROs also ensure the provision of liquidity at very low interest rates over long
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
periods of time, thereby safeguarding the stability of the financial sector. 
Furthermore, Greek banks obtained liquidity through the ELA mechanism, thus preserving
financial stability and avoiding disruptions of the transmission mechanism in times of stress.
The  aforementioned  monetary  policy  measures  were  reflected  in  the  evolution  of  the  Bank  of
Greece  balance  sheet.  Regular  monetary  policy  and  ELA  refinancing  and,  more  recently,  its
holdings  of  assets  in  the  context  of  the  EAPP  (Expanded Asset  Purchase  Programme)  have
accounted for the bulk of the increase in the Bank of Greece balance sheet. It should be noted
that the Bank of Greece purchases securities from supranational organisations in the context of
the PSPP and securities of other euro area countries in the context of the CBPP3 according to
its capital key. Based on the latest figures (August 2017), the securities held for monetary policy
purposes by the Bank of Greece amount to around €55 bn. In July this year, the balance sheet
was four times its pre-crisis level, after having grown almost fivefold in February 2012 and again
in June 2015 following the two episodes of strong volatility in markets.
Part III: Recent economic developments in Greece and the potential impact of monetary
policy normalisation
III.1 Greek economy: Recent developments and prospects
Confidence  about  Greece’s  economic  prospects  in  general,  and  about  the  Greek  banks  in
particular, has been gradually restored. This is reflected in the following:
Successful  return  of  the  sovereign  to  the  markets  with  the  issuance  of  a  new  5-year
government bond. 
A sharp decline in the Greek government bond yields and their spread versus core countries’
bonds,  while  the  slope  of  the  Greek  Government  Bonds  yield  curve  turned  positive  and
became  steeper,  implying  improved  investor  perceptions  for  the  outlook  of  the  Greek
economy — in line with the assessment of the rating agency Fitch which upgraded the rating
of Greece — as well as a repricing of risks. 
Improvement in the liquidity conditions of Greek banks, as banks have improved their access
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  the  interbank  market,  while  deposits  show  signs  of  improvement.  This  is  illustrated  by
banks’ declining recourse to central bank funding (including to ELA) in the past two years. 
Improved bank profitability and comfortable capital adequacy ratios. 
Lower bank lending rates for firms, and slower deleveraging of banks’ loan portfolios. 
Improved external financing conditions, as bank credit to non-financial corporations (NFCs)
has stopped declining since early 2016 and market financing of NFCs has increased. These
are positive signs that Greek companies are gradually getting access to market financing.
This can substitute for part of the lack of bank credit and help finance investment.
The improved confidence in the Greek economy and the banking system allowed for significant
relaxations  of  the  capital  controls  in  place  since  June  2015,  and  is  evident  in  the  increase  of
private deposits by about € 6 billion since then.
Following a prolonged period of recession, the Greek economy has once again a real chance to
embark on a new growth path (see Figure 4). After the headwinds at the end of 2016 due to
delays  in  the  implementation  of  the  adjustment  programme,  the  economy  moved  into
expansionary territory in the first two quarters of 2017, with real GDP growth amounting to 0.4%
y-o-y and 0.8% y-o-y, respectively.
The completion of the second review in June 2017 allowed the positive momentum to continue.
Recent soft data indicate a rebound in confidence.
Economic sentiment continued to increase in August (to 99) on the back of an improvement
in consumer confidence which reached a two-year high, as well as in business expectations
in the services sector. 
The  Manufacturing  PMI  has  been  in  expansionary  territory  in  the  last  three  months,
remaining  above  the  threshold  of  50;  notably,  in August  the  PMI  reached  an  8-year  high
(52.2), signalling strong growth in the Greek manufacturing sector.
Following these developments, it is expected that for the whole of 2017 GDP will rise by around
1.7%. The prospects for 2018 and 2019 are also positive, with GDP growth being projected at
2.4% and 2.7%, respectively.
On  the  employment  side,  over  the  past  three  years  the  private  sector  has  been  creating  on
average more than 100,000 new jobs per year, while the employment sub-index of the PMI in
August suggested a record increase in employment (the highest since May 2002). However, the
unemployment rate, although on a declining trend, still remains very high (June 2017: 21.1%).
Turning to prices, deflationary pressures were contained in 2016, while in the first seven months
of 2017 prices recorded a mild increase. Over the period 2017 to 2019, inflation is expected to be
around 1%.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The abovementioned outlook is subject to both downside and upside risks:
Some downside risks to the economic outlook relate to delays in the conclusion of the third
review of the adjustment programme, the impact of increased taxation on economic activity
and reform implementation, and the effect from global geopolitical uncertainty. 
On the other hand, upside risks are related to a quick completion of the third review, the
further  and  sustainable  access  to  international  markets  and  the  final  exit  from  the
programme in a year’s time.
Finally, the debt relief measures to ensure sustainability of public debt must be specified as soon
as  possible,  eliminating  possible  new  sources  of  uncertainty.  This  would  facilitate  access  to
international  financial  markets  in  a  sustainable  way  and  would  help  towards  abolishing  capital
controls and returning to financial normalcy. Postponing the decision on debt relief further down
the  road  does  not  serve  the  purpose  of  a  sustainable  comeback  to  financial  markets  and  a
sustainable recovery of the Greek economy.
III.2 Potential impact of monetary policy normalisation on the Greek economy
The continuation of the highly accommodative monetary policy stance in the euro area fosters an
economic environment conducive to growth.
However, given that the channels through which the non-standard measures were transmitted to
Greece were either indirect or related to sentiment, the impact of normalisation can be expected
to be smaller in Greece than that in other countries of the euro area. Indeed, financial conditions
have recently been improving in Greece, as government bond yields have fallen, banks and non-
financial companies have regained market access, and deleveraging has slowed. A tightening of
the monetary stance of the ECB is unlikely to stand in the way of continued improvements in
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial conditions.
Moreover,  the  Greek  economy  has  already  entered  a  phase  of  accelerating  growth,  and  this
should also help limit the detrimental effects of normalisation.
One  possible  channel  through  which  normalisation  might  affect  growth  is  via  exchange  rate
fluctuations exerting a negative impact on exports.
The  effect  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  cannot  be  quantified  at  this  stage.  The  extent  to
which  we  are  likely  to  see  a  strong  appreciation  of  the  euro  will  depend  on  the  pace  of
normalisation in the euro area relative to the pace of normalisation in other countries. The
fact that around half of Greek exports are to non-euro area countries does imply that the
exchange rate matters. 
However, the potential negative impact will be mitigated by the positive dynamics that have
developed over the past years, as bold reforms in the labour and product markets helped to
restore competitiveness, supporting the share of exports in GDP, and the rebalancing of the
economy towards tradable, export-oriented sectors. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
