Monetary Transmission in India: 
Why is it important and why hasn’t it worked well? 
-  Dr. Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India 
Inaugural Aveek Guha Memorial Lecture 
Thursday 16th November 2017  
Homi Bhabha Auditorium 
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) 
When  I  travel  from  my  residence  in  Vile  Parle  (W)  to  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
Central Office in Fort, I pass each way Kenilworth – the birth place of late Homi Jehangir 
Bhabha. It is a good way to start and end the day, being reminded not just of his immense 
intellect but also of his deep sense of service to India.  I am thus grateful to Professor Dipan 
Ghosh,  who  was  the  Dean  of  Students  during  my  time  at  IIT  Bombay,  for  inviting  me  to 
speak today in the Homi Bhabha Auditorium, and to Dr Subhendu Guha, for having endowed 
this lecture series at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) in memory of his dear 
son, Aveek Guha. “Aveek,” a beautiful Bengali name meaning “fearless”, is exactly how all 
research needs to be, taking on seemingly insurmountable challenges, fighting it out with grit, 
and along the way, dissecting, reflecting, and distilling truth to its essence until it is unearthed 
in  some  recognizable  form  from  beneath  its  scratchy  exterior.  The  TIFR  is  a  daunting 
proposition  for  any  researcher  to  speak  at.  I  hope  that  I  can  progress  some  way  towards 
meeting its highest standards in the form of this talk, by raising an issue that is germane to all 
of us in today’s forum and that is worthy of being tackled in due course – that of, Monetary 
Transmission in India: Why is it important and why hasn’t it worked well?   
Let me start with some technical jargon and then explain from first principles the part 
of it I wish to focus on. With the amendment of the Reserve Bank of India Act in 2016, the 
“primary objective of the monetary policy is to maintain price stability while keeping in mind 
the  objective  of  growth”.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  constituted  under  the 
amended  RBI  Act  is  mandated  to  determine  the  policy  repo  rate  to  achieve  the  specified 
medium-term inflation target of 4 per cent, within a band of +/- 2 per cent. For the Reserve 
Bank to achieve its mandate effectively, it is extremely important that an economic process 
referred to as “monetary transmission” works seamlessly. Any impediment to this process of 
monetary transmission hampers the achievement of our mandate. We, therefore, monitor and 
 1 
analyse monetary transmission on a regular basis, and undertake corrective steps to enhance 
its efficacy, if it seems broken or critically imperfect. 
What is monetary transmission?  It is essentially the process through which the policy 
action  of  the  central  bank  is  transmitted  to  the  ultimate  objective  of  stable  inflation  and 
growth. The policy action consists typically of changing the interest rate at which it borrows 
or lends “reserves” (in our case, Rupees) on an overnight basis with commercial banks. In 
other  words,  monetary  transmission  is  the  entire  process  starting  from  the  change  in  the 
policy  rate  by  the  central  bank  to  various  money  market  rates  such  as  inter-bank  lending 
rates, to bank deposit rates, to bank lending rates to households and firms, to government and 
corporate bond yields, and to asset prices such as stock prices and house prices, culminating 
in its impact on inflation and growth. The transmission mechanism hinges crucially on how 
monetary policy changes influence households’ and firms’ behaviour. This change can take 
place  through  several  channels.    Studying  these  channels  is  a  vast  subject  in  finance  and 
economics  literature.  Therefore,  given  the  time  constraint,  I  will  only  cover  a  few  key 
aspects. I will then explain how and why monetary transmission has, and more importantly, 
has not, worked in India, and touch also briefly upon how we could improve it. 
Channels of Monetary Transmission:   
Changes  in  the  central  bank’s  policy  rate  impact  the  economy  with  lags  through  a 
variety of channels, the primary ones being (i) interest rate channel, (ii) credit channel, (iii) 
exchange rate channel, and (iv) asset price channel.  
Let  us  start  with  how  the  interest  rate  channel  works.  The  immediate  impact  of  a 
change  in  the  monetary  policy  rate  is  on  the  short-term  money  market  rates  (such  as  call 
money rate, certificates of deposits, commercial papers, treasury bills), key financial markets 
(exchange  rate,  equity  prices),  and  also  on  medium  and  long-term  instruments  (yields  on 
dated government securities and corporate bonds). The impact is typically quick and broadly 
one-to-one from the policy rate to short-term money markets rates such as the call money rate 
which is the unsecured or uncollateralized inter-bank lending rate: A bank will be willing to 
part with its reserves overnight to another bank only if it earns at least the rate that it could 
earn by parking these funds with the central bank; and, if banks compete adequately for such 
lending, then the rate will in fact track closely the central bank’s policy rate. The impact of 
 2 
the policy rate on other market rates varies across tenors and instruments depending upon the 
liquidity conditions and other factors such as how interest rates vary at different maturities. 
In turn, the central bank’s changes in its policy rate are expected to impact the banks’ 
cost of funds, both the rates they would pay to depositors and the rates they would demand 
for  making  loans. For example, when a central bank reduces the policy repo rate with the 
intention to support aggregate demand in the economy, the expectation is that there would be 
a  reduction  in  the  banks’  cost  of  funds  and  lending  rates,  and  in  the  spectrum  of  market 
interest rates (and vice versa when the policy rate is increased). Lower lending interest rates 
of banks provide a boost to demand for bank credit from various segments of the society, for 
instance,  from  individuals  and  households  for  loans  for  consumer  durables  (such  as 
automobiles)  and  for  housing;  and  from  entrepreneurs  for  new  or  increased  investment  in 
plant  and  machinery.  An  increased  demand  for  automobiles,  housing,  and  machinery 
generates increased demand for the inputs including labour in these industries, and hence, an 
increase in overall demand, incomes, and output in the economy. As this process continues, it 
eventually puts upward pressure on wages of labor and prices of inputs, and this way, raises 
inflation.  A central bank mandated to maintain stable prices while taking account of growth 
thus faces a trade-off while lowering or raising its policy rate. 
The implicit assumption here is that bank balance sheets are strong and in a position 
to step-up quickly the supply of credit in response to lower funding cost and higher demand 
for credit – the bank lending or the credit channel of transmission. Cross-country evidence 
indicates that monetary transmission is greatly hindered if bank balance sheets are weak in 
that they do not have much loss-absorption capacity to deal squarely with their problem loans 
– indeed, the evidence suggests that there might be ever-greening of bad loans, and increased 
‘zombie’  lending,  lending  to  distressed  firms  at  subsidized  rates  to  kick  the  can  of  loan 
defaults down the road, resulting in misallocation of resources, productivity losses and weak 
growth.  This way, attempts to stimulate growth with aggressive policy rate cuts when there 
are  bank  balance-sheet  problems  get  wasted  and  can  even  backfire  in  the  form  of  mal-
investments, creating false hopes of a growth boost and relaxing the pedal on deeper balance-
sheet  and  structural  reforms  of  the  banking  sector.1  The  effectiveness  of  this  bank  credit 
channel is a critical issue in the current juncture in India to which I will come back later.  
                                                            
1 Acharya, V.V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger, and C.W. Hirsch (2016), ‘Whatever it Takes: The Real Effects of 
Unconventional Monetary Policy’, Working Paper, New York University Stern School of Business. 
 3 
  Lower interest rates also boost asset prices such as housing and equity prices as these 
can  now  be  purchased  at  cheaper  borrowing  costs.  The  resulting  boost  to  household  / 
corporate wealth and improved cash flows on the back of lower interest rates also add to the 
demand  impulses.  This  is  the  asset  price  channel  of  monetary  transmission.  Higher  asset 
prices can enhance the value of the collateral or net worth of the borrowers, interacting with 
the bank lending or credit channel, enhancing the capacity to borrow more and at competitive 
rates, reinforcing the impulses to aggregate demand.  
Finally,  lower  domestic  interest  rates  could  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  the  domestic 
currency, on the one hand making exports more competitive in the global market and adding 
to domestic demand and economic activity, but on the other hand, could also have a direct 
upward  impact  on  the  domestic  currency  prices  of  imported  inputs,  making  imports  (for 
example, crude oil) costlier. This is the exchange rate channel of transmission.  
All  the  channels  that  I  have  described  above  –  the  interest  rate  channel,  the  bank 
lending or credit channel, the asset price channel, and the exchange rate channel – are not 
stand alone channels; rather, these work at the same time, and may reinforce or interact with 
each  other,  so  that  their  individual  impact  is  difficult  to  disentangle.  It  also  needs  to  be 
recognised that the transmission mechanism is complex. The speed and strength at which the 
central bank’s policy rate changes travel to the rest of the economy could vary widely from 
country to country depending on the structure of the economy and the state of its financial 
system.  
Monetary Policy Lags  
The available empirical evidence for India suggests that monetary policy actions are 
felt with a lag of 2-3 quarters on output and with a lag of 3-4 quarters on inflation, and the 
impact  persists  for  8-12  quarters.  Among  the  channels  of  transmission,  the  interest  rate 
channel has been found to be the strongest.2 Given that monetary policy impacts output and 
inflation with long (and often variable) lags, it is critical for monetary policy actions to be 
forward-looking,  i.e.,  monetary  policy  needs  to  respond  to  expected  output  and  inflation 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
2 Report of the Expert Committee to Revise and Strengthen the Monetary Policy Framework (Chairman: Urjit R. 
Patel), 2014, Reserve Bank of India. The lags of 2-4 quarters that I just noted are the average lags over the 
sample periods of various studies, and the actual lags at any given point of time could be vastly different from 
these average lags, depending upon factors such as the stage of the domestic and the global business cycle, the 
domestic liquidity and financial conditions, the fiscal stance, the health of the domestic banking sector and the 
non-banking sector. 
 4 
developments. Of course, the expected evolution of output and inflation is uncertain, thereby 
rendering the transmission analysis even more challenging, adding to the complexity of the 
central  bank’s  decision-making  (and  creating  exciting  opportunities  for  its  critiques!).  The 
key  point  is  that  if  parts  of  the  transmission  machinery  are  broken,  then  monetary  policy 
would be less effective.   
Transmission from Policy Rate to Bank Lending Rates in India: Performance 
The Indian financial system remains bank-dominated, though the share of non-bank 
finance companies (NBFCs) and markets (corporate bonds, commercial paper, equity, etc.) in 
overall financing of the economy is steadily rising.  Hence, the overall efficacy of monetary 
transmission in India hinges critically on the extent and the pace with which banks, taking a 
cue from – and induced by –  the changes in the policy repo rate, adjust their deposit and 
lending rates and meet adequately the economy’s demand for credit. Overall, data suggests 
that  the  pass-through  from  policy  rate  changes  to  bank  lending  rates  has  been  slow  and 
muted.  This  lack  of  adequate  monetary  transmission  remains  a  key  policy  concern  for  the 
Reserve Bank as it blunts the impact of its policy changes on economic activity and inflation.  
Since the deregulation of interest rates in the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank has made 
several attempts to improve the speed and extent of the monetary pass-through by refining the 
process  of  setting  lending  interest  rates  by  banks,  while  at  the  same  time  imparting 
transparency to borrowers and flexibility to banks in the process of interest rate setting. We 
have  transited  from  the  prime  lending  rate  (PLR)  system  (1994)  to  the  benchmark  prime 
lending rate (BPLR) system (2003), the base rate system (2010), and the present marginal 
cost of funds based lending rate (MCLR) system (2016). Let me explain these interest rate 
setting regimes briefly, before I turn to an assessment of the performance of the (legacy) Base 
Rate and (prevalent) MCLR systems. 
In India, as in a number of other countries, a large proportion of loans is at floating 
rates, i.e., the interest rate charged to the borrower keeps changing depending on the reset 
periodicity. The floating rate is linked to some “benchmark rate” (which ideally varies over 
time  in  consonance  with  the  changing  macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions  and,  in 
particular, the central bank’s policy rate). Banks also charge a spread over the benchmark to 
factor  in  term  premia  and  credit  risk,  among  other  factors.  The  actual  lending  rate  is  the 
benchmark  plus  the  spread.  The  benchmark  could  be  internal  or  external;  an  internal 
 5 
benchmark will be based on elements which are in part under the control of the bank such as 
cost of funds, while an external benchmark is outside the control of the bank (for example, it 
could be market determined rate such as Certificate of Deposit rate or Treasury Bill rate or 
Inter-Bank Offer Rate, or it could simply be the central bank’s policy rate). The virtue of an 
external  benchmark  is  that  it  is  transparent,  common  across  banks,  and  borrowers  can 
compare various loan offers by simply comparing spreads over the benchmark (all else, such 
as maturity of the loan, being equal). As market rates normally move in line with the central 
bank’s  policy  rate,  an  external  benchmark  is  globally  considered  and  adopted  as  more 
appropriate than an internal benchmark for transmitting monetary policy signals. In India, the 
Reserve  Bank  has  provided  the  banks  flexibility  to  use  both  the  internal  and  external 
benchmarks,  but  the  banks  seem  to  have  preferred  internal  benchmarks  over  external 
benchmarks on two key grounds: first, the internal benchmark reflects their cost of funds, and 
second, it has been perceived that there have not been until recently any robust and vibrant 
external benchmarks.  
In October 1994, when the Reserve Bank deregulated lending rates for credit limits 
over ` 2 lakh, banks were required to declare their prime lending rates (PLR) - the interest 
rate charged for the most creditworthy borrowers - taking into account factors such as cost of 
funds and transaction costs. The PLR was, thus, expected to act as a floor for lending above ` 
2  lakh.  However,  the  experience  with  its  working  was  not  satisfactory  mainly  for  two 
reasons:  (i)  both  the  PLR  and  the  spread  charged  over  the  PLR  varied  widely,  and 
inexplicably  so,  across  banks;  and  perhaps  more  importantly,  (ii)  the  PLRs  of  banks  were 
rigid and inflexible in relation to the overall direction of interest rates in the economy. 
In view of these concerns, the Reserve Bank advised banks in April 2003 to announce 
Benchmark PLRs (BPLRs), taking into account the cost of funds, operational costs, minimum 
margin to cover regulatory requirements (provisioning and capital charge), and profit margin. 
The  BPLR  system  also  fell  short  of  its  desired  objective  of  enhancing  transparency  and 
serving  as  the  reference  rate  for  pricing  of  loan  products,  with  a  large  part  of  the  lending 
taking place at interest rates below the announced BPLRs. The share of sub-BPLR lending 
was as high as 77 per cent in September 2008, rendering it difficult to assess the transmission 
of policy rate changes of the Reserve Bank to lending rates of banks. The residential housing 
loans and the consumer durable loans were outside the purview of the BPLR. As such, sub-
 6 
BPLR  lending  became  a  major  distortion  in  terms  of  cross-subsidisation  across  borrower 
categories. 
Next,  the  drawbacks  of  the  BPLR  system  led  to  the  introduction  of  the  base  rate 
system in July 2010. The base rate was also based, inter alia, on the costs of borrowed funds; 
an indicative formula for arriving at the base rate was also provided. The base rate was to be 
the minimum rate for all loans (except for some specified categories) with the actual lending 
rate charged to the borrowers being the base rate plus borrower-specific charge or spread. In 
practice, the  flexibility accorded to  banks  in  the  determination  of  cost  of  funds  –  average, 
marginal or blended cost – caused opacity in the determination of lending rates by banks and 
clouded  an  accurate  assessment  of  the  speed  and  strength  of  the  transmission.  Moreover, 
banks often adjusted the spread over the base rate to benefit the new borrowers while leaving 
the transmission through the base rate weak for existing borrowers. 
The  weaknesses  and  rigidities  observed  with  the  transmission  under  the  base  rate 
system led to the present system, i.e., the MCLR system effective April 1, 2016. With banks 
required to determine their benchmark lending rates taking into account the marginal cost of 
funds  [unlike  the  base  rate  system  where  banks  had  the  discretion  to  choose  between  the 
average cost or the marginal cost (or blended cost) of funds], lending rates were expected to 
be  more  sensitive  to  the  changes  in  the  policy  rate  under  the  MCLR  system  vis-à-vis  its 
predecessor (the base rate). The actual lending rate is based on MCLR plus a spread (business 
strategy  and  credit  risk  premium).  The  base  rate  system  was  allowed  to  be  in  operation 
concomitantly for the loans already contracted, pending their maturity or a shift to the MCLR 
system at mutually agreeable terms between the bank and the borrower.  
 
The expected benefits of the MCLR system – better transparency, more flexibility and 
faster transmission – have, however, continued to elude as documented in the Reserve Bank’s 
recent study - “Report of the Internal Study Group to Review the Working of the Marginal 
Cost of Funds Based Lending Rate System” (Chairman: Dr. Janak Raj), the analysis wherein 
indicates that the transmission: 
•  has been slow and incomplete under both the base rate and the MCLR systems, although 
it has improved  since November 2016 under the pressure of large surplus liquidity in the 
system post demonetisation (Table 1).  
•  was significant on fresh loans, but muted for outstanding loans (base rate and MCLR).  
 7 
•  was uneven across borrowing categories.  
•  was  asymmetric  over  monetary  policy  cycles  – higher  during  the  tightening  phase  and 
lower during the easing phase – irrespective of the interest rate system.3  
Table 1: Transmission from the Policy Repo Rate to Banks’ Deposit and Lending Rates 
  Period 
October 2017 over 
end-December 2014 
October 2017 over 
April 1, 2016 
Memo: 
January 2015 to 
October 2016 
 
April 1, 2016 to  
October 2016 
Term Deposit Rates 
Deposit Rate  WADTDR  Median Base 
Median Term 
Rate 
(Variation in percentage points) 
Lending Rates 
Median  
MCLR (1-
year) 
WALR - 
Outstanding 
Rupee Loans 
WALR - 
Fresh Rupee 
Loans 
-1.66 
-0.94 
-1.99 
-1.08 
-0.75 
-0.15 
 -1.15 
-1.39 
-0.75 
-1.92 
-0.94 
Repo 
Rate 
-2.00 
-0.75 
Pre-Demonetisation 
-1.75 
-0.99 
-1.26 
-0.61 
 -0.75 
-0.97 
-0.50 
-0.27 
-0.35 
-0.01 
Post Demonetisation 
-0.15 
-0.11 
0.01 
-0.14 
-1.00 
-0.64 
-0.95 
-0.67 
-0.25 
November 2016 to  
October 2017 
WADTDR: Weighted Average Domestic Term Deposit Rate.      
WALR: Weighted Average Lending Rate.     
MCLR: Marginal Cost of Funds based Lending Rate. 
*: MCLR system was put in place in April 2016. 
Latest data for WALRs and WADTDR pertain to September 2017.  
Source: Reserve Bank of India. 
 
-0.73 
Transmission from Policy Rate to Bank Lending Rates: Some Issues 
What explains the slow and incomplete pass-through from the policy rate changes to 
the lending rates? Two broad factors have dampened transmission to the lending rates.  
First, a sizeable legacy loan portfolio of banks is still linked to the base rate (about 30 
per  cent  of  the  outstanding  bank  loans).  Lending  rates  under  the  base  rate  system  are 
relatively  stickier  than  the  loans  linked  to  MCLR.  During  the  current  easing  cycle  of 
monetary policy, as against 200 bps cumulative cut in the repo rate, the base rate has declined 
                                                            
3 For instance, the pass-through to outstanding loans from the repo rate was around 60 per 
cent during the tightening phase (July 2010 to March 2012), while it was less than 40 per cent 
during the subsequent easing phase (April 2012 to June 2013) 
 8 
by about 80 bps. Since the introduction of the MCLR in April 2016, as against the cumulative 
cut in repo rate by 50 bps, the base rate has declined by just about 20 bps (Charts 1a and 1b).  
The  Study  Group’s  analysis  suggested  that  banks  deviated  in  an  ad  hoc  manner  from  the 
specified methodologies for calculating the base rate and the MCLR to either inflate the base 
rate  and  MCLR  or  prevent  the  base  rate  and  MCLR  from  falling  in  line  with  the  cost  of 
funds.4  
Chart 1a: Transmission to  Base Rate and MCLR 
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
10.50
10.00
9.50
9.00
8.50
8.00
7.50
7.00
6.50
6.00
5.50
4
1
-
c
e
D
5
1
-
b
e
F
5
1
-
r
p
A
5
1
-
n
u
J
5
1
-
g
u
A
5
1
-
t
c
O
5
1
-
c
e
D
6
1
-
b
e
F
6
1
-
r
p
A
6
1
-
n
u
J
6
1
-
g
u
A
6
1
-
t
c
O
6
1
-
c
e
D
7
1
-
b
e
F
7
1
-
r
p
A
7
1
-
n
u
J
7
1
-
g
u
A
7
1
-
t
c
O
1Yr Median MCLR
Median base rate
Policy Repo Rate
                                                             
4 The ad hoc adjustments included, inter alia, (i) inappropriate calculation of the cost of funds; (ii) no change in 
the base rate even as the cost of deposits declined significantly; (iii) sharp increase in the return on net worth out 
of tune with past track record or future prospects to offset the impact of reduction in the cost of deposits on the 
lending rate; and (iv) inclusion of new components in the base rate formula to adjust the rate to a desired level. 
The slow transmission to the base rate loan portfolio was further accentuated by the long (annual) reset periods. 
 9 
11.00
10.50
10.00
9.50
9.00
8.50
  (
 
e
t
a
R
 
e
s
a
B
d
n
a
 
R
L
C
M
 8.00
5.50
Chart 1b : Transmission to Base Rate and MCLR 
5.75
6.00
6.25
6.50
6.75
7.00
7.25
7.50
7.75
8.00
8.25
Policy Repo Rate (%) 
1-Year Median MCLR
Median base rate
 Second, spreads charged by banks over MCLR were adjusted to offset the changes in 
MCLR, thereby impacting the overall reduction in lending rates. The spread over the MCLR 
could  vary  from  bank  to  bank  due  to  idiosyncratic  factors.  However,  as  the  Study  Group 
observed,  banks  adjusted  the  spread  over  the  MCLR  arbitrarily  in  several  ways  and  the 
variations in the spreads across banks appeared too large to be explained based on bank-level 
business strategy and borrower-level credit risk.5 The Study Group also observed that while 
the spread over the MCLR was expected to play only a small role in determining the lending 
rates by banks, it has turned out to be the key element in deciding the overall lending rates. 
What explains the muted pass-through from policy rate to bank lending rates, either 
by banks not changing the benchmark rate or by adjusting the spread?  
One  plausible  underlying  reason  is  the  rate  rigidity  on  the  liability  side  of  banks 
caused by several factors. In India, about 90 per cent of total liabilities of banks are in the 
form of deposits. Bank deposits are predominantly at fixed interest rates, thereby imparting 
rigidity to the transmission process.  Further, over 36 per cent of term deposits of banks have 
                                                            
5 For example, the Study Group found that: (i) large reduction in MCLR was partly offset by some banks by a 
simultaneous  increase  in  the  spread  in  the  form  of  business  strategy  premium  ostensibly  to  reduce  the  pass-
through to lending rates; (ii) there was no documentation of the rationale for fixing business strategy premium 
for various sectors; (iii) many banks did not have a board approved policy for working out the components of 
spread charged to a customer; (iv) some banks did not have any methodology for computing the spread, which 
was merely treated as a residual arrived at by deducting the MCLR from the actual prevailing lending rate; and 
(v)  the  credit  risk  element  was  not  applied  based  on  the  credit  rating  of  the  borrower  concerned,  but  on  the 
historically  observed  probability  of  default  (PD)  and  loss  given  default  (LGD)  of  the  credit  portfolio/sector 
concerned. 
 10 
maturity of three years and above (Table-2), implying their rates get reset infrequently and 
with  significant  lags  to  policy  rate  changes.  While  the  banks’  marginal  cost  of  funds  may 
drop quickly with a cut in fresh deposit rates, the average cost of deposits comes down rather 
slowly, which weakens the transmission, especially in the case of the base rate system.   
6-month 
Table-2: Maturity Profile of term Deposits of Scheduled Commercial Banks              
   (% share in total Term Deposits) 
5 years 
and 
above 
8.4 
8.3 
13.9 
14.0 
91-days to 
6 month 
10.5 
8.4 
4.1 
4.0 
2 years to 
3 years 
10.7 
12.3 
10.1 
10.6 
3 years to 
5 years 
18.1 
12.4 
11.4 
11.8 
1 year to 
2 years 
23.4 
37.9 
40.4 
43.3 
Up to 
90 
days 
13.9 
6.9 
7.5 
7.2 
15.0 
13.7 
12.6 
9.2 
to 1 
year 
End-
March 
2005 
2010 
2015 
2016 
Source: Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy, RBI. 
 What is often not recognised is the large access our banks have to low cost Current 
and Savings Account (CASA) funds. CASA funds constitute about 40 per cent of aggregate 
bank deposits with the share of saving deposits at around 31 per cent. Importantly, banks are 
free  to decide  saving deposit interest rates since  October 2011, but until recently, most of 
the banks  chose to  leave the saving deposit rate unchanged, ignoring completely monetary 
policy signals. For instance, the major banks kept their saving deposit rate unchanged at 4 per 
cent between October 2011 and July 2017, even as the Reserve Bank’s policy rate moved 
significantly over this period from 8.5 per cent in October 2011 to 7.25 per cent in August 
2013. It increased again to 8.0 per cent by January 2014, before declining to 6.0 per cent by 
August 2017. 
Furthermore,  the  deterioration  in  banking  sector  health  due  to  worsening  of  asset 
quality over the past 2-3 years and the expected loan losses in credit portfolios also seem to 
have  induced  large  variability  in  spreads  in  the  pricing  of  assets.  With  under-capitalized 
banks aiming to protect their net interest margins6 (NIMs) – indeed, weak banks’ NIMs have 
remained  broadly  unchanged  in  the  face  of  large  stressed  assets  –  so  as  to  maintain 
profitability in the short-term even at the expense of long-term profits as well as deposits and 
lending shares, the transmission to lending rates has been severely impacted. In effect, there 
                                                            
6 Net interest margin is defined as the difference between a bank’s interest income (on its loans and assets) less 
its interest expenditure (on its deposits and other borrowings). 
 11 
has been a cross-subsidisation of corporate loan losses by lending rates in healthier sectors 
such as in retail.  
Finally,  the  competition  that  banks  face  from  alternative  instruments  of  financial 
savings – such as mutual funds and small saving schemes – also seems to have made banks 
hesitant in varying the interest rates on term deposits in consonance with policy rate signals. 
Although bank deposits have some distinct advantages in the form of stable returns (vis-à-vis 
mutual fund schemes) and liquidity (vis-à-vis small saving schemes), bank deposits are in a 
disadvantageous position in terms of tax-adjusted returns in comparison with these schemes.  
All of these factors have imparted rigidity to the liability side of banks’ balance sheet 
with respect to policy rate changes, in turn inducing behaviour to make the rates on asset side 
of banks’ balance sheet rigid too.  
 Improving Transmission: The Way Forward 
Drawing  from  its  comprehensive  analysis,  the  RBI’s  Study  Group  has  suggested  a 
number of steps to enhance transparency and transmission from monetary policy signals to 
the actual lending rates. Their recommendations pertain to improving transmission based on 
the existing lending rate system as well as a fundamental reform of the interest rate setting 
process. Let me touch upon the four major recommendation by the Study Group.   
In  view  of  the  less  than  desired  transmission  and  transparency  under  the  internal 
benchmark based lending rate systems – PLR, BPLR, base rate and MCLR – so far, the Study 
Group has recommended  that there is need to shift to an external benchmark based lending 
rate  system.  The  internal  benchmark-based  pricing  regimes  are  not  in  sync  with  global 
practices on pricing of bank loans. Given the scope of arbitrariness under the MCLR system, 
the Study Group has recommended that the switchover to an external benchmark needs to be 
pursued  in  a  time-bound  manner.  While  recognising  that  no  external  instrument  in  India 
meets all the requirements of an ideal benchmark, and after analysing the pros and cons of 13 
possible  candidates,  the  Study  Group  has  recommended  that  the  Treasury  Bill  rate,  the 
Certificate of Deposit (CD) rate, and the Reserve Bank of India’s policy repo rate are better 
suited than other interest rates to serve the role of an external benchmark. The Study Group 
has  recommended  that  all  floating  rate  loans  extended  beginning  April  1,  2018  could  be 
 12 
referenced  to  one  of  the  three  external  benchmarks  selected  by  the  Reserve  Bank  after 
receiving and evaluating the feedback from stakeholders. 
Second, the Study Group has recommended that the decision on the spread over the 
external  benchmark  could  be  left  to  the  commercial  judgment  of  banks,  with  the  spread 
remaining  fixed  all  through  the  term  of  the  loan,  unless  there  is  a  credit  event  (as  per 
standardized or ex ante mutually agreed definition of “credit event”).   
Third, the periodicity of resetting the interest rates by banks on all floating rate loans, 
retail as well as corporate, be reduced from once in a year to once in a quarter to expedite the 
pass-through from the monetary policy signal to the actual lending rates.   
Fourth, to reduce rigidity on liabilities side, banks be encouraged to accept deposits, 
especially bulk deposits, at floating rates linked directly to the selected external benchmark.  
The  common  theme  underlying  these  recommendations  is  to  improve  monetary 
transmission by ensuring that changes in the policy rate transmit quickly and adequately to 
banks’  lending  rates  in  a  transparent  manner  without  any  cross-subsidisation  and 
discrimination between existing and new borrowers. The idea is also to make banks’ liability 
side more flexible so that the objectives of improving monetary transmission by the Reserve 
Bank and maintaining healthy net interest rate margins by banks are aligned.  
The report of the Study Group, which was put in the public domain on October 4, 
2017  has  generated  much  interest  and  extensive  feedback  to  the  Reserve  Bank  from  all 
stakeholders, not only banks, but also general public and media. We have received a number 
of useful suggestions and comments on the recommendations of the Study Group. These are 
being examined carefully and would help us to take a considered view, factoring in transition 
costs and providing a calibrated path to the desired benchmarking system.  
Improving Monetary Transmission: Shoring up Bank Balance Sheets 
As explained earlier, even as the Reserve Bank has reduced its policy repo rate by 50 
bps  since  October  2016  and  by  a  cumulative  200  bps  since  December  2014,  the  banking 
sector’s credit growth has remained much muted. While weak demand for bank credit could 
be one of the factors leading to the observed slowdown in credit growth, a primary cause of 
the slowdown had also been the weak balance sheets of public sector banks in view of large 
 13 
non-performing  assets  which  seem  to  have  made  banks  risk  averse  and  induced  them  to 
reduce  the  supply  of  credit:  under-capitalized  banks  have  capital  only  to  survive,  not  to 
grow7. The dominance of the supply side factor has also been borne out by the fact that the 
credit  growth  of  private  sector  banks  (better  asset  quality  and  well-capitalised  on  average) 
remains robust, whereas there has been a sharp deceleration in the credit growth of public 
sector banks (especially the ones with high stressed assets).    
Against this backdrop, the enactment of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) 
in  December  2016,  the  promulgation  of  the  Banking  Regulation  (Amendment)  Ordinance 
2017 (since notified as an Act), and the subsequent actions taken thereunder in the form of 
the Reserve Bank requiring banks refer the largest, material and aged non-performing assets 
(NPAs)  to  the  IBC,  have  made  the  IBC  a  lynchpin  of  the  new  time-bound  resolution 
framework for bank NPAs.  
These initiatives will now be supported by the Government’s decision to recapitalise 
public  sector  banks  in  a  front-loaded  manner,  with  a  total  allocation  of  `  2.1  trillion, 
comprising budgetary provisions (` 181 billion), recapitalisation bonds (` 1.35 trillion), and 
raising of capital by banks from the market while diluting government equity share (around ` 
580 billion).  
The two steps together – asset resolution and bank recapitalisation – are expected to 
strengthen  bank  balance  sheets  significantly  and  improve  banks’  ability  and  willingness  to 
lend  at  rates  in  consonance  with  policy  rates  and  result  in  an  improved  monetary 
transmission. 
Concluding Observations 
In  summary,  efficient  monetary  transmission  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the  successful 
pursuit  of  its  objectives  by  any  central  bank.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  it  has  been  the 
endeavour of the Reserve Bank to strengthen the monetary transmission process, but these 
efforts have yet not yielded the desired results. The transmission from the policy repo rate to 
bank  lending  rates,  which  is  the  dominant  transmission  channel  in  India,  has  remained  a 
matter  of  concern.  With  the  recent  explicit  objective  of  price  stability  mandated  by  the 
legislature, the issue of smooth  monetary transmission has assumed an added  significance.  
                                                            
7Acharya, Viral V (2017), “The Unfinished Agenda: Restoring Public Sector Bank Health in India”, 8th R K 
Talwar Memorial Lecture. 
 14 
Against  this  backdrop,  we  have  recently  put  out  a  report  by  the  Internal  Study  Group  to 
address  the  weaknesses  of  the  existing  monetary  transmission  system.  A  key  suggestion 
before  us  is  to  whether  to  shift  the  loan  pricing  system  from  an  internal  benchmark  to  an 
external  benchmark.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  take  a  considered  view  in  the  matter  at  an 
appropriate time. 
In my view, there is a deeper economic issue at hand in the recommendation to move 
towards  an  external  benchmark.  The  issue  is:  who  should  bear  the  interest  rate  risk  in  the 
economy – the borrower, or the depositor, or the bank? Who is likely to be better at managing 
the interest rate risk? Retail depositors and borrowers are unlikely to have efficient tools to 
manage  the  interest  rate  risk.  Banks,  however,  should  have  the  wherewithal  to  manage 
interest  rate  risk.  Similarly,  bulk  depositors  and  large  corporate  borrowers  can  also  be 
expected to be in a position to manage the interest rate risk. Non-bank financial institutions 
with less exposure to interest rate risk, such as insurance and pension funds, could also be 
good repositories of this risk.  Foreign banks may be able to offset interest rate risk globally.  
A  combination  of  interest-rate  risk  transfer  mechanisms  through  market  products  such  as 
interest-rate derivatives (swaps, in particular) and securitized products such as collateralized 
loan obligations (CLOs) will spring about, provided banks indeed have to manage the interest 
rate risk rather than have it as a matter of convenience to pass it onto borrowers.  
Hopefully,  I  will  focus  sometime  soon  on  these  issues  in  a  companion  piece  - 
Monetary Transmission in India: How can it be improved?  
  15 
