Zhou Xiaochuan: Prospects of the Chinese economy – broad-based
growth
Speech and Q&A by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the 32rd
G30 Annual International Banking Seminar, Washington DC, 15 October 2017.
 On October 15, 2017, Governor Zhou Xiaochuan spoke on China’s economic prospects in the
Group of 30’s International Banking Seminar in Washington D.C. He attended this event on the
margin of IMF/World Bank annual meetings. The following is the major content of his speech:  
China’s annual GDP growth rate has been declining for years, from double digit growth in the
past to around 8 percent in 2012, then down further to 6.7 percent in 2016. The momentum of
GDP growth has picked up this year. The GDP growth was 6.9 percent in the first half and is
expected to reach 7 percent in the second half of this year. The driving force is mainly the fast
growing household consumption. The gross retail sales volume grew at 10.4 percent in the first
eight  months  year  on  year.  Furthermore,  household  consumption  is  shifting  from  traditional
product consumption to service consumption. Therefore, development of service industry has
accelerated. The added value of the tertiary industry as a share of GDP grew substantially from
only  around  40  percent  15  years  ago  to  55  percent  currently.  Economic  growth  has
supported stable employment situation. In the first eight months, about 10 million new jobs have
already  been  created  in  urban  China.  Given  the  size  of  Chinese  population,  we  need  to  have
such  a  solid  employment  growth.  The  CPI  and  PPI  grew  at  1.8  percent  and  6.3  percent
respectively year on year, and nominal GDP growth is around 9.5 percent.
In  terms  of  money  supply  and  credit  expansion,  China  has  entered  into  a  stage  of
deleveraging  since  early  2017.  The  growth  of  M2  has  declined  continuously  to  below  9
percent currently. The overall leverage ratio has started to decline. Though the decline is still very
moderate, the downward trend has been there. In the global financial crisis period, China adopted
proactive  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  in  response.  The  total  debt  to  GDP  ratio  went  up
substantially in the two years after 2009. But it is worth doing because the Chinese economy
recovered  from  the  crisis  quite  quickly.  Now  we  need  to  find  ways  to  bring  the  leverage  ratio
down. Thanks to the positive international trade conditions, China’s performance in external trade
has  been  good  this  year.  So  far,  the  trade  in  goods  posted  a  surplus  of  USD  400  billion,  20
percent  lower  than  last  year.    However,  due  to  rapid  import  growth,  especially  that  of  service
import, the current account surplus to GDP ratio is estimated to shrink to 1.2 percent this year. In
comparison with the global numbers, this is a very moderate imbalance.
On  deleveraging.  The  leverage  ratio  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  is  relatively  high.  If  we
decompose the debt to GDP ratio, government debt ratio is not high; the household debt to GDP
ratio is still low, but grows up quickly. The major problem is the fairly high corporate debt to GDP
ratio.  Thanks  to  the  low  interest  rate  condition,  the  current  debt  service  ratio  is  still
reasonable. People may ask why the corporate sector had such a high leverage ratio and why
the financial institutions, especially the commercial banks, were willing to lend so much to them.
One  of  the  reasons,  as  indicated  by  many  economists,  is  that  in  China  the  local
governments  borrowed  heavily  through  various  financing  platforms.  Such  borrowing  was
included  in  the  statistics  of  corporate  debt.  Thus  the  debt  of  corporate  sector  has  been
overestimated.  If  these  borrowings  are  included  in  government  debt  statistics,  corporate  debt
would shrink by a large margin and government debt would go up. This will be a more balanced
debt structure. Therefore, to study China’s leverage ratio, it is necessary to look not only at the
corporate  sector,  the  state-owned  sector,  and  bank  credit.  It  is  also  important  to  look  at  the
borrowing of local governments, which is related to promoting urbanization. The IMF’s Article IV
consultation team has given us suggestions on the need to carefully study inter-governmental
fiscal  relationship,  and  to  reform  the  division  of  responsibility  in  terms  of  fiscal  revenue  and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
expenditure among the central and local governments.
On excess capacity and urbanization. In China, we have implemented a program to cut excess
capacity in steel and cement industries. One of the reasons behind the excess capacities is that
we  have  had  a  large  infrastructure  expansion  program. Another  reason  is  rapid  urbanization.
Large  quantity  of  steel  and  cement  are  needed  in  both  programs.  Infrastructure  has  already
improved substantially, but urbanization is still going on. Based on household registrations, the
urbanization rate is only 40 percent. But by the official population census, it is about 50 percent. If
we use the outcome in the sample survey conducted to find out how many people have lived in
urban areas for six months, it is 57 percent. That means a lot of farmers are still in the process
of moving into cities. Some of them may have already found a job, but they have not moved their
family  or  found  a  residence  or  apartment  in  the  cities.  Thus,  urbanization  is  still  going  on
rapidly  and  continues  to  generate  strong  demand  for  steel  and  cement.  The  Chinese
Government  intends  to  promote  structural  reform  and  optimization,  and  attaches  great
importance to environmental protection. Therefore, the Government has voluntarily undertaken to
cut  steel  and  cement  capacity  by  ten  percent.  Up  till  now,  progress  has  been  made  in
removing excess capacity. We expect the goal can be achieved.
On the shift of comparative advantage. The Chinese manufacturing sector has shifted a lot of
labor-intensive capacity into ASEAN countries. More and more Chinese investors are investing in
Africa  and  moving  some  capacity  there.  Therefore,  service  industry  is  accounting  for  an
increasingly larger share in the Chinese economy, which is a very good phenomenon. But the
service industry is not  competitive. We have some strong sectors but still need to strengthen the
relatively weak sectors, such as education and medical services.
On financial stability. This July, a decision was made in the National Financial Work Conference
to set up a Financial Stability and Development Committee. In the future, the focus will be on four
areas.  One  is  the  shadow  banking  issue.  We  started  to  deal  with  it  two  years  ago  and  have
made positive progress. Many shadow banking activities have returned to the banking sector and
are  included  in  the  balance  sheet  of  commercial  banks.  The  second  is  asset  management
sector.  This  is  relatively  complicated.  The  CBRC,  CSRC  and  CIRC  may  have  different  rules
regarding the same asset management activity. We agree with FSB’s guidance for streamlining
regulation of the asset management sector. The third is internet finance. A lot of IT companies
are providing financial services. Some have been granted licenses. But some do not have any
license, yet provide lending and payment services, and sell insurance products. This may cause
competition and financial stability problems. The fourth is financial holding companies. We have
observed that some large private-owned companies have got various financial service licenses
through M&A. But in the real sense, they are not financial holding companies. They may have
engaged in illegal activities, including connected transactions. Yet, we do not have the necessary
regulatory  policies  to  deal  with  such  cross-sector  transactions.  Going  forward,  we  will  further
deepen  reform,  gradually  push  forward  the  deleveraging  process,  and  strengthen  regulatory
coordination  to  promote  healthy  development  of  the  financial  markets  and  maintain  financial
stability.   
Q&A session:
David Marsh(Managing Director, OMFIF):
It is sometimes said that there is a vacuum in leadership in the world. Do you think it is about
time  for  China  to  take  a  greater  leadership  role  in  the  international  monetary  reforms?  You
mentioned  a  number  of  very  positive  developments  in  your  speech  regarding  the  Chinese
economy. It seems to provide a good platform for China to push forward some ideas about the
reform of reserve currencies, the role of the SDR, institutionalizing the swap, and so on.  
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Zhou Xiaochuan:
In recent years, along with rapid economic development, China has started to play a role in the
international  economic  governance,  including  participating  in  the  reform  of  reserve  currency
system and policy making in trade and financial stability. But China is still focusing very much on
the  domestic  agenda,  including  further  promoting  economic  development  and  regulatory
reforms so as to keep pace with global development.
We  are  pleased  to  see  that  IMF  has  included  the  RMB  into  the  currency  basket  of  SDR.  It’s
encouraging and it will prompt China to adopt more reform and opening up policies, and support
RMB to serve better as a freely usable currency. Although China has strengthened cooperation
with  the  international  organizations,  such  as  IMF,  BIS  and  FSB,  and  participated  in  standard
setting and rule making, we still have a long way to go in order to play a more significant role.
As for the currency swap, it is an unexpected outcome of the global financial crisis. After the
outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008, due to the shortage of hard currencies and the
difficulties  in  developing  correspondent  banking  relationship  on  the  part  of  commercial  banks,
some neighboring countries requested to enter into local currency swap agreements with China,
in order to support and facilitate regional trade. We first signed an agreement with South Korea,
then  with  some  ASEAN  countries  and  central  Asian  countries.  Later  on,  the  swap
arrangements gradually expanded into other parts of the world, such as Argentina, Ukraine and
Egypt. Therefore, currency swap arrangement is an unexpected outcome of the global financial
crisis. China supports the further development of global safety net. In our view, the global safety
net may be more efficient than bilateral arrangements.
William R. Rhodes (William R. Rhodes Global Advisors, Inc.):
Last  year,  you  expressed  concern  about  the  growing  debt  to  GDP  ratio.  But  you  sound  fairly
optimistic about the issue this year. It seems that the government is actively taking the necessary
steps to resolve it. Let me know if I’m right.
Zhou Xiaochuan:
As  for  the  debt  issue,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  in  the  stage  of  urbanization,  the  fiscal  policy
transparency  is  not  good  enough,  the  inter-governmental  fiscal  relationship  has  yet  to  be
improved, and there is no clear fiscal discipline to constrain the local governments. So in the
financial market, there is distortion in the pricing of the local government bonds and the lending to
the financing platforms of the local governments. Due to this distortion, the commercial banks
and financial sector have underestimated the risks in the fiscal standing of local governments. I
believe  those  issues  will  be  gradually  resolved,  and  the  financial  market  will  be  more
transparent and healthy. This July, the National Financial Work Conference emphasized the need
to  attach  importance  to  local  government  debt  risks. At  the  same  time,  we  should  note  that
compared with the private sector debt and external debt, the risks in the government debt are
relatively low. We will promote fiscal reform to actively address the matter.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
