  
 
 
 
Opening remarks 
 
by Már Guðmundsson, Governor of the Central Bank of Iceland, at a conference 
organised by the Bank and the Reinventing Bretton Woods Committee on The 
uncertain  future  of  global  economic  integration,  Harpa  Concert  Hall  and 
Conference Centre, Reykjavík, 14-15 September 2017. 
 
I welcome all of you to this conference and the foreign participants to Iceland. 
The conference is organised by the Central Bank of Iceland and the Reinventing 
Bretton Woods Committee. The heading is broad and probably reflects in part 
the  worries  that  some  of  us  might  currently  have  about  the  future  of  global 
economic integration. 
 
The topic encompasses both real economic integration – that is, trade in goods 
and services and the flow of labour and equipment across borders – and financial 
integration  –  that  is,  cross-border  capital  flows  and  stocks  and  associated 
activities of banks and other entities.  
 
The financial integration part will probably dominate the proceedings, not least 
because most of the speakers are current or former central bankers. I do not see 
that as a problem, as in my mind more work remains to be done in assessing the 
costs  and  benefits  of  global  financial  integration  than  regarding  real  side 
economic integration. After all, the post-war global economic order was initially 
based on the principles of free trade in goods, current account convertibility, and 
monetary stability through fixed but adjustable exchange rates vis-à-vis the US 
dollar. Open capital accounts were the exception, however. Real side economic 
integration was seen to be more important for economic progress than financial 
integration. 
 
It worked well for a long while, and some call the period from 1950 to 1970 the 
golden years.  Yet there were inherent flaws in this set-up that contributed to its 
demise in the early 1970s, not least the well-known Triffin dilemma regarding 
the conflict between the domestic economic objectives of the country providing 
the main reserve currency and the required international supply of that currency. 
Then capital accounts were opened up, with strong momentum in the 1980s and 
early 1990s. Capital controls were increasingly undermined by technology and 
financial innovation, and strong arguments were being made to the effect  that 
open capital  accounts  would  bring significant  benefits.  After  all, ongoing real 
economic integration at a global level demanded at least some degree of global 
financial integration. As the BIS reminded us in its latest Annual Report – and 
Jaime Caruana might touch on in his keynote speech later in this session – trade 
and  finance  tend  to  go  together.  Freer  capital  movements  in  turn  undermined 
pegged exchange rates and thus contributed to the spread of flexible exchange 
rate regimes and inflation targeting.  
 1 
  
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  both  real  and  financial  global  integration  have 
brought enormous economic benefits. Still, it has been increasingly questioned 
of late. We partly understand why.  
 
We know that there are significant gains from real integration but that there are 
winners and losers. The losers can be compensated in principle, but in practice 
this does not always happen. Inequality has increased within many countries and 
economic  integration  is  blamed,  although  research  shows  that  technological 
change plays a significantly bigger role.  
 
At least in part, the case of financial integration is different. Finance is an integral 
part  of  economic  progress,  and  there  are  significant  benefits  from  global 
financial integration. But more is not always better when it comes to finance, as 
we learned the hard way during the latest financial crisis. Furthermore, large and 
volatile capital flows can undermine the financial stability of countries. It is not 
clear who the winners are in that case nor what the compensation mechanism 
would be. Spillover effects from monetary policy of global rate setting countries 
to small, open and financially integrated economies (SOFIEs) increase as global 
financial integration intensifies. In particular, if the global rate setter experiences 
an economic slack at a time when a SOFIE is booming, the SOFIE might find it 
difficult to pursue warranted macroeconomic policies without risks to financial 
stability and/or significant detrimental effects on export sectors. This could be 
the case if there are perceived limitations to the use of fiscal policy; for instance, 
if there is already a sizable headline surplus. In this situation, macroprudential 
and even capital flow management measures could help. In Iceland’s case and 
some others, this raises the issue of compatibility with existing international and 
regional treaty obligations regarding free movement of capital.  The jury is still 
out on these issues. 
 
It is one thing to try to make global financial integration safer and to mitigate 
unwanted spillover effects – which might involve some retrenchment, as it did 
in this country and many others after the crisis – but it is another matter entirely 
to bring about a large-scale reversal of the global financial integration of recent 
decades. Most likely, such a reversal would seriously undermine real economic 
integration and the benefits associated with it. 
 
We are going to discuss these issues and others that pertain to the current state 
and  future  prospects  of  global  economic  integration.  After  Jaime’s  keynote 
speech, we will have two sessions with substantive presentations and discussions 
on different aspects of the topic. This afternoon, we aim to take stock of recent 
trends in global and regional economic and financial integration, assess country 
responses to these trends, and discuss how the responses in turn affect the level 
of  integration.  This  includes  macroprudential  and  capital  flow  management 
measures. We will probably hear something about how the challenges have been 
addressed in this country. 
 
 2 
 Tomorrow we turn to the international monetary and financial system. Part of 
that discussion will aim at identifying potential reforms that would better allow 
individual countries and the global economy to  reap the benefits  of economic 
and financial integration and avoid the risks associated with it. We will then wrap 
up with a policy panel. 
 
Looking at the programme, I am particularly pleased to note the high level of the 
speakers. I am even more pleased to see how many of them are old colleagues 
and friends. The speakers will all be properly introduced in their sessions. Let 
me just note that the relevant international organisations are represented at a high 
level. We have a General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements for 
the first time in Iceland. We have also a chairman of the Basel Committee for 
Banking  Supervision  for  the  first  time  in  Iceland,  as  far  as  I  know,  although 
Stefan  has  of  course  been  in  Iceland  several  times  with  other  hats.  We  have 
Deputy Managing Director of the  IMF for a second time in  Iceland. We have 
two current  governors (not  counting me) and two former  governors. We have 
three  former  deputy  governors  from  G20  countries  and  we  have  prominent 
academics. As you have probably realised there is some double counting in this, 
which just goes to show the quality of the speakers. 
  
Before I make my final remarks, I would like to remind us all that this is a closed-
door invitation-only event. There is no press here, and we are under modified 
Chatman House rules, which imply that you may use what you hear in your work 
and even speak about the event, but without attributing to or quoting individual 
speakers.  We  wanted  to  have  it  this  way  in  order  to  facilitate  frank  and  open 
discussion of a difficult topic that many of us are trying to get a handle on. The 
aim is to contribute in some small way to improved policy making at the global, 
regional, and country levels. 
 
In closing, I would like to thank all of those that have worked hard to make this 
event possible, especially the staff in my own office. Last but not least, let me 
thank  our  co-organiser  Marc  Uzan,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reinventing 
Bretton Woods Committee. This is the third event that he has been involved with 
in Iceland. He has organised roughly 100 seminars around the world and must 
be among the best connected individuals in this business. At the time of the 70th 
Anniversary of the Bretton Woods Conference he edited a large volume of short 
essays on the international monetary system that I among many others had the 
pleasure to contribute to.  I have also spoken in several of his seminars.  It is a 
great pleasure to work with him, and he has become a good friend. I have come 
to realise that what drives him is a passion to improve the international monetary 
system.  It  matters  a  lot,  and  for  various  reasons  it  matters  more  for  small 
countries like Iceland than for big countries that can better fend for themselves 
in a non-multilateral and non-rule based world. That is why we are having this 
conference here. Marc, the floor is yours. 
 
 3 
