Jerome H Powell: Confirmation hearing
Testimony by Mr Jerome H Powell, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington
DC, 28 November 2017.
 Chairman Crapo, Ranking Member Brown, and other members of the Committee, thank you for
expeditiously  scheduling  this  hearing  and  providing  me  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you
today. I would also like to express my gratitude to President Trump for the confidence he has
shown  by  nominating  me  to  serve  as  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal
Reserve System. The Federal Reserve has had a productive relationship with this Committee
over the years, and, if you and your colleagues see fit to confirm me, I look forward to working
closely with you in the years ahead.
Before I continue, I would like to introduce my wife, Elissa, who is sitting behind me. I would not
be here today without her unstinting love, support, and wise counsel.
As  you  know,  I  have  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  and  the  Federal  Open
Market  Committee  (FOMC)  for  more  than  five  years,  contributing  in  a  variety  of  capacities,
including most recently as chairman of the Board’s Committee on Supervision and Regulation.
My views on a wide range of monetary policy and regulatory issues are on the public record in
speeches and testimonies during my service at the Fed. The Congress established the Federal
Reserve more than a century ago to provide a safer and more flexible monetary and financial
system.  And,  almost  exactly  40  years  ago,  it  assigned  us  monetary  policy  goals: maximum
employment, meaning people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly
quickly; and price stability,meaning inflation is low and stable enough that it need not figure into
households’ and businesses’ economic decisions.
I have had the great privilege of serving under Chairman Bernanke and Chair Yellen, and, like
them,  I  will  do  everything  in  my  power  to  achieve  those  goals  while  preserving  the  Federal
Reserve’s independent and nonpartisan status that is so vital to their pursuit. In our democracy,
transparency and accountability must accompany that independence. We are transparent and
accountable in many ways. Among them, we affirm our numerical inflation objective annually and
publish our economic and interest rate projections quarterly. And, since 2011, the Chairman has
conducted  regular  news  conferences  to  explain  the  FOMC’s  thinking.  Additionally,  we  are
accountable to the people’s representatives through twice-a-year reports, testimony, oversight,
and audited financial statements. I am strongly committed to that framework of transparency and
accountability and to continuing to look for ways to enhance it. In our federated system, members
of  the  Washington-based  Board  of  Governors  participate  in  FOMC  deliberations  with  the
presidents  of  the  12  regional  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  which  are  deeply  rooted  in  their  local
communities.  I  am  a  strong  supporter  of  this  institutional  structure,  which  helps  ensure  a
diversity  of  perspectives  on  monetary  policy  and  helps  sustain  the  public’s  support  for  the
Federal Reserve as an institution.
If  confirmed,  I  would  strive,  along  with  my  colleagues,  to  support  the  economy’s  continued
progress toward full recovery. Our aim is to sustain a strong jobs market with inflation moving
gradually up toward our target. We expect interest rates to rise somewhat further and the size of
our balance sheet to gradually shrink. However, while we endeavor to make the path of policy as
predictable  as  possible,  the  future  cannot  be  known  with  certainty.  So  we  must  retain  the
flexibility to adjust our policies in response to economic developments. Above all, even as we
draw on the lessons of the past, we must be prepared to respond decisively and with appropriate
force to new and unexpected threats to our nation’s financial stability and economic prosperity—
the original motivation for the Federal Reserve’s founding.
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a regulator and supervisor of banking institutions, in collaboration with other federal and state
agencies, we must help ensure that our financial system remains both stable and efficient. Our
financial system is without doubt far stronger and more resilient than it was a decade ago. Our
banks have much higher levels of capital and liquid assets, are more aware of the risks they run,
and  are  better  able  to  manage  those  risks.  Even  as  we  have  worked  to  implement
improvements,  we  also  have  sought  to  tailor  regulation  and  supervision  to  the  size  and  risk
profile  of  banks,  particularly  community  institutions.  We  will  continue  to  consider  appropriate
ways  to  ease  regulatory  burdens  while  preserving  core  reforms—strong  levels  of  capital  and
liquidity, stress testing, and resolution planning—so that banks can provide the credit to families
and businesses necessary to sustain a prosperous economy. In doing so, we must be clear and
transparent  about  the  principles  that  are  driving  our  decisions  and  about  the  expectations  we
have for the institutions we regulate.
To conclude, inside the Federal Reserve, we understand that our decisions in all these areas
matter for American families and communities. I am committed to making decisions objectively
and based on the best available evidence. In doing so, I would be guided solely by our mandate
from the Congress and the long-run interests of the American public.
Thank you. I would be happy to respond to your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
