Ed Sibley: Central Bank of Ireland's financial regulation functions
restructure, relevant issues this year and forthcoming priorities
Address by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Association of
Compliance Officers of Ireland’s (ACOI) annual conference, Dublin, 10 November 2017.
Introduction
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen. I am delighted to be here at the Association of Compliance
1
Officers of Ireland’s (ACOI) annual conference. Thank you for the invitation to speak here today .
It is the second time this year that I have spoken at an ACOI event, which I hope is evidence of
how important I consider the role of compliance to be to our mandate of safeguarding the stability
of the financial system and protecting consumers.  
2
When  I  spoke  at  your  event  in  March ,  I  covered,  among  other  topics,  my  expectations  of
compliance  officers.  This  warrants  repeating.  My  comments  today  will  also  cover  the  recent
restructure  of  the  Central  Bank’s  financial  regulation  functions,  a  summary  of  relevant  issues
arising from our work in 2017, and some of our priorities for 2018.
Central Bank restructuring of Financial Regulation
On  the  1  September  2017,  the  Central  Bank’s  financial  regulation  function  was  split  into  two
distinct pillars: prudential regulation and financial conduct.
The  restructuring  reflects  the  critical  and  equal  importance  of  both  our  financial  stability  and
financial  conduct  mandates,  the  ongoing  evolution  and  increasing  complexity  of  Ireland  as  a
financial services centre, and a strengthening of our approach to conduct supervision, over and
above our longstanding work on, and commitment to, consumer protection.
The two pillars, led by me as Deputy Governor, Prudential Regulation, and by Derville Rowland
as Director General, Financial Conduct, are working as equal partners to drive delivery of our
mandate  of  safeguarding  stability  and  protecting  consumers;  and  that  vision  of  a  financial
services sector that serves the needs of the economy and its customers over the long term.
The  new  structural  arrangements  are  designed  to  enhance  how  we  operate  as  One  Bank,
recognising the interlinkages, dependencies and need to challenge each other across financial
stability, prudential regulation and financial conduct disciplines.  As the Governor of the Central
3
Bank  has  stated   “Measures  applied  to  protect  consumers  range  from  working  to  ensure
financial  stability, 
through  prudential  and  macro  prudential  regulation,  supervision  and
enforcement to [provision of] personal financial information.”
Approach to Prudential Regulation
Delivery of this vision of financial services in Ireland requires that regulated firms:
1.  have sufficient financial resources, including under a plausible but severe stress;
2.  have capitally accretive business models over the long term;
3.  are  well  governed,  have  appropriate  cultures,  effective  risk  management  and  control
arrangements in place, which are commensurate with their size, scale and complexity; and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4.  can recover if they get into difficulty, and if they cannot, are resolvable in an orderly manner
without significant externalities or taxpayer costs.
To this end, my number one priority is to ensure that my teams deliver an effective, intrusive,
analytical and outcomes-focused approach to supervision.  In other words, that we do our job
4
and that we do it well.  Our approach will continue to be risk-based and anchored by our PRISM
supervisory methodology, underpinned by the credible threat of enforcement. 
Compliance & Risk Management
There  are  some  obvious  similarities  between  the  work  of  the  regulator,  and  the  work  of
compliance. 
The  execution  of  our  work  involves  risk-based  and  targeted  engagement  with  firms  and
sectors, based on consideration of their impact and their risk profile.
We  complete  intensive  onsite  engagements,  both  firm-specific  and  thematic,  across  a
broad range of risks.
We  undertake  detailed  analytical  assessments  to  support  and  challenge  the  ongoing
supervisory and inspection efforts and identify and guard against the build-up of risk.
The  complexity  of  our  work  continues  to  increase  with  growing  rulebooks,  increasing
expectations, faster pace of change and more complex business models and organisational
structures.
Our resources are finite, and we cannot look over the shoulder of all activity or transactions
– and so need to rely on governance, systems and controls, analysis, sample testing and,
ultimately, our own judgement.
Moreover, it is critical that we focus on the delivery of our core roles and responsibilities, at
the  same  time  as  being  flexible  enough  to  deal  with  emerging  risks  and  changes  that
demand our immediate attention.
5
Bringing risk under control is, perhaps, one of the key factors that distinguishes modern times
from the distant past .  Risk  management  can  be  a  liberating  factor,  taking  the  fate  of  human
society out of the control of oracles and soothsayers. As societies moved from uncertainty and
prophecy  towards  informed  and  calculated  risk,  this  necessitated  skilled  and  dedicated
individuals  to  manage  the  level  of  risk  in  line  with  risk  appetite  (implicit  or  explicit),  to  provide
unambiguous  warnings  at  appropriate  junctures,  and  to  call  a  halt  to  activities  outside  of  risk
appetites before risks crystallised, thus protecting others from negative outcomes. 
Compliance and risk management are not often considered as being liberating forces, but this is
your lineage. I see the role that you play as part of the second line control functions as crucial,
and my expectations of you, and how you do your work, are very high. As compliance leaders,
you play an important role in financial stability and consumer protection and as supervisors we
are  comfortable  in  saying  that  we  expect  a  lot  from  you.  Your  customers  and  society  more
broadly deserve a lot. 
In  this  context,  I  was  pleased  to  see  in  the  ACOI’s  own  material a  recognition  of  these
responsibilities  and  their  continued  evolution.  Specifically,  that  there  is  a  recognition  that
compliance  is  expected  to  cover  both  conduct  and  prudential  risks  and  regulations,  and  that
compliance  needs  to  consider  wider  governance  matters  –  such  as  the  functioning  and
effectiveness of the board.  At the same time, compliance functions typically retain responsibility
from  a  second  line  of  defence  perspective  on  a  long  list  of  responsibilities  more  traditionally
associated  with  compliance  –  such  as  conduct  of  business,  data  protection,  financial  crime,
conflicts of interest, market abuse, client assets, whistleblowing and so on.  
6
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  ACOI  also  notes  that  “Compliance  Officers  are  being  tasked  with  Cyber  Security  risk
management responsibilities ………… and utilising their skill sets in the areas of drafting and
training personnel in what are often complex and grey areas”.
In light of all of the above, I would recognise that there are risks of you being spread too thinly;
and the evolution of your responsibilities not being matched by the changes in resource levels
and skillsets.  And, perhaps this is evidenced by the issues that we continue to see in firms,
including in compliance functions.  You need to be bold and noisy not only in the identification of
risk and issues, but also in your own needs, to serve your businesses and your customers as
you need to, and they deserve.
By doing so, you can meet our overriding expectation that the compliance function will support
and, where necessary, challenge the board and senior management in driving and demanding a
risk-focused  culture  that  delivers  sound  behaviours  throughout  the  organisation  and  where
customers’ interests are to the forefront. In other words, a compliance culture that is not simply
about ticking boxes, but rather ensuring regulated firms are doing the right thing in the right way,
and considering the spirit as well as the letter of the requirements. 
Recent Supervisory Experience
Both  domestically  and  internationally,  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  services  firms
continues to evolve.  In the 10 years since the onset of the financial crisis, multiple reforms have
sought to address the root causes of the crisis and other issues.  Indeed, there continues to be
reforms  of  the  reforms.    We  are  embedding  recent  changes  (such  as  Solvency  II),  and
implementing further changes, notably MiFID II . This undoubtedly causes all of you challenges.
7
One of the most significant changes locally in the last couple of years has been the expansion of
onsite  inspections  activity,  which  has  deepened  considerably  in  terms  of  intensity  and
intrusiveness, starting in banking  supervision  in  late  2014  and  extending  to  insurance  and  the
asset  management  sector  more  recently.      Our  analytical  work  also  continues  to  be
strengthened, again starting in banking supervision post the onset of the crisis.
Through  this  intrusive  supervisory  activity,  we  have  unsurprisingly  identified  issues  and
concerns.  I have also heard complaints about the intrusiveness of supervision.  I would have
more sympathy for these complaints if we were finding less issues of fundamental importance,
or to put it another way, if the boards, senior management, and the first, second and third lines of
defence were proving to be more effective, and so demonstrating better that our work was not
needed.
In this context, and given my audience today, it is worth sharing some of the common and most
serious issues we are seeing today.  That is not to be overly critical, and it is important that I am
balanced  in  recognising  that  there  is  also  much  evidence  of  good  work,  and  effective  risk
management and compliance functions.  Nonetheless, it is important that we all learn from the
many issues that continue to be identified, and that we all seek to raise standards proactively. By
way  of  illustration,  the  most  critical  issues  that  we  are  seeing  relating  to  governance
arrangements and compliance functions include: 
In  the  context  of  the  international  nature  of  the  Irish  financial  services  sector,  there  is  a
continued overreliance on group policies and a lack of understanding and ownership at the
Irish board level of the risks and compliance obligations that are particular to the Irish entity;
Many  of  the  issues  highlighted  by  recent  governance  inspections  raise  serious  concerns
about board effectiveness in overseeing the activities and risks of the firm, including:
complying with the Corporate Governance Codes
issues in boards’ annual assessments of their own performance and effectiveness;
8
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
weaknesses in board oversight including: (i) a lack of evidence of appropriate oversight
of key issues (e.g. failure to approve plans, slippage in remediation deadlines); and (ii)
inadequate reporting to the board; and
inadequacies in risk appetite frameworks.
In relation to the compliance function, the key issues relate to:
incomplete registers of obligations (i.e., the firm not identifying its compliance obligations);
incomplete compliance mandates (e.g., the PCF Holder i.e. the ‘Head of Compliance’ role
holder, is not the effective Head of Compliance in that he/she only had oversight over certain
aspects of compliance rather than the full spectrum of compliance issues);
immature compliance functions and a lack of awareness, at board and management level,
of the universe of compliance obligations, particularly those specific to the Irish entity;
lack  of  understanding  of,  or  adherence  to,  international  standards  and  principles  for
9
compliance functions and the Central Bank’s Corporate Governance Codes ; 
inadequate  compliance  monitoring  within  institutions,  including  inadequate  coverage  of
prudential compliance matters; 
poor compliance monitoring plans which do not provide details on the objectives, timelines
and resource needs to monitor or assess compliance in the institution as a whole;  and
inadequacies in the reporting to the board and / or audit and risk committees.
The long and the short of it is that there is still much more work to be done in many firms to meet
minimum  regulatory  standards  and  legitimate  supervisory  expectations.    This  will  obviously
continue to be a priority for the Central Bank, to drive further improvements and enhancements in
governance and control arrangements, such that they are commensurate with the size, scale
and complexity of the business.  
2018 Priorities
I  will  turn  now  to  other  priorities  for  Prudential  Regulation  for  2018.    We  are  currently  going
through our planning process for 2018, as well as developing our longer term strategy for 2019
onwards. While not finalised, it is safe to say that the following areas will feature in our priorities
for next year:
Core supervisory activity
As referred to earlier, my number one priority is to ensure that my teams deliver an effective,
intrusive, analytical and outcomes-focused approach to supervision.  This involves our day to day
supervisory team engagement with regulated firms, inspections and analysis – the three core
functions of prudential regulation. I will strive to ensure that we continue to improve across these
areas.  In particular, the material increase in the volume and complexity of data being received by
the Bank warrants us to enhance our approach to analysing and using this data.
MiFIDII
After CRDIV, BRRD, the implementation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, and Solvency II,
the latest material regulatory change is MiFIDII, which will be implemented on 3 January 2018.
Preparation  for  the  “go  live  date”  is  a  key  priority  for  the  Central  Bank.  In  addition  to  our  own
extensive  preparations,  our  engagement  with  industry  to  date  has  entailed  a  heat-mapping
exercise,  issuing  a  questionnaire  to  firms,  providing  keynote  addresses  and  participating  in
industry  roundtable  events.  In  this  regard,  we  have  presented  on  different  aspects  of  MiFIDII
during  the  year  including  investor  protection,  product  governance,  transaction  reporting  and
transparency requirement changes which are introduced or significantly enhanced under MiFIDII.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I emphasise the important role that compliance officers play in the asset management sector
today.  You  are  well  placed  to  support  your  firms  in  progressing  preparation  for  MiFID  II,  and
compliance thereafter. The challenges presented to this sector today demand sufficient time and
effort  from  the  compliance  functions,  by  doing  this,  firms  will  be  able  to  take  advantage  of
opportunities presented in the future.  This will also position you to respond appropriately as we
continue  our  supervisory  focus  through  a  programme  of  full  risk  assessments  and  thematic
inspections.
Importantly,  we  will  be  monitoring  MIFID  II  compliance  through  our  regular  supervisory
engagement and through focused engagement during the year.
Brexit
I have outlined the Central Bank’s views in relation to Brexit over a number of speeches this year
and last.
There are, of course, direct impacts on the existing financial services firms operating in Ireland
today, including those who have direct exposure to the UK. Our engagement with firms to date
shows that much more work needs to be done to prepare for the plausible scenario of a hard
Brexit.   Our engagement with incumbent firms will, therefore, continue.
Moreover,  we  will  continue  to  engage  proactively  with  our  European  colleagues  on  the  key
supervisory and regulatory issues and risks that are associated with Brexit.  We have had a high
degree  of  success  in  influencing  the  policy  and  supervisory  stances  within  the  European
supervisory framework, with the aim of ensuring that we are both operating to European norms
and influencing them. 
We will continue to prioritise our authorisation activity and continue to deliver on our commitment
of being transparent, predictable and consistent in our approach to authorisations and material
business changes.
Information Technology
Information technology covers a multitude of activities and risks.
10
My colleague Gerry Cross, Director of Policy & Risk, addressed this conference last year on the
topic of IT and cybersecurity  and this topic remains high on our list of priorities. The Central
Bank will continue to enhance and develop its approach to IT risk.  Our supervisory approach and
capability has developed considerably in the last few years, and we now have a dedicated IT risk
inspection team that will cover all sectors in 2018.  While this is still a relatively small team –
particularly  compared  to  the  resources  applied  by  regulated  firms  –  we  are  still  identifying
material issues in too many firms.  
Of all the risks facing the financial system in Ireland today, IT resilience and security are still the
risks  that  concern  me  most.  We  are  ever  more  dependent  on  IT,  but  threats  abound,  are
increasing  in  complexity  and  the  potential  impacts  are  massive  –  and  could  impact  on  the
financial system’s ability to deliver its core functions overnight. There is still, therefore, much to
be done to increase the resilience and security of IT systems.
Financial  innovation  /  “FinTech”  continues  to  grow  in  importance  and  also  presents  very  real
threats to incumbent business models.  Our approach to, and engagement on, this will be further
developed in 2018.
I mentioned data and analytics earlier.  As our approach continues to develop and evolve, we
must be able to rely on the information receive.  We continue to find significant issues regarding
the oversight, control and delivery of regulatory returns data.  Accurate, timely and verifiable data
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
is a prerequisite for effective analytics and compliance officers have a direct role in ensuring it is
provided to the Central Bank.  Significant investment is required in information technology and the
supporting processes to make sure this is happening.
Outsourcing
Outsourcing is a key part of many financial services firms, whether this is to group companies or
to  third  parties  and  it  is  clear  that  there  are  sizeable  benefits  to  appropriately  managed  and
delivered outsourcing arrangements, including cost savings and increased expertise.  However,
outsourcing  also  creates  additional  risks  and  with  the  continued  growth  of  the  international
dimension  to  Ireland’s  financial  services  industry,  including  relating  to  Brexit,  the  tendency  to
increase the level of outsourcing is something that we in the Central Bank are very mindful of.  
Outsourcing will therefore continue to be a supervisory priority.  Building on the work undertaken
in recent years, we will be undertaking firm-specific, sector-specific and cross-sector work to
obtain  a  holistic  view  of  the  outsourcing  landscape  and  the  effectiveness  of  its  management
across the Irish financial services sector.
Conclusion
I will conclude here.  
Financial  services  firms  are  built  on  the  premise  of  taking  risk.  But  there  are  wider  societal
dependencies  on  the  financial  system  and  the  services  it  provides.  It  is  therefore  critically
important that the financial system works well, and serves the needs of the economy and its
customers in a sustainable way over the long-term.   As I have referred to in other speeches, and
as is evident by recent events, there is a breakdown in trust in many aspects of financial services
provision.    This  is  problematic  in  its  own  right,  but  also  will  cause  unnecessary  frictions  and
costs within the system itself.
Compliance functions and other parts of the second and third lines of defence within regulated
firms have an important role in play in rebuilding that trust, and in doing so, support and, perhaps
counter-intuitively, liberate your firms to be more successful over the long term. 
I thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
With thanks to Steven Cull for his assistance in preparing my remarks.
See The Banking Landscape – Ed Sibley, Director of Credit Institutions Supervision – 14 March 2017.
The Role of Financial Regulation in Protecting Consumers - 23 February 2017.
The  Probability  Risk  and  Impact  SysteMTM  (PRISMTM)  is  the  Central  Bank’s  risk-based  framework  for  the
supervision of regulated firms.   It supports our challenging firms, judging the risks they pose to the economy
and the consumer and mitigating those risks we judge to be unacceptable. See Introduction to PRISM.
See, for example, Bernstein, Peter L. (1996). Against The Gods: The Remarkable Story of Risk.
See Association of Compliance Officers in Ireland.
Markets in Financial Instruments Directive.
With  respect  to  the  appointment  of  directors  and  senior  management,  including  assessments  of:  director
independence; conflicts of interest among board members; and suitability of senior management with respect
to their knowledge, experience, skill and competence for their roles.
For  example,  Compliance  policies  and  mandates  frequently  do  not  reflect  Basel  Committee  on  Banking
Supervision  best  practice,  as  they  do  not  contain  information  on:  (i)  measures  to  ensure  the  compliance
function’s independence; (ii) the relationship of compliance with the risk and internal audit functions; (iii) the
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
right to obtain access to information from staff; and (iv) the right to conduct investigations of possible breaches
of compliance policy and appoint external experts.
10
IT and cyber security risks facing the Financial Services Sector – 8 November 2016.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
