Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Returns
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the joint meeting of the Rotary Club of Makati with the Rotary Club of
Makati North, Makati City, 29 August 2017.
 Mr. Conrado Dayrit, Rotary Club of Makati (RCM) President, President Dennis Pe  (RCM North),
President Carol Mercado (RCM Premier District),  RCM officers, members, guests, ladies and
gentlemen, magandang hapon po sa inyong lahat. Thank you for the opportunity to keynote this
meeting co-sponsored by RCM North.
I  would  like  to  begin  with  the  word,  “returns.”  In  this  group  of  distinguished  businessmen  and
professionals,  it  could  readily  mean  “return  on  investment”—  a  financial  metric  indicating
efficiency of a commercial venture. 
At the same time, to this same group of community builders and philanthropists, “to return” could
also mean, “to give back” and to work for society’s improvement and welfare. In this regard, RCM
deserves  commendation  for  its  active  engagement  in  public-spirited  projects  since  its
establishment in 1966.
RCM understands that businesses operate more successfully when society and its needs are
considered.  It knows that commerce fully succeeds in a society that is also successful. The
reverse is also true.
We at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas share this belief. Established for the public interest, we
believe in first – providing a conducive business environment through promotion of price stability;
banking and financial stability; and the operation of an efficient and reliable payments settlements
system.  We also have come to believe in, second, working for greater financial inclusion so that
economic development and progress would be truly meaningful. 
I would like to think of the BSP and RCM as partners in these two shared goals.
A positive environment for investment
The BSP cannot guarantee businesses’ a return on their investments. As you know, this is a
function of many factors such as prudent management, quality of customer service, innovation,
location, supply and demand and so on.
The  BSP’s  task  is  to  work  for  a  better  and  more  stable  operating  economic  landscape  for
commerce, banking and finance.
In  that  regard,  I’m  pleased  to  note,  the  numbers  are  quite  positive. And  my  commitment  as
Governor of the Bangko Sentral is for there to be continuity in the policies that brought about this
favorable  economic  environment,  with  space  for  improvements  through  bold  and  strategic
financial sector reforms.
1. Increasing gross domestic product - Developments in 2017 point to overall economic
resilience.    Real  GDP  rose  by  6.4  percent  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  with  stronger
economic activity expected in the second half.
2. Manageable inflation. - Although headline inflation rose to 2.8 percent in July (from 2.7
percent in June), the year-to-date average inflation rate is 3.1 percent.  We expect it to stay
that way.  We therefore will meet the inflation target of 3 percent, +/- 1 percentage point
allowance for 2017.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fostering a stable business environment is primordial to the BSP. Keeping inflation low
and stable does away with uncertainty and better enables businessmen and investors (like
yourselves) to plan and make informed decisions about consumption, investment, saving,
and production.
Moving forward, the BSP will continue to fine-tune its monetary policy framework to make it
more market-oriented, while staying focused on inflation control. We deployed the interest
rate corridor (IRC) system in 2016.  Its objective is to make market interest rates move
closer to the BSP policy rate. In the long run, this supports Philippine capital markets by
encouraging money market transactions and better liquidity management.
3. Ample  domestic  liquidity  -  Latest  data  also  shows  ample  domestic  liquidity.  Bank
lending remains upbeat and continues to flow into productive sectors such as real estate;
power  and  utilities;  manufacturing;  wholesale  and  retail  trade;  and  information  and
communication. 
4. Sound and Stable Banking System - Our banking sector is fundamentally sound. The
reforms put in place by the BSP, along with banks’ commitment to manage operational
risks  have  resulted  in  significant  improvements  in  the  quality  of  bank  assets  and  loan
portfolios as well as strong capitalization. Also, I am pleased to note that as banks fund the
domestic economy, they remain prudent in their lending activities.
The  BSP  will  continue  to  review  and  align  regulations  with  international  standards  to
improve  risk  management  and  improve  bank  competitiveness  in  view  of  ASEAN
integration. 
 Working towards a stronger and more stable banking system is a practical goal.  Banks
support  the  financing  needs  of  our  continuously  growing  economy  and  have  a  role  in
efficient allocation of resources. 
5 . Market-driven  exchange  rate  and  adequate  GIR  -    Recent  developments  in  the
exchange rate reflects a confluence of factors. These are: strong import growth, reflecting
a rise in dollar demand given expansion in private and government sectors, and expected
U.S.  Federal  Reserve  rate  hikes  due  to  their  policy  normalization.  These  factors
notwithstanding,  we  expect  the  country’s  robust  growth,  stable  inflation  environment,
strong  and  resilient  banking  system,  and  prudent  fiscal  position  to  provide  underlying
support to the peso. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  that  inflow  of  cash  remittances  from  overseas  Filipinos  (OFs)  coursed
through banks remain steady reaching US$ 2.5 billion in June.  This is a 5.7-percent increase
from  the  level  posted  in  the  same  period  a  year  ago.  Meanwhile,  export  growth  has  actually
picked up to around 13%.  As a result, the country’s gross international reserves (GIR) as of end-
July  2017  remains  at  more  than  US$80  billion,  equivalent  to  nearly  nine  (9)  months’  worth  of
imports of goods and services.
Need for vigilance
While the economic backdrop is favorable, the BSP remains vigilant given global and domestic
challenges.    An  expected  rise  in  US  interest  rates  may  drive  portfolio  capital  outflows  from
emerging  markets,  including  the  Philippines,  adding  to  exchange  rate  pressures  in  these
economies.    Moreover,  US  implementation  of  a  conservative  policy  agenda  on  immigration,
offshoring/outsourcing,  trade,  tax  reform,  labor/immigration  laws,  and  financial  and  business
regulation could impact exports as well as OF remittances. Finally, the ongoing rebalancing of
the  Chinese  economy  as  it  transitions  from  export-led  growth  to  services  and  domestic
consumption-driven expansion could impact Philippine exports.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Potential Economic fall-out from the ongoing tensions between the US and North Korea, as well
as peace and order issues if not managed are also a source of concern.
These risks notwithstanding, In June 2017, Moody’s affirmed its stable outlook on the Philippine
banking system citing our: (1) robust real GDP growth; (2) broadly stable bank asset quality; (3)
high  capital  buffers  and  loan-loss  provisioning;  (4)  the  banking  system  remaining  fully  deposit
funded; and (5) high proportion of liquid assets held by banks.  This is a good indication.
At any rate, the BSP has a broad policy toolkit to respond to the risks mentioned.  We are also
coordinating  with  other  government  agencies  and  regulators  to  further  enhance  our  macro-
financial  surveillance  capability.  The  BSP  is  watchful  of  shifts  in  market  sentiment  along  with
trends  in  commodity  prices  and  other  inflation  drivers,  refreshing  its  liquidity  forecasting  and
inflation models so they are in tune with evolving impulses.  In the spirit of “continuity plus plus,”
no significant deviation from previous monetary policy approach is anticipated.
Returning to the community
As the country experiences more economic success, it becomes imperative to allow a greater
number of our fellow Filipinos to enjoy the gains. Financial inclusion translates to allowing more
of our countrymen to save and borrow for productive uses…avail of investment and insurance
products and send and receive payments securely and efficiently.
We believe this is the only way for economic growth to be truly meaningful. Filipinos from the
grassroots must be given usage and access to financial services, and be provided with financial
literacy and education empowering them to make informed financial decisions to better their lives
and that of their families.
RCM has, through the years, made positive and lasting change in Philippine communities. We in
the BSP will be glad to partner with you in the transformation of our country, perhaps in launching
Public Information Campaigns and other endeavors.  Imagine even our lowest socio-economic
group  as  a  financially  literate  populace!    This  is  an  exciting  prospect  that  we  hope  you,  our
partners in business and industry, would support the BSP in achieving. 
On  the  BSP’s  part,  we  have,  among  other  initiatives,  implemented  the  National  Strategy  for
Financial Inclusion to make the financial system accessible and responsive to the needs of the
entire population.
We  are  also  working  with  other  government  agencies  for  the  implementation  of  a  national  ID
system.  With this system, disenfranchisement will be a thing of the past, with the number of
“unbanked” citizens shrinking faster and with more certainty. Individual biometric identification will
give each one a voice to be recognized, to be heard and to participate in economic growth and
development. 
We are also continuously creating a more enabling regulatory environment for the development
of  fin-tech  and  digital  finance.  The  digitalization  of  finance  is  essential  to  achieve  significant
inroads against financial exclusion and payments inefficiency.  Soon, financial consumers and
investors will be able to make more informed business decisions choosing from a longer, fresher
and more innovative menu of available financial products and services.
We adopted the National Retail Payments System (NRPS), a flagship program for digital finance.
With this, we hope to transition from a cash-heavy economy, where 99 percent of transactions
are done in cash, to a cash-lite economy, with transactions becoming electronic.  This move
towards  modernization  supportive  of  e-commerce  might  be  of  particular  interest  to  business
people such as yourselves. On our part, we see the role innovations play in on-boarding currently
excluded markets into the formal financial system.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
But there is still much to be done.  We count on you, RCM to help us in our financial inclusion
efforts  to  collaborate  with  us  towards  maintaining  a  more  stable,  conducive  and  stronger
business environment.   I am confident that the returns on this, far from just being financial or
proprietary, will be more satisfying and enduring. 
I end with a simple but powerful quote from Deepak Chopra “ If you want something, give it.” .
What  one  gives  out,  we  know,  returns  somehow.    As  we  work  towards  society’s  positive
transformation, we do not shirk at the possibilities of being at the receiving end.
Thank you for your kind attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
