 NATIONAL BANK OF SERBIA  
Governor’s opening remarks at the presentation of 
the Inflation Report – November 2017 
Dr Jorgovanka Tabaković, Governor 
         Belgrade, 15 November 2017 
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Welcome to the presentation of the November Inflation Report. We will give you an overview of the 
monetary  and  macroeconomic  trends  for  the  period  since  the  previous  Report  and  set  out  our 
expectations for the coming period. 
Before  I  give  the  floor  to  my  colleagues,  who  will  elaborate  on  the  Report,  allow  me  to  reflect  on 
several topics that were current in the period following the August Report. 
Progress  on  international  lists,  a  fall  in  the  country  risk  premium,  higher  investment  in 
Serbia, along with robust growth in exports 
I  would  like  to  open  this  conference  by  stating  the  fact  that  Serbia  has  recorded  progress  on  the 
World  Bank  Doing  Business  list  2018  for  the  third  year  in  a  row,  and  currently  we  are  on  the  43rd 
position. Furthermore, according to the latest Global Competitiveness Report of the World Economic 
Forum,  Serbia,  as  in  the  past  year,  made  the  greatest  improvement  on  macroeconomic 
environment indicators, by 31 notches, owing to low and stable inflation, a reduced budget deficit, 
an  increase  in  national  savings  and  a  more  favourable  country  credit  rating.  Measured  by  the 
achieved  inflation  level,  according  to  the  Global  Competitiveness  Report  of  the  World  Economic 
Forum, Serbia kept the first position, shared with 35 more countries.  
Owing to the results achieved, Serbia’s credit rating was upgraded, and the country risk premium fell 
to  a  historical  low  this  year.  Only  during  this  year  the  risk  premium  more  than  halved,  and  since 
August it has been trending at a relatively stable level – around 120 basis points, its lowest levels. To 
us, this virtually means the possibility of using both domestic and external sources of finance under 
more favourable conditions. 
The practical significance of the above stated is testified by the increased interest of foreign investors 
to invest  in Serbia –  both in the form of investment in domestic government securities,  and in the 
form of foreign direct investment.  
Despite  the  fact  that  the  Federal  Reserve  System  has  raised  the  funds  rate  three  times  since 
December last year, this year we recorded an appreciably lower outflow of portfolio investment. To 
be  specific,  the  outflow  was  down  by  around  85%  during  these  nine  months  relative  to  the  same 
period  last  year.  And  in  the  second  and  third  quarter,  there  was  in  fact,  a  net  inflow  of  portfolio 
investment despite the global ambience, where, as I have already said, the Federal Reserve System 
raised its funds rate. 
 1 
Additionally, bearing in mind the achievements made in the past nine months, we revised upwards 
our projection of the foreign direct investment net inflow for this year again, from 1.7 billion euros to 
2.1 billion euros. That means that the expectation is that this year foreign direct investment will be at 
the level of around 5.5% of GDP, exceeding the current account deficit for the third year in a row. At 
the same time, this contributes to the rebalancing of our economy, leading to more dynamic exports, 
which  record  two-digit  growth  rates,  owing  to  new  projects  and  expansion  of  the  exports  base. 
Manufacturing,  which  is  the  most  propulsive  part  of  our  economy,  has  been  recording  diversified 
exports  growth  of  13.6%  year-on-year  in  the  first  nine  months  of  this  year.  Even  though  exports 
increased  in  almost  all  areas,  the  most  significant  contribution  to  this  growth  stemmed  from  the 
production  of  base  metals,  rubber  and  plastic  products,  machinery  and  equipment  and  chemical 
products.  
In  the  coming  period,  the  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  maintaining  the  achieved  results,  further 
improvement  of  the  business  ambience  and  further  enhancement  of  the  competitiveness  of  the 
domestic economy through structural reforms.  
Further  monetary  policy  easing  in  the  conditions  of  low  inflationary  pressures,  with  the 
reduction in the cost of government borrowing 
In the period following the last Inflation Report, we have lowered the key policy rate two times, in 
September and October, by 50 basis points in total. Hence, the key policy rate was lowered to 3.5%, 
which  is  its  lowest  level  in  the  inflation  targeting  regime.  The  decision  to  proceed  with  monetary 
policy easing was driven by additionally subdued inflationary pressures, and the fact that resilience 
of  the  domestic  economy  to  external  shocks  increased,  owing  to  favourable  macroeconomic 
performance.  Low  inflationary  pressures  are  indicated  by  low  and  stable  core  inflation,  moving 
around 1.5% year-on-year, the same as at the end of the previous year. The impact of the drought on 
food  prices  was  also  less  pronounced  and  the  second-round  effects  on  other  prices  were  absent, 
which is also confirmed by inflation expectations within the target tolerance band. According to our 
latest  projection  which  takes  into  account  past  monetary  easing  and  the  public  sector  wage  and 
pension increase, inflation will continue to trend within the target tolerance band of 3±1.5% until the 
end of the projection horizon. 
    2 
Lowering  of  the  key  policy  rate  expectedly  reflected  on  a  further  drop  in  interest  rates  in  the 
interbank  money  market  and  lower  government  costs  in  respect  of  issued  dinar  securities.  To  be 
specific,  the  achieved  interest  rates  at  the  last  three  auctions  of  dinar  securities  with  seven-,  two- 
and three-year maturity were lower by 0.5 to 0.6 percentage points relative to the previous auctions 
with  the  same  maturity,  which  corresponds  to  the  lowering  of  the  key  policy  rate.  Hence,  the  full 
coordination of fiscal and monetary policy continues. 
Acceleration  of  credit  activity  as  support  to  economic  activity  and  a  decrease  in  the  NPL 
ratio to its lowest level in the past nine years  
Past  monetary  policy  easing,  a  fall  in  the  country  risk  premium,  increased  interbank  competition, 
economic  growth  and  labour  market  recovery,  as  well  as  low  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area, 
contributed to credit activity acceleration to 5% year-on-year in September. Excluding the effect of 
NPL write-offs, the recovery of credit activity is even more evident and equalled 9.8% year-on-year.  
  Also  in  the  past  two  years,  that  is,  since  the  adoption  and  implementation  of  the  NPL  Resolution 
Strategy, banks stepped up their efforts to resolve these loans through the write-off and sale to non-
banking  sector entities.  The  result  of  these measures  is  the  reduction  in  the  NPL  ratio  by  over 10 
percentage points since the Strategy adoption, which is the lowest ratio for the past almost nine 
years, to be more precise, after January 2009. 
Credit activity growth, with lower interest rates, supported economic growth as well. 
Continued  labour  market  recovery  and  creation  of  the  basis  for  growth  on  sustainable 
grounds 
At the beginning of the year, economic activity was without a doubt affected by supply-side shocks, 
which primarily reflected on agriculture and energy. However, sectors unaffected by negative effects 
of these shocks continued to record good performance, particularly manufacturing. The third quarter 
saw accelerated growth with gradual waning of the effects of these shocks. Non-agriculture and non-
energy  economic  activity  will  post  3%  growth  this  year,  and  the  growth  of  manufacturing  will 
probably be even faster than previously expected. 
Ahead  of  us  is  the  continued  work  on  improvement  of  the  business  ambience,  which  will,  along 
with  a  high  and  project-diversified  inflow  of  foreign  direct  investment,  implementation  of 
infrastructure projects, past monetary policy easing and responsible fiscal policy, contribute to the 
 3 
creation of the  basis  for acceleration of economic growth on sustainable  grounds  in the medium 
run. Accordingly, for 2018 and 2019 we expect acceleration to around  3.5%, and around 4% in the 
medium  run.  Parallel  with  that,  we  expect  the  continuation  of  labour  market  recovery,  that  is,  an 
increase in employment and the standard of living.  
Ladies and gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
Finally, I would like to reflect on the just completed mission of the International Monetary Fund on 
the  occasion  of  the  eighth  review  of  the  stand-by  arrangement of  the  Republic  of  Serbia.  When  it 
comes to the policy and results of the National Bank of Serbia, inflation is estimated to remain at the 
level  around  the  target  midpoint  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia.  In  addition,  bearing  in  mind 
exchange rate movements and the expectation that inflation will trend at a low level, the monetary 
policy stance has been assessed as adequate. As for the financial sector, it has been assessed that the 
NPL  Resolution  Strategy  continues  to  yield very  good  results,  that  bank  credit  activity  is  rising  and 
contributing to economic growth,  and that  significant  progress  has been made  in the area of bank 
supervision  and  alignment  of  the  legal  framework  with  European  Union  standards.  All  of  this 
together contributes to the preservation of financial stability.  
With this I would conclude my opening remarks and give the floor to my colleagues who will present 
the key messages of the November Inflation Report and our perception of macroeconomic trends in 
the coming period. You will hear from them that our projections of inflation movements indicate that 
we will accomplish our main statutory objective by ensuring low inflation within the target tolerance 
band in the future period as well.  
  4 
