Andreas  Dombret:  Too  little,  too  much,  or  just  right?  Reforming
banking regulation after the financial crisis
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the 21st Colloquium of the Institute for Banking and Financial History (IBF) "Ways to a stable
financial system", Frankfurt am Main, 23 November 2017.
1. Ways to a stable financial system
Ladies and gentlemen
 You have heard numerous speeches today on proposals for reforms and their pros and cons.
Now I think it’s time to briefly revisit our actual objective. And this is “Ways to a stable financial
system”.
Scholars, politicians and regulators have been racking their brains over this problem since 2007,
the year the financial crisis broke out. The question of whether a financial system can even be
stable in the first place has also emerged. And yet if there is one thing we all know, it is that there
will never be a completely stable, completely crisis-proof financial system in the real world.
However, we are all here today at this colloquium out of the conviction that, if nothing else, a
financial system can be made a little less vulnerable, thereby containing the fallout from crises –
provided the right solutions are found.
The  G20  countries  have  travelled  a  long  and  often  rocky  road  in  order  to  make  the  financial
system  more  stable. 
from  my  perch  at
the Bundesbanksince  2010  –  I  started  out  originally  responsible  for  financial  stability  and,
since 2014, have been in charge of banking and financial supervision.
I  have  been 
this  path 
following 
And I, too, have been asking myself time and again: have we taken the right road? Or have we
fallen short? Have we possibly gone too far in some places, or even gone entirely off track?
The answer to these questions, sadly, is not that simple – and that is why it has been occupying
us to this day. Still, I would like to attempt to deliver an answer, based on three points.
I initially wish to discuss the regulatory principle that was supposed to guide post-crisis reforms:
if we assume that the idea of a 100 % stable financial system is utopian, then reforms should be
conducted  to  prevent  financial  bubbles  from  being  created  by  misvaluation  and  excessive
leverage while crisis-proofing banks.
My second point concerns equilibrium and an assessment of these reforms. As a supervisor and
regulator, I am naturally partial and convinced that we have taken the path of the golden mean: in
my assessment, financial stability and risk appetite are being treated equally. And this is why,
once Basel III has been finalised, we should take a regulatory break for now.
Yet – and this is my third point – reforms will have the desired effect if, and only if, the rules are
also credibly and rigorously implemented and applied.
2. Prevent the build-up of bubbles and make banks crisis-proof
Let us begin with the question as to the right guiding principle for regulation. As long ago as 1986,
economist  Hyman  Minsky  formulated  one  avenue  worth  exploring  in  his  book  Stabilising  an
unstable economy, a book which remained largely obscure for 20 years – and thus long past his
death in 1991. It was only the 2008 crisis which revealed the importance of his theses to all.1
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Minsky saw financial markets as having a natural inclination towards instability and crisis. That
was wholly out of kilter with the then-prevailing zeitgeist – and the blossoming financial markets
of the period. Nor, by the same token, did it go along with the prevailing theory in economics – the
efficient markets hypothesis.
From today's perspective, we know that financial markets have a tendency to exaggerate and
thus  experience  cyclical  instability.  Minsky  was  far  from  along  in  noticing  this.  His  decisive
discovery, however, was that this instability has its origins in stability – more precisely, in a period
of stability which encourages increasingly excessive risk taking.
What do I mean by that? Long periods of growth lead to exceptionally favourable funding terms;
these, in turn, encourage enterprises and households to make investments that are based to a
very great extent on the principle of hope – hope that the economy will continue to grow at the
same pace. Banks prop up this optimism by easing the terms and conditions for their lending
and  later  even  lowering  their  credit  standards.  This  all  adds  up  to  burgeoning  debt,  which  is
sustainable only as long as debt can be serviced.
However, once it is no longer possible to service this debt, and asset values subsequently fall,
what is known as a “Minsky moment” occurs. That is, debt becomes unsustainable, materialising
when  positive  expectations  give  way  to  pessimism. A  subsequent  cascade  of  financial  price
corrections and defaults causes losses to the real economy.
One of the decisive things we can learn from this is that financial crises and their causes are an
integral part of the system. And, like with any system, the disrupting factors are already built into
the financial system.
So what does Minsky mean in terms of banking and financial regulation? In any case, it doesn’t
mean sitting around and twiddling one’s thumbs. Although Minsky explains how financial crises
occur, the cause and effect relationship he describes is not a law of nature. Far more important
is that regulators and supervisors understand these interrelationships and use the instruments at
their disposal to reduce the likelihood of a “Minsky moment” occurring.
Minsky has therefore tendered a guiding principle for discussion: if regulators develop new rules,
they have to ensure that the build-up of a bubble through excessive credit growth is less likely
than it would be in a wholly unregulated financial market with an inclination towards exaggeration.
However, since no regulation, however forward-looking it might be, can completely prevent crises
altogether, banks have to be crisis-proofed.
As I said, Minsky’s theory has been around for over 20 years. Yet guiding principles – as we all
know – do not automatically translate into optimal regulation. Real regulatory initiatives need a
little more actual content.
This  has  been  a  matter  for  policymakers  and  supervisors  in  equal  measure  since  2008.  The
second point I will discuss is how well they have performed.
3. Reform after the financial crisis: too little, too much or just right?
This  morning,  my  colleague  on  the Bundesbank Executive Board, Carl-Ludwig Thiele, already
gave an account at this colloquium of the major cornerstones of the reforms after the financial
crisis. I shall now flesh that out by naming the latest developments: in the case of the Basel III
reform,  a  compromise  is  within  reach. At  the  technical  level,  negotiations  have  already  been
concluded. With the completion of Basel III, the G20’s reform agenda will have essentially been
fulfilled.
The question of whether this puts us on a path towards a stable financial system is not one that I
am going to answer by citing individual regulatory clauses or percentages, but with a general
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
evaluation.
The  objective  of  good  regulation  is  and  has  always  been  to  prevent  economic  bubbles  from
forming  as  far  as  this  is  possible  and  –  if  a  crisis  is  unavoidable  –  to  limit  its  impact  on  the
general public and the economy. It is just that therein lies the major challenge: what is the correct
measure? What constitutes a proportionate intervention? What regulations are appropriate and
which are disproportionate?
As I have already explained, I firmly believe that we have embarked on an effective and, at the
same  time,  balanced  path  over  the  past  few  years.  The  reform  packages  are  making  banks
significantly safer: as a result of more stringent capital requirements, by the introduction of the
leverage  ratio,  by  the  introduction  of  not  one  but  two  liquidity  minimum  requirements,  by  the
introduction of capital buffers and by further elements.
More  than  that:  we  are  also  tackling  the  problem  of  bubble  formation.  Through  prudential
requirements  and  through  stress  tests,  for  example,  institutions  are  being  placed  under  an
obligation to conduct a more cautious risk management at an early stage. There has also been a
microprudential  upgrade,  say,  as  a  result  of  stricter  requirements  for  systemically  important
institutions and instruments designed to prevent the emergence of bubbles – think, for example,
of possible cyclical capital add-ons for mortgage loans.
And,  not  least,  the  creation  of  the  banking  union  has  very  much  strengthened  regulation  and
supervision of the financial system in the euro area.
In  total,  the  reforms  have  all  been  concerned  with  restoring  the  equilibrium  of  the  market
economy. You can tell that, in particular, by an additional, quite important new instrument – the
way in which bank distress is treated. During the financial crisis, there were a number of bank
rescues. Mr Thiele has already referred to this “fall of the market economy”.
A  resolution  regime  has  now  been  established  in  Europe.  The  failure  of  a  major  Spanish
institution five months ago demonstrated that the rules work and that investors can indeed be
bailed in. Other, less satisfactory cases have shown, however, that gaps still exist, and these
have  to  be  closed.  All  things  considered,  I  nevertheless  regard  the  reforms  as  important
instruments with which the fall-out and costs of financial crises can be distributed more fairly
among those responsible.
You can see, therefore, that we are not relying on a single solitary instrument or a single solitary
approach – rather, we have a toolbox with complementary instruments. In total, this toolbox – I
firmly believe – makes our financial system much more stable.
Other proposals presented today go even further. Their common denominator, however, is that
the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  can  supposedly  be  eliminated  only  by  even  more  radical
approaches.
I think that such a debate is very important: in my opinion, scholars have a downright duty to look
beyond their own field, to question old approaches and develop bold new ones.
For that reason, too, I shall not be going into detail about the pros and cons of these alternative
approaches.  My  point  is  a  more  general  one:  the  advantage  of  a  far-reaching,  fundamentally
novel approach may also be its inherent drawback. While offering new solutions, it also creates
new problems – problems that are mostly unidentifiable on the drawing board.
Seen in that light, a comparison between an existing system and a radically new one is always
flawed:  with  the  existing  system,  the  focus  is  on  the  real  problems,  while  the  new  approach
directs attention to improvements that are full of promise. Because the new approach has not yet
undergone  a  reality  check,  it  virtually  almost  always  looks  like  the  better  option.  But  its
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
implementation in terms of actual regulations may bring serious, unintended side effects for our
financial system in its wake.
It is also extremely important to me that we take into account the fact that regulation can, indeed,
go too far ‒ that is to say when there is formed the illusion that a perfect, stable financial world
can  be  created  and  the  zeal  for  reform  restricts  economic  activity  to  such  an  extent  that
innovation is choked off and economic upturns are stifled.
But, sadly, unintended side effects of reforms can indeed lead to the obstruction of key functions,
the unnecessary break-up of beneficial, established structures, and the unpredictable frustration
of  wealth  creation.  Sustained  economic  growth  needs  innovation  and  risk  taking,  however:  a
failure to safeguard the supply of credit to economy can enfeeble economic activity.
I perceive such a threat in the calls for making banking regulation even more stringent. As much
as  I  can  understand  the  motivation  behind  them,  I  have  immense  appreciation  of  the
accompanying effects of turning the screws too tightly when it comes to regulation.
Anyone wanting to live in a completely risk-free world would therefore also have to accept much
less dynamic economic growth.
There is another point that seems important to me: regulation can create inadvertent effects on
the  structure  of  the  financial  sector. Applying  regulations  adopted  for  the  large  banks  with  an
international focus one-to-one to smaller institutions clearly places those small institutions at a
disadvantage.  That  is  why  I  advocate  lowering  the  regulatory  burden  for  the  small,  low-risk
institutions that do not operate internationally.
In summary, I take a positive view overall of the post-crisis reforms that will soon be completed.
Taking  this  compromise  as  a  starting  point,  we  now  have  to  look  to  the  future  –  for  it  is  well
known that the challenges for the banking sector are considerable. With regard to regulations, we
must not give in to those who want to turn back the regulatory clock. But nor we must not go on
tightening the screws of regulation ever further.
I am therefore in favour of a regulatory break after the reforms have been completed. This should
be used to thoroughly evaluate the impact of the reforms and to amend and improve them where
gaps  and  errors  are  found.  This  does  not  include  the  few  outstanding  areas  where  action  is
called for, such as the regulatory treatment of government bonds.
4. Paper never refused ink: reforms will be short-lived without a change in attitude
Ladies and gentlemen, as you can tell, I am a realist. And that brings me to the third point I would
like to make – that even the best reforms will only go so far if they are not accompanied by a
permanent change in attitude.
Because  without  that  change,  the  rules  will  be  monitored  less  rigorously  than  intended.  Even
before the diesel scandal broke, we knew that even the best rules don’t achieve much if nobody
is made to keep them.
Ideally, the change in attitude in the financial sector should be based around an understanding
that consistently monitoring and complying with the rules is in everyone’s interests. All too often,
decision-makers  think  that  they  are  doing  the  economy  a  favour  by  saving  a  bank  from
insolvency  or  calling  for  prudential  leniency  in  order  to  prolong  a  riskier  type  of  activity.  Their
intention, one would imagine, is to safeguard stability and jobs – but unfortunately, it has often
turned out to be an unrealistic one.
Instead,  all  that  such  leniency  has  done  is  make  two  things  more  likely  in  the  medium  term:
financial market bubbles and economic stagnation.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
That’s because the financial crisis was the outcome not just of a handful of undisciplined banks
or gaps in the rules but also of the belief that light-touch interpretation and monitoring of the rules
was  promoting  economic  activity.  As  you  can  see,  political  beliefs  influence  how  rules  are
2
applied – and there is now even clear, international evidence to confirm this view.
And  yet  some  people  keep  slipping  back  into  the  old  ways  of  thinking.  The  debate  about
deregulation  in  the  US  springs  to  mind,  for  example,  as  does  the  discussion  about  non-
performing  loans  –  here,  at  times,  it  seems  that,  for  some  decision-makers,  things  can’t
progress slowly and gently enough when it comes to tackling these long-standing and serious
problems. The debate about competitive deregulation after Brexit suggests that the old mindset
might be making a comeback.
The  more  important,  then,  to  grasp  that  the  reforms  being  discussed  today  will  only  actually
prevent  bubbles  from  forming  and  strengthen  banks  if  the  rules  are  applied  consistently  and
effectively.
Those  who  go  easy  on  or  even  rescue  a  sickly  bank  by  interpreting  the  rules  generously  are
eroding the substance of our economy. They are deactivating the market economy principle of
competition, enfeebling innovative potential in the banking sector and, if anything, helping to prop
up  “zombie  banks”  whose  days  would  be  numbered  were  it  not  for  the  light-touch  approach.
Indulging a credit institution and its creditors ultimately comes at the cost of economic growth.
Financial history repeats itself, too, so we need to rigorously implement the reforms we have
agreed  upon.  But  what  does  the  change  in  attitude  I  am  talking  about  mean  for  prudential
decisions on the ground?
To be clear, most prudential decisions are made within the established legal framework, which
the reforms undertaken have made far more tight-knit and robust.
Decisions where the rules are not entirely clear-cut – that is, where discretion can be applied –
might pose difficulties. And this is where the change in attitude comes into play. Today, we know
that  supervisors  need  to  weigh  up  between  reducing  the  likelihood  of  a  bubble  forming  or
permitting low-yielding but relatively risky activity. As I see it, they must have the courage and
confidence in this situation to do what is best for financial stability – and then be bold enough to
face  the  music  –  even  if  it  later  transpires  that  one  or  the  other  decision  went  overboard.
Because decisions that are geared to preserving stability are generally better for the economy as
a whole.
To  put  this  principle  into  practice,  decision-makers  will  also  have  to  make  uncomfortable
decisions – such as winding up a bank with a bail-in of investors, imposing capital add-ons, or
restricting the distribution of dividends if an institution fails to comply with the buffer requirements.
I would like to remind you again of the balancing act between preventing bubbles from forming on
the  one  hand,  but  not  stunting  economic  growth  on  the  other.  This  feat  is  something  which
regulators  and  supervisors  need  to  take  very  seriously  at  all  times.  For  the  vast  majority  of
decisions, it would be very wrong for us to act like supervisory sheriffs, clamping down on useful
financial intermediation. We need to focus on the decisions that really count – with prudence,
expertise and determination.
Specifically, this means that the change in attitude, which can be seen in the post-crisis reforms
and elsewhere, needs to be embraced once and for all – by supervisory authorities as well as
political decision-makers. Not only do supervisors need to have the tools to intervene; they also
have  to  be  confident  enough  to  use  them. And  it  would  be  wrong  for  that  confidence  to  be
undermined  by  incentives  to  shield  banks.  Policymakers,  then,  would  do  well  to  respect  the
professional independence of authorities and the objective decisions they make. Conversely, this
means that they must refrain from applying pressure on authorities for political reasons. 
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. Conclusion
We  have  made  considerable  progress  since  the  financial  crisis  erupted.  The  banking  and
financial system is a great deal better off these days. We have created a toolkit to make future
crises  less  likely  and  make  institutions  more  resilient  to  withstand  any  turbulence  that  does
occur. Banks have more capital, and they are managing their risks better.
But  there  is  a  danger  that  even  the  best  regulation  will  remain  piecemeal  if  its  rules  are  not
applied  consistently.  Only  the  rigorous  and  consistent  supervision  of  credit  institutions  can
ensure that bubbles are less likely to form and that, in an emergency, there is enough capital to
absorb losses.
When it comes to applying the rules in future, we should heed Minsky’s key message, which is
that, for all their undeniable merits, financial markets do always have a tendency to form bubbles
and thus slip into financial crises; also, that these bubbles build up in upbeat economic spells –
which is when nobody wants to talk about it.
To stall the formation of bubbles and to equip banks to cope with headwinds, supervisors and
policymakers need to evaluate the impact on society as a whole. But this will only happen if the
change  in  attitude  takes  hold  among  policymakers  and  supervisors.  Let  us  hope  that  today’s
conference will help make this happen.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
2
HP Minsky (1986) Stabilizing an unstable economy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Barth, J R, Caprio, G & Levine, D S (2012), Guardians of Finance. Making Regulators Work for Us, MIT Press,
Cambridge.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
