Benoît Cœuré: Interview with France Info TV
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and France Info TV, conducted by Mr Jean-Paul Chapel on 9 November 2017.
 Global indebtedness is at record levels. Government debt in the rich countries stands at
over 100% of GDP. Isn’t that sowing the seeds for the next global crisis?
It’s a matter that calls for attention, but I don’t think it will be the cause of the next financial crisis.
What will cause it then?
I don’t know. But at the ECB we are more concerned about the rapid rise in private debt.
Corporate debt?
Yes, corporate debt, and shadow banking – those loans that are not made by banks.
Dark banks...
Shadow banks. They are insufficiently regulated. Also, there’s a widespread temptation to relax
banking regulations, at a time when, as you say, interest rates are very low. All that is a source of
risk. Government debt is a concern, but it doesn’t threaten to trigger a financial crisis. When the
next crisis hits Europe we want to be sure that Member States, governments, have budgetary
firepower. Today, that power is very limited or even non-existent. That’s why countries have to
deleverage.
But in the meantime, you, the central banks, the European Central Bank and other banks,
with low interest rates, ample liquidity, you are inflating these bubbles…
It’s true that the low rates can create financial stability risks; we’re aware of that. The longer we
conduct these policies, the longer the rates will remain low and these risks will exist. That shows
how urgent it is to have growth policies which do not rely mainly on monetary policy. A full mix of
policies would be healthier from this point of view, since they would not create financial stability
risks. We are closely following this and at the moment we see no financial bubbles at euro area
level. There are some small, worrying signs in some countries. In France, for example, corporate
debt is rising very quickly. But there is nothing that would justify the ECB withdrawing its support
for  growth.  Monetary  policy  supports  growth  and  job  creation.  For  that  reason  we  won’t  be
withdrawing support now.
Let’s talk about Europe, about its construction. It’s the issue that’s stirring up anger.
Jean-Baptiste Duval of the Huffington Post would like to ask a question on that.
“Europe was a great success”, you said in [your interview with] Le Journal du Dimanche,
but  what  exactly  are  you  talking  about?  About  the  “no”  in  the  2005  referendum,
wonderfully ignored? About the support for Greece, just like a hangman’s rope? Or the
return of nationalist flames in the United Kingdom and in eastern Europe? Joking aside,
Benoît Cœuré, do you live in an ivory tower in Frankfurt, or do you know things that
Europeans are unaware of?
Do you know things that Europeans are unaware of?
No, we don’t know things that Europeans are unaware of. We try to do our work as best as we
can, which is to ensure price stability in the euro area. And I don’t think we have to be negative
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
about Europe. Not everything is going very well. There are plenty of things which don’t work well
and which need to be improved. But what would we say to the millions of eastern Europeans
who have returned to prosperity thanks to Europe, if Europe didn’t exist today? What would we
say to the millions of French people who work in companies which are exporting to Europe? And
when you travel round the world, Europe is admired. Why? Because it is a prosperous region,
but  also  because  it  is  a  place  of  security,  and  of  social  protection.  Europe  is  one  of  the  few
places in the world where, if you go to hospital, you won’t be asked for your credit card. That’s
what we need to safeguard, but we need to safeguard it together, as Europeans.
Emmanuel Macron wants a euro area budget and greater solidarity between the Member
States. Will that be achieved soon?
It’s necessary because the Member States have to regain budgetary firepower. It would not be
reasonable to expect the European Central Bank to sort out all of Europe’s economic problems
indefinitely.  Economic  capacity  and  budgetary  capacity  have  to  be  recreated.  But  that  won’t
happen  overnight;  French  ideas  won’t  be  imposed  on  Europe  by  magic,  it  will  be  a  long
discussion. To do that, trust should be rebuilt between the countries of Europe. Trust is vital.
From a French perspective, how can that trust be re-created?
By carrying out reforms, and France is doing that.
And by reducing deficits even more?
By  continuing  to  reduce  the  deficit  so  that  debt  falls  and  France  is  ready  when  growth  slows
down.
And by making further cuts in public spending?
It is not for the ECB to tell the French government what needs to be done in detail, but what we
wish is for France to have the capacity to respond economically when growth slows down and
for it not to depend completely on monetary policy.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
