Andreas  Dombret:  Have  we  got  a  (lesson)  plan?  Economic
education in Germany
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the University of Münster, Münster, 3 November 2017.
 Professor Wessels,
Professor Theurl,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Münster  folk  like  ourselves  have  always  got  something  up  our  sleeves.  My  party  trick  for  you
today is that I won’t be talking about banks, nor about monetary policy. No, my surprise is that I
will be sharing my thoughts on economic education in Germany – and of all the places to do that,
I  have  chosen  the  University  of  Münster,  where  I  dare  say  this  topic  won’t  be  causing  any
sleepless nights.
But  looking  further  afield,  what’s  the  state  of  play  for  economic  education  in  Germany  as  a
whole? That’s a topic I think about a lot. And a divisive one, for that matter. You might remember
this tweet by a 17 year-old schoolgirl around three years ago: “I’m getting on for 18 and clueless
1
about taxes, rent or insurance. But I can analyse a poem. In four languages.”
That post was retweeted tens of thousands of times in less than no time, and in the weeks that
followed, it sparked extensive debate in newspapers, on television and in political circles. Some
felt it vindicated their view that the education system is setting the wrong priorities, while others
cautioned against asking too much of schools. My takeaway is that to all intents and purposes,
this debate has been stuck in a rut for decades.
Three questions spring to mind in this regard:
First, what’s the state of play for economic education in Germany?
Second, do we have a problem?
Third, what does economic education need to look like today?
Before  I  continue,  let  me  remind  you  that  I  am  speaking  here  today  as  the  member  of
the Bundesbank’s  Executive  Board  who  is  responsible  for  the  Bank’s  economic  education
activities.
1. State of play
So what’s the state of play right now? The calls for a better quality of economic education, and
more  of  it,  are  nothing  new. As  far  back  as  the  1970s,  education  policy  makers  and  parents’
associations  were  pointing  their  fingers  at  the  deficits  they  saw.  The  German  society  for
economic education, the Gesellschaft für ökonomische Bildung, for instance, was established in
the summer of 1978 – by proponents of economic education from higher education and teacher
training  institutions.  And  the  Standing  Conference  of  the  Ministers  of  Education  and  Cultural
Affairs from Germany’s federal states, the Kultusministerkonferenz, is on record as describing
economic education as an indispensable component of general knowledge.
The reality of our education system, though, is quite different: education in Germany is a matter
for the federal states, of course, which is why the curricula differ widely from one state to the
next. Secondary schools teach economics-related topics inconsistently and in different subjects.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Those topics also crop up in mixed subjects, as they are known, like social sciences or politics
and the economy. And they often have to make do without a fixed number of lessons. Dedicated
economics courses can be offered in upper secondary school levels, but schools are under no
2
obligation to do so.
All in all, then, the offering is meagre. An opinion poll by the bank ING-DiBa, the results of which
were published last week, revealed that not even 20 % of the current round of school leavers had
received school tuition in financial matters. Four years ago, that figure was at least a little better,
3
at more than 30 %.
But  should  it  be  the  job  of  schools  in  the  first  place  to  teach  economics,  finance  and  other
economic education topics? It would be wrong to make schools responsible for everything, some
would argue. That view isn’t entirely off the mark – after all, the scarcity principle applies to the
running of a school as well, so it’s not possible to offer every subject.
But there are also some ideological misgivings, I’m sad to say. Some fear that the “neoliberal
doctrine”, as some call it, might make inroads into school curricula. And a general aversion to
economic matters might also have a bearing, to a degree. You don’t talk about money, or so
we’ve been told – and certainly not with young people, apparently. There’s still no sign of that
trend reversing, even after the global financial crisis.
Lastly,  opinions  differ  over  which  particular  economic  topics  should  be  taught.  These  three
factors – scarce resources, a sense of being at risk and uncertainty – often play a part in eroding
the enthusiasm for economic education reform before the ink has even dried on declarations of
intent.
2. Have we got a problem?
But why should we even change the economic education situation in Germany? Have we got a
problem?
Essentially, there are two types of economic education. The first revolves around the individual –
internationally, it is known as financial literacy: empowering people to take responsibility for their
own financial situation. This strand of economic education is directed at the customers of credit
institutions – that is, at borrowers and investors, if you like.
The  second  type  of  economic  education  aims  to  help  people  understand  the  economy  as  a
whole, and the target audience here is the general public.
A  deficient  understanding  of  financial  relationships  can  very  easily  plunge  an  individual  into
misfortune. When several Italian banks were wound up a couple of months ago, it meant that
quite a number of retail investors lost some of their pension pot, because they had invested in
bonds issued by those banks without understanding the inherent risks or being properly made
aware of them by the issuers. As it turned out, these individual investors got off lightly because
selling these instruments to retail investors was standard practice throughout Italy, which was
why the Italian government quickly came to the rescue and paid out compensation.
There are indeed gaping holes in the public’s general knowledge, including in day-to-day financial
matters.  The opinion poll I mentioned earlier reveals that Germans feel less financially educated
5
than citizens from most other European countries.
4
Former  Bayern  Munich  and  Germany  goalkeeper  Oliver  Kahn  once  neatly  summed  up  this
deficient practical knowledge among his then team-mates when he said: “When no-one is talking
about stocks and shares, just like none of us are doing right now because we are each nursing
painful losses, then that’s the right time to buy. But if everyone’s chattering and saying, ‘Just take
a look at what I’ve earned,’ then you might want to think about selling. It’s what I jokingly call the
6
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
‘team indicator’, and it’s a fantastic counter-indicator.”
But we don’t necessarily need to look at Germany to see this phenomenon in action. The G20,
under German presidency this year, has reiterated its commitment to boosting financial literacy
levels worldwide.
But what is more crucial still, in my eyes, is an ability to grasp the economy and financial system
as a whole. Economic education and participatory democracy are two sides of the same coin.
Given  the  huge  bearing  which  the  economy  has  on  our  lives,  economic  education  is  an
exceedingly  important  means  of  putting  an  electorate  in  a  position  to  make  well-founded
decisions.
If voters do not fully understand the economy, the potential repercussions can be well and truly
devastating. Without a firm grasp of how the economy works, a situation can easily arise where
people are led astray by seemingly straightforward, but ultimately misguided answers. Just take
the current hotly debated topic of protectionism which many, it would appear, consider to be the
ideal solution for a wide array of problems in the economy.
3. What does economic education need to look like today?
There are a great many reasons, then, why we should boost economic education. But if we’re
looking to alleviate today’s deficits, simply making a general commitment to economic education
will not suffice. No, what we need instead is a clear goal and a viable path to lead us there.
Needless to say, I haven’t got a made-to-measure economics curriculum up my sleeve – though
I’m sure that really would have taken you by surprise – so a couple of general considerations will
have to suffice for now.
Let’s kick off with school. I firmly believe that economics should be a separate school subject – it
shouldn’t just make a brief appearance in other school lessons. Incidentally, the criticism levelled
at this idea of making economics a standalone school subject is less about the pros and cons of
a separate subject and more about the concerns I mentioned earlier that teaching economics at
school might sway the social consensus in one particular direction. I will address these concerns
in greater detail later in my speech today.
Generally speaking, we won’t succeed in carrying this debate forward if we don’t take problems
and criticism seriously. For instance, we shouldn’t overburden the curriculum – the “dosage”, as
it were, needs to be manageable, just like in any other school subject. There are plenty basic
principles and abilities which can be taught to school pupils – principles such as the scarcity of
goods  and  the  economic  choices  it  forces  agents  to  make,  or  the  ability  to  comprehend
economic processes. The trade-off between risk and return is something else which shouldn’t
only be familiar to investment bankers or professional traders – the retail investors of the future,
especially,  also  need  to  get  a  basic  feel  for  it.  I  also  think  that  economics  should  be  a  fun
subject  –  it  needs  to  centre  around  real-life,  everyday  situations,  not  just  complex  economic
models.
Like in any other school subject, it’s good to know how knowledge can be put to practical use in
real life: how contraception works is part of biology lessons, and how to write a job application is
taught in German. But there’s no need to go as far as making the school subject of economics
nothing more than a “self-help” course.
And what about the claim I mentioned earlier that economics lessons might be misused as an
ideological vehicle? It is beyond doubt that there are different strands of thinking in economics,
just as there are in any other field of knowledge. And one of the key takeaways from the recent
financial crisis, in my view, is that we shouldn’t become enamoured with any one single model or
line of thinking. Because it might be wrong. What’s important is to be aware that there is more
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
than one line of thinking and more than one model out there. And that’s something which could
be readily taught in a school subject like economics.
This year’s winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, Richard Thaler, has also
remarked that the branch of behavioural economics he has played a large part in bringing to the
mainstream makes no claim to absolute validity, saying: “All economics will be as behavioural as
7
the topic requires.”
As  far  as  school  education  is  concerned,  this  means  that  on  no  account  should  economic
ignorance be replaced by an unthinking one-dimensional perspective. Dogmas can and indeed
should themselves become part of the curriculum – not just at schools but at universities, too.
Yet while appreciating that economic education warrants a higher status in schools, we should
not forget one thing. Economics is a highly complex topic – as I’m sure you will agree. Just as
biology lessons do not produce fully trained biologists or maths classes mathematicians, so, too,
will economics lessons not serve up economists. School-level education is no substitute for the
study of economics. But what it certainly can do is prepare students for it. And what is perhaps
even more important is that it can arouse interest – interest in the workings of the economy and
what it means for every one of us.
To  achieve  all  this,  advanced-level  school  courses  in  economics  need  to  be  geared  more  to
university studies. By that I mean, first, that in courses dealing with economic topics, the material
needs to be handled to an adequate extent from the economic angle. After all, learning a subject
essentially  means  approaching  a  given  problem  methodically.  Second,  courses  with  a  similar
content  should  be  offered  in  schools  throughout  Germany’s  federal  states.  Because  school
pupils who are about to enter university should not have completed levels of class content which
differ fundamentally from one federal state to the next. And it goes without saying that the same
applies to teacher training. No one would want to learn Spanish from a teacher who obtained all
of  his  or  her  knowledge  on  the  subject  in  two  afternoon  training  sessions.  The  bar  therefore
needs to be raised when it comes to training economics teachers, too.
4. Examples that are catching on
Of course, fostering an appreciation of economic education does not stop at the school gates.
Extracurricular initiatives are also needed. For example, the German young researchers contest
(Bundeswettbewerb  “Jugend  Forscht”)  awards  prizes  to  talented  youngsters  in  the  natural
sciences and in the working world. Why not in the field of economics as well? Allow me to make
a  specific  suggestion  today,  namely  to  introduce  a  nationwide  contest  for  young  people
researching economic and financial topics.
Indeed,  there  also  needs  to  be  input  from  beyond  the  confines  of  the  school  system,  be  it  in
terms of talent promotion or “economic education for all”. Because whether we like it or not, the
lack of economic education is making itself felt in all spheres of society.
The Bundesbank takes the matter of economic education extremely seriously. After all, monetary
policy can only be successfully communicated if the general public have a basic grasp of terms
such as inflation or interest. Here in North Rhine-Westphalia alone, the Bundesbank last year ran
almost 300 economic education events which attracted around 7,500 participants. Throughout
8
Germany, in 2016 we held some 1,600 events, with over 53,000 people taking part.
To reach out to young people in particular, the Bundesbank offers a wide array of educational
materials that are designed for use in a school classroom setting.
These materials range from offerings for kindergartens and primary schools – for instance, play
and  counting  money  or  the  “Kinderfunkkolleg”,  a  money-themed  course  of  audio  lectures  for
children,  which  we  developed  in  cooperation  with  the  Frankfurt-based  TV  and  radio
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
broadcaster Hessischer Rundfunk.
Another  educational  resource  the  Bundesbank  provides  is  “Geld  und  Geldpolitik”  (Money  and
monetary policy), a book aimed at the upper secondary school level.  And I am especially excited
about our school textbook “Geld Verstehen” (Understanding money), due to be published next
spring.  This  book  is  aimed  at  lower  secondary  school  pupils  and  will  be  supplemented  by  a
“teacher’s guide” with suggestions on how teachers can plan their lessons. This, we hope, will
address the problem I mentioned earlier, namely that economics is often taught by teachers who
have  not  studied  the  subject  and  are  therefore  grateful  for  support  in  their  preparations.  In
addition, we have developed a media package for lower and upper secondary school levels in
cooperation with the Medieninstitut der Länder (the federal states’ media institute).
10
9
We at the Bundesbank are especially proud of our new Money Museum in Frankfurt, which was
reopened last December after a complete overhaul. The result is a unique venue that makes
learning an experience and where visitors of all ages can discover a great deal about money and
monetary policy in an informal and entertaining manner. The museum complex includes rooms
for seminars and workshops where we offer school classes in particular talks on selected topics.
We expect the total number of visitors this year to be in the region of 50,000.
11
Fortunately, the Bundesbank is not the only institution that is committed to making a contribution
to  economic  education.  The  German  savings  banks’  “Sparkassen-SchulService”
  and  the
“Schul|Bank” portal of the Association of German Banks,
 to name but two, likewise offer a wide
range of teaching resources, competitions for school pupils and other forms of support.
12
13
15
two  German  newspapers, 
Similar flagship projects are to be found in the media sector. These include, for example, the
offerings  of 
the
“F.A.Z. Schulportal”.
 It is gratifying to note that at the interface to economics studies, too, a
number of points of contact are available for both inquisitive school pupils and first-year students.
I am thinking here, for instance, of the initiative launched by the Verein für Socialpolitik (German
Economic Association), which enables keen youngsters to take part in economics conferences
and organises workshops for this specific target group.
 These initiatives and many others like
them help make up a rich array of educational opportunities. Allow me to expressly acknowledge
this work at this juncture.
“Handelsblatt  macht  Schule”
  and 
14
16
However, many of the extracurricular learning opportunities depend on schools asking for them.
Thus, schools are and will remain at the heart of education activities. That is why I would urge
schools in Germany to anchor economic education much more firmly in the curriculum than is
the case at present.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Critics’  voices  want  to  be  heard,  and  so  they  should  be.  However,  I  believe  that  many  of  the
points  they  raise  can  be  remedied.  In  the  debate  about  economic  education  we  dare  not
succumb to ideological trench warfare. It is my belief that by adopting an excessively defensive
attitude, we do more harm than good with regard to what we are actually seeking to achieve –
namely a broad level of general knowledge as befits a free society.
One solution would be to focus on giving economic education the status it deserves by making it
a subject in its own right. The key components worthy of particular attention, in my opinion, would
then be:
teaching fundamental concepts such as the shortage of goods, capital and labour,
bringing the subject closer to everyday life, although this should not be misunderstood as
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
relegating the subject to “self-help” advice on coping with day-to-day problems,
as well as a critical engagement with economic dogmas and economic history.
Extracurricular  initiatives  also  need  to  be  stepped  up.  Specifically,  I  would  propose  creating  a
young researchers competition for economic and financial topics, too.
At the end of the day, whether or not every one of you agrees with every point I have made is of
secondary importance. But it would be downright wrong to simply agree that economic education
is important and leave it at that. For if we did that, countless pupils in Germany would see their
economic skillset continue to fall short of their potential – and in saying this, I don’t only mean
with regard to their understanding of taxes, insurance and rent but also the knowledge they need
as citizens.
No one ought to be intimidated by questions concerning financial provisioning or globalisation. On
the contrary, everyone should be given the means to seek answers. Whether or not people can
then  communicate  these  answers  in  four  different  languages  strikes  me  as  being  a  luxury
problem.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Naina Kümmel (nainablabla), tweeted on 10 January 2015 at 3:49 a.m.
Report by the Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and Cultural Affairs dated 19 October 2001 in
the version dated 27 June 2008.
See ING-DiBa online opinion poll, run by Ipsos in August 2017, persons surveyed: financial decision makers
aged 18 and over. International N = 12,708, Germany N = 1,010. Cited inter alia in the Börsen-Zeitung on
26 October 2017: “Deutsche sehnen sich nach Finanzbildung”.
See Wobker, I., P. Kenning, M. Lehmann-Waffenschmidt & G. Gigerenzer (2014). What do consumers know
about the economy? Journal für Verbraucherschutz und Lebensmittelsicherheit, 9(3), pp. 231 242.
See ING-DiBa online opinion poll, run by Ipsos in August 2017, persons surveyed: financial decision makers
aged 18 and over. International N = 12,708, Germany N = 1,010. Cited inter alia in the Börsen-Zeitung on
26 October 2017: “Deutsche sehnen sich nach Finanzbildung”.
See Die Welt dated 16 January 2001, interview with Oliver Kahn, “Joschka Fischer sollte ein Beispiel sein”.
See New York Times of 9 October 2017, interview with Richard Thaler, “Nobel in Economics Is Awarded to
Richard  Thaler”,  available  online  (31  October  2017)  at: www.nytimes.com/2017/10/09/business/nobel-
economics-richard-thaler.html.
See  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  “Sharing  central  bank  knowledge"  –  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank’s  economic
education  activities,  Annual  Report  2016,  pp.  33–42.  Digital  version  available  online  (31  October  2017)
a
: www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/​Publications/Annual_Report/2016_annual_report.pdf?​
__blob=publicationFile#page=33.
t
The result is a unique venue that makes learning an experience and where young and old can discover a great
deal about money and monetary policy in a relaxed and entertaining manner. Digital version available online
(31 
only)
at: www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/DE/Service/Schule_und_​Bildung/Geld_und_Geldpolitik/geld_und_geldpolitik.html
German 
October 
2017, 
See Deutsche Bundesbank und FWU-Medieninstitut der Länder, media package “Preisstabilität”. Information
available 
only)
at: www.bundesbank.de/Redaktion/DE/Standardartikel/Service/​Schule_und_Bildung/neues_medienpaket.html.
(German 
online 
See 
at: www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Bundesbank/​Money_museum/money_museum.html.
Deutsche 
Museum 
Money 
the 
the 
of 
Bundesbank 
online
See “Sparkassen-SchulService” online (German only) at: www.sparkassen-schulservice.de/
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
13
14
15
16
See “Schul|Bank” online (German only) at: schulbank.bankenverband.de/
See “Handelsblatt macht Schule” online (German only) at: www.handelsblattmachtschule.de/home.html
See “F.A.Z. Schulportal” online (German only) at: www.fazschule.net/
See  “Faszination  Wirtschaftswissenschaften  für  SchülerInnen/Studieninteressierte/StudienanfängerInnen”,
Initiative  of 
the  Verein 
(German  only)  at: vfs2017.univie.ac.at/faszination-
wirtschaftswissenschaften/
für  Socialpolitik  online 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
