Yves Mersch: Europe in transformation - structural, regulatory and
technological challenges for the markets of tomorrow
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Slovenian Banking Days conference, Brdo pri Kranju, Slovenia, 6 November 2017.
 Banks play a vital role in the economy, matching surplus funds from savers to those wishing to
invest in profitable projects – a process that contributes to the growth in productivity and overall
welfare.
It is also a process that plays an important role in the transmission of monetary policy, which
means  that  monetary  policymakers,  such  as  myself,  take  great  interest  in  the  structure  and
performance of the banking sector. From this point of view too, it is important that the sector
operates in an efficient  and smooth fashion. During the crisis, banks in the euro area did not
operate in this way, and their failure to do so exacerbated the impact of the crisis on people and
on the economy.
This will be the focus of my talk today. Banks face a number of challenges, visible in the weak
financial  performance  of  the  sector,  with  low  price-to-book  ratios  and  meagre  profitability.
Compared with the pre-crisis status quo, profound changes in the sector in terms of structure
and  business  models  will  be  needed  to  tackle  those  challenges.  Broadly  speaking,  the
challenges are threefold: structural, regulatory and technological.
Structural challenges
We are now a decade after the onset of the crisis. Yet despite the ongoing broad-based recovery
in the euro area economy, bank profitability remains low. In part, the roots of that continued poor
performance lie before the crisis, which served to expose structural issues within the European
banking sector. Chronic overcapacity had resulted in poor profitability and too much lending to
marginal projects which eventually turned sour.
That  stock  of  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  remains  high  in  some  countries  and  continues  to
depress bank profitability today. At the end of 2016, the stock of gross NPLs in the EU banking
sector  was  around  €1  trillion.  This  NPL  overhang  is  tying  up  bank  capital  in  failed  or  failing
ventures and preventing the efficient flow of new lending to profitable projects.
How  should  banks  react  to  this  challenge?  First,  we  should  recognise  that  Europe  remains
overbanked. Although progress has been made on this front, with 25% fewer credit institutions in
the  euro  area  now  than  in  2008,   there  is  considerable  scope  for  consolidation  within  some
countries and across borders. The creation of Europe-wide banking groups would help break the
bank-sovereign nexus and the consequent fragmentation of bank lending along national lines and
through national interference that so marked the crisis. Credit provision should then be able to
continue  in  a  smooth  fashion  in  future  downturns,  mitigating,  rather  than  exacerbating,
asymmetric shocks.
1
Greater efforts should be made to resolve the overhang of NPLs. I see a number of avenues that
are worth exploring. Banks themselves should make efforts to fully provision the true expected
loss from NPLs. Countries where NPLs are higher are often those where weak institutions make
it difficult for banks to seek insolvencies and seize collateral from non-payers. Structural reforms
to boost judicial efficiency will aid banks in the process of NPL recovery. Finally, setting up an
effective Europe-wide securitisation market for distressed debt should help banks to shift NPLs
from  their  balance  sheets  and  free  up  capital  for  new  lending.  Too  much  remains  on  bank
balance  sheets  at  uncertain  values  by  comparison  with  other  continents,  where  securitisation
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
makes assets tradable, thereby allowing the markets to clear banks’ balance sheets.
Zombie banks supported by official interventions prevent new lending to the economy. And the
low  growth  environment  fostered  by  such  behaviour  in  turn  sours  more  assets  on  the  banks’
balance sheets.
To break this vicious circle, determined action on NPLs is required.
Regulatory challenges
The  second  challenge  faced  by  banks  is  the  stricter  regulatory  and  prudential  framework
imposed on the sector following the crisis. These measures aim to create a banking sector that
works efficiently and smoothly, as I mentioned earlier.
Banks  are  now  required  to  have  more  –  and  better  quality  –  capital.  The  incoming  rules  on
liquidity  and  leverage  are  already  forcing  banks  to  make  some  tough  decisions  on  asset
allocation  and  business  lines.  New  regulations  on  resolution  provide  supervisors  and  the
resolution authority with a toolkit to intervene early to require banks in difficulty to take necessary
actions to bring about recovery.
In the case of an actual resolution, the new regulations aim to minimise the impact of a failed
bank on overall financial stability – i.e. to ensure the system as a whole runs smoothly and to
better  protect  taxpayers’  money  at  large,  rather  than  the  invested  money  of  the  few  directly
involved.
There is evidence that these new regulations are helping to create a stronger banking sector in
the  euro  area.  Common  Equity  Tier  1  capital  ratios  of  significant  institutions  rose  on  average
from 7% in 2007 to 13.5% by end-2016. I recognise that tighter regulations do come at a higher
cost to banks, but this should be set against the costs incurred by society over the past decade
as  a  result  of  regulation  that  was  too  lax.  Nonetheless,  regulators  should  quickly  agree  on
appropriate  international  standards  to  give  banks  certainty  over  long-term  planning  around
business models.
Technological challenges
The final challenge for banks comes from the impact of technology, which is leading to increased
competition  from  non-banks  in  domains  traditionally  considered  to  be  the  core  business  of
banks: lending and payment services. I wish to focus my remarks on this particular challenge
today.
With regard to lending, technological advances have permitted the growth of internet and mobile
banking,  opening  up  the  sector  to  newcomers  and  exposing  incumbents  with  large  branch
networks to greater competition. Moreover, there is a shift to more market-based finance in the
euro area, a trend that is likely to continue under the Capital Markets Union initiative. While still
small in overall terms, there is a growing role for so-called shadow banking – asset managers,
pension funds, money market funds and the like – in providing financing to the real economy.
But there is also increased competition in the provision of retail payment services, made possible
through new technology, which is disrupting banks’ traditional business models.
Traditionally,  banks  have  offered  payment  services  as  an  extension  of  a  customer  account  –
debit and credit cards, direct debits and the like. There has of course always been some limited
competition between banks – customers could obtain a credit card from another bank, and even
change banks, although they seldom did.
Yet  the  growth  of  e-commerce  has  created  a  demand  for  payment  services  outside  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
traditional  channels.  The  banking  sector  overall  was  slow  to  respond  to  consumer  demand,
permitting  companies  such  as  PayPal  to  enter  the  market.  Initially,  they  used  the  existing
infrastructure and instruments, such as credit cards.
More  recently,  a  new  type  of  provider  which  directly  uses  the  online  banking  services  of  the
respective bank has emerged. Such services operated in the past in a legal and regulatory grey
area, and often in contravention of the terms of service of banks’ online platforms.
Regulation  has  started  to  catch  up  with  the  new  technology.  The  Second  Payment  Services
Directive  (PSD2)  has  codified  these  services,  requiring  companies  to  be  authorised  as  a
payment service providers, to identify themselves to the bank and to communicate with the bank
using a common and secure method. The Directive mandated the European Banking Authority to
develop technical legal requirements, which are now being finalised.
The main aim of the legislation is to provide a Europe-wide common framework for payments,
and a standardised interface for such payments. Without that standardisation, there was a risk
that new providers would face different sets of connection protocols and data requirements from
each of the 4,000 retail payment banks.
By providing a standardised system that operates across the EU, PSD2 offers the basis for a
new generation of financial services. For example, it will become easier for consumers to track
all their accounts at different institutions using a single app and to analyse expenditure by type,
and it will further open up mobile and internet payments. The benefits of this digitally integrated
market for consumers should be welcomed.
The Eurosystem has been involved throughout this process in several roles: as an operator to
provide the right services for settlement and payments; as a catalyst to facilitate standardisation,
reachability and interoperability, and as overseer and regulator to ensure a smooth functioning of
payment systems and to ensure a level playing field.
Our aim, as with the provision of banking services generally, is to have a payment system that
functions smoothly and efficiently, while still providing the necessary legal safeguards for data
and privacy. We are striving for a regulatory framework that is consistent and neutral – neither
stifling new competitors, nor protecting the incumbents.
Much work remains to be done by both banks and the providers of these payment services to
ensure we have a robust framework. Despite the disruptive nature of this technology, banks have
plenty of opportunities to take a leading role. Consumers clearly value the service provided by the
new entrants. Rather than seeking to obstruct the new payment systems (an ultimately fruitless
endeavour),  banks  should  seize  the  chance  to  provide  an  extra  service  that  their  customers
value.  For  all  that  technology  has  changed  the  methods  of  delivery,  one  of  the  constants  in
securing long-term viability for a service provider is keeping its customers happy.
Technology and central banking
Of  course,  commercial  banks  are  not  the  only  ones  facing  challenges  from  technology  and
consequent changes in the economic environment. Technology also affects how central banks
carry out their operations. As I said in a recent speech,  technological progress can affect the
dynamics and measurement of inflation, which can in turn influence the monetary policy settings
that  are  needed  to  fulfil  our  price  stability  mandate.  The  unconventional  monetary  policy
measures we have put in place over the past decade reflected the particular circumstances at
the time, when our traditional tool of influencing short-term interest rates was insufficient by itself
to achieve price stability.
2
In other areas, too, central banks are analysing the potential impact of technology. The advent of
Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) has the potential to change how central banks issue base
3
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
money  and operate payment systems. We are currently carrying out research to improve our
understanding of this technology. It remains to be seen whether DLT can genuinely provide more
efficient central banking services, while still operating smoothly and offering the necessary legal
safeguards. Only through detailed research and testing can we determine if, and how, we should
use DLT. This is different from the steady upgrading of our platforms to meet the demand for
real-time services, as in the case of instant payments for instant purchases.
But despite the changes in the institutional and economic environment, one of the constants in
the  field  of  central  banking  is  that  of  central  bank  independence  What  is  of  essence  in  this
concept is the freedom from the political instruction of the government or its influence. But while
the institutional and economic environment is in flux, one concept in the field of central banking is
an enduring one: independence. The idea is to shield monetary policy from political interference
and  electoral  considerations.  Therefore,  it  is  clear  that  any  reforms  implemented  via  national
legislation that specifically target the central bank, as we have seen in some recent legislative
initiatives  in  Slovenia,  must  not  undermine  its  independence  either  directly  or  indirectly  by
exposing the institution to political pressure.
The most recent ECB opinion approved by the Governing Council concerning the Slovenian Act
on judicial relief together with the draft law amending the Banka Slovenije Act (relating to the audit
of its operations) underlines the risk of inducing this undesired effect. First, the combination of
the  two  acts  creates  uncertainty  with  regard  to  the  standard  against  which  Banka  Slovenije’s
past practices are to be audited by the Court of Audit. Let me just point out that the Slovenian Act
on judicial relief was triggered by the need to remedy the unconstitutionality of certain provisions
of the Slovenian Banking Act which authorised Banka Slovenije to adopt measures to write-down
or convert qualified liabilities during the reorganisation of banks. Second, the Slovenian Act on
judicial relief alone puts the central bank in a precarious position. Banka Slovenije is essentially
obliged to file a claim against the State even though the central bank has nothing to claim but
rather has to defend itself, and what is more, to defend the diligence it has exercised against an
implicit presumption of wrongdoing and an ambiguous standard of assessment.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
A  well-functioning  financial  system  is  of  vital  importance  for  long-term,  sustainable  economic
growth.  The  crisis  laid  bare  elements  of  the  financial  system  that  were  not  functioning  in  the
smooth and efficient manner required.
The  new  regulatory  regime  put  in  place  since  the  crisis  provides  the  right  framework  for  the
banking system to function better in the future. But work remains to clear up the legacy of the
crisis, particularly in terms of the overhang of NPLs. Regulation alone is insufficient, and further
effort is required of banks, in terms of both consolidation and refining business models, to return
the  sector  to  sustainable  rates  of  profitability.  But  efforts  are  also  required  at  national  level  to
make national institutions function in line with European legislation.
Payment services is a further area where regulatory advances are of themselves insufficient to
provide  a  working  system  that  operates  in  a  smooth  and  efficient  way,  that  is  still  safe  and
respects European privacy provisions. Banks now have a great opportunity to embrace the new
technology  and  serve  their  customers  in  a  new  fashion. Agreeing  and  implementing  technical
standards  in  a  timely  fashion  will  help  foster  the  right  conditions  for  a  payment  system  that
benefits everyone.
1
2
European Central Bank (2017), 2017 Report on Financial Structures.
Mersch, Y. (2017), “Central banking in times of technological progress”, speech at the Bank Negara Malaysia
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Monetary Policy Conference, Kuala Lumpur, 24 July.
3
Mersch, Y. (2017), “Digital Base Money: an assessment from the ECB’s perspective”, speech at the Farewell
ceremony for Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank, Helsinki, 16 January.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
