Jens Weidmann:  Keynote  speech - "Europe  into a new era - how 
to seize the opportunities"
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  Frankfurt  European
Banking Congress "Europe into a New Era - How to Seize the Opportunities", Frankfurt am Main,
17 November 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Central  bank  communication  can  certainly  be  tricky.  That  is  why  Bank  of  Japan  Governor
Haruhiko  Kuroda  said  three  days  ago,  during  an  ECB  conference  on  this  very  issue,  that  the
message needs to be simple. "It should better be straightforward," he told the audience. "That’s
the best way."
As was also alluded to at the conference by moderator David Wessel, there might now be a new
option that would allow Governor Kuroda to be taken at face value – in the truest sense of the
word.
Artificial intelligence researchers claim to have found clues in the facial expressions of the Bank
of Japan Governor. Supposedly, Kuroda showed "fleeting signs of ‘anger’ and ‘disgust'" at news
conferences that preceded changes in monetary policy in 2016.
This raises important questions: Can we now make monetary policy changes with the blink of an
eye? And will botox injections be the only way to uphold the maxim “we never pre-commit?"
On  a  more  serious  note:  Artificial  intelligence  is  a  fascinating  subject,  with  wide-ranging
implications not least for economics and finance. But today I will confine myself to more everyday
matters for a central banker – matters which definitely also have wide-ranging implications for
our monetary union.
"Restoring the European project", the title of the upcoming panel, calls for policymakers to live up
to their respective responsibilities. What is required of monetary policy, national governments,
and European institutions? In the next 15 minutes, I will try to briefly sketch out some possible
answers to this question.
2. Monetary policy
Let me start by having a short look at the Eurosystem’s monetary policy.
The Eurosystem’s expansive monetary policy has contributed significantly to the recovery in the
euro area. Growth rates have been positive for more than four years. The unemployment rate
has  almost  been  reduced  to  its  pre-crisis  average.  And  economic  indicators  all  point  to  a
continued economic up-swing.
In Germany, indicators now suggest even stronger growth than outlined in our June projection.
Over  the  last  four  years,  capacity  utilisation  has  steadily  increased.  And  since  2016,  the
economy is even running above capacity. The duration and strength of the current recovery is
impressive, especially against the background of high political uncertainty globally.
Inflation, however, has not quite kept pace with the recovery. Price pressures are expected to
remain rather subdued.
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Multiple factors seem to be at play here. The recovery has certainly been aided by the fact that
most of the crisis-hit countries have strengthened their competitiveness and turned their current
account deficits into surpluses. But improving price competitiveness through wage restraint is,
naturally enough, also dampening domestic price pressures.
This factor is euro area-specific. But price pressures have been subdued in other countries, too,
in spite of very low unemployment rates. It seems that global factors are affecting inflation as
well.  Research  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  suggests,  for  example,  that  greater
labour market contestability as a result of global value chains are putting a lid on wages and thus
1
price pressures.
Given the rather subdued inflationary pressure at present, an accommodative monetary policy
stance  remains  appropriate  in  the  euro  area.  But  we  must  be  attuned  to  the  fact  that  the
economic  recovery  has  progressed  further  than  inflation  figures  currently  suggest,  and  that
domestic price pressures will gradually increase in keeping with a path towards our definition of
price stability.
This is why, in my view, a less distinct loosening of monetary policy in the next year and setting a
clear end date for net asset purchases would have been justified – also against the backdrop of
increasing risks and side-effects, the longer monetary policy remains ultra-loose.
Euro-area monetary policy will remain highly accommodative even after net purchases under the
asset purchase programme (APP) have been discontinued.
First,  what  is  crucial  for  the  overall  effect  of  the APP  is  not  so  much  the  amount  of  monthly
additional  purchases  but,  above  all,  the  total  outstanding  volume  of  sovereign  bonds  on  our
books. And the APP stocks held by the Eurosystem will remain at a very high level even after net
purchases have been discontinued, as the Governing Council of the ECB has decided to reinvest
the proceeds from the maturing bonds.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  not  to  raise  interest  rates  until  well  after  the  net
purchases have ended.
Setting  a  clear  end  date  to  net  asset  purchases  would  have  merely  meant  refraining  from
pushing down on the accelerator even further – not putting the brakes on monetary policy.
One thing has to be clear in any case: As Mario Draghi has pointed out: Monetary policy alone
cannot  bring  lasting  prosperity  for  our  economies.   That  is  the  task  of  governments  and
parliaments.
3. Economic challenges in Germany
2
In the wake of the sovereign debt crisis, many member states indeed introduced far-reaching
reforms which allowed swifter macroeconomic adjustment. Some of them led to a better labour
market  performance.  And  some  improved  competition,  thus  providing  new  impetus  for
innovation.
But more measures are needed, not least in Germany. The challenges Germany faces might
seem more latent than those of other member states. But even if the consequences of an aging
society might present themselves less abruptly than a sovereign debt crisis, the challenge is no
less real. Without policy action, Germany’s growth potential is expected to fall below 1% within
the next decade due to the reduction in labour supply.
It  would  therefore  be  sensible  to  modify  provisions  that  discourage  participation  in  the  labour
market.  To  further  support  the  participation  especially  of  women  in  the  workforce,  continued
investments in childcare remain imperative as well.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
However,  Germany’s  growth  potential  cannot  be  strengthened  simply  by  limiting  the  losses  in
labour supply. Germany’s economy also has to become more productive.
Here,  digitalisation  holds  untapped  potential.  Studies  show  that  removing  bottlenecks  in
broadband connection can raise economic growth, as this increases competition and induces
3
innovative products and processes.
To be able to fully capitalise on the digital dividend, investments in skills and education are key.
This would not only boost labour productivity, but also enhance job security. And this, in turn,
would in my view be the most effective antidote to the feeling many have of being threatened by
globalisation  and  technological  progress,  both  of  which  are  at  the  root  of  our  economic
prosperity.
By  the  way,  even  within  the  European  Union  there  is  not  yet  a  common  market  for  digital
products and the single market for services still has to be completed.
4. Strengthening the euro area’s resilience
Facing economic challenges head-on will not only prove a boon to citizens’ prosperity: it will also
raise the equilibrium real interest rate. And this will make the job of a central bank substantially
easier, as it adds distance to the lower bound of interest rates.
But while raising growth potential in Germany and the other member states will go a long way
towards strengthening the euro area, it is not the last word in making our monetary union more
resilient.
When it comes to resilience, the question of risk sharing has to be addressed. How can shocks
that hit individual member states particularly hard be cushioned?
In the United States and other large currency areas, shocks are spread through the distribution of
business profits and losses throughout the currency area, because company owners are often
resident in other states. The sharing of losses across state borders in the United States absorbs
4
around 40% of an economic shock.
Saving  and  lending  could  represent  another  channel  of  private  economic  risk  sharing.
Enterprises and households take out loans in different US states during an economic downturn
to bridge a slump in earnings. In the United States, this type of risk sharing smoothes something
like  25%  of  a  shock.  To  some  extent,  this  includes  a  contribution  of  the  Federal  Deposit
Insurance Corporation to this form of risk sharing. In Europe, however, the conditions for putting
in place a similar euro-area-wide deposit insurance mechanism are not yet met. I will come back
to this point in a few moments.
By comparison, risk sharing through fiscal policy takes a back seat. Only between 10% and 25%
5
of all risks are shared by a common fiscal policy in federations like the US or Canada.
It is thus clear that much could be achieved in the euro area if cross-border corporate funding
were strengthened, particularly in the form of equity capital.
A  raft  of  measures  would  be  needed  to  tear  down  the  walls  in  European  capital  markets.
Standardising national insolvency regimes is just one especially important step worth mentioning.
After all, investors need to count on having the same level playing field throughout Europe. Not
only  would  that  promote  private  risk  sharing;  it  would  also  reduce  capital  flows  into  less
productive businesses and stimulate flows in more productive ones. That, in turn, would boost
6
economic momentum, as a recent OECDresearch paper confirms.
On a general note, the development of equity capital markets, including in Europe, is suffering
 3 / 5
7
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
from the preferential tax treatment given to debt over equity capital.
Interest payments can be deducted from taxable income; equity costs cannot. Eliminating this
bias would encourage businesses to make greater use of equity capital as a funding instrument.
And that would facilitate greater private risk sharing whilst at the same time reducing the debt
bias.
Another way in which risk could potentially be shared in times of crisis might be for enterprises
and households to take out cross-border loans. Yet this mechanism hardly worked during the
crisis  in  the  euro  area.  Even  worse:  Depositors  in  crisis-hit  countries  lost  confidence  in  their
domestic  banking  systems  and  withdrew  their  deposits.  Banks  in  the  euro  area  also  lost
confidence in each other and reined in their lending.
The Banking Union was created in part to overcome the financial fragmentation triggered by the
sovereign debt crisis. With its Single Supervisory Mechanism and rules on bailing-in creditors in
the event of bank failures, the Banking Union bolsters the banking sector’s resilience. This makes
a loss of confidence in national banking systems less likely. And less danger of a fragmented
financial system stabilises cross-border lending, particularly in turbulent times.
A common European deposit guarantee scheme could, in theory, even heighten this confidence.
However, as with any insurance policy, one would have to make sure in this case, too, that the
insurance does not encourage imprudent behaviour.
Such risks can arise from carelessly granting credit to the private sector. But they can also result
from providing sovereigns with too much credit. Since the onset of the sovereign debt crisis, at
the latest, we know that loans to general government are not risk-free either.
Banks in the euro area have a sizable share of sovereign bonds on their books. To insure euro-
area bank risks in such a situation would be tantamount to insuring fiscal risks.
Given that the member states themselves still decide freely and independently on the level of
government expenditure and taxes, this ultimately sets the wrong incentives: finance ministers
would see less of a need to pay adequate attention to the sustainability of public finances.
The precondition for a European deposit insurance scheme, then, is that the size of government
bond  portfolios  that  banks  hold  on  their  books  is  limited.  Loans  to  sovereigns  should  not  be
treated any differently from loans to enterprises or individuals.
Another  precondition  concerns  the  stock  of  non-performing  loans  in  the  European  banking
system.  Insurance  usually  covers  future  damage,  not  damage  that  already  exists.  Hence,  in
order to be eligible for a common deposit insurance, banks in the euro area have to either fully
provision for non-performing loans or divest them.
Non-performing loans not only constitute an obstacle to a common deposit insurance scheme.
They also weigh on financing conditions and, ultimately, growth prospects in the member states
concerned.  Banks  need  to  clear  up  existing  non-performing  loans. And  we  need  to  establish
rules that ensure the prudent management of non-performing loans in the future as well. The
proposals  that  were  recently  made  by  the  ECB  in  this  regard  strike  me  as  a  sensible  way
forward.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me conclude.
After all, I would not want to evoke the feelings that a doctor once gave to a patient who craved
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
immortality.
The  doctor  informed  the  patient  that  immortality  was  beyond  the  reach  of  medicine,  but  the
patient was insistent: "Is there nothing I can do?" The doctor replied: "Well, there is one thing.
You  could  marry  an  economist  and  move  to  North  Dakota."  "And  that  will  make  me
immortal?" "No. But that way, even six months will seem like an eternity."
I thank you for your attention and wish you all a stimulating discussion.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Auer, R, C Borio and A Filardo (2017), “The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance of global value
chains," BISWorking Papers 602, Bank for International Settlements.
Draghi, M (2015), “Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area", Speech from 14 December 2015
Czernich et al (2011), Broadband infrastructure and economic growth, Economic Journal Vol 121.
Asdrubali, P, B E Sørensen, and O Yosha, “Channels of Interstate Risk Sharing: US 1963–1990", in Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4), 1996, pp 1081–1110.
Allard, C, P K Brooks, J C Bluedorn, F Bornhorst, K Christopherson, F Ohnsorge, T Poghosyan and an IMF staff
team (2013), “Towards a Fiscal Union for the Euro Area", IMFStaff Discussion Note, 13/09.
Adalet McGowan, M and D Andrews (2016), “Insolvency Regimes and Productivity Growth: A Framework for
Analysis", OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 1309.
German Council of Economic Experts (2017), “Towards a future-oriented economic policy".
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
