 CENTRAL  BANK  OF KENYA 
 INTERNATIONAL  MONEY  TRANSFER  AND  CROSS  BORDER  PAYMENT 
CONFERENCE  (IMTC)   
Crowne Plaza Hotel, Nairobi 
 Remarks  by  Dr. Patrick Njoroge  
Governor  of the Central Bank  of Kenya 
September 21, 2017 
 As Prepared for Delivery 
  Good morning, ladies and  gentlemen! It is a great pleasure for me to join you  at this 
conference. Let me begin  by thanking  the conference organizers  for the invitation,  and 
for giving  me the opportunity  to interact with  the distinguished  participants.  We feel 
particularly  privileged  to host this inaugural  IMTC  Africa Conference in Nairobi. It is 
equally  significant  for the East African  region, which  increasingly  is viewed  as an 
attractive  destination for business and  investments.  This  conference therefore provides 
an  excellent opportunity  to reflect on the important topics of remittances and  cross-
border payments,  the challenges  and  opportunities that lie ahead. 
 The  beginnings  of our banking  system is intertwined  with  remittances and  cross 
border payments.  The  first bank  in Kenya  was  established in 1896, to facilitate 
sending  money  home by Indian  workers that  were building  the railway  through 
Kenya,  and  also to support  trade in the Europe-South  Africa-India  axis. A  lot has 
changed  since then.  A hundred  years ago, remittances depended  on the movement  of a 
written instruction over sea and  land.  It could take  months and  the transaction faced 
many  perils. Today,  transfers are virtually  instantaneous  and  current protocols ensure 
certainty of the transfer. Customers’ interest in a secure and  inexpensive  remittance 
channel  remain  unchanged. 
 The  importance  of cross border payments  cannot be overemphasized.  Remittance 
flows to developing  countries amounted  to US$429 billion in 2016, more than  twice 
the amount  of foreign aid  that these countries received, and  have  become an  important 
source of foreign exchange.1  Similarly,  remittance to Sub-Saharan  Africa  (SSA) 
amounted  to US$33 billion in 2016. These  remittances are a critical source of income 
for many  households  and  provide  a  highly  beneficial insurance  function. 
 Innovations  in digital  financial  services have  been transforming  the remittance 
industry.  For Kenya,  prior to 2013 when  Money Remittance Regulations  were issued, 
remittance flows were largely  through  informal channels  as banks  were deemed 
prohibitively  expensive.  Since then domestic money transfer products such as M-Pesa 
have  evolved  to become convenient  and  reliable platforms which  with  the expansion 
of mobile phone  technology are now  available  to large segments of the population. 
For instance,  Kenya  has a mobile phone  penetration  rate of 89 percent compared to 
the Sub-Sahara  Africa average  of 43 percent, and  85 percent of all financial 
transactions are conducted through  the mobile transfer platforms though  they 
comprise only 9 percent of the total value.  These  providers  are now  broadening  the 
channels  of international  money transfers, and  the Central Bank  of Kenya  (CBK)  has 
approved  their partnering  with  various  international  money  transfer institutions. 
 Nevertheless, there are some issues of concern alongside  these positive developments. 
These  need to be kept  in mind  and  addressed in a concerted manner,  and  I offer some 
reflections on a few  of them. 
   First, the cost of remittances remains very  high,  at an  estimated 7.32 percent 
globally  and  9.42 percent for SSA,  and  needs to be lowered  quickly.2  These  costs 
are charged  largely by  the originating  institutions in countries where  the traditional 
structures and  institutions such as banks  remain  dominant.  However,  the ease and 
cost of remittance transfers also has a significant  impact on the welfare of the 
many  households that  rely on these flows. The  regionalization  of money 
remittance services and  modernization  of cross border payment  platforms would 
certainly facilitate a lowering  of the cost of remittances. Nevertheless, it is 
imperative  that  innovative  ways  be found  to further lower these cost towards  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goal (SDG)  target of 3 percent.  Therefore the 
fundamental  question is what  will each agent  along  the transfer chain  do so as to 
reduce the overall  cost to the consumer and  how  will  innovations  assist in this 
process? 
 
                                                                 
1 World Bank Group,  Migration and Remittances: Recent Developments and Outlook , April 2017 
2 World Bank Group,  Remittance Prices Worldwide, June 2017 
  Second,  the Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combating  the Financing  of Terrorism 
(AML/CFT)  framework  needs to be improved  continuously.  This  would  ensure the 
adoption  of best practices and,  inter alia, lead  to compliance with  the AML/CFT 
requirements and  the fostering of an enabling  environment  for remittances. On  the 
other hand,  if progress in this area is not forthcoming,  those jurisdictions would 
face the prospect of de-risking—a  termination  of their correspondent banking 
relationships, a withdrawal  of foreign banks,  or the imposition of other restrictions 
due to the perceived risks to money  laundering  and  terrorism financing. 
 In  many  ways  de-risking has  been attributed  to the misapplication  of AML/CFT 
measures and  to address this concern the Financial  Action  Task  Force (FATF),  the 
international  standard  setter, has  advocated  that  countries fully implement a risk-
based  approach  to combating  money  laundering  and  terrorism financing.  To this 
end,  the CBK  has  adopted  a Risk-Based  Supervisory  Framework  for AML/CFT. 
This  framework  complements the existing framework  on prudential  supervision 
and  legal compliance  with  special attention directed to anti-money  laundering  and 
combating  financing  of terrorism. Nevertheless,  all agents  have  a responsibility in 
reducing  AML/CFT  risks and  building  a robust framework  for cross-border 
payments. 
   Third, financial  sector regulators need to remain  vigilant  on potential risks, while 
safeguarding  an  effective processing of payments  and  ensuring  that a consumer-
focused environment  is maintained.  As a  regulator, financial  stability continues to 
be our primary  objective,  regardless of the transaction channels  that are deployed. 
However,  cyber security and  data  privacy  continue to pose the greatest concerns in 
terms of the efficacy of regulatory  protections, and  further concerted work  is called 
for. There  is certainly a lot of room for peer learning. 
 These  are the issues that will likely come up  in your  discussions, and  I hope a way 
forward  will  be found.  I look forward  to interesting and  lively interactions, but  more 
importantly,  to learning  from your diverse experiences in this area. 
 Once again,  I am  grateful for this opportunity  to engage  with  you. Thank  you for your 
attention! 
