Jacqueline Loh: Singapore - the gateway to Asia's bond market
Opening address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore,  at  the  Global  Borrowers  &amp;  Investors  Forum  - Asia,  Singapore,  21  September
2017.
Toby Fildes, Global Managing Editor, GlobalCapital
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
 1.     Thank you very much for inviting me to the Global Borrowers & Investors Forum – Asia.
2.     I am delighted that Euromoney has chosen Singapore to anchor the Asian edition of
your flagship Global Borrowers & Bond Investors Forum. The Forum started over 20 years
ago in London, and consistently attracts over 700 issuers, investors and financial intermediaries
from around the world to exchange views on key issues facing global bond markets, to network
and importantly, to close deals.
3.     Asia is the natural next franchise for the Forum. In 2016, Asia’s debt issuance at USD
1.3 trillion made up about one-fifth of global debt issuance, but at 20% y-o-y, grew twice
as quickly. A focused Asian edition will help to make the Forum more accessible to issuers,
investors  and  intermediaries  based  in Asia.  Today’s  programme  is  very  topical,  covering  the
deepening of Asia’s bond markets, financing Asia’s infrastructure and the rise of Asia’s green
bond market, and features distinguished speakers like Governor Agus of Bank Indonesia and Sir
Robert  Stheeman,  Chief  Executive  of  the  UK  Debt  Management  Office.  I  will  touch  on  these
themes briefly.
Asian bonds are a mainstream asset class
.     Asian  bond  markets  are  growing  healthily  and  Asian  bonds  are  an  essential
4
component of any balanced and diversified portfolio. Over the last five years, Asian bond
issuances grew at a compound annual growth rate of more than 10%. Asian bonds now make up
over 30% of the J.P. Morgan Emerging Markets Government Bond Index. Since last year, 2 Asian
1
countries received rating upgrades, notably Indonesia to investment grade .
5 .     Asia is expected to remain the fastest-growing region in the world. The IMF places
Emerging Asia at the top of the global growth league table, with average growth rates of 6.3%
p.a. from now to 2022 , outstripping expected outturns in the developed economies  as well as
all  other  developing  regions.  China  and  India,  the  two  largest Asian  markets,  are  expected  to
grow  by  6%  p.a.  and  7–8%  p.a.  respectively,  while  activity  in  the  ASEAN-5  economies  is
4
expected to expand at around 5% p.a. .
6.     The rosy outlook translates to two significant implications for capital markets:
2
3
        a. On the demand side, relatively favourable demographics, the emergence of a rising
middle class and rapid urbanisation will  stimulate more savings and investments; 
        b. On the supply side, there is much scope in Asia to improve infrastructure, technology and
innovation, the success of which will go a long way toward raising productivity and incomes even
further. To finance these important structural needs, Asia’s ability to raise long-term capital for
sustainable growth would make cross-border capital market activities even more important.
Singapore is the gateway to Asia’s bond market
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
7 .     Singapore is well-positioned to serve Asia’s growing financing needs.  We  are  a
developed pan-Asian asset management centre with more than 600 asset managers and over
SGD  2.7  trillion  of  assets  under  management,  of  which  20%  is  invested  in  fixed  income
strategies such as Asian or Emerging market debt. These include global fund managers such as
Schroders, PIMCO, BlackRock as well as our local fund managers such as Fullerton and UOB
Asset Management. Let me share a few highlights of our bond market:
        a. Issuances volumes grew at a compound annual growth rate of around 9% over the last
five years to reach SGD 186 billion (USD 129 billion) in 2016.
        b. 60% of corporate bonds issued in Singapore are in foreign currencies including G-3 and
Asian currencies, which encompass the RMB.
        c. 70% of issuers are repeat issuers, returning to tap Singapore’s bond market, after the
favourable experience with their maiden issue.
Let me zoom in on three pillars of strength:
I. International capital for Asian companies
8 .     Singapore offers an excellent ecosystem for Asian companies to raise international
capital. Asian corporates, including Chinese and Indian companies, looking to regionalise and
globalise are increasingly looking to international bond markets to raise capital and to diversify
funding sources.
        a. Over 50 international and regional banks locate their debt capital markets teams here in
Singapore. They are supported by international lawyers, accountants and rating agencies that
provide essential ancillary services in issuing a bond.
        b. Asian companies are coming to Singapore to issue debt. Bright Food Singapore Holdings
Pte. Ltd., a Chinese bond issuer, issued EUR 400 million in 2016. PT Saka Energi Indonesia,
also  a  new  issuer  here,  issued  a  USD  625  million  bond  in  2017.  Under  the  Chongqing
Connectivity Initiative, first-time bond issuers from Chongqing issued a total of USD 900 million in
Singapore.
                c.  Many  multinational  corporations  that  have  successfully  issued  bonds  in  Singapore,
continue to tap on Singapore for repeat issuances. This is a clear testament of the attractiveness
of  our  debt  market  ecosystem.  For  example,  the  treasury  unit  of  Japan’s  Hitachi  International
Limited, has been a frequent issuer in our bond market for over a decade. BOC Aviation has
issued numerous bonds in currencies including USD, JPY, AUD, CNH and SGD since 2010.
        d. Singapore’s bond market has also grown in sophistication. For instance in the area of
covered bonds, Singapore has transited from a debutant to an advanced covered bond market in
the region. Our 3 local banks have established their global covered bond programmes, with well-
received issuances denominated in USD, EUR and AUD.
9 .     We are rolling out the red carpet for new Asian issuers. MAS introduced the Asian
Bond Grant Scheme this year to support first-time Asia issuers in Singapore‘s bond market, up
to an amount of S$400,000. We have received good interest thus far.
II. Financing Asian infrastructure development
10.     The second area is in infrastructure finance. Asia’s infrastructure financing needs
are vast, far beyond what government and bank financing will be able to provide.  The
Asian Development Bank estimates that developing Asian countries will need to invest USD 1.7
trillion annually in infrastructure till 2030 to fulfil its medium- to long-term growth potential. Private
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector debt financing can play a significant role here.
1 1 .     Singapore’s  bond  market  is  drawing  in  private  capital  for  infrastructure
projects. About 60% of ASEAN infrastructure projects have benefitted from project finance or
advisory services of Singapore-based banks. Let me highlight three examples:
        a. Belt and Road Initiative bonds or BRI bonds. Chinese banks in Singapore have issued
bonds to finance BRI projects. China Construction Bank Singapore branch issued RMB 1 billion
(USD 145 million) of BRI bonds last year. Bank of China Singapore branch recently issued RMB
4 billion (USD 600 million) of BRI bonds in May this year.
        b. Asian project bonds. This year, we witnessed the successful return of project bonds into
Asia’s  bond  market  after  more  than  a  decade  of  absence.  Indonesia’s  second  largest
independent power producer, PT Paiton Energy, received more than USD 9 billion in orders for
its  USD  2  billion  issue;  a  demonstration  of  increasing  sophistication  and  growing  demand  of
investors. Debt capital market teams in Singapore including DBS and HSBC lead arranged the
deal.
6
        c. Offshore rupee denominated bonds. In May, the National Highways Authority of India
issued the largest offshore rupee denominated bond to date and listed the bond on the Singapore
Exchange.  The  INR  30  billion  (USD  465  million)  bond  will  be  used  to  finance  road  network
development in India. There is a well-trodden path for issuing offshore rupee denominated bonds
out of Singapore, including NTPC Ltd and Indiabulls etc., and follow the journey that we are on
with the offshore RMB bond market.
III. Channelling capital towards catalysing adoption of sustainability practices
12.     Alongside the greater push towards the mainstreaming of green financing, we are
witnessing an unprecedented surge in green bond issuances, globally and in Asia. Over
the last five years, global green bond issuances grew over 150% to reach USD 84   billion  in
2016, with Asia contributing around 40% of that. The market continues to register strong growth
in 1H2017, with over USD 60  billion in issuance.
13.     Singapore is building a sustainability-focused financial sector. We have placed great
emphasis  on  capacity  building  to  ensure  that  our  financial  institutions  understand  the
technicalities  of  sustainability  standards.  As  an  example,  the  Investment  Management
Association  of  Singapore  (IMAS)  in  April  2017  issued  a  public  statement  endorsing  its
commitment  to  sustainability  considerations  and  expressing  support  for  global  and  local
standards  such  as  the  United  Nations  Principles  for  Responsible  Investment  (PRI)  and  the
Singapore  Stewardship  Principles  for  Responsible  Investors  (SSP)  in  April  2017.  With
sustainability-focused  mandates  gaining  traction  in  parts  of Asia,  Singapore  is  supporting  our
asset managers to develop relevant solutions and skills in their investment processes to support
this  growing  and  strategic  segment,  such  as  the  IMAS-WWF  responsible  fund  managers
masterclass, with the first run this November.
14.     In June, MAS launched the Green Bond Grant Scheme to nurture the growth of the
green bond market and enlarge the supply of green assets. The grant defrays the costs of
obtaining  an  external  review  for  green  bonds  of  up  to  S$100,000  per  issuance.  With  asset
owners mobilising capital into sustainability-focused products, green bonds is emerging as an
asset class here in Asia.
5
        a. In April, Singapore witnessed its first green bond issuance by a Singapore company, City
Developments Limited (CDL). CDL successfully financed its investments in energy saving and
efficient infrastructures through the green bond. In July, DBS also led the way with a USD 500
million green bond issue, the first such issuance by a financial institution in Singapore.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
                b.  International  green  bond  issuers  are  also  considering  Singapore.  Indian  Renewable
Energy Development Agency (IREDA), the non-banking financial arm of India’s Ministry of new
and renewable energy, announced plans to raise a USD 300 million Green Masala Bond at the
Singapore Stock Exchange.
Conclusion
15.     In conclusion, Asia’s economic growth is the bright spot in the global economy, and this
will create immense opportunities for bonds in Asia. Singapore’s strong ecosystem of buy-side
and  sell-side  institutions,  alongside  professional  services  providers,  makes  us  an  excellent
gateway to channel international capital to Asian borrowers. Today’s conference gives you a first-
hand experience of being part of this ecosystem.
16.     MAS is strengthening Singapore’s value proposition as Asia’s fixed income hub for bond
issuers, and we would be glad for the opportunity to explore how we can serve your needs.
17.     On this note, I wish you an enjoyable discussion ahead and many fruitful interactions.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Standard & Poor’s
IMF WEO, April 2017, estimates for Emerging and Developing Asia (excluding Japan).
Advanced Economies are expected to grow at an average of 1.8% over 2017–2022. 
The ASEAN-5  economies  in  the  IMF’s  forecast  refers  to  Indonesian,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Vietnam  and  the
Philippines.  
HSBC Research, 2016.
SEB Research, 2017.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
