Egil Matsen: Government Pension Fund Global - experiences and
organisation
Speech  by  Mr  Egil  Matsen,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway),  Oslo,  27 October 2017.
 Accompanying slides
Introduction
At  a  press  conference  in  February  2017,  Prime  Minister  Erna  Solberg  summarised  Norway’s
management of its oil and gas revenues as follows: “We have been fortunate, but we have also
managed our resources well.”   Many will probably agree with the Prime Minister’s assessment.
1
In  1990,  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament)  passed  the  Act  relating  to  the  Government
Petroleum Fund, an important milestone for the management of Norway’s petroleum revenues.
The Act draws a distinction between current oil and gas revenues and the spending of these
revenues over the central government budget. This distinction has allowed the accumulation of
the savings in what is now called the Government Pension Fund Global (GPFG). Under the Act,
all of the government petroleum revenues are to be placed in the GPFG, which can only be used
via the central government budget. Under the fiscal rule, the transfers are to follow the long-term
expected annual real return of the GPFG.
Chart: A large fund – NOK 8 000 billion
The first deposit in the fund was NOK 2 billion and was made in May 1996 by Sigbjørn Johnsen,
the Minister of Finance at the time. Today, the value of the GPFG is around NOK 8 000 billon, or
almost three times annual mainland GDP. The transfers to the central government budget are
expected  to  finance  15  percent  of  central  government  expenditure  in  2018.     The  GPFG  has
become important to the Norwegian economy.
2
Norges Bank has been tasked with managing the fund since its establishment in 1996. Already
then, objections were raised, both inside and outside the Bank, to the Bank’s role as manager of
the fund. Could a bureaucratic institution like Norges Bank be suited to reaching the objective of
earning the highest possible return? Would the Bank succeed in recruiting employees with the
necessary  expertise?  What  about  safeguarding  the  central  bank’s  reputation?  Would  this
weaken executive management’s focus on the Bank’s core tasks? It is interesting to note that
more than 20 years later, the Central Bank  Law  Commission   addresses  some  of  the  same
issues.
3
4
Despite the scepticism, the management of the fund was assigned to the Bank. In the history of
Norges Bank, the authors write: “Even though the challenges posed by investment management
at  Norges  Bank  were  obvious,  neither  the  civil  servants  at  the  Ministry  of  Finance  nor  the
executive  management  of  Norges  Bank  appeared  to  be  in  any  doubt  that  the  fund  should  be
placed in the central bank.”  The historians cite the need to keep investment management under
control  and  fears  of  lower  returns  if  investment  management  were  divided  among  several
institutions among the reasons behind the choice of Norges Bank as manager. We should also
remember that it was uncertain how large the fund could grow and how long it would last. It was
therefore  natural  that  an  existing  institution  with  systems  and  expertise  for  managing  the
country’s foreign exchange reserves was chosen to perform this task. It may be said that the
fund  was  thought  of  as  a  savings  account  that  the  government  opened  at  Norges  Bank,
alongside the government’s ordinary sight deposit account.
1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Chart: A large fund
The return on this savings account has so far been good. Since the beginning of 1998, the fund
has achieved an average annual return of 6 percent. In NOK terms, the total return came to more
than NOK 3 800 billion at the end of September 2017. The return has been around ¼ percentage
point higher than the return on the fund’s benchmark index. The annual real return has been 4
percent. Management costs have been low. Over time, they have fallen as percentage of assets
under management down to 0.06 percent annually at present.
Governance model and governance principles
The Central Bank Law Commission has considered alternatives for the future organisation of the
GPFG. Before I comment on the Commission’s conclusions, I would like to speak briefly about
the current governance model and the interaction between the Storting, the Ministry and Norges
Bank.
Chart: Governance structure
The  legislative  basis  is  decided  by  the  Storting,  while  the  Ministry  of  Finance  lays  down  a
management mandate that is issued to Norges Bank. Moreover, the Ministry has established a
practice whereby decisive changes are submitted to the Storting for approval. Pursuant to the
Ministry’s  mandate,  the  Bank’s  Executive  Board  prepares  a  job  description  and  investment
mandate for the CEO of Norges Bank’s investment management unit, NBIM.
The current governance model is in line with the Santiago Principles, which have been developed
for the governance of sovereign wealth funds. The Principles stress that the policy purpose of
such a fund should be clearly defined. The Government Pension Fund Act contains an explicit
objective that the fund shall support government saving and support long-term considerations in
the  use  of  petroleum  revenues.  In  the  mandate  from  the  Ministry,  this  has  been  specified  by
providing that Norges Bank shall seek to achieve the highest possible long-term real return with
moderate risk.
The  Santiago  Principles  also  emphasise  the  importance  of  a  clear  division  of  roles  and
responsibilities and of avoiding micromanagement of investment activities. This is provided for
with regard to the relationship between the Ministry of Finance and Norges Bank as the Ministry
does not issue instructions in matters relating to the exercise of ownership rights or individual
investments.
The Santiago Principles are derived from more general principles of corporate governance. An
important purpose of these principles is to mitigate what is called the “principal-agent problem”.
This problem arises when a principal delegates a task to an agent who has more information and
who may have interests other than those of the principal. Delegated investment management is
an often-used example of a situation where the principal-agent problem can arise.
In the current governance model, it is natural to think of the Ministry of Finance as the principal
and Norges Bank as the agent. For the Ministry, the formulation of the management mandate,
reporting and supervision will be important tools for ensuring that investments are managed in
line with objectives. It is my view that the interests of the Ministry and the Bank largely coincide.
All employees of the Bank are highly conscious of the Bank’s social mission. But there is no
escaping  the  fact  that  the  Bank  has  much  more  information  about  the  investments  and  their
management at its disposal than the Ministry.
The  Ministry  has  given  Norges  Bank  a  relatively  detailed  mandate  for  the  management  of  the
fund.  The  investment  strategy  is  largely  determined  by  this  mandate.  The  mandate  sets  the
benchmark index and tracking error limits. In addition, the mandate imposes constraints on the
fund’s  investment  universe.  The  permitted  deviations  between  the  actual  portfolio  and  the
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
benchmark  portfolio  are  subject  to  defined  limits,  also  known  as  index-tracking,  which  means
that the GPFG’s return and investment risk are for the most part determined by the benchmark
index.
Chart: Return on the GPFG and the benchmark index
The role of the Bank and the Executive Board in formulating and elaborating the management
mandate is to advise the Ministry of Finance. This is an important job. Beyond this, the Bank has
limited responsibility and room for determining the overriding investment strategy, especially in
comparison with other large public investment funds.
An  example  is  the  Singapore  Government  Investment  Corporation  (GIC),  where  the  country’s
finance ministry also formulates a mandate with a benchmark portfolio and investment limits, but
the board of the GIC has greater responsibility for actual asset allocation than Norges Bank’s
Executive  Board.  Another  example  is  the  Canada  Pension  Plan  Investment  Board.  The
governance structure of this fund differs even more from our own in that the board itself draws up
the investment strategy pursuant to a statutory objective.
Chart: Asset allocation in the GPFG, GIC and CPPIB.
At the same time, there are considerable differences between the asset allocation in the GPFG
and  that  in  the  Canadian  and  Singaporean  funds.  This  probably  reflects  the  differences  in
governance  structure  as  governance  structure  and  organisation  set  a  framework  for  the
investment  strategy  to  be  pursued.  In  the  consultation  response  to  the  Central  Bank  Law
Commission’s recommendations, we place emphasis on the relationship between governance,
organisation and strategy. I shall return to this shortly.
First, however, remember that in addition to defining the investment strategy, the mandate from
the  Ministry  of  Finance  contains  specific  reporting  requirements.  Thanks  to  its  extensive
reporting, the GPFG enjoys a reputation of being one of the world’s most transparent sovereign
wealth funds. For a fund with the entire population as actual owners, transparency is vital for
ensuring democratic control and confidence in investment management.
Both  the  fund’s  investment  strategy  and  investment  management  have  tolerated  substantial
return volatility over the past 20 years, partly owing to transparency about the consequences of
strategic choices and performance. Regardless of how the GPFG is organised in the future, it is
essential  to  maintain  the  established  confidence  in  and  legitimacy  of  the  fund.  Transparency
about investment management will continue to be important in this regard.
The investment strategy and organisation have evolved in parallel
The  investment  strategy  for  the  fund  has  evolved  gradually  since  the  beginning  in  1996,  with
decisive  changes  along  the  way.  The  initial  capital  in  the  fund  was  invested  exclusively  in
government  bonds.  Already  in  1997,  it  became  clear  that  the  fund  would  grow  larger  than
assumed  and  the  saving  horizon  longer.  It  was  therefore  decided  that  40  percent  should  be
invested in equities to attain a higher long-term real return. From 1998, the fund therefore went
from being a lender to just a handful of countries to becoming part owner of a wide range of
private companies.
Chart: Evolution of strategy and governance structure over time
From 2002, fixed income investments were expanded to include bonds issued by corporates and
international  organisations.  Important  new  steps  were  taken  in  2007,  when  it  was  decided  to
increase the equity allocation and invest in new markets. The fund could thereby become a larger
shareholder in more companies and in more countries. By increasing the equity allocation from
40  to  60  percent  during  the  financial  crisis,  the  fund  doubled  its  average  stake  in  the  world’s
5  
3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
publicly traded companies to around 1 percent.
Since 2011, Norges Bank has also invested in real estate. And most recently, earlier this year it
was decided to increase the equity allocation in the GPFG to 70 percent. In the course of 20
years, the fund has changed from being a small lender to a handful of countries to becoming the
world’s  largest  sovereign  wealth  fund.  The  GPFG  is  invested  in  thousands  of  companies
worldwide and now owns the equivalent of close to 1.5 percent of all large listed companies in
the world.
Such a large ownership stake entails rights and obligations. As the fund has grown, there have
been increasing expectations and demands concerning what the GPFG should not own and the
type of owner it should be. As the manager of the GPFG, Norges Bank is to act as a responsible
investor  and  exercise  the  fund’s  shareholder  rights  in  line  with  the  Ministry’s  management
objectives.
In parallel with the growth of the GPFG and the broadening of the management mandate, Norges
Bank’s  organisation  and  governance  structure  have  evolved 
to  growing
responsibilities and complexities.
in  response 
The most important change came as early as 1998, which was to organise NBIM as a dedicated
investment management unit, with responsibility for the investments in the fund. NBIM now has a
staff of around 600, with about half working outside Norway, while Norges Bank Central Banking
Operations has a staff of 340.
Today, NBIM and Central Banking Operations are two virtually independent operational areas at
Norges Bank. The Governor is the chair of the Executive Board and at the same time general
manager of Central Banking Operations. Under a resolution of the Executive Board, NBIM is to
have its own chief executive officer with a specific job description, mandate and separate lines of
reporting to the Executive Board.
The  Executive  Board’s  total  board  time  and  the  number  of  items  for  consideration  have
increased  considerably  in  recent  years.  This  pertains  especially,  but  not  exclusively,  to
investment management matters. In 2015, the Executive Board appointed two new committees,
an  Ownership  Committee  and  a  Risk  and  Investment  Committee.  This  has  strengthened  the
Executive Board’s work on responsible investment and investment strategy, risk limits and large
real estate investments. As you know, in January 2016, the government also appointed a new
Deputy Governor, with special responsibility for investment management matters.
The  supervisory  and  control  structure  has  been  strengthened,  among  other  things  by
establishing an internal audit  function  for  the  Bank  and  an Audit  Committee  solely  comprising
external  members  of  the  Executive  Board.  Moreover,  since  2010  Norges  Bank’s  Supervisory
Council  has  reported  supervisory  results  directly  to  the  Storting,  and  in  addition  an  external
auditor was appointed for the Bank.
Investment strategy, governance and organisation must continue to evolve in tandem 
The sceptics who 20 years ago doubted the decision to give Norges Bank task of managing the
oil fund have not been proven right so far. In the National Budget for 2018, the Ministry of Finance
states that the Bank has managed and continues to manage the fund in a sound manner.
Norges Bank believes that the Bank is well positioned to manage the GPFG and perform central
banking tasks in a sound manner also in the future. If the fund remains under the aegis of the
Bank, Norges Bank recognises that there are arguments for establishing a separate committee
for monetary policy and financial stability. Such a committee will substantially unburden the board
of central banking matters, and the composition of the board can then be tailored more closely to
specific tasks relating to investment management. In this case, the Executive Board favours a
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
model that is based on the current governance structure.
Norges Bank also recognises that there are aspects of the current organisation and governance
that  could  be  reconsidered.  The  organisation,  governance  structure  and  supervision  must  be
considered in the light of new challenges for the management of the fund and for central banking.
In recent years, changes in the Ministry’s mandate have given the Bank greater responsibility for
formulating parts of the GPFG’s investment strategy. The Executive Board and the organisation
have had to devote greater resources to investment management, partly owing to the addition of
unlisted real estate to the GPFG’s investment universe. Since the beginning of 2017, the Bank
has been responsible for deciding the allocation to unlisted real estate subject to an upper limit. In
addition, the Executive Board now decides whether individual companies will be placed under
observation or excluded from the GPFG’s investment universe on the basis of advice from the
Council  on  Ethics.  From  the  turn  of  the  year,  the  Executive  Board  shall  also  decide  which
government bond issuers are eligible for inclusion in the fund.
The Bank has managed these tasks by adapting its organisation and governance structure. An
example of this is the establishment in 2014 of a separate organisation within NBIM to manage
real  estate  investments.  Nevertheless,  developments  in  recent  years  show  that  the  future
organisation and home of the GPFG should be considered in the light of the continued evolution
of the investment strategy.
As you may know, the Central Bank Law Commission proposes to separate management of the
GPFG from Norges Bank and establish a statutory entity to manage the fund. The Commission
does not discuss the actual management mandate, but its assessment of governance models
for the Bank and the GPFG takes into account that it may be changed.
The  Commission  itself  points  out  that  the  Ministry  may  hand  over  more  decision-making
responsibility  regarding  investment  strategy  and  asset  composition  to  the  manager,  as  is  the
case with many other sovereign wealth funds. It is also possible that the investment strategy may
be broadened to include more unlisted asset classes, such as infrastructure and private equity.
These  sorts  of  investments  will  place  heavier  demands  on  executive  management  and  the
governance structure and require a larger and more complex organisation. Moreover, demands
and expectations concerning the fund’s exercise of ownership rights may increase further. The
Commission  raises  the  question  of  placing  the  Council  on  Ethics  within  the  management
organisation. This would mean that the organisation given the responsibility of managing the fund
will also be given greater responsibility for making ethical assessments.
If there are prospects that investment management evolves as I have indicated above, it may be
appropriate to organise the management of the fund outside the central bank.
The fund must not be compromised
The  chair  of  the  Central  Bank  Law  Commission  has  underscored  that  “the  fund  must  not  be
compromised” in the event of a new governance model. This was also a concern echoed in the
public  debate,  reflecting  fears  that  changes  in  the  organisation  of  the  fund  may  give  special
interests influence over investment management. I would like to highlight four areas that could
have  serious  pitfalls:  the  primary  objective  of  investment  management,  the  division  of
responsibility in the governance model, board composition and cost-effectiveness.
Chart: Important considerations for the future
The purpose of investment management as defined by the political authorities sets a clear aim
for  the  long-term  return.  To  illustrate  this  point,  I  have  chosen  again  to  look  to  Canada,  more
specifically  to  the  province  of Alberta. Alberta  has  earned  considerable  oil  and  gas  revenues
since  the  1970s.  In  1976,  the  provincial  government  established  the Alberta  Heritage  Savings
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Trust Fund (AHSTF), where these revenues were invested.
Chart: Alberta Heritage Savings Trust Fund
At the outset, the AHSTF had a number of objectives. In addition to saving for the long term, the
AHSTF  was  also  tasked  with  strengthening  and  diversifying  the  economy  of  Alberta  and
improving the quality of life of Albertans. Individually, these are admirable aims, but as an overall
objective for investment management, they are more demanding. Retrospectively, it is difficult to
measure the fund’s contribution to a more diversified economy or to an improved quality of life of
residents.  Such  purposes  may  also  conflict  with  a  desire  to  save  for  the  future. Alberta  has
chosen  to  adjust  course  along  the  way.  The  management  objective  of  the  fund  is  now  to
maximise long-term returns at a prudent level of risk.
Chart: Important considerations for the future
The Central Bank Law Commission advises against multiple objectives for the management of
the GPFG. The Commission underscores that a change of manager for the GPFG should not
occur  if  this  entails  that  other  considerations  overshadow  the  aim  of  maximising  long-term
returns. Norges Bank concurs with this view. Using the fund to attain policy objectives such as
environmental, foreign, regional or industrial policy goals may easily come at the expense of high,
long-term returns.
The other area I would like to address is the division of responsibilities in the governance model.
It  must  be  explicit,  with  a  clear  division  of  roles  and  responsibilities.  The  current  governance
model for the GPFG is based on a delegation of responsibilities and powers from one level to
another. A control and supervisory line runs in parallel from the manager upward to the Storting.
Regardless  of  whether  the  fund  remains  under  the  aegis  of  the  Bank  or  is  organised  in  a
separate  entity,  its  governing  bodies  and  management  must  be  held  to  account.  This  also
requires that the parties at the various levels in the governance hierarchy respect the powers and
delegated authority actually conferred on them. A lack of clarity in decision-making responsibility
may adversely affect investment management in the long term.
The third potential pitfall concerns the composition of the board of a new management entity. The
Central Bank Law Commission emphasises that such a board must have expertise in finance
and investment management, but also expertise beyond the purely financial. In Norges Bank’s
experience,  a  sound  understanding  of  the  GPFG’s  role  in  the  Norwegian  economy  and  in
economic policy is important for the board in discharging its tasks, and not least important in
filling the role of key adviser to the Ministry on matters concerning the mandate and investment
strategy. The board must also be conscious that it is the owner’s representative – its loyalty must
lie with the principal. If this emphasis is misplaced, it can damage the position of the fund in the
public consciousness.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  underscore  the  importance  of  preserving  cost-effective  investment
management.  In  the  course  of  20  years,  Norges  Bank  has  built  up  a  competent  investment
management organisation. Considerable economies of scale have been realised – investment
management costs are low. The level of management costs over time is particularly important
for  the  owner’s  net  return.  We  must  keep  the  GPFG’s  management  costs  at  a  low  level,
regardless of whether the fund remains within the Bank or is organised outside the Bank. Norges
Bank concurs with Central Bank Law Commission in that neither the fund nor its management
tasks should be divided among several entities. This will raise management costs. Any gains,
however, would be difficult to come by.
Conclusion
Norway has managed its petroleum resources well. We have set aside wealth for the future and
have created a stable institutional framework for the management of the country’s savings. In the
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
quotation I began with, the Prime Minister points out that Norway has also been somewhat lucky.
Oil and gas prices were high during a period where production was also substantial.
Luck is hardly a permanent condition. Oil prices are now far below the levels prevailing just a few
years ago. Looking ahead, volatility in global capital markets may have a pronounced impact on
the value of the GPFG, to both the upside and the downside. Good institutions can enable us to
use favourable periods to create long-term value. The same institutions can also help us through
less  favourable  periods  without  permanent  damage.  And,  unlike  either  good  or  bad  luck,
institutions, as a rule, are more permanent.
The  future  management  model  for  the  GPFG  is  ultimately  a  matter  of  institutions  that  are
supposed to be long-lasting. Norges Bank’s societal and constitutional role has provided a stable
framework  for  the  fund.  Should  the  framework  that  the  Bank  can  provide  still  be  the  decisive
factor, or has the fund now become so large and investment management so extensive, that the
assets can be best preserved and grown in a separate organisation?
The Commission’s recommendation and the ensuing debate show that there is a wide range of
views. The discussion reflects both the evolution towards an increasingly complex fund and the
fund’s key role in Norwegian politics and Norway’s economy. But once the decision is made, the
issue of the fund’s future organisation must be regarded as settled. Regardless of the outcome,
we must be prepared to live with the chosen governance model for many years to come. Broad
political consensus is an effective guarantee in this context.
1
2
3
4
5
Regjeringen.no:  Pressemelding  16.02.2017  Økt  aksjeandel  i  pensjonsfondet  og  justert  anslag  for
fondsavkastningen”
The non-oil deficit as a percentage of total general government expenditure.
Official  Norwegian  Reports  NOU  2017:13  New  central  bank  act.  Organisation  of  Norges  Bank  and  the
Government Pension Fund Global (Summary in English).
Lie, E., J. T. Kobberrød, E. Thomassen and G. F. Rongved (2016): Norges Bank 1816–2016. Fagbokforlaget (in
Norwegian only).
Between  31  December  2007  and  31  December  2009,  the  average  stake  in  listed  companies  worldwide
doubled.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
