  Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France and 
 President of the ACPR 
 ACPR conference of 22 November 2017 
Bank resolution: from regulation to implementation 
  Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 I am delighted to welcome you to this new conference organised by the Autorité de contrôle 
prudentiel  et  de  résolution.  For  the  first  time,  the  morning  of  this  conference  will  focus  on 
bank resolution. This is always a somewhat paradoxical subject: if we are spending time on it 
today, it is in the hope that we will never have to deal with it in the future. "Si vis pacem, para 
bellum", as the Romans said... just as they prepared for war to maintain peace, we must be 
fully prepared for a crisis if we are to avoid it. 
But  I  would  like  to  start  by  noting  an  important  victory:  that  of  Paris  and  France,  which  will 
welcome  the  European  Banking  Authority.  It  represents  an  achievement  for  a  highly 
motivated and dynamic team, as well as a threefold recognition, i.e. that of the attractiveness 
of  France  and  the  Paris  financial  centre  today;  the  richness  of  a  financial  ecosystem  that 
boasts one of Europe's most impressive talent pools; and lastly, I believe, the quality of the 
public  regulators  and  the  supervisor  –  the  ACPR.  And  the  European  Banking  Authority's 
decision  to  move  from  London  to  Paris  clearly  bodes  well  for  other  post-Brexit  financial 
relocations. 
There is no better time to talk about resolution, as this year, 2017, has seen the adoption of 
the first resolution decisions and the management of several crisis cases, which have been a 
baptism of fire for the Single Resolution Mechanism.  
 1 
The  Banking  Union,  which  is  a  major  step  forward  for  the  euro  area,  is  now  operational, 
based  on  a  single rulebook  and  –  already  –  two  pillars:  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism 
(SSM)  since  the  end  of  2014;  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM)  since  the 
beginning  of  2016.  Those  two  pillars  should  be  supplemented  by  a  third  pillar,  Deposit 
Insurance, for which we will need to find practical and reasonable compromises. But today I 
would like to focus on two cross-cutting challenges that are less often discussed: consistency 
and  consolidation.  As  you  will  see,  both  involve  resolution.  However,  it  is  my  goal  this 
morning to go further and consider the completion of the Banking Union as a whole. 
 I. 
The  first  challenge  is  to  achieve  better  consistency  between  regulation, 
supervision and resolution, at three levels:  
 -  First, consistency in the concrete  mechanisms: finalising and simplifying the resolution 
pillar  should  be  a  priority.  The  case  of  the  Italian  bank  failures  has  illustrated  just  how 
complex  it  is  to  combine  the  resolution  regime  laid  down  in  the  Bank  Recovery  and 
Resolution  Directive  (BRRD)  with  the  State  aid  framework  for  orderly  liquidation.  In 
addition,  confidence  in  the  Single  Resolution  Fund  (SRF)  and  its  capacity  to  intervene 
has  to  be  bolstered.  The  setting-up  of  a  common  backstop,  as  mentioned  in  the 
European  Commission’s  communication  of  11  October,  is  a  promising  avenue,  which 
could  take  the  form  of  a  credit  line  granted  by  the  ESM  (the  European  Stability 
Mechanism).  If  it  is  placed  within  the  ESM's  remit,  the  rules  for  triggering  this  backstop 
could be introduced during the ESM governance review. Furthermore, this avenue could 
provide a partial response to the issue of the liquidity of newly resolved entities – mainly 
the  “good  banks”  –,  which  has  not  yet  been  addressed  with  sufficient  clarity:  liquidity 
support from public  sources,  beyond  what  can  legitimately  be  expected  from  the 
Eurosystem, should be clarified.  
 -  Second,  consistency  in  the  legal  framework  and  requirements:  faced  with  the 
accumulation  of  new  and  “separate”  requirements,  we  need  to  adopt  a  holistic  and 
consistent approach in order to avoid a prudential overload. In particular, the Total Loss 
Absorbing  Capacity  (TLAC)  requirement  resulting  from  the  new  international  framework 
requires  a  consistent  adaptation  of  the  European  minimum  requirement  for  own  funds 
and eligible liabilities (MREL). Therefore, the MREL targets should be set on the basis of 
updated prudential requirements – pillar II and buffers – and the most up-to-date financial 
position  of  the  banks  concerned.  It  is  a  question  of  consistency.  In  the  same  vein,  the 
consequences of the Basel III reforms package – when it is finalised – should be carefully 
 2 
taken into account, as it may lead to increased risk-weighted assets, which could in turn 
impact the MREL.  All these regulatory developments, combined with changes to pillar II 
capital requirement amounts, could lead to over-calibration: each individual decision may 
be warranted; but their somewhat disorderly accumulation is not. And naturally, in setting 
these  requirements,  we  must  not  jeopardise  the  level  playing  field  between  euro  area 
banks and their international competitors. 
 -  Third,  consistency  in  the  interaction  between  authorities,  which  should  be  improved: 
the  case  of  Banco  Popular  in  Spain,  although  it  was  resolved  satisfactorily,  also 
demonstrated  the  importance  of  swift  and  close  cooperation  between  supervisory  and 
resolution  authorities,  both  at  European  and  national  levels.  There  is  no  denying  that 
there is still a need to better coordinate the roles of the different European authorities  – 
the SSM and ECB, the SRM, the Commission, and the European Banking Authority – in 
order  to  have  a  more  clearly  established  “pilot  in  the  plane” for crisis  management. We 
still  need  to  define  the  roles  in  order  to  decompartmentalise  the  different  pillars  and 
guarantee a continuum, which is vital to the smooth running of operations. But we must 
give our unequivocal support to these authorities in the performance of their duties: when 
the SSM, chaired by Danièle Nouy, and the ECB propose standards for the provisioning 
of new non-performing loans, they are operating fully within their remit to prevent future 
crises and ensure the convergence within the euro area that is at the heart of the Banking 
Union. We will see what the precise outcome of the present dialogue will be, but already I 
would like to say that I find some of the resistance shown by banks generally, and even 
more  so,  the  controversy  that  has  arisen  in  Italy  in  particular,  inappropriate  and 
unfounded. For non-performing loans, we have to plan ahead if we are to stop picking up 
the  pieces  afterwards.  If  we  ever  needed  proof  of  the  necessity  for  independent 
European supervision, this controversy has provided it. 
 II. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  encourage  consolidation  within  the  Banking 
Union  
 Consolidation  must  be  the  result  of  consistency,  and  consistency  is  considering  the 
Banking Union as a unique jurisdiction. 
 -  We  must  therefore  stop  hindering  cross-border  bank  consolidations  in  the  euro 
area. 
 3 
We need to ensure that the implementation of new regulations does not give rise to new 
barriers. The development of cross-border banking activities is essential to reinforcing the 
single market, facilitating the allocation of savings and financing investment. We still lag 
far behind the American market in this respect: the market share in the United States of 
the top five banks is more than 40% whereas the market share in the euro area of the top 
five  banks  is  less  than  20%.  Sound  and  safe  cross-border  consolidations  would  make 
banks better able to diversify their risks across the euro area, and channel savings more 
effectively  towards  productive  investment.  This  is  what  I  called  a  "Financing  Union  for 
Investment and Innovation", notably to shore up equity, which is the key to an innovation 
economy. The aim is crystal clear: within a Monetary and Banking Union, a cross-border 
merger must not be more difficult and cumbersome than a “domestic” merger.  
Several levers must be pulled if the obstacles to these activities are to be removed. From 
a supervisory point of view, this involves promoting a consolidated approach by granting 
more  waivers  on  liquidity  and  capital  so  as  to  allow  more  flexible  capital  allocation  and 
limit ring-fencing. From a resolution point of view, internal MREL requirements should be 
a  tool  to  facilitate  the  resolution  of  institutions,  but  they  would  become  meaningless  if 
calculated on a national basis. They must be calculated at the level of the Banking Union, 
considered as a unique jurisdiction. Indeed, compartmentalising an internal MREL within 
national borders would be an obstacle to the single market and European banking cross-
border mergers. As a first concrete step, I suggest that the European Banking Authority 
publish  a  comprehensive  stock-taking  of  all  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  obstacles  to 
cross-border activities and mergers. 
 Conclusion: 
Banks must be prepared for these extreme situations because: 
-  There  is  no  such  thing  as  zero  risk,  despite  the  improvements  to  prudential 
regulations and the reinforcement of banks' financial capacity. 
-  The  failure  of  a  single  participant,  even  one  considered  to  be  secondary,  can  have 
systemic effects, as even the largest groups are now no longer immune. Since 2011 
and  the  end  of  the "too-big-to-fail"  doctrine, these groups  have  become  increasingly 
aware  of  this,  and  have  drawn  up  their  recovery  plans  and  worked  closely  with  the 
authorities to ready themselves for crisis situations. 
 The role played by the authorities in these continued efforts is crucial. Accordingly, the ACPR 
in France, and the ECB and the SRB at Banking Union level, guide and support these efforts, 
while also preparing for failure scenarios.  
 4 
 To this end, as of 2015, the ACPR has provided a decisive boost that has led to the drafting 
of the first  resolution  plans  by  France's  leading  institutions. Today,  all  institutions  under the 
authority  of  the  Single  Resolution  Board  have  a  resolution  plan  in  place.  As  for  the 
institutions  under  the  direct  responsibility  of  the  ACPR,  a  first  wave  of  plans  has  been 
completed and plans will be finalised for all the 142 institutions concerned at the end of 2018. 
 These  combined  efforts  to  pre-empt  and  to  manage  crisis  situations  must  therefore  be 
maintained  in  order  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  banking  operations  that  are  essential  to  the 
functioning  of  the  economy,  to  avoid  harming  financial  stability,  to  protect  the  resources  of 
the Member States and to strengthen protection for depositors and investors. 
  5 
