François Villeroy de Galhau: The euro – which way to go?
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the
EconPol  Europe  (European  Network  for  Economic  and  Fiscal  Policy  Research)  Founding
Conference and first Annual Meeting "The Euro - Which Way to Go?", Brussels, 9 November
2017.
1
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure to be in Brussels today, which doesn’t happen so often for a central banker… who
has just arrived from Frankfurt. I welcome the fact that you at EconPol Europe have chosen the
euro  as  the  theme  of  your  founding  conference,  and  invited  me  to  give  this  keynote  speech.
Since Maastricht 25 years ago, we have succeeded in building a Monetary Union. However we
have not delivered on Economic Union. To avoid overburdening monetary policy, our Union must
stand on two feet rather than just one: that is why it is legitimate that we, as central bankers,
propose ideas on this subject, even if we are not those who legitimately make decisions. It is now
urgent to make concrete progress on Economic Union, all the more so as the economic context
is now favourable, as confirmed today by the European Commission. Euro area growth of 2.2%
in 2017 should be the highest rate in 10 years, and as strong as in the United States. It could be
for  France  even  slightly  higher  than  forecasted  (1.6%),  if  we  look  at  our  Banque  de  France
forecast for Q4 published this morning – at 0.5%. It will be sustained in the next two years thanks
to strong investment and increased convergence among countries. These forecasts, including a
positive  but  still  subdued  inflation,  confirm  the  adequacy  of  the  gradual  normalisation  of  our
monetary policy we are engaged in.
“German 
rules”  vs 
“French  expenditure”  and 
There  is  a  risk,  however,  that  the  debate  will  continue  to  revolve  around  two  long-standing
divisions: 
“community  methods”  vs
“intergovernmental methods". Too many fears and suspicions have been inherited from the past,
but we are living in a new era – which is also thanks to the acceleration of reforms in France –
and  in  a  time  of  unique  historic  opportunity.  In  Rome,  on  25  March  of  this  year,  the  Member
States all expressed their clear will for “the completion of the Economic and Monetary Union".
We are in agreement on the “why": greater stability, to counter the risk of a new crisis befalling
an unprotected euro area; and greater growth, to catch up our past lag on the United States and
finally treat the fatal disease of mass unemployment in Europe.
But how can we achieve this shared objective? We should trigger four accelerators: a macro
accelerator,  which  would  consist  of  a  collective  economic  strategy  shared  by  all  euro  area
Member  States;  a  micro  accelerator,  which  would  take  the  form  of  a  Financing  Union  for
Investment and Innovation, going beyond the CMU (Capital Markets Union); a fiscal accelerator,
which  would  draw  on  a  euro  area  budget.  The  fourth  is  not  an  accelerator  in  substance,  but
rather  a  “facilitator”  for  the  first  three:  on  institutions,  a  euro  area  Finance  Minister  and
Parliament.
2
These  accelerators  would  contribute  to  the  functions  of  economic  policy,  as  described  by
Musgrave:  allocation, stabilisation and distribution. The allocation function aims at making sure
that  resources  are  used  in  an  efficient  way.  This  would  obviously  be  the  role  of  the  micro
accelerator, but also of the fiscal one – through the financing of European common goods. The
stabilisation  function  consists  in  the  smoothing  of  the  cycle  and  cushioning  of  the  impact  of
crises, and this could be ensured mainly by the macro accelerator, but also by the micro one,
thanks to enhanced private risk sharing, and possibly by the fiscal one. Finally, the distribution
function  is  to  foster  an  equitable  sharing  of  income.  This  role  could  possibly  fall  to  the  fiscal
accelerator  but  its  implementation  would  require  increased  trust  and  greater  economic
convergence between euro area Member States in order to avoid a “transfer union” which would
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
be a one-way budget: in that case, I would understand German fears.
So these four accelerators are needed, but this does not mean they all have to be implemented
at the same time. The latter two accelerators, fiscal and institutional, would indeed require Treaty
changes, unless they were to be very limited. However, this must not stop us from taking steps
straight away on the first two accelerators, macro and micro, on which I will insist today. I would
like to share with you some personal reflections – useful for the proposals that the European
Commission will make in December and for our debate today. To be more specific, I will focus
on one part of each of these two accelerators, where progress can be made quickly: I will first
dwell on the creation of a Stabilisation Lending Instrument (SLI) as part of the macro accelerator,
and I will then elaborate on the completion of the Banking Union as part of the micro accelerator.
**
I. A macro accelerator, including a Stabilisation Lending Instrument (SLI) and perhaps a
European Monetary Fund
The macro accelerator is premised on one simple fact: economic growth and employment would
be stronger in the euro area if we combined more reforms in countries where they are needed,
like  France  or  Italy,  and  more  stimulus  in  countries  with  leeway  for  it,  like  Germany  or  the
Netherlands.  To  achieve  this  collective  economic  strategy,  euro  area  Member  States  have  to
seal a deal, which could be prepared and adopted as early as 2018.
In addition to this commitment, I also suggest creating a Stabilisation Lending Instrument at the
euro  area  level,  and  I  would  like  to  detail  some  key  aspects  regarding  its  objectives  and
operational efficiency. I will then talk more broadly about a possible European Monetary Fund.
Let me start with the objectives. The SLI would provide loans to euro area Member States faced
with an asymmetric economic shock, in order to support their countercyclical policies. Finland for
instance  was  faced  with  a  triple  asymmetric  shock  in  the  late  2000s,  due  to  the  collapse  of
Nokia,  the  decline  of  the  paper  industry  and  the  aftermath  of  the  Russian  crisis  –  real  GDP
contracted by 9% in 2009. Such a shock could also stem for instance from temporary political
uncertainty – as long as it is not fuelled by inadequate economic policies – from natural disasters
or from an irrational loss of confidence in the financial markets resulting in excessive pressure on
the  sovereign  spread.  The  SLI  would  be  a  complement  to  and  not  a  substitute  for  national
stabilisers. It would help Member States not to abandon their long term investments, especially
by preventing an unwarranted widening of their financing conditions.
Beyond  this  Stabilisation  Lending  Instrument,  the  creation  of  a  “rainy  day  fund”  with  fiscal
resources  could  be  considered  at  a  later  stage  once  confidence  and  economic  convergence
between Member States have increased.
On the operational efficiency of the SLI, access to the instrument should be simple, subject to
carefully chosen macro-financial criteria. Minimum conditions would be first that Member States
actually  abide  by  common  rules  –  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  the  Macroeconomic
Imbalances Procedure – and second that they actually conduct policies consistent with the euro
area  collective  economic  strategy.  However,  contrary  to  the  ESM  instruments  that  have  been
used so far, access to the SLI should not be conditional on the implementation of an adjustment
program. Its design would be such that it does not involve a stigma for Member States.
The issue of governance brings me to a broader reflection on the idea of a European Monetary
Fund  (EMF). An  EMF  would  only  make  sense  if  its  scope  of  action  and  its  governance  went
beyond those of the current ESM. Otherwise, why would we give it a different name? The scope
of action of a potential EMF should not be limited to crisis management. We should entrust it with
the role of crisis prevention in a broad sense, including contingent lending through the SLI. This
would require decision-making processes that would not be tied up by veto-based governance.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As President of the Eurogroup and Member of the European Commission, the Finance Minister
of the euro area would logically chair the Board of Governors of an EMF and play a stronger role
in situations that require Board level judgement. In due course, it would be beneficial to bring an
EMF  into  the  fold  of  the  Community  method,  which  means  anchoring  this  institution  in  the
framework of Union law [the Commission has suggested proceeding on the basis of art. 352 of
the TFEU]. Within this framework – and only within it – it would make sense to entrust an EMF
with  a  broader  surveillance  mission,  including  the  task  of  monitoring  compliance  with  the
common rules, a role that is today assigned to the European Commission.
II. A micro accelerator, including the completion of the banking union
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  micro  accelerator  for  the  Economic  Union:  a  Financing  Union  for
Investment  and  Innovation.  The  aim  is  to  better  steer  the  euro  area’s  EUR  350  billion  annual
savings surplus towards productive investment, notably by shoring up equity which is the key to
an  innovation  economy.  Thanks  to  unified  governance,  this  Financing  Union  would  help
circumvent bureaucratic barriers and foster synergies between the existing building blocks: the
Juncker  Investment  Plan,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  and  the  Banking  Union.  Yet,  for  this
Financing  Union  to  be  effective,  progress  is  still  needed  in  four  key  areas:  first,  providing
incentives  for  cross-border  investments  –  mainly  in  equity  –  through  accounting,  taxes  and
insolvency laws; second, developing pan-European long-term saving products – with a key role
for  the  insurance  sector  –  and  investment  vehicles  like  European  venture  capital  funds;  third,
completing  the  Banking  Union;  fourth,  controlling  financial  activities  and  risks  that  are  of  vital
importance for the euro area, such as supersystemic CCPs. And so, we could reach significant
gains for digitalisation, SME’s scaling up or energy transition. Today, I will focus on the third area:
completing the Banking Union.
The Banking Union is a major step forward for the euro area and is now operational, based on
the single rulebook and already two pillars: the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) since end-
2014;  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM),  since  the  beginning  of  2016.  Those  two
pillars will have to be complemented by a third pillar about Deposit Insurance, where we could
find practical and reasonable compromises. But in addition, I will elaborate on two challenges
that are less often mentioned: consistency, and consolidations.
The first challenge is to achieve better consistency between regulation, supervision and
resolution, at three levels:
First, in the concrete mechanisms: finalising and simplifying the resolution pillar should be
a priority. The case of the Italian banks has illustrated just how complex it is to combine the
resolution regime laid down in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) with the
State aid framework for orderly liquidation. In addition, confidence in the Single Resolution
Fund (SRF) and its capacity to intervene has to be bolstered. The setting-up of a common
backstop, as mentioned in the European Commission’s communication of 11 October, is a
promising  avenue,  which  could  take  the  form  of  a  credit  line  granted  by  the  ESM.
Furthermore,  the  issue  of  the liquidity of  the  newly  resolved  entities  –  mainly  the  “good
banks”  –  is  not  sufficiently  clearly  addressed:  liquidity  support  by  public  sources  beyond
what can legitimately be expected from the Eurosystem should be clarified.
the legal  framework  and  requirements:  faced  with  the
Second,  consistency 
accumulation  of  new  and  “separate”  requirements,  we  need  to  adopt  a  holistic  and
consistent  approach  in  order  to  avoid  a  prudential  overload.  In  particular,  the  TLAC
requirement resulting from the new international framework requires a consistent adaptation
of the European minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL). In the
same vein, the consequences of an internationally-agreed Basel III package – if and when it
comes – should be carefully taken into account, as it would lead to increased risk-weighted
assets,  which  will  in  turn  impact  the  MREL.  All  this,  combined  with  pillar  II  capital
requirements, could lead to over-calibration: each individual decision may be warranted; but
in 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
their somewhat disorderly accumulation is not. And obviously, we must not jeopardise the
level playing field between euro area banks and their international competitors.
Third,  in  the interaction  between  authorities,  which  should  be  improved:  the  case  of
Banco Popular, although it was a success, has also demonstrated the importance of swift
and close cooperation between supervisory and resolution authorities, both at European and
national  levels.  In  this  respect,  there  is  still  a  need  to  better  coordinate  the  roles  of  the
different European authorities – SSM and ECB, SRM, Commission, and EBA – in order to
have  a  clearer  “pilot  in  the  plane”  in  crisis  management. At  a  later  stage,  we  could  even
consider  establishing  a  single  banking  authority  for  our  single  Banking  Union,  acting  to
bolster the robustness of the European banking sector.
The second challenge is to support cross-border bank consolidations in the euro area. The
head of the SSM too, Danièle Nouy, insisted on this point a couple of days ago. We still lag far
behind the American market in this respect: the market share in the United States of the top five
banks is more than 40% whereas the market share in the euro area of the top five banks is less
than 20%. Sound and safe cross-border consolidations would make banks better able to diversify
their  risks  across  the  euro  area,  and  channel  savings  more  effectively  towards  investments
across borders; this would foster the Financing Union I talked about.
transactions 
From a supervisory point of view, it involves supporting an approach on a consolidated basis by
granting more waivers on liquidity and capital so as to allow more flexible capital allocation and
limit  ring-fencing.  Swift  execution  of  cross-border 
the
implementation of a fast-track process by the SSM would address this issue. From a resolution
point of view, internal MREL requirements could be a tool to facilitate the resolution of institutions,
but  they  would  become  meaningless  if  calculated  on  a  national  basis.  Indeed,  having  internal
MREL in all countries could be an obstacle to the single market and European banking cross-
border  mergers.  Finally,  we  should  address  business  and  legal  impediments  to  cross-border
mergers: information asymmetry, non-performing loans (NPL) or anti-takeover legal structures in
different  countries. As  a  first  concrete  step,  I  suggest  that  the  EBA  publish  a  comprehensive
stock-taking  of  all  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  obstacles  to  cross-border  activities  and
mergers. The aim is crystal clear: within a Monetary and Banking Union, a cross-border merger
must not be more difficult and cumbersome than a “domestic” merger. The logic of the banking
union is that it should be considered for banking purposes as a unique jurisdiction.
is  also  essential: 
I would like to conclude by quoting one of the founding fathers of Europe. On 10 December 1951,
Robert Schuman, declared before the Assembly of the Council of Europe: “If we do not make up
our minds in time, Ladies and Gentlemen, we shall run the risk of letting slip the last chance of
salvation  for  Europe  and  for  our  countries".  In  a  post-war  context,  he  was  well  aware  of  the
urgent  need  for  action  in  Europe.  In  the  current  context,  we  should  draw  from  this  feeling  of
unique opportunity. There are of course non-economic projects: to name a few, climate change
or youth education and training – in this respect an Erasmus Pro programme should be a priority
for the unskilled and unemployed youth. But in the economic area which is my focus today, it is
now or never: this is the right time to step up the pace in Europe. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
I would like to thank Marine Dujardin, Jordan Granata, Simon Laplace, Olya Ranguelova, Bérengère Rudelle,
Caroline Varlet and Edouard Vidon for their help in preparing this speech.
Musgrave, R. and Musgrave P., Public Finance in Theory and Practice, McGraw Hill, 1989.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
