François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Economic  Union,  Financing  Union,
Banking Union
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Annual
General Meeting of the Foreign Bankers’ Association, Amsterdam, 16 November 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a pleasure to be in Amsterdam today and to give the keynote speech at your Annual General
Meeting. I wish to warmly thank my friend Governor Klaas Knot and FBA Chairman Leonique van
Houwelingen  for  their  kind  invitation.  For  a  central  banker, Amsterdam  is  a  highly  significant
place, especially because the Bank of Amsterdam, in Dutch the “Amsterdamsche Wisselbank”,
which was established as early as 1609, can be considered a precursor to central banks, before
its role was taken over by the Nederlandsche Bank, which is also a venerable ainstitution since it
was created by King William I in 1814. Furthermore, for a long time, Amsterdam has been an
economic and financial capital and a major city at the heart of Europe. If I add your tradition of
freedom  and  tolerance,  your  country  is  a  paragon  of  many  of  the  European  virtues  that  we
cherish.    
This afternoon, I would like to share with you some reflections as a central banker on a highly
topical issue: the future of Europe. Your new Minister of Foreign Affairs, Halbe Zijlstra, gave a
speech on this very theme last week and rightly called for “a Europe that is relevant to its people
[and] which is again synonymous with prosperity and growth”. This issue is topical also because
it is the right time to step up the pace in Europe. Indeed, we have clearly succeeded in building a
Monetary Union, but this is not sufficient. It is urgent to make concrete progress on Economic
Union, on which we have not yet delivered. We are living in a time of unique historic opportunity:
first, the economic context is now favourable to move forward, since euro area growth should be
at least 2.2% in 2017; “when the sun is shining, it is time to fix the roof”. Second, after the recent
elections in France, Germany and the Netherlands, we have a “democratic alignment”, in terms
of the calendar and probably in substance, for the four years to come. Lastly, the Brexit vote and
the  election  of  Mr  Trump  in  the  United  States  have  come  as  external  stimuli,  showing  how
important it is to breathe new life into European integration so that we Europeans take our destiny
into our own hands, as Chancellor Merkel rightly said in Munich last spring.  In my remarks today,
I  will  explore  three  economic  concentric  circles:  first  the  Economic  Union,  by  presenting  the
accelerators  that  are  needed  to  make  concrete  progress;  second  the  Financing  Union,  by
focusing on one of these accelerators, which might be of particular interest to your community of
banks and financial institutions; and third the Banking Union, which is a key part of the Financing
Union and which has to be completed.
It is now time to act in Europe: four accelerators of the Economic Union
In Rome, on 25 March of this year, the Member States all expressed their clear willingness to
work  “towards  completing  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union".  We  are  in  agreement  on  the
“why". Let me say one word about our monetary policy. Taking into account our progress, the
Governing  Council  decided  at  the  end  of  October  to  pursue  a  gradual  normalisation.  We  will
clearly follow this path of gradual normalisation, with caution but combining the whole range of
our instruments – and there shouldn’t be excessive focus on the net purchases of assets. But
monetary policy cannot be the only game in town, and therefore we should not overburden it.
Furthermore  we  aim  at  greater stability,  to  counter  the  risk  of  a  new  crisis  befalling  an
unprotected euro area, with all its damaging political and economic repercussions; and greater
growth, to catch up our past lag on the United States and finally treat the fatal disease of mass
unemployment in Europe.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With this objective in mind, how, concretely, can we make progress on Economic Union? In my
view,  we  should  trigger  four  accelerators:  a macro  accelerator,  which  would  consist  of  a
collective economic strategy shared by all euro area Member States; a micro accelerator, which
would take the form of a Financing Union for Investment and Innovation, going beyond the Capital
Markets Union; a fiscal accelerator, which would draw on a euro area budget. The fourth is not
an accelerator in substance, but rather a “facilitator” for the first three: in terms of institutions,
we would need a euro area Finance Minister and Parliament.
These four accelerators are needed, but this does not mean they all have to be implemented at
the  same  time.  With  the  existing  Treaty,  we  can  take  steps  straight  away  on  the  first  two
accelerators, macro and micro, on which I will elaborate.
The macro accelerator is a collective economic strategy in the euro area. It is premised on
one  simple  fact:  economic  growth  and  employment  would  be  stronger  in  the  euro  area  if  we
combined  more  reforms  in  countries  where  they  are  needed,  like  France  or  Italy,  and  more
stimulus in countries with leeway for it, like Germany or the Netherlands. To achieve this, euro
area Member States have to seal a deal, which could be prepared and adopted as early as 2018.
National reforms  are  obviously  a  prerequisite  to  any  enhancement  of  the  Economic  Union.  I
take this opportunity to welcome the successful reforms carried out in the Netherlands in recent
years, especially in the labour market. Real GDP is expected to grow here by 3.2% in 2017 and
the unemployment rate is likely to reach 4.8% in 2017, close to full employment.
Stepping up reforms is now a priority in France too, with a focus on two main areas: on the one
hand,  sustainably  consolidating  our  public  finances,  and  on  the  other,  aiming  to  achieve  a
structural economic transformation, with a major simplification effort in the labour market, and
large-scale  investment  in  education,  vocational  training  and  apprenticeships.  The  new
government, under Mr Macron’s Presidency, has made decisive steps in that direction with the
labour market reform voted this summer and already implemented, and a forthcoming reform of
unemployment  insurance,  vocational  training  and  apprenticeship  next  year. At  the  same  time,
measures have been taken to reduce the tax burden on investment. Moreover, decisions have
been taken to reduce the government deficit. For the first time in 10 years, the government deficit
should be below the threshold of 3% of GDP in 2017 (2.9%).    
The micro accelerator: a Financing Union for Investment and Innovation
Let  me  now  focus  on  the  micro  accelerator  for  the  Economic  Union,  which  is  the  second
concentric circle. This micro accelerator would take the form of what I call a “Financing Union
for Investment and Innovation”. The euro area is experiencing an excess of savings relative to
investment of about 350 billion euros per year, which is more than 3% of GDP. The aim of such a
Financing  Union  is  to  better  steer  these  savings  towards  productive  investment,  notably  by
shoring up equity which is the key to an innovation economy.
Several key initiatives contribute to this Financing Union and already exist: (i) the Capital Markets
Union, which promotes the diversification of private financing; (ii) the Juncker Investment Plan,
which mixes public and private investment towards the real economy; and (iii) the Banking Union,
which addresses persistent financial fragmentation. These initiatives, however, lack the unified
governance of a Financing Union, which would help circumvent bureaucratic barriers and foster
synergies. 
In addition, progress towards a Financing Union is still needed in four key areas:
First,  providing  incentives  for  cross-border  investments  –  mainly  in  equity  –  through
accounting, taxes and insolvency laws. Strengthening the free movement of capital within
the  EU  requires  overcoming  a  wide  range  of  legal  obstacles.  We  should  improve  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
predictability of insolvency frameworks, eliminate tax-related biases that penalise equity and
harmonise the accounting rules for small businesses;
Second,  developing  pan-European  savings  products  more  oriented  towards  long-term
investment.  This  could  be  done  through  a  variety  of  savings  vehicles:  the  creation  of
European venture capital funds, new market initiatives for green bonds, securitised portfolios
that are diversified across member states, and so on and so forth;
Third, completing the Banking Union;
Fourth, controlling financial activities and risks that are of vital importance for the euro area,
such as supersystemic CCPs.
Improvements in these four areas are needed so as to reach significant gains for digitalisation,
SME’s  scaling-up  or  energy  transition.  In  each  of  these  fields  we  have  significant  investment
needs.
As part of the Financing Union, completing the Banking Union
Allow  me  now  to  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  third  area  of  progress,  which  is  also  my  third
concentric circle: completing the Banking Union. The Banking Union is a major step forward
for the euro area and is now operational, based on the single rulebook and – already – two pillars:
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) since end-2014; and the Single Resolution Mechanism
(SRM) since the beginning of 2016. Those two pillars will have to be complemented by a third
pillar: Deposit Insurance, where we could find practical and reasonable compromises. But there
are two additional challenges that are less often mentioned: consistency, and consolidations.
The first challenge in order to complete the Banking Union is to achieve better consistency
between regulation, supervision and resolution, at three levels:
in 
First, in the concrete mechanisms: finalising and simplifying the resolution pillar should be
a priority. The case of the Italian banks has illustrated just how complex it is to combine the
resolution regime laid down in the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD) with the
State aid framework for orderly liquidation. In addition, confidence in the Single Resolution
Fund (SRF) and its capacity to intervene has to be bolstered. The setting-up of a common
backstop, as mentioned in the European Commission’s communication of 11 October, is a
promising  avenue,  which  could  take  the  form  of  a  credit  line  granted  by  the  ESM.
Furthermore,  the  issue  of  the liquidity of  the  newly  resolved  entities  –  mainly  the  “good
banks”  –  is  not  sufficiently  clearly  addressed:  liquidity  support  by  public  sources  beyond
what can legitimately be expected from the Eurosystem should be clarified.
the legal  framework  and  requirements:  faced  with  the
Second,  consistency 
accumulation  of  new  and  “separate”  requirements,  we  need  to  adopt  a  holistic  and
consistent  approach  in  order  to  avoid  a  prudential  overload.  In  particular,  the  TLAC
requirement resulting from the new international framework requires a consistent adaptation
of the European minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL). In the
same vein, the consequences of an internationally agreed Basel III package – if and when it
comes – should be carefully taken into account, as it would lead to increased risk-weighted
assets,  which  will  in  turn  impact  the  MREL.  All  this,  combined  with  pillar  II  capital
requirements, could lead to over-calibration: each individual decision may be warranted; but
their somewhat disorderly accumulation is not. And obviously, we must not jeopardise the
level playing field between euro area banks and their international competitors.
Third,  in  the interaction  between  authorities,  which  should  be  improved:  the  case  of
Banco Popular, although it was a success, has also demonstrated the importance of swift
and close cooperation between supervisory and resolution authorities, both at European and
national  levels.  In  this  respect,  there  is  still  a  need  to  better  coordinate  the  roles  of  the
different European authorities – SSM and ECB, SRM, Commission, and EBA – in order to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
have a clearer “pilot in the plane” in crisis management. At a later stage, we should even
consider  establishing  a  single  banking  authority  for  our  single  Banking  Union,  acting  to
bolster the robustness of the European banking sector.
transactions 
is  also  essential: 
The  second  challenge  is to support cross-border bank consolidations in the euro area.
You, the “foreign” bankers in the Netherlands, are probably especially sensitive to that. The head
of  the  SSM  too,  Danièle  Nouy,  insisted  on  this  point  last  week.  We  still  lag  far  behind  the
American market in this respect: the market share in the United States of the top five banks is
more than 40% whereas the market share in the euro area of the top five banks is less than 20%.
Sound and safe cross-border consolidations would make banks better able to diversify their risks
across  the  euro  area,  and  channel  savings  more  effectively  towards  investments  across
borders; this would foster the Financing Union I talked about.
From a supervisory point of view, it involves supporting an approach on a consolidated basis by
granting more waivers on liquidity and capital so as to allow more flexible capital allocation and
limit  ring-fencing.  Swift  execution  of  cross-border 
the
implementation of a fast-track process by the SSM would address this issue. From a resolution
point of view, internal MREL requirements could be a tool to facilitate the resolution of institutions,
but  they  would  become  meaningless  if  calculated  on  a  national  basis.  Indeed,  having  internal
MREL in all countries could be an obstacle to the single market and European banking cross-
border  mergers.  Finally,  we  should  address  business  and  legal  impediments  to  cross-border
mergers: information asymmetry, non-performing loans (NPL) or anti-takeover legal structures in
different countries. As a first concrete step, I suggest that the European Banking Authority publish
a  comprehensive  stock-taking  of  all  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  obstacles  to  cross-border
activities and mergers. The aim is crystal clear: within a Monetary and Banking Union, a cross-
border merger must not be more difficult and cumbersome than a “domestic” merger. The logic
of the banking union is that it should be considered for banking purposes as a unique jurisdiction.
Before I conclude, I would like to add a few words on financial regulation. No one, I hope, can
seriously  dispute  that  after  the  financial  crisis  it  was  necessary  to  significantly  strengthen
regulation  to  reduce  risks.  Is  there  any  need  to  recall  the  disastrous  consequences  that  this
crisis inflicted on the real economy, the social dramas, and the democratic fragmentation with
the  rise  of  populism?  Financial  stability  is  a  common  good  that  needs  to  be  guaranteed.
Remarkable achievements have been carried out since 2009 under the impetus of the G20 and
the Financial Stability Board. For banks in particular, the majority of the Basel III work – let’s say
80%  –  has  already  been  done  in  2010–2011.  However,  discussions  remain  ongoing  on  the
question of the measurement of risk on bank balance sheets. It is in the strategic interests of
France  and  Europe,  which  has  always  promoted  international  rules,  to  conclude  a  final
agreement on Basel III. We are working hard towards a fair and reasonable agreement.
But beyond Basel III, we should finalise measures that target non-banks. We must ensure a
balance between financing channels. The priority has now shifted from the solvency of banks,
which has improved substantially, to the liquidity of the shadow banking sector, particularly funds
and asset management companies that are exposed to the risks of sudden panic-driven runs.
1
Let  me  conclude  my  speech  by  quoting  a  French  Philosopher,  who  spent  many  years  in  the
Netherlands:  René  Descartes.  He  was  both  the  father  of  “l’esprit  cartésien”  –  having  a  clear
vision of our aims – and a pragmatist, with this useful principle: “divide each of the difficulties
under examination into as many parts as possible and as might be required in order to resolve
them better” . Indeed, we must not get bogged down by misunderstandings, sterile debates and
considerations about which of the intergovernmental or community method to use. But in order to
move forward, we should combine a holistic vision and a stepwise approach to implementation.
This  is  what  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  do  in  my  speech  today:  I  identified  areas  where
concrete progress can be made rapidly. We should not let this historic opportunity slip: it is now
or never. Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
Discourse on the Method, René Descartes, 1637.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
