Andreas  Dombret:  What's  the  future  of  globalisation?  What's  the
future of free markets? European optimism in an uncertain world
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at New York University, New York City, 11 October 2017.
 1. Introduction: Whither globalisation? Whither free markets?
Ladies and gentlemen
It gives me great pleasure to be back in New York and at NYU.
Today I want to talk about two things: chocolate and Nobel prizes.
Stay with me for a moment. Some time ago, I stumbled upon a story that connected chocolate
and Nobel prizes in a way that reminds me of how we talk about globalisation nowadays. In 2012,
a  New  York-based  physician  and  researcher  published  a  note  in  the  New  England  Journal  of
Medicine  in  which  he  analysed  the  link  between  chocolate  consumption  and  cognitive
function.   While  not  unusual,  his  measurement  was,  let’s  say,  creative.  He  measured  the
correlation between a nation’s chocolate consumption and the number of Nobel laureates per
population. It came as little surprise that Switzerland won, with the US and Germany achieving
only a mediocre ranking.
1
While the author himself was careful not to claim that he had found a causal link, he highlighted
an extremely strong correlation – indeed, his only regression graph was quite close to being a
perfect  line.  Thus,  others  were  tempted  to  debate  the  merits  of  launching  a  government
programme to boost national cocoa consumption.
Correlation does not imply causation. Intuition is not always based in fact.
Confusing correlation with causation is amusing – but it is also disturbingly similar to what we are
seeing in current political debates. Is the idea that more chocolate leads to more Nobel prizes
really any different from the idea that protectionism brings back old jobs? Is it really any different
from  the  idea  that  Brexit  or  the  breakup  of  the  European  Union  would  bring  with  it  increased
welfare and security?
Across the globe, populism is on the rise – leading many to fear that the post-war economic
order is coming to an end. What’s more, even the future of the Western alliance has come into
question.
My impression is that many people in the United States are still asking these questions. Political
tensions  still  dominate.  The  role  of  global  cooperation  with  other  nations  is  still  contested.
Globalisation and free markets are still questioned.
Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  whether  I  have  brought  optimism  with  me  from  across  the
ocean.
Sadly, I have not. In my talk, I will argue that too little has been done to resolve the economic
challenges that underscore populist success.
I will start in the present by giving you my take on the current state of the European Union. Much
like in the US, we have not yet found the solutions to the root causes of these problems. Next, I
take  a  look  back  at  the  past  to  explain  that  the  root  causes  lie  at  the  heart  of  our  market
economies – the tension between innovation and social cohesion that has been there for more
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
than 200 years. Finally, I will turn to the future to discuss three principles for better economic
policies and several concrete policies that could serve to implement these principles.
 
2. European optimism in an uncertain world
So let’s start with the present – with Europe’s current economic and political condition.
Since the financial crisis, the pace of recovery in the euro area has been slower than it has been
in the United States. Lately, however, there have been signs of a broad economic recovery.
Recent figures reveal a pleasant surprise for the euro area, with sound GDP growth of 0.6% for
the second quarter of 2017. Unemployment stood at 9.1% in July, down from its peak of 12.1% in
2013.
But a recent study has shown that the labour market in the euro area is in worse shape than the
official job figures suggest, with workers unlikely to see real increases in pay because of the level
of underemployment.  A measure of “'slack"’ in the labour market indicates that about 15% to
18% of the euro area workforce are without jobs or would like to work more – which is nearly
double  the  official  unemployment  rate.  Underemployment  is  even  growing  in  weaker  labour
markets, such as those in France and Italy.
2
The  still  weak  labour  market  in  many  regions  of  the  euro  area  is  one  of  the  gravest  ongoing
consequences of the recent financial crisis and an indication that the recovery is still weak. This
is particularly true with respect to the high level of underemployment in peripheral regions and
among young people.
Thus, while the euro area economy looks increasingly healthy on average, it becomes clear on
closer inspection that a lot still remains to be done to move onto a sustainable, integrative path of
prosperity.
And this is one of the reasons why extreme populists are still making gains at elections. Sure,
Marine Le Pen, the front woman of the far right in France, did not become the French president,
and  Geert  Wilders,  her  counterpart  in  the  Netherlands,  did  not  become  part  of  the  Dutch
government. So yes, there is reason to be a little less pessimistic.
However, two weeks ago, the German general election showed us that politics has not yet laid
the groundwork for optimism, as a populist party came in third. I will come to that in a moment.
In  my  eyes,  though,  the  positive  outcome  is  one  of  government  stability:  Chancellor  Merkel’s
conservative  Union  gained  the  majority  again.  But  she  faces  the  difficult  task  of  forming  a
coalition,  as  only  two  options  are  possible.  The  first,  which  is  to  continue  her  current  grand
coalition with the social democratic SPD, has little chance of success as the SPD wants to go
into opposition. Second, she could form what has been dubbed the Jamaica coalition with the
liberal  Free  Democratic  Party  and  the  Green  party.  While  all  parties  are  willing  to  enter  into
negotiations, it will be challenging – finding common ground, will take creative political agenda-
setting and political diplomacy. But I am confident that an agreement can be reached. Thus, I am
confident that the stability of the German political landscape will remain intact. And with that the
strong growth momentum of the German economy will also remain intact, which, in turn, will be a
strong basis for continued growth of the Euro area economy.
Yet  this  election  reveals  a  deeper,  inconvenient  truth  –  that  we  are  far  from  having  found
sustainable solutions to the root causes of populist success. This is mirrored in the first far-right
party entering the Bundestag since 1949: Alternative for Germany, or AfD for short. It is now the
third-biggest party in the Bundestag, with almost 13% of voters supporting it.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Its  supporters  can  be  divided  into  three  buckets:  first,  an  established  fringe  group  of  far-right
voters; second, a group frustrated with how the government handled the refugee crisis and their
integration;  and  third,  a  group  of  economically  disappointed  people. About  half  of  the  party’s
voters are economically disappointed.
This is the economic side of why protectionism and populism still enjoy strong support. The AfD,
like  many  other  populist  parties,  pins  the  blame  for  economic  malaise  on  globalisation  and
European integration – and demand that they be reversed.
These simple explanations offer intuitively appealing solutions to Europe’s problems – they are
the chocolate to Nobel prizes. And they overshadow the actual economic challenges.
If we do not solve these actual challenges, populist influence might well grow – and that would
put  global  and  European  cooperation  at  risk.  These  unresolved  economic  tensions  could
become the roots of serious political conflict.
Can this really become such a problem? My answer is one word: Brexit.
In June 2016, UK voters decided to leave the EU – they had been told that they would be able to
save their money and put it to better use, and that they could once again be sovereign in the
global economy, all without any negative consequences. Unfortunately, the campaign was built
on false anti-EUinformation. These intuitively appealing anti-European sentiments did find support
– to a substantial degree – among economically disappointed citizens.
Where are we now? Brexit is definitely happening, and chances are it will be a hard one – by
which I mean that there will be a complete exit rather than a partial one. The UK and the EU will
go  their  separate  ways  in  March  2019. After  we  agree  on  how  to  separate,  we  will  start  to
negotiate the terms of our new partnership. Since negotiations have been going rather slowly,
there may be a transition period of two years from 2019 to 2021 – during which the old rules
would  still  apply  and  the  terms  of  their  new  partnership  could  be  drawn  up.  What  kind  of
economic  partnership  this  will  be  has  yet  to  be  determined.  If  we  do  not  find  a  solution,
the  EU  and  the  UK  will  trade  under  rules  set  by  the  World  Trade  Organization  –  which  is  in
nobody’s interest, but could be particularly harmful to the UK economy. I hope that negotiations
will  be  able  to  strike  an  economic  partnership  that  underscores  the  close  political  friendship
between the UK and the EU.
Brexit  shows  that  less  integration  is  not  the  solution  to  the  root  causes  of  our  economic
problems. But a simple case of more integration is not a solution either.
The  EU  appears  stronger  today  than  it  did  a  year  ago.  This  was  mirrored  in  Commission
President  Jean-Claude  Juncker’s  State  of  the  Union  address  on  13th  of  September,  and  in
French President Emmanuel Macron’s plan to reform the EU, as set out in his speech on 26th of
September. I agree with them that a strong EUis in the best interest of all Europeans and that it
can play an important role in international relations.
But  I  think  that  we  should  get  the  order  right:  first  reform,  then  the  next  steps  towards  more
integration. Taking economic and monetary union as an example, there remains a lot to be done
to become a stable monetary union – in the case of the United States, it took more than a century
of  conflicts.  We  need  to  work  on  equalising  living  conditions  across  the  widely  differing
economies of the euro area and on improving the fiscal rules. This will take years of political work
and debate. We should take this step first before rushing prematurely into integration projects.
But let me be as clear as I can: I am a passionate European, and I want the EU to become
stronger and better in the years to come.
Neither  less  nor  more  integration  at  any  price  is  a  panacea  for  the  problems  in  our  market
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies. Our problems are not that we cooperate at a European or a global level – the EU and
globalisation are achievements. But they have serious side effects. These side effects give us a
glimpse of the fundamental challenge that our economies are facing – and this holds, to varying
degrees, for all developed market economies.
What is this fundamental challenge? 
 
3. It’s not globalisation, stupid – it’s the (market) economy
It lies at the heart of our market economies: it is the tension between liberalisation of economic
exchange, on the one hand, and social cohesion, on the other.
Let’s  take  a  historical  look  at  this  tension,  and  let’s  do  so  through  the  eyes  of  two  great
economists:  Adam  Smith  explained  in  the  18th  century  that  if  you  allowed  people  to  work
wherever they want and for whomever they want, the market would then work like an invisible
hand, creating prosperity.  The idea of a liberal market economy was born.
3
4
But this liberalisation created tension. It was the economic historian Karl Polanyi, who identified
this tension.  In the early 1940s, Polanyi lived in exile in Vermont. Thinking about the root causes
of  the  rise  of  fascism  in  Germany  and  Austria,  he  realised  the  economic  tensions  that
underscored the ascent of Hitler and his like. He understood that the rise of the market economy
had brought with it not only unmatched prosperity but also rising social hardship and tensions.
He studied the emergence of modern market economies during the industrial revolutions of the
18th and 19th centuries. At that time, huge workforces were required to produce goods. Workers
needed to be drawn away from their previous occupations into factories, and so labour came to
be seen as an economic resource – one that needs to be flexible for a complex economy to
function.
Industrialisation and market economy changed the social structure, as people were now relying
on  a  macro-economic  production  process  –  and  this  dependence  could  have  very  negative
consequences if working conditions were bad or people lost their jobs.
Thus, while the market economy created much prosperity, it did also change society. Polanyi
realised that this led to a struggle that helped to explain many historic events since the industrial
revolutions: liberalised markets would create change and prosperity, but the social problems that
they created would lead to opposing forces. The negatively affected would then demand policies
to counterbalance the negative side effects, one example of which was social security.
You  can  look  at  the  history  of  the  markets  over  the  last  200  years  through  the  lens  of  this
struggle. Until the 1930s, laissez-faire liberalism led to markets being quite unconstrained, which
created social tensions that contributed to the rise of fascism.
From the late 1940s until the 1970s, the developed nations experienced the glorious thirty years
of rising wealth and welfare states, during which the markets were much more constrained by
government regulation. This episode, however, came to an end with the decade of stagflation in
the 1970s.
The response was to liberalise the markets once again. From the 1980s until today, privatisation
and globalisation have been the leading paradigm.
The financial crisis, which erupted in 2008, may have been a turning point. Today’s big economic
debates may very well be a sign of the tides turning.
Criticism of globalisation and inequality, as well as rising populism and socialism, are symptoms
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
of a bigger problem of our market economy model.
Now, that was a fast ride through 200 years of economic history. And to be clear, much of this
story has been simplified and I mooted many competing explanations. My point is that, at their
core,  our  market  economies  are  fraught  with  tension  –  the  tension  between  free  market
exchange, on the one hand, and social cohesion, on the other. This tension can create social
and political conflict.
We  must  ensure  that  these  conflicts  are  mediated  in  a  spirit  of  cooperation  and  that  our
economic and political model can survive.
How do we achieve this?
 
4.  How to soften the blow: principles for a better global economy
To my regret, I do not have a master plan. That’s because there are no simple, realistic, quick-fix
solutions.  And  that’s  why  a  serious  debate  is  needed  about  what  we  can  do  to  make  our
economies future-proof.
Three principles, in my mind, should guide our discussions.
First, we need a fairer market economy. What do I mean? Markets are in principle successful in
organising the complex division of labour. But they have negative externalities – in other words,
others may be negatively affected by a market transaction between two individuals or firms. It
might lead to the pollution of our environment, the lowering of labour standards or the loss of
jobs. If these side effects become too much, they can threaten social cohesion.
To prevent this, we need to strike the right balance between two policies: policies that foster the
competitive dynamics of market economies, and policies that ensure the social cohesion that is
necessary for market economies and indispensable to democratic societies.
The most obvious tools are fiscal policy instruments that serve to strengthen the social security
system,  which  provides  financial  compensation  to  individuals  such  as  those  who  are
unemployed.
At least as important as the provision of financial compensation is making sure that people are
capable of helping themselves. To that end, we need better education and higher qualifications:
countries  need  to  promote  equal  access  to  high-quality  primary,  secondary  and  tertiary
education. What is crucial to educational success in 5 to 50 years is that we increase public
spending on qualified personnel. Moreover, active labour market policies are needed to support
the jobless in their efforts to qualify for other professions.
The second principle is that we must tackle the hidden problems that are weakening our market
economies.  What  do  I  mean?  I’m  talking  about  the  problems  that  are  complex  in  nature  and
difficult to solve – which makes them less intuitively appealing – but nonetheless pose challenges
that are significant.
We need an open and honest debate about these problems, even though the debate might not
be promising in terms of electoral gains. Because if we don’t talk about them, the populists surely
will – and once they own the debate, facts will certainly play less of a role.
Let  me  give  you  an  example  of  what  I  mean:  where  should  we  take  money  from  to  fund  the
compensation and education measures that I just talked about – without increasing public debt?
This is a difficult debate, but one important aspect needs more debate than it has received so far:
financing  must  be  tax-based  rather  than  debt-based.  And  the  tax  base  has  been  seriously
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
weakened by international tax evasion and avoidance.
This is one of the big problems of globalisation. According to Gabriel Zucman, 8% of the world’s
total  household  wealth,  which  is  USD  7.6  trillion,  was  in  tax  havens  in  2016  –  according  to
Zucman’s conservative estimates, 75% of these funds are derived from illegal tax evasion.  In
2009, the G20 took action and compelled tax havens to sign bilateral treaties providing for the
exchange  of  bank  information.  While  this  is  an  important  first  step,  there  is  evidence  that  the
6
effects are modest and that more needs to be done.
5
Moreover,  in  addition  to  tax  evasion,  the  public  is  also  saddled  with  substantial  losses  due  to
t a x avoidance  stemming 
international
corporations.  The reason is simple: our tax codes are outdated and not ready for the digital age,
in  which  it  is  possible  to  shift  profits  around  the  world.  Fortunately,  the  first  steps  in  the  right
direction are also being taken here.
from  profit-shifting  strategies 
implemented  by 
7
OECD and G20 countries have agreed on the BEPS project – short for Base Erosion and Profit
Shifting. But this agreement is toothless without effective implementation – which is the important
task for all signatory countries. A promising approach is the recent initiative by ten EU member
states to enhance the taxation of international corporations by updating the corporation tax codes
in a manner independent of profits.
And this brings me to the third principle: we need better globalisation. We need to find a form of
global  cooperation  that  lies  in  between  the  two  extreme,  ideologically  motivated  solutions  of
national isolation and a borderless global economy.
A  realistic  middle  ground  would  be  focused  global  cooperation:  continuing  to  exchange,  to
cooperate and to harmonise regulations, where sensible – but also focusing and improving our
efforts. Focused global cooperation would also offer greater scope for solutions that respect the
legitimate interests of countries wanting to run their economies independently.
An example is the global harmonisation of banking regulation. We, the Basel Committee – which
includes the banking supervisors from the G20 – currently work on the final piece to complete
global regulatory reforms after the financial crisis – the so-called Basel III agreement; and we are
close to an agreement. That would bring global minimum standards to regulate internationally
active banks.
Yet,  for  purely  nationally  active  banks,  there  is  no  need  to  have  global  minimum  standards.
National supervisors may adapt the standards to fit historically grown national circumstances.
For  example,  in  the  EU  we  are  considering  a  small  banking  box,  with  less  complex  rules  for
small, non-risky, and nationally focused banks.
But let me make one thing very clear: focused cooperation and more national autonomy must not
be  abused  to  water  down  post-crisis  reforms  of  financial  regulation.  I  am  concerned  by  such
efforts,  because  they  could  be  captured  by  the  financial  industry  and  result  in  a  race  to  the
bottom. Instead, we need sound minimum standards for a stable, global financial system.
 
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
To my regret, more chocolate does not lead to more Nobel prizes – even if it looks that way.
Neither  the  US  nor  Europe  has  yet  sorted  out  the  economic  problems  that  contribute  to  the
success of populism. I am an optimist, so I would say that we have made progress – but we are
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
certainly not there yet.
Our  economic  policies  need  to  strike  a  balance  between  Smith  and  Polanyi  –  enabling  the
competitive  dynamics  of  market  economies  while  safeguarding 
the  social  cohesion
indispensable to democratic societies.
You may not share all of the policies discussed. But I hope we can debate on the basis of the
three principles: a fair, social market economy; the need to identify and tackle hidden problems;
and better globalisation through focused global cooperation.
This debate will not come easy: many must be willing to overcome their ideological convictions. It
is only in this way that we can harness the benefits of market economies and limit their social
costs, that we can create better market economies and a better global economy, and that we
can stabilise our economies and our democracies.
And now, let’s debate!
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Franz  H  Messerli  (2012),  Chocolate  Consumption,  Cognitive  Function,  and  Nobel  Laureates.  New  England
Journal of Medicine, 367 (October): 1562–1564.
European Central Bank (2017), Assessing labour market slack. ECB Economic Bulletin 2017 (3): 31–35.
A Smith (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
K Polanyi (1957), The great transformation. The political and economic origin of our time. Beacon Press.
G Zucman (2015), The hidden wealth of nations: The scourge of tax havens. University of Chicago Press.
N  Johannesen  and  G  Zucman  (2014),  The  End  of  Bank  Secrecy?  An  Evaluation  of  the  G20  Tax  Haven
Crackdown. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(1): 65–91
G Zucman (2015), The hidden wealth of nations: The scourge of tax havens. University of Chicago Press.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
