Norman Chan: Facilitating financial innovation in Hong Kong
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the HKMA Fintech Day, Hong Kong, 25 October 2017.
Good morning, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
 1.  This is the second year that the HKMA organises a Fintech Day. I am pleased to say that,
compared with the much smaller venue at PMQ last year, we have almost 1,000 participants
attending  today’s  event,  which  is  double  of  the  participation  last  year.  This  is  a  clear
demonstration  of  the  very  rapid  growth  in  the  interest  as  well  as  progress  in  the  field  of
fintech in Hong Kong.
2.  Talking  about  progress,  I  would  like  to  update  you  on  the  latest  developments  since  I
announced a “New Era of Smart Banking” on 29 September at the annual conference of the
Hong Kong Institute of Bankers. You may recall that I mentioned seven initiatives to prepare
Hong  Kong  to  enter  into  the  Smart  Banking  Era:  a  Faster  Payment  System,  Supervisory
Sandbox 2.0, Virtual Banking, Open API, Banking Made Easy, Cross-border Collaboration,
and  Research  and  Talent  Development.  Although  it  is  only  less  than  a  month  after  my
announcement, I am pleased to report on the encouraging progress made in respect of two
of  these  seven  initiatives,  i.e.  cross-border  collaboration,  and  research  and  talent
development.
Cross-border collaboration
Singapore
3.  One of the key characteristics of Fintech is that it is borderless. While each financial market
has  many  idiosyncratic  factors,  fintech  can  offer  solutions  that  cut  through  different
geographical and market boundaries. For example, breakthrough in biometric authentication
technology is helpful not only in the advanced markets but also in the developing markets. By
the same token, cybersecurity threats can originate from anywhere in the world and is not
bound by national boundaries. There is a high degree of commonality in the application of
fintech, especially in the  context  of  cross-border  financial  transactions  and  flows.  So  it  is
crucial  for  Hong  Kong  to  enhance  its  collaboration  with  other  financial  centres  to  share
experience and learn from each other. In this context, I am very pleased to announce that I
have  just  signed  a  Cooperation Agreement  on  fintech  with  the  Managing  Director  of  the
Monetary Authority  of  Singapore  (MAS),  Mr  Ravi  Menon.  To  mark  the  occasion,  a  simple
ceremony will be held later this morning to exchange the signed Agreement. May I take this
opportunity  to  thank  my  MAS  colleagues  for  working  very  hard  with  us  on  this  most
meaningful collaboration.
4.  Hong Kong and Singapore are the two leading international financial centres in Asia. Both the
HKMA  and  MAS  are  actively  promoting  the  use  and  development  of  fintech  respectively.
There  is  considerable  scope  for  the  two  places  to  collaborate  and  achieve  a  win-win
outcome. A priority area of collaboration is the use of fintech in advancing the hitherto paper-
based trade finance system that has been in use for as long as trade existed. As we know,
trade finance is an integral part of the global trading system and the paper-based system is
very  inefficient  and  prone  to  human  errors  and  fraud.  But  then  it  has  proved  to  be  very
difficult  for  the  trade  finance  processes  to  be  automated  or  digitalised  mainly  because
multiple parties and banks in different jurisdictions are involved in a single trade transaction.
Unless  there  is  a  common  global  standard  for  the  digitisation  of  trade-related  documents
and  a  trusted  central  repository,  it  is  pointless  for  any  party  or  jurisdiction  to  change  the
paper-based system on its own. However, with the breakthrough of the Distributed Ledger
Technology (DLT), we firmly believe that the time has come for trade finance to move into
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
the digital era. Together with a consortium of five banks in Hong Kong, the HKMA conducted
in  the  second  half  of  2016  a  proof-of-concept  project  on  the  use  of  DLT  to  build  a  trade
finance platform in Hong Kong. I am pleased to announce that the proof-of-concept project
has been successful in that it can digitise trade documents, automate the processes, allow
sharing of required documentation among authorised participants, and reduce human errors
and risks of fraud. We are therefore moving into the next phase of the project by developing
a full production system. The consortium, now joined by two more banks, is in the process
of conducting tender for the system development. We aim to build an open system in which
other banks in Hong Kong are welcome to join if they are interested. It is obvious that the
new platform will create the highest value if the majority of banks engaging in trade finance
businesses are making use of it.
5.  However, this is only half of the story. As we all know, trade is by definition cross border and
invariably involves parties and financial institutions in two or more jurisdictions. So it is not
good enough for a jurisdiction to do it alone in digitalising trade finance. In this connection, I
am pleased to say that the first item of collaboration between Hong Kong and Singapore
would be the building of a DLT interface linking the domestic trade finance platforms being
developed separately in the two centres. Later this morning, colleagues from the HKMA and
MAS will talk more about this exciting collaborative project. What I want to say here is that
this interface would likely to be the first of its kind in the world in the application of DLT in
solving the century-old problem arising from the inefficiency of the paper-based trade finance
system. This new trade platform interface, once developed and implemented, would allow
our other trading partners around the world to plug into it. This will be an important piece of
market  infrastructure  that  helps  demonstrate  Hong  Kong’s  commitment  not  only  to
technological  innovation  but  also  to  cross-border  collaboration  to  promote  more  efficient
trade and financial flows for the benefit of our businesses and peoples.
UK and Others
6.  I  am  also  pleased  to  report  that  the  HKMA  has  expanded  and  strengthened  our  ties  with
several  other  overseas  authorities  in  the  area  of  fintech  collaboration  in  addition  to
Singapore.  For  example,  we  signed  a  Fintech  Cooperation Agreement  with  the  Financial
Conduct Authority (FCA) of the UK in December last year. Later this morning, a colleague
from  Project  Innovate  of  the  UK  FCA  will  share  with  us  their  experiences  in  fintech
development. Moreover, the London-Hong Kong RMB Forum, which was first set up in 2012,
has recently been expanded to become “London-Hong Kong Financial Services Forum” so
as to cover wider areas such as fintech and the Belt and Road Initiative. This year’s annual
meeting  of  the  Forum  will  be  held  in  Hong  Kong  in  December,  and  is  expected  to  be
attended  by  high  level  government  and  private  sector  representatives  from  both  sides  to
discuss a whole range of financial collaboration issues.
7.  I  should  perhaps  mention  that  we  are  also  in  active  discussions  with  some  other
jurisdictions, including Switzerland, which share a common interest in mutual cooperation in
promoting fintech. I hope to be able to report more news in the not too distant future.
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Bay Area
8.  As  well  as  building  collaborative  ties  across  the  world,  we  are  also  creating  partnership
closer  to  home.  There  is  a  huge  upside  in  tapping  the  considerable  potential  in  fintech
development in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Bay Area. The Bay Area has a population
of  over  66  million  and  a  GDP  of  over  US$1.3  trillion.  With  the  deepening  of  the  financial
sector and the expanding cluster of technology talents and industrial base, the Bay Area is
going to become one of the main engines of growth for China and a very fertile ground for
innovation in financial services and fintech.
9.  Recognising the importance of cross-border collaboration in the Bay Area, the HKMA, as a
start, has signed a Fintech MOU with the Office of Financial Development Service (“OFDS”)
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the Shenzhen Municipal Government. Now, I am pleased to announce that, in pursuing
our commitment to collaboration, Hong Kong and Shenzhen will jointly launch three fintech
initiatives:
          (i) A fintech competition;
          (ii) A soft-landing scheme; and
          (iii)A talent development programme.
Fintech Competition
10.  Together with the Shenzhen OFDS, we will organize a fintech competition that is open to
participation by Shenzhen and Hong Kong financial institutions. It offers total prizes of more
than HK$7 million for the winning fintech products or solutions. I am sure the awards will
provide  a  strong  incentive  for  financial  institutions  to  innovate,  either  by  themselves  or  in
partnership with fintech firms. There are two categories of awards, both of which are open to
Shenzhen and Hong Kong-based regulated financial institutions. The first is for the use of
fintech, while the second is for cross-border financial innovation. It is a prestigious award
and  I  would  encourage  Hong  Kong  financial  institutions  to  take  part  and  showcase  their
achievements.  The  Director-General  of  OFDS  will  share  with  us  more  details  about  this
exciting competition in the next session.
Soft-landing scheme
11.  The second initiative is a mutual referral system for fintech firms – this is sometimes called
“soft-landing”. Under this programme, the OFDS will provide support to Hong Kong fintech
firms that want to establish a presence in Shenzhen, perhaps with a view to using it as a
springboard to tap into the enormous market of Mainland China.
12.  To  better  utilise  this  valuable  opportunity,  we  are  working  with  our  strategic  partner,
Cyberport, on the establishment of cross-border soft-landing facilities in Shenzhen. Such an
arrangement would give qualified Hong Kong fintech firms access to the business support
from OFDS, which would be helpful for these firms to expand their business to the Mainland.
At the same time, Cyberport will leverage on this platform in Shenzhen to assist Mainland
fintech companies to establish operations in Hong Kong.
13.  Given the geographical proximity between Hong Kong and Shenzhen, I have no doubt that
this collaboration will further enhance Hong Kong’s role as the springboard to help home-
grown and overseas firms reaching out to the Mainland market.
Talent development programme
14.  The  third  and  last  initiative  we  are  working  jointly  with  Shenzhen  relates  to  talent
development.  You  may  recall  that  last  year  we  launched  the  Fintech  Career Accelerator
Scheme and, since then, more than 70 Hong Kong students have been working on fintech
projects in 12 banks and the HKMA. Building on the success of this scheme, and with the
support  of  the  Shenzhen  OFDS,  we  have  secured  commitments  from  several  high-tech
firms  in  Shenzhen,  including  Ping An  Technology,  WeBank,  Tencent  and  others,  to  offer
summer intern positions for Hong Kong students to learn the latest technologies, not only in
financial application but also in areas such as big data analytics or artificial intelligence. This
people-to-people approach will deepen collaborative ties between Hong Kong and Mainland
China in fintech development to our mutual benefit.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Enhanced research
15.  Finally, I want to talk about enhanced research, which is one of the seven initiatives in the
package  helping  Hong  Kong  to  migrate  to  the  new  era  of  Smart  Banking.  Today  we  will
publish  our  second  whitepaper  on  DLT.  You  may  recall  that  we  released  the  first  DLT
whitepaper  around  this  time  last  year,  in  which  we  explained  how  the  technology  works,
outlined proof-of-concept projects and, more importantly, identified potential implementation
challenges and issues. This year, with the help from the Law Society of Hong Kong, eminent
law  professors  in  the  field,  consultancy  firms,  and  the Applied  Science  and  Technology
Research Institute, I am pleased to say we have compiled the DLT whitepaper 2.0 to provide
advice  on  over  20  governance,  control,  legal  and  compliance  issues  identified  in  the  first
whitepaper.
16.  While there have been lively discussions in the fintech community on the technology and
application  aspects  of  DLT  over  the  past  year,  there  has  not  been  enough  focus  on  the
deployment and implementation issues gathered from practical and diverse proof-of-concept
applications.  There  have  been  very  few  suggestions  to  address  the  governance,  control,
legal and compliance issues raised by DLT.
17.  In  our  second  whitepaper,  we  have  confirmed  the  promising  nature  of  DLT  while
acknowledging that DLT cannot be a universal solution for all financial applications. Experts
taking  part  in  our  research  have  also  confirmed  that  the  issues  identified  in  the  first
whitepaper are valid and that many of them would need new thinking to overcome. While the
solution will depend on the precise application, the whitepaper has provided broad advice in
areas such as the importance of governance structure and its implications on the level of
control  and  liability  acceptable  to  participants,  how  a  hybrid  model  of  DLT  and  traditional
database may be used to resolve the immutability nature of DLT in the storage of personal
data, the limits of smart contracts, and the need of adequate security and controls over the
operating environment of DLT.
18.  The  next  step  would  be  for  the  HKMA  to  work  with  the  banking  industry  and  the  fintech
community to turn the findings and advice in the second whitepaper into a set of practical
guidelines for the use of DLT in the banking sector in the future. Given the rapidly evolving
nature of DLT, this is no easy task to undertake. We welcome comments and input from the
stakeholders and stand ready to share the findings of our research and practical experience
with our international peers.
Conclusion
19.  Ladies and gentlemen, now is an exciting time for financial innovation. Technology is a game
changer for the future of banking, payment and other financial services. It will differentiate
winners from losers. I am very pleased to share with you today the important progress made
by Hong Kong in cross-border collaboration and the use of DLT applications. As I said in my
speech last month, the transformation of our banking system to a new and higher level of
Smart Banking is not just something that is nice to a have, it is a must! To stay relevant and
ahead of the game in this new era, I am sure you will agree that the collaborative efforts and
research  developments  that  I  just  mentioned  are  the  essential  building  blocks  to  facilitate
financial innovation and prepare Hong Kong to advance to the new Smart Banking Era.
20.  Finally, I wish you a productive and fruitful time here at the HKMA Fintech Day, and trust that
you will benefit from today’s rich plenary and parallel sessions.
21.  Thank you very much.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
