Marzunisham Omar: Fintech & entrepreneurship
Opening remarks by Mr Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Islamic  Fintech  Dialogue  2017  "Fintech  &  Entrepreneurship,
Kuala Lumpur, 11 October 2017.
 The financial industry today is confronted with a new normal – rapid advances in technology and
an increasingly tech-savvy demographic are presenting both opportunities and challenges to the
industry. Indeed, as financial technology or fintech is disrupting the industry, it is also emerging
as a major game changer with unique value propositions. The nascent yet growing fintech space
has  large  ambitions. At  the  fore  is  its  aim  to  revolutionise  the  entire  value  chain  of  financing.
Globally, fintech start-ups are making large inroads and openly challenging the traditional financial
players  in  their  own  space.  Significantly,  fintech  is  reshaping  consumers’  expectations  of
financial services. And yet, fintech does offer tremendous opportunities to financial institutions.
There is no doubt in my mind that the financial institutions that fully embrace the advancements
in technology will be the future winners. What is required is for us to face up to the reality of
fintech – what it is, how it works and how to benefit from it.
I am pleased to be here with you today and to speak at this inaugural Islamic Fintech Dialogue.
The theme of the dialogue opens up an avenue for interesting discussions to take place on two
key emerging trends – the expansion of fintech and the rise of entrepreneurship. In fact, I see
fintech as the nexus between finance and entrepreneurship. Finance is essential in helping start-
ups  and  entrepreneurs  get  off  the  ground  and  scale  up.  Likewise,  entrepreneurs  can  help  to
reinvent finance by providing ideas to develop innovative financial solutions.
This  morning,  I  would  like  to  share  some  of  my  thoughts  on  fintech  and  on  how  the  finance
industry,  especially  Islamic  finance  can  gain  from  technology-driven  solutions.  I  will  also
elaborate  on  how  multisided  platforms  are  facilitating  the  interaction  between  investors  and
ventures. I will then briefly touch on the efforts that Bank Negara Malaysia is taking in promoting
fintech.
While Islamic finance has made significant progress domestically and globally, the next growth
phase requires the industry to ride the fintech wave. At present, Islamic finance fintech is still in
its infancy and growing. Encouragingly, we are seeing increasing number of fintech start-ups,
innovation labs and incubators that are based on the values and principles of Islamic finance.
However, they are not as visible and omnipresent as their conventional peers.
The  case  is  compelling  for  Islamic  finance  to  take  on  a  more  prominent  role  in  the  fintech
ecosystem.  The  technology  is  ripe,  with  higher  penetration  of  mobile  and  internet  across
markets. Consumers are also becoming more and more tech-savvy. Digital-banking consumers
stand at an estimated 670 million in Asia alone and are expected to reach 1.7 billion by 2020. In
Malaysia, within a population of 31 million, there is high mobile and internet penetration rate at
about  141%  and  81%  respectively.  With  a  diverse  population  and  a  growing  middle  class,
Malaysia is an ideal test bed for developing and commercialising fintech solutions.
The  emergence  of  fintech  has  opened  up  new  opportunities  which  can  greatly  benefit  the
financial industry. At its core, fintech has led to the creation of various business models that help
improve and simplify financial transactions, which 10 or 20 years ago seemed impossible. Here, I
would like to highlight three key areas that Islamic finance stand to gain from fintech.
Entrepreneurs  too  stand  to  gain  from  fintech. First,  fintech  provides  the  technological
underpinnings to realise the goal of Islamic finance in creating a risk sharing economy. This will
in  turn  benefit  entrepreneurs  who  will  gain  wider  access  to  bank-intermediated  credit.  An
example  is  the  Investment  Account  Platform  (IAP).  IAP  is  Malaysia’s  first  multi-bank  online
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
platform  that  combines  the  credit  evaluation  expertise  of  Islamic  banks  and  the  power  of
technology  to  channel  funds  from  investors  to  economic  ventures.  This  virtual  “multisided”
platform facilitates a collection of interesting investment ventures and projects, with transparent
risk-return rewards for investors.
Second, fintech has opened up new sources of funding to entrepreneurs, in what is increasingly
being  referred  to  as  the  alternative  financing  space.  Crowdfunding  and  peer-to-peer  (P2P)
funding platforms have emerged as highly efficient “matchmakers” between entrepreneurs and
investors.  From  the  USD10  million  raised  globally  in  2009  through  nine  major  platforms,
crowdfunding  platforms  mobilised  over  USD767  million  in  2016  with  backers  from  over  200
countries.  This  has  facilitated  the  growth  of  entrepreneurs  by  providing  finance  to  about  1.3
million  crowdfunding  projects.  Crowdfunding  platforms  also  allow  entrepreneurs  to  closely
engage with their customers – themselves investors – to shape and refine product ideas.
A good example is the role played by crowdfunding in the rise of virtual reality (VR), which was
largely ignored by traditional funders after its disappointing performance in the 1990s. Oculus Rift
or  the  VR  technology  as  we  know  would  never  have  happened  without  crowdfunding.  Such
success stories can be an inspiration for our SMEs. With SMEs in Malaysia facing difficulty in
obtaining  capital  and  mezzanine  financing,  crowdfunding  and  P2P  platforms  can  be  further
explored to meet such funding needs.
Third,  the  matching  of  funds  enabled  by  fintech  also  has  great  application  within  the  social
financing space. In particular, we see the potential of digitising the collection and utilisation of
zakat, waqaf and sadaqah as holding great promise. The efficiency and transparency enabled by
technology  not  only  provides  greater  convenience  to  customers,  but  more  importantly,  builds
public trust and confidence in the system. In turn, this will see wider participation and greater
contributions towards social impact initiatives such as those to improve education, widen access
to healthcare and extend humanitarian relief.
We are already seeing encouraging developments in this space. For example, SkolaFund raised
over RM200,000 in 2016 to fund 25 students from less-privileged families studying in universities
and colleges in Malaysia. Meanwhile, LaunchGood, has raised USD9 million in over 20 countries
and funded 1,300 social impact projects, ranging from disaster relief and humanitarian aid, to
water and housing infrastructure in developing countries.
In  Malaysia,  our  Islamic  financial  institutions  are  in  a  good  position  to  benefit  from  the  growth
multipliers that fintech offers. What is required is for the industry to invest in technology and talent
to accelerate the adoption of technology. Key to making this a success is for the industry leaders
and practitioners to transform their fears into familiarity; to embrace the digital transformation to
re-engineer  the  entire  organisation.  In  reimagining  their  businesses  and  viewing  disruptive
technologies  not  as  a  threat,  but  as  an  enabler,  industry  players  can  make  the  necessary
operational, structural and cultural shifts. The tone has to be set from the top. The innovation
agenda must be a boardroom priority, and Islamic financial institutions must be willing to allocate
capital and resources to make this work. A further imperative to this is to inculcate and infuse a
culture of innovation permeating throughout the organisation.
The Islamic finance industry should adopt the motto of “dare to ideate” – to become founders and
leaders of big ideas; to be able to synthesise the needs of customers; and to develop products to
respond to those needs. Customised financial solutions can be achieved through fintech, with
Shariah contracts as building blocks for innovation. We can start small and simple, with a view to
iteratively improve and fine-tune to meet evolving needs of customers. 
Of importance, Islamic financial institutions must be open to rethinking their traditional business
models and approach to doing business. In particular, the openness to forge digital partnerships
and strategic alliances has the potential for the co-creation of innovative solutions. Globally, 82%
of  incumbents  are  expected  to  increase  fintech  partnerships  in  the  next  three  to  five  years.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Collaboration  with  the  fintech  community  should  therefore  become  the  norm.  For  example,
collaboration  with  crowdfunding  and  peer-to-peer  financing  startups  can  be  a  win-win  growth
opportunity.  Through  such  partnerships,  banks  would  be  better  able  to  service  smaller
businesses  by  referring  potential  borrowers  not  meeting  their  targeted  credit  profiles  to  these
lending platforms. In return, these platforms can refer its borrowers that have gained scale to the
banks for larger financing.
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  supportive  of  the  growth  of  fintech,  including  Islamic  fintech. At  the
same time, as a regulatory body with a mandate for financial stability, we need to ensure that
risks to the financial system and customers arising from innovations are properly managed. This
is  why  we  have  developed  the  Regulatory  Sandbox  which  allows  new  fintech  solutions  to  be
introduced in a live and controlled environment. It provides a “safe” environment where any risks
and failures can be better managed. The time to market for new innovative products can also be
reduced, which would otherwise be a hurdle under the traditional regulatory process. Its flexibility
is  also  expected  to  better  improve  accessibility,  affordability  and  attractiveness  of  financial
products and services.
The Bank has also introduced regulatory bootcamp sessions that are held every quarter. These
sessions  provide  an  opportunity  for  fintech  companies  to  gain  deeper  knowledge  and
understanding  before  entering  the  Regulatory  Sandbox.  I  hope  that  more  fintech  startups  and
companies, Islamic financial institutions and technology providers would take part in this key and
exciting  development  –  to  contribute  towards  the  creation  of  value-added  and  meaningful
innovations that can greatly benefit the Islamic finance industry and the public at large.
Conclusion
Technology has indeed reshaped various aspects of our personal and business lives. Virtually
every sector, in each and every country, is being transformed by this digital revolution. Fintech is
unlocking  tremendous  opportunities  that  will  bring  significant  benefits  to  consumers  and  the
industry. Islamic finance, in embracing what technology offers, would be able to better meet the
ever-changing needs of customers and the real economy. The incumbents have no choice but to
quickly  learn  to  adapt,  invest  and  innovate  to  deploy  new  technologies.  At  the  same  time,
technology and fintech in particular, offer significant opportunities for entrepreneurs to scale up
and succeed.
In closing, I wish you all an insightful and engaging Dialogue ahead.
First,  by  leveraging  on  technology,  industry  players  are  able  to  create  more  value  and
customer  focused  services.  This  can  be  achieved  through  the  delivery  of  customised
solutions  using  for  example  biometric  technologies,  big  data  and  analytics.  Technologies
such  as  Application  Programme  Interfaces  (or  APIs)  could  bring  substantial  benefits  to
customers, by making banking transactions simpler, quicker and more convenient.
Second,  the  adoption  of  technology  can  help  Islamic  finance  reach  out  to  market
segments which would not otherwise be cost-effective. This means a great opportunity
to serve untapped markets.
Third, in terms of processes, fintech can assist to improve the efficiency of back-end
systems and operations, including through the use of predictive analytics to undertake
real time risk management.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
