Ibrahim:  Future  proofing  compliance 
Muhammad  bin 
responsibility and response-ability
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  9th  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and  Terrorism
Financing  (IFCTF)  "Future  proofing  Compliance:  Responsibility  and  Response-ability",  Kuala
Lumpur, 4 October 2017.
 "Compliance, Past and Future"
 This  is  an  important  and  serious  gathering.  I  am  encouraged  to  see  many  leaders  and  key
compliance  officers  of  the  financial  industry  here  at  the  International  Conference  on  Financial
Crimes  and  Terrorism  Financing,  signifying  the  industry’s  commitment  to  a  safer  and  more
secured financial system.
It  is  worth  repeating  that  public  trust  and  confidence  in  the  financial  system  cannot  be
compromised. The cost of financial crimes and terrorism financing are staggering. Based on the
United  Nations  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  (UNODC),  money  laundering  transactions  are
estimated to cost economies between 2% to 5% of global GDP. This equals to USD1 to 2 trillion
annually. It is a humongous amount. Beyond monetary terms, these activities have destructive
consequences for the lives of many, especially the poor and underprivileged.
We must do better on this if we really want to ‘future-proof’ our financial system. Three points are
worth mentioning on compliance:
First, it is not the end, it is a means to an end;
Second,  it  should  be  viewed  within  a  broader  context  of  a  financial  institution’s
responsibilities to society; and
Third,  it  should  be  approached  in  partnership  with  other  key  participants  in  the  financial
system.
Compliance as a means to an end
The past decade has been a turning point for compliance. Arising from major systemic failures of
governance, regulators have since elevated the importance of compliance. For good reason, this
has  led  to  tighter  regulations,  greater  scrutiny  and  stronger  enforcement.  The  industry  has  in
turn, invested heavily in their compliance function. It is estimated that some firms could spend up
to  10%  of  their  revenues  on  compliance  within  the  next  few  years.  This  is  by  no  means  an
insignificant amount.
Yet, as we have seen over the recent years, this has not put a stop to money laundering and
terrorism  financing. A  case  in  point  is  a  major  bank  in  the Asia  Pacific  region  which  is  being
investigated for more than 50,000 violations of money laundering and terrorism financing.
Perhaps we need to take a step back and question if the industry has the right understanding of
compliance. If the motivation for the increased compliance is merely to abide strictly by the rules
and follow the book, thus avoiding scrutiny from regulators, this is misplaced. If this is the case,
then indeed the rules are just ‘burdens’, rather than instruments to assist banks’ operations and
safeguard confidence in the financial system.
Compliance therefore, is merely a means to an end. It is a process that enables us to achieve
certain outcomes. Having the right controls in place merely gets us to the starting line. The real
race is in creating and sustaining an environment where everyone in the organisation is involved
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in preventing the systematic abuse of the financial system.
This process is not a sprint, but a marathon of endurance and perseverance.
To drive the point, someone once asked, “How many compliance officers does it take to change
a lightbulb?” The answer is three, one to change it, one to check it and one to check it again, and
file a report. This illustrates how compliance can often be seen as an end to itself, forgetting that
it should be focusing on the end game, the quality of light emitted.
From the regulator’s perspective, rules have progressively evolved from detailed prescriptions in
the  past,  to  standards  and  best  practices  today.  This  is  due  to  the  rapid  pace  of  innovation,
increasing  complexity  of  financial  services  and  the  realisation,  that  a  ‘one-size-fits-all’,
micromanaging and prescription-based approach is not an optimal approach in regulation. Thus,
institutions have more latitude in implementing these standards at the micro level. This in turn
means that the board and the senior management are now placed with greater accountability
and responsibility in this area.
This  approach  also  benefits  the  industry  as  they  are  not  hamstrung  to  introduce  new  and
innovative products and services. The intent is also to improve the time-to-market. However, it
comes with a responsibility. Financial institutions are expected to apply the standards judiciously
and  proportionately.  This  should  take  into  account  risks  within  their  business  activities  and
strategies,  and  the  role  and  relationships  within  the  broader  financial  system.  Another  issue
organisations face in the conduct of their businesses arises from principal-agent relationships.
Establishing  clear  behavioural  norms  with  the  right  combination  of  controls  and  incentives,  to
shape  the  desired  behavior  is  key.  For  all  the  above,  the  compliance  function  can  play  a
meaningful role in this process.
Compliance in the context of broader responsibilities to society
As the theme for this conference suggests, compliance is a responsibility. What I have said so
far has focused on perspectives from the point of view of individuals within the industry. However,
compliance must also be viewed in relation to the broader financial system and society itself. A
key lesson from the global financial crisis in 2008 was that individual behavior, even though well
intended  and  rational  from  an  individual’s  point  of  view,  can  cause  massive  damage  at  the
aggregate level.
In  many  ways,  the  complexity  of  rules  that  apply  to  the  financial  system  is  a  reflection  of  its
important role in the economy and society. An efficient, productive and resilient financial system
supports  and  contributes  to  economic  growth  and  the  overall  well-being  of  the  people.  In
contrast, financial busts can have a destructive impact on the broader economy, impacting the
livelihood of ordinary people. This is the painful lesson from the history of financial crises.
Despite  the  huge  amount  of  resources  being  invested  in  compliance,  we  still  uncover  many
banking,  market  manipulation  and  rigging  scandals.  These  cases  illustrate  again  that  rules,
although  necessary,  are  not  sufficient  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  These
cases have damaged the confidence and trust of society in the system.
One  solution  for  this  is  a  stronger  focus  on  ethics  and  professional  standards  to  take  into
account  how  actions  impact  the  wider  society.  In  other  words,  financial  institutions  must
recognise and embrace their role as responsible corporate citizens. This means:
Establishing a framework that promotes ethical behaviour and decisions;
Going beyond what the letter of the law permits, to understanding and complying with its
‘spirit’; and
Seeking opportunities to add value and contribute to the well-being of society.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Viewed  from  this  perspective,  the  values  of  a  responsible  citizen  are  antithetical  to  money
laundering, terrorism financing and illegal behavior. Anyone who is a responsible citizen will not
engage in these activities and will actively seek to eradicate them. With no shortage of recent
examples  of  financial  institutions  that  have  flirted  with  questionable  conduct,  it  should  also  be
very clear by now that involvement in illegal activities is fundamentally incompatible with the trust
the public expects.
Compliance in partnership with others
In today’s world, no one has a monopoly on knowledge, power and competence. It is not solely
the job of the regulator to ensure the integrity of the financial system. The industry needs to be an
active  and  responsible  partner. All  parties  have  a  stake  to  ensure  that  the  system  is  not  only
functional, but thriving.
Bank Negara Malaysia will continue to remain firm in ensuring the orderly conduct of the financial
system.  We  expect  financial  institutions  to  adhere  to  strong  compliance  and  corporate
governance  standards.  We  have  not  hesitated  to  impose  hefty  fines  when  circumstances
warranted  such  actions.  Between  2015  to  June  2017  a  total  of  RM115.8  million  of  fines  and
penalties were imposed for breaching our regulations and affecting the integrity of the financial
system.
Moving forward, effective January 2018, the Bank will publish enforcement actions taken against
financial institutions and intermediaries for non-compliance with rules and regulations. This aims
to further increase the impact of enforcement actions as a credible deterrent. 
We  are  also  working  in  partnership  with  the  industry  and  other  agencies  to  ensure  that  the
integrity of our financial system remains intact. For example, over the last three months, a total of
415 names of individuals who were involved in facilitating financial scams was shared among the
industry players. This is a joint initiative by the Association of Banks in Malaysia and supported by
the  Royal  Malaysian  Police  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia.  To  coordinate  and  expedite  actions
against the operators of financial scams, a taskforce led by the Attorney-General’s Chambers
has  also  been  established  under  the  National  Coordination  Committee  to  Counter  Money
Laundering.
Our  regulatory  approach  will  continue  to  strike  a  right  balance  between  innovation  and  the
stability of the system. We are ready to adapt regulations to support emerging technologies and
changing business and operational models when they bring clear benefits to our financial system
and economy, and when the risks are well-understood and managed. New requirements for e-
KYC solutions that were recently released for industry feedback are an example of this. We will
also  be  releasing  guidelines  for  digital  currencies  by  the  end  of  this  year  to  address  risks
associated with money laundering and terrorism financing.
Last but not least, let me state that Bank Negara Malaysia values our cross-border partnerships
with  financial  intelligence  and  law  enforcement  agencies.  We  will  continue  to  cooperate
constructively with our counterparts, including through our membership in the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), to safeguard the integrity of the global financial system. This partnership at
the  international  level  is  increasingly  critical  as  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing
transcend borders. More importantly, our efforts are to secure the future of our economy and the
trust of our people by effectively preventing abuses of the financial system for criminal purposes. 
Conclusion
In my remarks, I have outlined that to “future-proof’’ compliance, we must change the way we
think  about  the  subject.  I  also  emphasised  that  a  narrow  focus  on  rule  setting  and  micro
managing would likely fail.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Instead,  compliance  needs  deep  understanding.  It  needs  to  consider  incentives,  ethics  and
professional conduct. It needs to leverage on mutually reinforcing partnerships. It needs to fulfil
its responsibility to contribute to the well-being of society. After all, compliance is an enabler, it is
not the end outcome that we seek.
This is how we should future-proof our financial system and compliance. On that note, I wish all
of you a productive conference.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
