  An address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Central Banking Seminar of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
 New York 
16 October 2017 
 Economic and monetary policy developments in South Africa 
 Introduction 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  of  fellow  central 
bankers as we gather here in New York City to  compare  the  current economic and 
financial  developments  across  the  major  regions  and  to  discuss  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy in a world that finds itself in a transition. 
 For  many  of  the  previous  years,  as  we  gathered  for  the  annual  meetings  of  the 
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, we had to discuss the reasons for 
the continued disappointing performance of global growth, and the most appropriate 
role that  monetary policy could play  in contributing to remedying the shortfalls. 
 This  year,  I am  pleased  to  say,  the  outlook  is  finally  looking  somewhat  promising: 
global  economic  growth,  especially  in  the  advanced  economies,  is  gathering  some 
momentum,  is  generally  stronger  than  most  observers  expected  a  year  ago,  and 
looks sustainable, even if medium-term risks, which need tackling to safeguard these 
encouraging developments, cannot be ignored.  
 Page 1 of 8 
 As  much as  these  developments  are  welcomed  by  the  emerging  economies,  some 
of  which  have  struggled  with  sub-par  growth  in  recent  years,  there  are  some 
accompanying  challenges.  For  example,  stronger  economic  growth  will  continue  to 
reduce the degree of economic slack in the advanced economies, calling for ongoing 
monetary  policy  normalization  and,  eventually,  higher  real  interest  rates  across  the 
world.  For  the  emerging  economies  that  have  become  used  to  elevated  capital 
inflows of late, this may force unpopular policy adjustments.  
 My remarks today will focus on the South African experience and how our monetary 
policy  is  negotiating  the  present  challenges  of  low  growth,  inflation  risks,  and  a 
benign yet uncertain global environment. 
 The dilemma of slowing growth and stubborn inflation 
 In its conduct of monetary policy, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has faced 
a  growing  dilemma  in  recent  years:  that  of  slowing  economic  growth  coupled  with 
inflation  that  is  stubbornly  rigid  above  the  midpoint  of  its  3-6%  target  range. 
Following the short-lived rebound in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, which 
saw real GDP1 expand by  about  3% in both 2010 and 2011, the economy‟s growth 
rate  has  gradually  slowed,  reaching  a  low  of  0.3%  in  2016.  The  average  growth  of 
1.6% in the past five years is a far cry from the 4.7% seen in the five years leading 
up to the 2008/09 recession. Our forecasts currently see real GDP registering growth 
of only 0.6% in 2017 before recovering moderately to a similarly weak 1.2% in 2018 
and 1.5% in 2019. 
 Yet  inflation  has  not  shown  a  typical  response.  From  a  low  of  3%  in  late  2010,  the 
year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) has mostly hovered 
around the upper end of the SARB‟s 3-6% target band, breaching it on the upside on 
five occasions – the last time between September 2016 and March this year. Even if 
we look at the core rate of inflation – which excludes the volatile food, non-alcoholic 
                                                           
1 gross domestic product 
 Page 2 of 8 
beverages, fuel, and electricity components – the picture is quite similar. From a low 
of 3.6% year on year in the early months of 2011, core inflation rose for most of the 
following five years, only declining since the beginning of this year. 
 Why has this happened? To a large extent, the answer lies in the structural nature of 
the  economic  slowdown.  A  self-reinforcing  cycle  of  poor  private-sector  confidence, 
coupled  with  subdued  business  investment  and  infrastructure  bottlenecks  (in 
particular in the electricity sector), has led to a gradual but sustained deterioration in 
the  potential  rate  of  economic  growth.  From  the  3-4%  range  seen  for  most  of  the 
2000s, the SARB‟s estimate of potential growth has slowed to no more than 1.1% for 
this  year,  with  only  a  mild  pickup  expected  in  the  next  two  years.  Consequently, 
while  we  estimate  that  actual  GDP  is  currently  about  1.7%  below  potential,  this 
output  gap  explains  only  a  minor  part  of  the  poor  growth  performance  of  recent 
years. 
 Yet, even the presence of an output gap for most of the past eight years has not had 
a  major  impact  on  inflation.  Indeed, our  internal  models  suggest  that  the  degree  of 
slack in the economy has a lesser impact on the formation of price trends than other 
factors  do,  for  instance  exchange  rate  developments  –  which,  incidentally,  have 
been unfavourable over the past few years. Several other factors are frequently cited 
to  explain  this  relative  lack  of  responsiveness,  including  rigidities  in  the  wage 
formation process, insufficient competition in many sectors of the economy, and the 
adaptive and backward-looking nature of inflation expectations.  
 Recent improvements in the inflation outcome and inflation outlook 
 Admittedly,  the  last  three  quarters  have  seen  an  encouraging  improvement  on  the 
inflation  front,  despite  the  stickiness  above  the  midpoint  of  the  target  band.  The 
headline  rate  of  inflation,  which  peaked  at  6.7%  in  December  2016,  fell  to  4.6%  in 
July 2017. Part of this slowdown reflects the more benign developments on the food 
and  energy  fronts.  Helped  by  a  strong  rebound  in  grain  production  following  the 
2015/16  drought,  which  sharply  reduced  the  prices  of  cereals,  food  inflation  has 
fallen to 5.7% from a high of 11.8% last December. Fuel inflation is still off its early-
 Page 3 of 8 
year highs, while the modest gain in electricity prices in July 2017 has improved the 
overall year-on-year CPI comparison. 
 However,  not  all  of  the  inflation  slowdown  is  attributable  to  these  transitory  factors. 
Encouragingly,  after a  long  upward  drift,  core  inflation fell from  a peak  of  5.9%  last 
December to 4.6% in July. Furthermore, this moderation was stronger than both the 
market consensus and the SARB expectations at the start of the year, as evidenced 
by the regular downward adjustments  to our  inflation  projections. True: a large part 
of the deceleration in core inflation occurred in the goods sector, especially in those 
subsectors  where  import  penetration  is  elevated,  and  these  subsectors  clearly 
benefitted  from  a  recovery  in  the  rand  from  early  2016  to  March  2017  (an 
improvement  of  37% in  nominal,  trade-weighted  terms).  Yet  the  magnitude  of  that 
slowdown in inflation, just like the absence of upside price pressures in the services 
sector (in particular in housing and insurance), surprised most observers. 
 The  marked  improvement  in  the  inflation  forecast,  as  well  as  the  significant 
deterioration  in  the  growth  outlook  coupled  with  an  assessment  by  the  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  (MPC)  of  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  being  more  or  less 
balanced, gave the MPC room for a moderate reduction in the repurchase rate of 25 
basis points to 6.75% at its July meeting.  
 The current rates of inflation are not expected to  fully persist, in large part because 
they  still  reflect  the  lagged  impact  of  last  year‟s  rand  recovery,  which  has  already 
partly  reversed.  Indeed,  the  SARB‟s  latest  projections  see  inflation  rising  back  to 
5.3% by  the  third  quarter  of  2018  and  stabilising  around  these  levels  over  the 
remainder of the forecast period. By the time of the MPC‟s September meeting, while 
the  inflation  outlook  was  more  or  less  unchanged  and  the  growth  outlook  had 
improved  moderately,  the  risks  to  the  inflation  outlook  were  assessed  to  be 
somewhat  on  the  upside,  resulting  in  the  MPC  opting  to  keep  rates  unchanged  at 
that meeting.  
    Page 4 of 8 
Risks to the more benign environment 
 While  the  overall  situation  looks  more  benign  when  compared  to  previous  periods, 
this should not allow a sense of complacency to creep in. The exchange rate of the 
rand,  whose  recovery  over  the  past  year  has  been  key  to  the  decline  in  inflation, 
remains volatile but does not display any major deviation, at present, from what our 
internal  models  suggest  as  fair  valuation.  Yet  the  risks  to  the  rand  are  probably 
skewed towards renewed depreciation, for both internal and external reasons.  
 On  the  internal  front,  factors  such  as  the  combination  of  political  and  policy 
uncertainty,  growing  fiscal  challenges  of  addressing  growth-induced  revenue 
shortfalls,  the  continuing  upward  drift  in  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  as  well  as  growing 
funding needs for state-owned enterprises could all add to currency vulnerability.  
 Global market developments could also easily compound the rand‟s vulnerability. So 
far this year, the combination of low global market volatility, relatively flat government 
bond yield curves, and compressed risk premiums across a broad range of financial 
assets has largely sheltered South African assets from domestic causes of volatility. 
Net portfolio inflows into the local bond market have remained positive, and even in 
instances  where  domestic  developments  did  put  local  assets  under  pressure,  such 
tension  proved  short-lived.  Yet  the  recent  upward  correction  in  interest  rate 
expectations in several advanced economies, including the US2 and the UK3, serves 
as a warning that even a gradual pace of monetary policy normalization – after years 
of  very 
loose  global  monetary  conditions  –  may  not  be  without  adverse 
consequences for emerging market currencies such as the rand. 
 Other  factors  present  upside  risks  to  inflation  over  the  coming  two  years.  On  the 
exchange  rate  front,  we  must  also  remember  that  the  2016  and  early  2017 
appreciation was greatly helped by a recovery in South Africa‟s  terms of trade.4 But 
the recent developments in commodity prices, including the stronger prices of crude 
                                                           
2 United States 
3 United Kingdom 
4 The SARB‟s broad measure of South Africa‟s terms of trade, including gold, increased by 7.1% year 
on year as of the first quarter of 2017; it was relatively stable in the second quarter. 
 Page 5 of 8 
oil  and  the  downward  correction  in  the  prices  of  iron  ore,  indicate  that  this 
improvement could partly reverse. The possibility remains for a larger electricity tariff 
increase  in  2018  than  the  8%  assumed  in  the  SARB‟s  forecast.  In  addition,  in  the 
longer  run,  the  implementation  of  minimum  wage  legislation  could  put  upward 
pressure on labour costs, even though the size and timing of that impact is not yet 
fully understood. 
 Monetary policy’s unclear margin of manoeuvre 
 Amid  such  elevated  uncertainties,  and  despite  the  subdued  nature  of  domestic 
demand, it is not clear how much space exists, if at all, for additional policy rate cuts 
by  the  MPC  in  the  coming  quarters.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  SARB 
does not take the weakness of real economic growth into consideration. It certainly 
does.  Indeed,  estimates  by  the  SARB‟s  Quarterly  Projection  Model  (QPM)  of  a 
Taylor  rule  based  on  the  historical  policy  rate  path  show  that  the  output  gap  has 
played a role in determining that policy rate.5  
 Furthermore,  the  policy  stance  is,  at  present,  probably  not  far  from  what  can  be 
perceived  as  „neutral‟.  According  to  estimates  from  the  above-mentioned  QPM 
model, the current real interest rate is not far from its equilibrium, or „neutral‟, level. 
Admittedly, estimates of this „neutral‟ level are fraught with high uncertainty, in South 
Africa  and  elsewhere.  Nonetheless,  such  calculations  suggest  that  the  SARB  does 
not have the kind of „room to ease‟ it had when policy was unambiguously tight, for 
instance at the start of the 2008/09 recession. 
 Arguably, because of the existence of an output gap, monetary policy could  – under 
normal circumstances – be allowed to loosen somewhat, with a real interest rate that 
is moderately below its „neutral‟ level. This bias must, however, be weighed against 
both  the  upside  risks  to  inflation  (which  I  have  already  highlighted)  and  the 
stubbornly high level of inflation expectations.  While expectations are  currently  less 
volatile,  and  probably  less  adaptive  than  in  the  early  years  of  the  inflation-targeting 
                                                           
5 See the Monetary Policy Review published by the SARB in October 2017. 
 Page 6 of 8 
regime, they remain above the midpoint of the target range and uncomfortably close 
to its upper end. The consequence is a relatively large risk of persistent above-target 
inflation in the event of an inflationary shock to the economy – and it is the mandate 
of the MPC to mitigate such a risk. 
 As indicated earlier, in light of the balance of risks to the outlook and  to the current 
policy stance, the MPC decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at its September 
meeting. This does not prejudge any future moves. Rather, because of the elevated 
level of uncertainty we are currently facing, the MPC feels a particularly strong need 
to  reassess  the  balance  of  risks  at  every  meeting.  Consequently,  monetary  policy 
decisions, now more than ever, have to be data-dependent. 
 The most recent decision of the MPC appeared to surprise domestic money markets 
somewhat, as  they  had  come  to discount  a 25  basis points  rate  cut  in  the  wake  of 
the July move. We prefer not to surprise markets. In fact, we see policy transparency 
and consistency as crucial in ensuring an effective transmission of rate decisions to 
the economy.  
 Yet in a fluid environment, where even small changes in the balance of risks can tip 
the  policy  scales  one  way  or  another,  it  is  not  possible  to  systematically  come  up 
with  fully  predictable  policy  decisions  –  just  as  it  is  not  possible,  in  such  an 
environment, for the MPC to give the kind of forward guidance  that some call for. If 
anything,  domestic  financial  market  indicators  seem  to  broadly  echo  the  SARB‟s 
view  that  the  uncertain  environment  is  forcing  a  cautious  approach  to  policy.  Thus, 
forward  rate  agreements  only  discount  a  short  and  shallow  easing  cycle  while  the 
yield  curve  is  positively  sloped  –  a  sign  that  investors  are  cognisant  of  the  upside 
risks to inflation, and therefore to policy rates, in the medium to long term.  
 Conclusion – the continued relevance of the inflation target range 
 The  challenges  that  South  Africa  has  had  to  face  over  the  past  few  years  –  in 
particular the combination of slow growth and relatively high inflation – may have led 
some  observers  to  question  whether  the  current  inflation  target  range  remains 
 Page 7 of 8 
relevant  for  the  country  at  this  stage.  In  my  view,  raising  or  even  contemplating 
abandoning the inflation target band would be a misguided approach. Both economic 
theory  and  historical  experience  show  that  whenever  the  price  and  wage  formation 
process  is  rigid  and  price  expectations  are  adaptive  rather  than  well  anchored,  the 
cost of negative shocks tends to be higher and longer-lasting in real economic terms. 
South  Africa‟s  own  experience  of the  most  recent  global financial  crisis,  which  saw 
the country suffer a relatively high number of job losses, illustrates the merit of such 
a strong and credible price anchor. 
 In fact, many emerging economies, including those at a similar level of development 
as South Africa, have enjoyed both stronger economic growth  as well as lower and 
more  stable  inflation  since  introducing  inflation  targets.  This  observation  has 
continued to apply since the global financial crisis. Equally, the adoption of a different 
anchor – for example the exchange rate – would be very difficult for South Africa as 
we are a commodity exporter and therefore regularly exposed to large terms-of-trade 
fluctuations.  
 The  truth  of  the  matter  is  this:  low  and  stable  inflation  is  the  best  contribution  that 
monetary policy can make towards stronger and more sustainable economic growth 
and  poverty  reduction.  As  the  saying  goes:  “Facts  do  not  cease  to  exist  because 
they are ignored.”  
 There  is  no  better  way  to  contribute  to  the  socio-economic  well-being  of  a  nation 
than  to  protect  the  cost  of  living  of  its  citizens.  In  his  speech  titled  „Whip  inflation 
now‟, US President Gerald Ford warned that inflation would „destroy our country, our 
homes, our liberties, our property, and finally our national pride‟.  
 As  the  SARB,  we  remain  committed  to  formulating  and  implementing  monetary 
policy aimed at controlling  inflation at low levels, in  line  with the independence  that 
the Constitution guarantees us, while remaining relevant to the context  in which  we 
operate. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 8 of 8 
