Mario Draghi: Monetary policy and the outlook for the economy
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Frankfurt European
Banking Congress “Europe into a New Era – How to Seize the Opportunities”, Frankfurt am Main,
17 November 2017.
 Today I would like to describe how the euro area economy is developing and explain our latest
monetary  policy  decisions.  The  economic  recovery  is  continuing  but  inflation  developments
remain subdued. So, while we are confident in the recovery, we still need a patient and persistent
approach to our monetary policy to ensure that medium-term price stability is achieved.
The euro area economic recovery
The  euro  area  is  in  the  midst  of  a  solid  economic  expansion.  GDP  has  risen  for  18  straight
quarters, with the latest data and surveys pointing to unabated growth momentum in the period
ahead. From the ECB’s perspective, we have increasing confidence that the recovery is robust
and that this momentum will continue going forward. There are three factors in particular that
suggest this.
First, the major headwinds that were weighing on the recovery in recent years have now largely
dissipated, although downside risks still remain related to external factors.
For some years global growth and world trade have been a drag on the recovery. Now, we are
seeing signs of a sustained expansion. Global PMIs remain strong. The share of countries in
which growth has been improving relative to the previous three years has risen from 20% in mid-
2016 to 60% today. And this has fed through into a rebound in world trade, which is growing at its
strongest annual rate in six years, and may well become a tailwind going forward.
Domestically,  a  key  headwind  in  the  past  has  been  the  necessary  deleveraging  by  firms  and
households. But this is also now diminishing as debt returns to more sustainable levels.
For the euro area, gross corporate debt  to value added is now roughly back to its pre-crisis
level. In vulnerable countries the decline has been steeper. In Spain, corporate debt has fallen
from 215% of gross value added in early 2012 to close to 150% today – the same level it had at
the end of 2004. Italian firms have seen their debt ratio fall by around 30 percentage points since
2
end 2012, returning to the same level as in mid-2007.
1
For households, gross indebtedness is also edging down and now stands just below its mid-
2008 level. And importantly for the recovery, household deleveraging is now happening largely
“passively” – i.e. through nominal growth – rather than “actively”, that is, through paying down
debt  or  write  offs.  We  estimate  that  the  monetary  policy  measures  we  have  implemented  in
recent years will reduce the household debt ratio by 1.5% of GDP from 2015 to 2019, and by 2%
for firms over this period.
The  recovery  therefore  has  not  come  against  the  backdrop  of  re-leveraging  in  any  economic
sector. In fact, monetary policy is helping to reduce leverage and produce a more sustainable
upswing, which should in turn facilitate further balance sheet adjustment.
The  second  factor  that  gives  us  confidence  in  the  recovery  is  that  the  drivers  of  growth  are
increasingly  endogenous  rather  than  exogenous.  In  the  early  phase  of  the  recovery,  its  main
3
motors were falling oil prices and monetary policy.
Now,  we  see  more  signs  that  growth  is  “feeding  on  itself”,  i.e.  spending  multipliers  and
endogenous propagation are again supporting activity.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This cycle is most evident for private consumption, which has remained robust even as oil prices
have  risen  by  about  30  dollars  since  the  start  of  2016.  Consumption  is  being  supported  by  a
virtuous  circle  between  rising  labour  income  and  rising  employment.  Employment  in  the  euro
area has reached its highest level ever, while unemployment has fallen to its lowest rate since
January 2009.
Importantly, this has taken place against the backdrop of a rising participation rate, which is now
4
2 percentage points above its pre-crisis level.
This has been driven in particular by the increased entry of women into the workforce, whose
participation rate has risen by 4 percentage points since 2008 and reached an all-time high.
It has also been strongly driven by older people. Since the start of the crisis  , the participation
rate has increased by 3.6 percentage points for people aged 50–54, 13.6 percentage points for
55–59 year olds and 17.1 percentage points for 60–64 year olds. The fact that unemployment
has fallen so much while labour participation has been rising is a remarkable success story.
5
As consumption has strengthened and spending multipliers have taken hold, investment has also
followed with a lag. Since 2016, investment has contributed almost 45% to annual GDP growth,
compared with under 30% in the two years previously.
The  third  factor  that  signals  a  robust  recovery  is  that  the  economy  may  be  becoming  more
resilient to new shocks. This is the result of two ongoing trends.
One is the increasing convergence among euro area countries across a range of indicators. The
dispersion of both employment and GDP growth between euro area countries is now at record
low levels. The previous divergence in credit conditions has also largely disappeared.
For very small loans – which are a proxy for the financing conditions facing SMEs – the spread
between vulnerable and less vulnerable countries has fallen from 170 basis points in mid-2014 to
2 basis points today. For the first time since 2009, loans to firms are moving into positive territory
in all major euro area economies. And demand for loans by firms, which at this time last year
6
was still negative in several vulnerable countries, is now positive across the whole euro area.
The  other  trend  is  the  growing  resilience  of  the  financial  sector.  The  total  capital  ratio  of
significant banks has increased by more than 170 basis points since early 2015. Their return on
equity has risen from 4.4% at the end of 2015 to 7.1% at the start of this year, even as their
leverage  ratios  have  declined. All  banks  have  benefited  from  the  upward  trend  in  returns  on
assets since the start of our monetary policy easing in 2014, although in some cases starting
from low levels. Clearly this trend hides some variation among banks, which is largely driven by
differences in their business models.
As  regards  bank  profitability,  ECB  research  finds  little  evidence  that  our  monetary  policy  is
currently doing harm. Net interest income has remained quite stable over the past two years. If
there are any negative effects of low rates on net interest income in the future, they should be
largely  offset  by  the  positive  effects  of  monetary  stimulus  on  the  other  main  components  of
7
profitability, such as the quality of loans and therefore on loan-loss provisions.
Low-for-long  interest  rates  might  contribute  to  a  build-up  of  financial  risks,  and  this  has  to  be
carefully monitored. At present we do not see systemic risks emerging at the euro area level. If
there are some local pockets of risk, the defence lies in micro-prudential and macro-prudential
policies,  not  changing  area-wide  monetary  policy.  Furthermore,  in  such  an  environment  any
backtracking on financial regulation would be a mistake, as the pre-crisis experience has shown.
The outlook for inflation and the ECB’s recent policy decisions
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Despite this progress on the real side of the economy, from a monetary policy perspective our
task is not complete, as we have not yet seen a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
A  sustained  adjustment  is  one  where  the  return  of  headline  inflation  towards  our  objective  is
durable  and  not  just  a  temporary  blip,  and  it  can  be  self-sustained  without  monetary  policy
support. We do now see inflation moving steadily away from the very low levels of recent years,
although progress remains incomplete and partial.
Two  indicators  are  important  for  gauging  the  durability  of  inflation.  The  first  is  the  outlook  for
growth,  since  this  helps  us  assess  whether  inflation  will  continue  to  rise  as  we  expect.  The
second is underlying inflation. This allows us to assess whether inflation will stabilise around our
aim once the effects of volatile factors, such as oil and food price swings, have faded away.
The  growth  outlook  is  now  clearly  improving,  for  all  the  reasons  I  have  mentioned.  But  the
underlying inflation trend remains subdued. According to a broad range of measures, underlying
inflation  has  ticked  up  moderately  since  the  start  of  this  year,  but  it  still  lacks  clear  upward
momentum. A key issue here is wage growth.
Since  the  trough  in  mid-2016,  growth  in  compensation  per  employee  has  risen,  recovering
around half of the gap towards its historical average. But overall trends remain subdued and are
not broad-based. A number of explanations have been put forward for this.
One is that the effects of past low inflation are continuing to weigh on wage growth. A second
explanation is that the relationship between wage growth and traditional measures of slack has
weakened in the post-crisis period.
8
There are many reasons why this weakening may have happened.
Slack might be larger than we thought due to rising labour supply or mismeasurement of so-
called “underemployment” in traditional measures of slack. Or the relationship between slack and
wage growth might itself have changed, due – for example – to a shift in focus by trade unions
towards job security rather than wages in view of higher economic uncertainty.
With the continued support of monetary policy that will avoid any unwanted tightening of financial
conditions, these factors should slowly fade away. With well-anchored inflation expectations, the
effects of past low inflation in wage formation should not be persistent. And as the labour market
tightens  and  uncertainty  falls,  the  relationship  between  slack  and  wage  growth  should  begin
reasserting itself. But we have to remain patient.
A third explanation is that structural changes due to globalisation and digitalisation have made it
more difficult for central banks to stoke domestic inflation. But we do not see much evidence to
suggest that e-commerce is depressing inflation in the euro area today – at least to extent that
9
we can measure it.
The same is true for “global slack”.
10
In fact, as the global economy recovers, the foreign output gap is moving in the same direction
as the euro area output gap.
11
In sum, we are not yet at a point where the recovery of inflation can be self-sustained without our
accommodative  policy.  A  key  motor  of  the  recovery  remains  the  very  favourable  financing
conditions  facing  firms  and  households,  which  are  in  turn  heavily  contingent  on  our  policy
measures. An  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains  necessary  for  underlying  inflation
pressures to build up and support headline inflation over the medium term. 
This is reflected in the monetary policy decisions that we took last month. These aim to signal
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
our growing confidence in the euro area economy, while also acknowledging that we must be
patient and persistent for inflation to return sustainably to our objective.
We decided to reduce the pace of our monthly asset purchases from €60 billion to €30 billion,
while  extending  the  horizon  of  those  purchases  until  end  of  September  2018,  or  beyond,  if
necessary, and in any case until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
This recalibration of our asset purchases, supported by the sizeable stock of acquired assets
and  the  forthcoming  reinvestments,  and  by  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates,  helps  to
maintain  the  necessary  degree  of  accommodation  and  thereby  to  accompany  the  economic
recovery  in  an  appropriate  way.  In  this  sense,  the  recent  decisions  follow  the  same  logic  as
those in December last year when we reduced the pace of purchases from €80 billion to €60
billion.
Our  monetary  policy  influences  long-term  yields  through  both  its  main  components:  by
compressing the term premium, and by anchoring the expected path of policy rates in the future.
By accumulating a portfolio of long-duration assets, the central bank can compress term premia
by extracting duration risk from private investors. Via this “duration extraction” effect, the central
bank frees up risk bearing capacity in markets, spurs a rebalancing of private portfolios toward
the  remaining  securities,  and  thus  lowers  term  premia  and  yields  across  a  range  of  financial
assets.
In the past, since the crisis had heightened risk perceptions, the Eurosystem had to purchase
very sizeable amounts per month to foster a certain impact on the term premium and on long-
term yields. But, as market conditions have normalised and the economic outlook has improved,
risk perceptions have declined and the capacity to absorb risk in private portfolios has risen. This
explains why we reduced the pace of monthly purchases.
But asset purchases matter also for the signals they entail about the path of future policy rates:
the so-called “signalling effect”. In the euro area this effect is reinforced by the sequence in which
our instruments are ordered.
Specifically,  the  length  of  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  and  the  statement  that  our
policy interest rates are expected to remain at their present levels “well past” the end of those net
purchases,  mechanically  affect  the  time  of  the  first  expected  rate  hike,  anchoring  the  path  of
expected policy rates over the lifespan of the net asset purchase programme and beyond.
The signalling effect of asset purchases has therefore naturally increased in prominence relative
to the duration effect. This explains why our decisions three weeks ago to reduce the pace of
purchases while extending the horizon left, on impact, financial conditions largely unchanged.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. The ECB’s mandate is framed in terms of price stability, as this is the best
contribution that we can make to the welfare of citizens. Ensuring price stability is a precondition
for the economy to be able to grow along a balanced path that can be sustained in the long run.
This is the guiding principle of all our monetary policy decisions.
With  the  recovery  ongoing,  now  is  the  right  moment  for  the  euro  area  to  address  further
challenges  to  stability.  This  means  actively  putting  our  fiscal  houses  in  order  and  building  up
buffers for the future – not just waiting for growth to gradually reduce debt. It means implementing
structural reforms that will allow our economies to converge and grow at higher speeds over the
long term. And it means addressing the remaining gaps in the institutional architecture of our
monetary union.
1
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
 On a consolidated basis. Consolidated gross debt includes total loans granted to NFCs net of intra-sectoral
loans, debt securities issued and pension liabilities.
European  Central  Bank  (2016),  “Business  investment  developments  in  the  euro  area  since  the  crisis”,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 7; Bank for International Settlements (2017), “87th Annual Report”; Barkbu B., Berkmen
P., Lukyantsau P., Saksonovs S., and H. Schoelermann (2015), “Investment in the euro area: why has it been
weak?”, IMF Working Paper, No. 32; Arce O. (2017), “Financing corporate investment along the recovery: the
case of Spain”, presentation at the Global Interdependence Center, March.
For more detail on this point see Draghi, M. (2017), “Monetary policy and the economic recovery in the euro
area”, speech at The ECB and Its Watchers XVIII Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April 2017.
For people aged 15–64.
2008Q1 to 2017Q2.
According to Bank Lending Survey data.
Altavilla C., M. Boucinha and J.-L. Peydró (2017), “Monetary Policy and Bank Profitability in aLow Interest Rate
Environment”, forthcoming.
See Draghi, M. (2017), “Accompanying the economic recovery”, speech at the ECB Forum on Central Banking,
Sintra, 27 June 2017.
ECB (2015), “Effects of E-Commerce on Inflation”, Box 6, Economic Bulletin Issue 2.
ECB (2017), “Domestic and global drivers of inflation in the euro area”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 4.
Nickel, C. (2017), “The role of foreign slack in domestic inflation in the Eurozone”, VoxEu, 28 July.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
