William C Dudley: The monetary policy outlook and the importance
of higher education for economic mobility
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Council  for  Economic  Education’s  56th  Annual  Financial  Literacy
&amp; Economic Education Conference, New York City, 6 October 2017.
 Good afternoon.  It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this Council for Economic
Education  (CEE)  event,  marking  the  CEE’s  56th  Annual  Financial  Literacy  and  Economic
Education  Conference.    Given  the  hard  lessons  of  the  financial  crisis—and  the  economic
challenges  still  facing  many  Americans—there  are  few  goals  more  worthy  than  promoting
greater financial and economic literacy.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own views
and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  the  Federal
1
Reserve System.
Personal educational experience
Before discussing the economic outlook and the role of education in income mobility, I will offer a
few remarks on my own educational experience.  While it may not be surprising that I have a
Ph.D.  in  economics,  the  path  that  led  me  to  the  University  of  California,  Berkeley,  is  a  bit
unusual. 
I started college in the 1970s at Columbia University.  On the positive side, the professors were
engaging, and I had the opportunity to read the great books of the university’s core contemporary
civilization curriculum.  But, I was troubled by the emphasis on grades and test taking.  I wanted
something that was more free-form.  The idea was to find an environment that fostered learning
for learning’s sake.  So, in a small act of rebellion—after all, it was the early 1970s and I was a
teenager—I decided to transfer to New College in Sarasota, Florida.  New College provided a
strong liberal arts, cross-disciplinary, and flexible education program that relied—as it does today
—on  an  unstructured  format  of  evaluations,  study  programs  with  individual  professors,  and
contracts rather than grades.  I like to call it “graduate school for undergraduates,” because it
really is a place that encourages students to engage intellectually, read and think critically, and
communicate effectively. 
This experience made me a strong advocate of a liberal arts education, which I believe is now
more valuable than ever, given the greater importance of synthesizing and evaluating the vast
array of information we have at our fingertips.  The cross-disciplinary approach of a liberal arts
program is also vital to understanding and solving complex problems.  I believe that training—
combined  with  the  excellent  education  in  economics  I  got  at  Berkeley—helped  me  to  better
diagnose what was going wrong in 2007 and 2008, and how the Federal Reserve could be most
effective in our response to the crisis. 
Economic and monetary policy outlook
Turning to the economic outlook, the damage wrought by Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria
has  imposed  immeasurable  hardship  on  many.    And,  the  damage  will  undoubtedly  disrupt
commerce for some time.  However, these effects are likely to be relatively modest in the context
of the national economy.  Natural disasters tend to depress economic activity initially, but once
the recovery and reconstruction efforts get underway in earnest, such disasters actually serve to
lift economic activity. 
Looking  beyond  the  storm  effects—which  will  make  interpreting  near-term  economic  data
releases more difficult—the economy remains on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth at
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
about  2  percent,  and  the  fundamentals  supporting  continued  expansion  are  generally  quite
favorable. Low unemployment, sturdy job gains (recognizing the near-term negative impact of the
storms),  and  rising  wages  (even  at  a  pace  below  previous  expansions)  are  lifting  personal
income.  Household wealth has been boosted by rising home and equity prices, and household
debt  has  been  growing  relatively  slowly,  contributing  to  a  healthy  household  balance  sheet. 
Thus, consumer spending should continue to advance in coming quarters. 
Business fixed investment outlays are also likely to continue to rise.  With the supply of labor
tightening,  there  are  greater  incentives  for  businesses  to  invest  in  labor-saving  technologies. 
Investment spending should also benefit from a better international outlook and the improvement
in U.S. trade competitiveness caused by the dollar’s recent weakness.  The softer dollar and
solid  growth  abroad  also  suggest  that  the  trade  sector  will  no  longer  be  a  significant  drag  on
economic growth. 
Turning to the outlook for inflation, I have been surprised by the persistence of the shortfall from
the FOMC’s 2 percent long-run objective.  While some of this year’s shortfall can be explained by
one-off  factors—such  as  the  sharp  fall  in  prices  for  cellular  phone  service—its  persistence
suggests that more fundamental structural changes may also be playing a role.  These include
the increased ability of prospective buyers to compare prices across different sellers quickly and
easily, the shift in retail sales to online channels of distribution from traditional brick-and-mortar
stores, and the consequences of these changes on brand loyalty and business pricing power.
Over  the  coming  months,  I  hope  that  we  will  be  better  able  to  differentiate  between  these
competing explanations.  If it turns out that structural changes have played a significant role, I
would generally view this as a positive, rather than negative, development.  It would imply that the
U.S. economy could operate at a higher level of labor resource utilization without generating a
troublesome large rise in inflation.  More people could be put to work on a sustainable basis,
enabling them to gain opportunities not just to earn greater income, but also to develop their skills
and grow their human capital.
Slightly above-trend growth is gradually tightening the U.S. labor market, which should support a
rise in wage growth over time.  When combined with a firmer import price trend—partly reflecting
recent  depreciation  of  the  dollar—and  the  fading  of  effects  from  a  number  of  temporary,
idiosyncratic  factors,  I  expect  inflation  will  rise  and  stabilize  around  the  FOMC’s  2  percent
objective over the medium term.  Thus, even though inflation is currently somewhat below our
longer-run  objective,  I  judge  that  it  is  still  appropriate  to  continue  to  remove  monetary  policy
accommodation gradually.  This judgment is supported by the fact that financial conditions have
eased, rather than tightened, even as the FOMC has raised its short-term interest rate target
range by 75 basis points since last December. 
But, the upward trajectory of the policy rate path should continue to be shallow, in part because
the level of short-term interest rates consistent with keeping the economy on a sustainable long-
run growth path is likely to be considerably lower than it was in prior business cycles. 
The  FOMC  recently  launched  the  process  of  balance  sheet  normalization—in  which  an
increasing  proportion  of  maturing  Treasuries  and  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS)
repayments are allowed to run off the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  While this process also
should exert some monetary policy restraint over time, I believe the impact will be quite modest. 
Not only was this shift in policy widely anticipated, but we also have seen that the impact on the
level of long-term interest rates has been small as expectations have adjusted. 
The  economy  has  made  great  strides  in  recovering  from  the  Great  Recession,  as  the
unemployment rate has fallen from 10 percent to 4.2 percent, aided by accommodative monetary
policy.  Measures of underemployment have also improved considerably and are near pre-crisis
levels.  Stronger labor market conditions are perhaps the best means to improve the economic
well-being  of  most  Americans,  particularly  those  who  have  been  struggling  and  are  most
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
vulnerable to economic downturns. 
And, as discussed in the Federal Reserve’s July Monetary Policy Report and in Chair Yellen’s
accompanying testimony before Congress, it is encouraging that unemployment rates continue
to fall for most demographic groups, including African-Americans and Hispanics.   At the same
time,  we  should  remain  concerned  that  the  jobless  rates  for  those  groups  remain  above  the
unemployment rate for the nation. 
2
Recent U.S. Census Bureau estimates of household income growth also provide some reason
for optimism.  Median real household income rose 3.2 percent in 2016, after strong gains the
prior year.  Gains were particularly notable among African-American and Hispanic households,
and the poverty rate fell to near pre-crisis levels.  While this is good news, I think we can all agree
that we have a long way to go to improve income inequality and mobility in the United States.  As I
see it, these are among the most important issues we face as a nation.
Income mobility and education
Now, it is clearly the case that, given differences in individuals’ abilities, a free-market society will
generate some level of inequality.  However, there are persistent trends toward growing inequality
and  diminished  economic  mobility—and  in  my  view,  these  are  problematic.     First,  income
inequality has widened notably since about 1980.   Second, and more distressing, is a relatively
low rate of economic mobility, or the degree to which individuals or families can move up or down
in the income distribution over time.  For example, the fraction of children who earn more than
their parents has fallen from 90 percent to 50 percent over the past half century, and only 37
percent of parents believe that their children will be better off financially than they are, according
5
to a recent Pew Research Center survey.
3
4
High inequality combined with a low rate of mobility is particularly problematic in a democratic
society. In short, it means that being born into a low-income family is likely to severely limit an
individual’s opportunities and well-being over his or her lifetime.  The United States fares notably
weaker on both dimensions relative to its OECD peers.   That is concerning, and something we
should be working to address.
6
One significant initiative we have taken within the Federal Reserve System is the establishment
of  the  Opportunity  and  Inclusive  Growth  Institute  at  the  Minneapolis  Fed,  which  conducts
research and makes recommendations on the structural barriers to economic advancement in
the  nation.    The  New  York  Fed  has  been,  and  will  continue  to  be,  an  active  participant  and
supporter of this initiative. 
Let me now turn to the primary routes of economic mobility and the impediments that too often
block them.  The primary avenue to higher incomes for most people is investment in their human
capital, namely through education.  Indeed, the income returns on education are very high, and
they continue to rise in spite of very significant increases in the supply of highly educated workers
during much of the 20th century.  Since the 1980s, however, increases in the supply of well-
educated  workers  in  the  United  States  have  slowed,  while  demand  for  these  workers  has
accelerated due to technological change.  These forces have been a major contributor to the
increase  in  the  college  wage  premium.   While  college  graduation  rates  in  the  U.S.  have
stagnated, those in many other OECD countries have continued to rise.  As a result, only one-
quarter of those in the 25-to-34 age bracket in the United States have more education than their
parents, compared with an OECD average of one-third.   This represents a dramatic decline in
college  education’s  influence  as  an  engine  of  upward  mobility.    So,  part  of  a  solution  to  the
increase in inequality and the reduction in social mobility is to increase the level of educational
attainment in the population.
7
8
There are many barriers to expanding post-secondary education, however. From the potential
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
student’s  perspective,  a  lack  of  information,  low  college  preparedness,  and  high  costs  are  all
substantial  barriers  to  college  attendance  and  completion,  and  these  barriers  restrict  social
mobility.  Let me discuss each of these in turn. 
By lack of information, I mean the recognition that in spite of its high price tag, a college degree
typically offers an even larger payoff in terms of future earnings.  Many aspects of the college
attendance  decision  are  complex  and  hard  to  predict,  especially  for  students  from  families
without much experience with higher education.  For example, research indicates that decisions
about college attendance are highly correlated with an understanding of the future payoffs from
attendance  and  particular  majors.     New  York  Fed  research  shows  evidence  of  systematic
underestimation  of  the  average  benefits—and  overestimation  of  the  costs—of  a  college
education, with larger biases among lower-income and non-college households.
 Families may
not realize that listed tuition prices may not be what a particular student actually pays.  Moreover,
misperceptions  about  the  net  return  from  a  college  degree  can  be  consequential,  influencing
parents’ expectations and intentions for their children’s college attendance. 
10
9
Importantly,  however,  these  expectations  are  not  hardwired.    Evidence  from  an  information
experiment indicates that students do respond to new information by revising their expectations
and their education choices.
  This suggests that making information about higher education
decisions  more  available  to  families—particularly  those  with  less  experience  with  higher
education—is a promising way to expand economic mobility.  I was fortunate as a child that I
didn’t face this problem.  Both my parents went to college and there was no doubt among us
about the payoff from higher education. 
11
Another concern is the lack of college preparedness among new college entrants.  Nearly seven
out of 10 students entering public two-year institutions and four out of 10 students entering four-
year  public  institutions  take  remedial  courses  in  college.
  Generally,  these  are  courses  they
should  have  taken  in  high  school.  The  costs  of  taking  these  courses  in  college  are  high,
especially  because  they  do  not  count  for  college  credit.    Low  readiness  contributes  to
persistently  low  college  completion  rates,  with  only  55  percent  of  first-time  undergraduates
completing a degree within six years.
  College dropout rates are especially high among lower-
income, part-time, and nontraditional students, with high costs, low perceived ability to pay, and a
lack of information about the returns to degree completion also contributing to the high dropout
rate.
12
13
The importance of college readiness underscores the value of high-quality K-12 schooling.  But,
research indicates that fewer than half of five-year-olds from low-income families possess the
math and reading skills, behaviors, and overall health required for learning success, compared to
75 percent of children from middle- and high-income families.
 These differences are important
because  they  have  long-lasting  effects  on  academic  achievement  and  future  careers.    A
substantial body of evidence, including research by economists at the Minneapolis Fed, points to
very  large  economic  returns  to  high-quality  preschool  and  early-childhood  development
programs.
  Clearly, such programs can play an important role in improving economic mobility. 
14
15
I benefited from nursery school and kindergarten and a mother who taught me to read before I
entered  elementary  school.    And,  when  my  junior  high  school  tried  to  move  me  out  of  an
accelerated math program, my mom intervened and got me back in. 
Paying for college is another major impediment to college attendance and completion.  While
college  is  generally  a  good  investment,  it  has  become  increasingly  expensive  over  the  last
several  decades  to  attend  a  four-year  program,  as  costs  have  risen  considerably  faster  than
wages—especially wages for all but the very top of the income distribution.  This means that
college has become increasingly unaffordable for those families who need it most, if we are to
increase social and economic mobility.  Of course, one result of the increasing unaffordability of
college education is that fewer people get a college degree, which could help account for the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
slowdown  in  the  growth  rate  of  the  college-educated  workforce  that  I  discussed  earlier.
 However, recent research by my colleagues at the New York Fed shows that young Americans
have mostly adjusted to rising tuition and fees not by foregoing college education, but rather by
amassing more debt.  
Over the past few decades, funding for higher education has shifted from state and local sources
to  students  and  their  families.  While  the  federal  student  loan  program  has  helped  ease  that
transition,  the  result  has  been  that  more  students  are  leaving  college  with  significantly  higher
amounts of debt.  In fact, student loan debt has grown 170 percent over the last decade and now
totals over $1.3 trillion.
16
 
To be clear, I don’t want to downplay the importance of student loans. When accompanied by
college completion, they allow students to make what generally turns out to be a very worthwhile
investment.    I  personally  benefited  from  student  loans  while  at  Berkeley.    But,  compared  to
alternative ways of financing higher education—such as greater government support for public
universities  and  increased  federal  education  grants—student  loans  can  have  adverse
consequences.  This is especially true when loans are taken on by those who don’t complete
their education.  For borrowers with large student loan balances, such consequences include
slow or late repayment, serious delinquency, and default.
  New York Fed researchers have
shown  that  such  unfavorable  outcomes  are  related  to  family  background.    Thus,  at  times,
student loans can have the perverse effect of limiting social mobility.
17
In addition, our research indicates that, for any given level of educational attainment, workers who
have  student  debts  are  less  likely  to  own  homes  than  those  who  got  their  education  without
incurring debts.  Certainly, for those who have difficulty repaying their student loans, the resulting
damage to credit scores will make obtaining a mortgage very difficult, especially under today’s
lending standards.  A student loan default, which is unhappily common, means that borrowing to
buy  a  home  is  essentially  impossible.    And,  we  know  that  these  factors—slow  repayment,
delinquency, and default—are most prevalent among those from modest family circumstances.
This  connection  between  rising  college  costs,  increased  student  borrowing,  and  reduced
homeownership is important for inequality and social mobility because, for the great majority of
American families, increasing home equity is the major form of wealth accumulation.
  Thus,
changes over the last few decades in the way that college is financed mean higher education is
less able to lift people from poverty into the middle class.
18
I  should  note  here  that  economic  education  has  an  important  role  to  play  in  mitigating  these
challenges,  which  increasingly  arise  as  debt  becomes  a  more  common  part  of  the  college
experience.    For  example,  financial  literacy  and  the  skills  taught  by  educators  have  been
demonstrated to better prepare young people for the management of their finances, enhancing
their well-being.  Financial literacy allows people to better understand the terms of student loans
and the consequences of missed payments, and how to accumulate wealth.
  I strongly support
the CEE’s efforts to bring economic knowledge to young people, as I believe that it is increasingly
vital for everyone, and has an especially important role in fostering social and economic mobility.
19
Other factors that can foster or inhibit social mobility are the practices of universities themselves.
 In some very recent work, Raj Chetty and his co-authors have documented the role that different
universities  play  in  fostering  economic  mobility.
    From  my  perspective,  the  most  important
findings are that access to the best universities is very closely related to parent income—children
from  wealthier  families  are  more  likely  to  go  to  Ivy  League  schools,  for  example.    Yet,  those
students from poorer families who actually are admitted to the best universities do just as well in
their future earnings as those from more advantaged backgrounds.
20
Part of the problem, aside from cost, is the legacy admission policies of elite schools—where
children  of  alumni  receive  preferential  access.    This  is  patently  unfair,  and  scrapping  such
21 
5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
policies would help increase economic mobility.
I really don’t see how our best universities can
continue to justify this practice.  Yes, fund-raising might suffer slightly over time—but I suspect
the  impact  would  be  very  small.    More  importantly,  do  we  really  want  to  encourage  what  is
essentially  a  “donate  to  admit”  policy  at  our  major  universities?    Such  an  approach  only
preserves the status quo and constrains economic mobility.
21
The  research  shows  that  upward  mobility  differs  substantially  across  colleges.    Ivy  League
schools are good at producing top earners, but, as I noted, they accept very few lower-income
students,  so  their  impact  on  income  mobility  is  small.    Meanwhile,  other  schools  with
economically  diverse  student  bodies  produce  few  high  earners,  and  their  impact  is  likewise
small. Then there are certain schools—some of which can be found in the CUNY and California
state  systems—that  manage  to  produce  a  large  number  of  high  earners  from  economically
diverse student bodies.  Learning exactly how they do it and how it can be replicated strikes me
as a first-order question for further study.
While I am distressed by the high and increasing levels of inequality and diminished mobility that
our economy has delivered over the last several decades, I remain optimistic about the future.
 There is more attention now to inequality and low intergenerational mobility than I can recall at
any time during my professional life.  Organizations like the CEE and the National Association of
Economic  Educators  exist  to  improve  awareness  of  economic  concepts.    This  enhances  the
ability  of  young  people  to  make  better  financial  decisions  and  helps  to  close  the  gaps  in
knowledge that contribute to inequality.  Top-tier researchers in both academia and the Federal
Reserve System are focusing their attention on the causes, consequences, and solutions of this
social problem, using better data, methods, and means of communicating their results.  Even
more  importantly,  policymakers  are  also  paying  close  attention.    Ultimately,  I  believe  we  will
identify and implement policies that can make the dream of a better life a reality for more of our
fellow citizens.
Thank you again for your kind attention. I would be happy to take your questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Gerard Dages, Jack Gutt, Andrew Haughwout, Anand Marri, and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing
these remarks.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary Policy Report – July 2017, July 7, 2017.
See William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Regional Economy, August 10, 2017.
See the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on Wage Inequality in the Region, August 10, 2017.
Pew Research Center, Global Publics More Upbeat About the Economy, June 5, 2017.
Corak,  2013.  “Income  Inequality,  Equality  of  Opportunity,  and  Intergenerational  Mobility.”  The  Journal  of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 27, no. 3 (Summer). 79–102.
Goldin and Katz, 2007. Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure: Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing. NBER
Working Paper No. 13568 (November, revised December).
OECD, 2015. Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators, OECD Publishing. p. 78.
Wiswall and Zafar, 2011. Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an Information Experiment.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 500 (June; revised August 2014).
Bleemer and Zafar, 2015. Intended College Attendance: Evidence from an Experiment on College Returns and
Costs. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 739 (September).
Wiswall and Zafar, 2015. “How Do College Students Respond to Public Information about Earnings?” Journal of
Human Capital, vol. 9, no. 2 (Summer). 117–169.
Chen,  2016. Remedial  Coursetaking  at  U.S.  Public  2-  and  4-Year  Institutions:  Scope,  Experiences,  and
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Outcomes (NCES 2016–405). U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for Education
Statistics.
Shapiro, Dundar, Khasiala, Yuan, Nathan, and Hwang, 2015. Completing College: A National View of Student
Attainment Rates – Fall 2009 Cohort (Signature Report No. 10). Herndon, VA: National Student Clearinghouse
Research Center (November).
Isaacs, 2012. Starting School at a Disadvantage: The School Readiness of Poor Children. Brookings Institution
Center on Children and Families (March).
Wat,  2010. The Case for Pre-K in Education Reform. A Summary of Program Evaluation Findings . The Pew
Center on the States (April).Grunewald and Rolnick, 2010. An Early Childhood Investment with a High Public
Return. The Regional Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (July).
See  the  New  York  Fed’s Economic  Press  Briefing  on  Household  Borrowing,  Student  Debt  Trends  and
Homeownership, April 3, 2017.
For example, the default rate for students from relatively modest backgrounds is around 35 percent, 2-3 times
that of those from wealthier backgrounds. See Press Briefing on Household Debt, with Focus on Student Debt,
p.26.
Bleemer,  Brown,  Lee,  Strair,  and  van  der  Klaauw,  2017.  Echoes  of  Rising  Tuition  in  Students’  Borrowing,
Educational Attainment, and Homeownership in Post-Recession America. Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Reports, no. 820 (July). Tracy, Schneider, and Chan, 1999. Are Stocks Overtaking Real Estate in Household
Portfolios? Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 5, no. 5 (April).
Zafar,  Bleemer,  Brown,  and  van  der  Klaauw,  2014.  What  Americans  (Don’t)  Know  about  Student  Loan
Collections. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (June 5).
Chetty,  Friedman,  Saez,  Turner,  and  Yagan,  2017.  Mobility  Report  Cards:  The  Role  of  Colleges  in
Intergenerational Mobility. NBER Working Paper No. 23618 (July).
See Richard Reeves, Dream Hoarders (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2017).
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
