Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  14  December
2017.
Introductory statement
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which  was  also  attended  by  the  President  of  the  Eurogroup,  Mr  Dijsselbloem,  and  by  the
Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels for an
extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that from January 2018 we
intend to continue to make net asset purchases under the asset purchase programme (APP), at
a monthly pace of €30 billion, until the end of September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and in
any  case  until  the  Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation
consistent with its inflation aim. If the outlook becomes less favourable, or if financial conditions
become  inconsistent  with  further  progress  towards  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of
inflation, we stand ready to increase the APP in terms of size and/or duration. The Eurosystem
will reinvest the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the APP for an
extended period of time after the end of its net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as
necessary.  This  will  contribute  both  to  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  to  an  appropriate
monetary policy stance.
Our monetary policy decisions have preserved the very favourable financing conditions that are
still needed for a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to,
2%.  The  incoming  information,  including  our  new  staff  projections,  indicates  a  strong  pace  of
economic  expansion  and  a  significant  improvement  in  the  growth  outlook.  The  strong  cyclical
momentum and the significant reduction of economic slack give grounds for greater confidence
that inflation will converge towards our inflation aim. At the same time, domestic price pressures
remain muted overall and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend. An
ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  therefore  remains  necessary  for  underlying  inflation
pressures to continue to build up and support headline inflation developments over the medium
term. This continued monetary support is provided by the additional net asset purchases that we
decided on at our October monetary policy meeting, by the sizeable stock of acquired assets
and the forthcoming reinvestments, and by our forward guidance on interest rates.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. The
economic  expansion  in  the  euro  area  continued  in  the  third  quarter  of  2017,  when  real  GDP
increased  by  0.6%  quarter  on  quarter,  after  0.7%  in  the  second  quarter.  The  latest  data  and
survey  results  point  to  solid  and  broad-based  growth  momentum.  Our  monetary  policy
measures,  which  have  facilitated  the  deleveraging  process,  continue  to  support  domestic
demand.  Private  consumption  is  underpinned  by  ongoing  employment  gains,  which  are  also
benefiting  from  past  labour  market  reforms,  and  by  rising  household  wealth.  Business
investment  continues  to  strengthen  on  the  back  of  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  rising
corporate profitability and strengthening demand. Housing investment has also risen further over
recent quarters. In addition, euro area exports are being supported by the broad-based global
expansion.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This assessment is broadly reflected in the December 2017 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 2.4% in
2017, 2.3% in 2018, 1.9% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020. Compared with the September 2017 ECB
staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  has  been  revised  up
substantially.
Risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain broadly balanced. On the one hand, the
strong  cyclical  momentum,  underpinned  by  continued  positive  developments  in  sentiment
indicators, could lead to further positive growth surprises in the near term. On the other hand,
downside  risks  continue  to  relate  primarily  to  global  factors  and  developments  in  foreign
exchange markets.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.5% in November,
up from 1.4% in October. At the same time, measures of underlying inflation have moderated
somewhat  recently,  in  part  owing  to  special  factors.  Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current
futures  prices  for  oil,  annual  rates  of  headline  inflation  are  likely  to  moderate  in  the  coming
months,  mainly  reflecting  base  effects  in  energy  prices,  before  increasing  again.  Underlying
inflation is expected to rise gradually over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy
measures, the continuing economic expansion, the corresponding absorption of economic slack
and rising wage growth.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  December  2017  Eurosystem  staff
macroeconomic projections for the  euro  area,  which  foresee  annual  HICP  inflation  at  1.5%  in
2017, 1.4% in 2018, 1.5% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020. Compared with the September 2017 ECB
staff macroeconomic projections, the outlook for headline HICP inflation has been revised up,
mainly reflecting higher oil and food prices.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an annual rate of growth of 5.0% in October 2017, from 5.2% in September, reflecting the impact
of the ECB’s monetary policy measures and the low opportunity cost of holding the most liquid
deposits. Accordingly, the narrow monetary aggregate M1 continued to be the main contributor to
broad money growth, expanding at an annual rate of 9.4% in October, after 9.8% in September.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 2.9% in
October  2017,  after  2.4%  in  September,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households
remained stable at 2.7%.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  ‒
notably for small and medium-sized enterprises ‒ and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from 
for  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but
close to, 2%.
the  monetary  analysis  confirmed 
the  need 
the 
to  strengthening 
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  decisively 
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing
vulnerabilities. The implementation of structural reforms in all euro area countries needs to be
substantially stepped up to increase resilience, reduce structural unemployment and boost euro
area  productivity  and  growth  potential.  Regarding fiscal  policies,  the  increasingly  solid  and
broad-based  expansion  strengthens  the  case  for  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers.  This  is  particularly
important  in  countries  where  government  debt  remains  high. All  countries  would  benefit  from
intensifying efforts towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances. A
full,  transparent  and  consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  over  time  and  across  countries  remains  essential  to
increase the resilience of the euro area economy. Strengthening Economic and Monetary Union
remains a priority. The Governing Council welcomes the ongoing discussions on completing the
banking  union  and  the  capital  markets  union,  and  on  further  enhancing  the  institutional
architecture of our Economic and Monetary Union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
