Zhou  Xiaochuan:  The  opening-up  of  Chinese  economy  -  from
manufacturing industry to service industry
Keynote speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People's Bank of China, at the 2017
Lujiazui Forum "Financial reform and steady development from a global perspective", Shanghai,
21 June 2017.
 Distinguished guests,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Good  morning!  It’s  a  pleasure  to  attend  the  2017  Lujiazui  Forum.  China  has  built  a  socialist
market  economy  to  promote  social  and  economic  progress  and  reach  prosperity  through
competition  and  optimal  resource  allocation.  During  this  process,  opening-up  has  played  a
significant role. I’d like to share my understandings of opening-up based on relevant international
and domestic experiences.
1. The opening up of manufacturing industry turned China into a world factory
The manufacturing industry of China opened up relatively early.  There were different opinions on
opening  in  the  early  days,  but  it  was  relatively  easy  to  reach  a  consensus.  This  made  the
manufacturing industry an adequately opened industry. An observation on the opening-up of the
manufacturing  industry  showed  that  most  industries  which  participated  in  opening-up  and
competition  early  grew  faster  and  became  stronger  eventually.  Opening-up  is  a  process  of
optimizing the resource allocation by market force and competition mechanism.
Specifically,  in  terms  of  bringing  in  foreign  capital，we  opened  up  via  importing  foreign
products  and  inviting  foreign  companies  to  invest  and  build  factories  in  China,  which  in  turn
competed with domestic companies. Before reform and opening-up, Chinese companies had no
foreign competition and only little domestic competition. The pressure of competition has driven
industrial firms to make great progress.
In  terms  of  going  global,  domestic  firms  compete  with  global  players  via  export  and  doing
business internationally. At the beginning, Chinese companies rarely participated in international
competition and only exported commodity related products. In the 1980s, very few believed that
Chinese  manufacturing  products  export  could  have  a  bright  future. As  a  result  of  opening-up,
both processing trade products and manufactured products were able to compete globally and
domestic firms started to go abroad. Instead of losing the competition, Chinese manufacturing
industry  and  Chinese 
leading
manufacturing  country  and  gained  the  reputation  of  world  factory.  Many  industries  have  been
moving to the higher end of global value chain.
fast  growth.  China  became  a 
firms  experienced 
It is competition that breaks up monopolies. There was a less competitive environment in China,
especially among the foreign trade enterprises. Foreign trade companies, including Sinochem,
China  Minmetal,  COFCO  and  etc.  were  divided  by  sub-industries,  such  as  agricultural  and
animal husbandry, textile, light industry, machinery, and so on. They were in charge of import and
export  of  their  respective  sub-industry  and  adopted  different  financial  rules.  There  was  no
competition among the companies. In order to attract foreign investment, China introduced the
first  Sino-foreign  joint  venture  Law  in  1979,  after  which  domestic  companies  competed  from
foreign companies and industry segmentation and monopolies began to fall apart.
Competition  has  driven  the  SOEs  to  make  great  progress.  Industries  with  more  sufficient
opening-up and fiercer competition have developed more rapidly. The manufacturing industry has
flourished.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Opening-up has promoted domestic policy reform
The  opening-up  has  strongly  impacted  the  traditional  centrally  planned  policy  making  system,
and triggered a series of major domestic reforms, including pricing system reform, value-added
tax reform, export tax refund reform, market-based exchange rate regime reform, and negotiation
for accession to GATT and WTO. In the early 1980s, in order to attract foreign investment, the
domestic  policy  system  must  move  more  closer  toward  the  market  rules  and  provide  a  level
playing field. Subsequent consideration was to make sure Chinese enterprises compete fairly in
the international market.
Fair  competition  and  opening-up  are  inter-connected.  It  involves  not  only  competition  between
Chinese  and  foreign-funded  companies,  but  also  equal  and  adequate  competition  among
Chinese  companies.  Opening-up  accelerated  the  access  of  domestic  private  capital,  and
subsequently brought in the concept of national treatment. Market access criteria should be the
same for domestic and foreign-funded companies. The opening-up facilitated three major policy
reforms,  i.e.,  trade  and  investment  liberalization,  market-based  exchange  rate  regime  reform,
easing  of  exchange  control,  including  lowering  the  market  access  threshold.  As  a  result,
 competition and market gradually became generally applicable policy mechanism.
3. Service industry has opened up in a similar process
In the past, economists treated the service industry as a non-tradable industry. However, with the
rapid  progress  of  information  technology,  transportation  and  globalization,  many  services
became  tradable.  People  began  to  say  that  “the  world  is  flat”.  The  opening-up  of  the  service
industry in China followed a similar pattern of the manufacturing industry: opening-up brought in
competition, boosted efficiency and quality of service, and facilitated domestic policy reform.
In the industrial field, the market competition rules are not applicable to a very small number of
industries such as defense industry, but most industries can open up and bring in competition. In
the  service  sector,  there  are  also  sensitive  industries,  and  some  services  can’t  be  delivered
across  the  border.  Thus,  the  market  mechanism  cannot  cover  all  of  them.  But  most  other
service  industries  can  open  up.  The  understandings  of  service  industry  opening-up  and  the
necessary  policy  reform  followed  a  similar  process  like  that  of  manufacturing  industry.  The
opening up to foreign capital started in industries such as hotels, restaurants, transportation, and
etc., and expanded to other service industries. In terms of Chinese services going global, the
export products and their after-sale service of industrial companies were the first, followed by
banking,  insurance,  medical,  shipping,  tourism,  software,  retail,  payment,  cultural  services,
and etc. Shanghai’s shipping industry is a typical example.
4. The experience of regional pilot programs has enhanced the confidence in opening-
up
In the early days, decisions were made to open up and develop four special economic zones,
and there were different opinions at that time. Later on, the successful experiences of special
economic  zones  were  introduced  to  other  places.  There  were  also  different  opinions
regarding China's accession to the WTO, but fact has proved that the WTO membership had a
profound and positive influence on China. The government advanced the experiment of Shanghai
Free  Trade  Zone  (FTZs)  after  the  new  leadership  took  office.  There  are  11  FTZs  now.  Many
experiences from the FTZs have been applied nationwide, the benefits of opening up has been
tangible and well recognized.
5. Financial service sector is a competitive service industry
Finance is an important component of the service industry, as reflected in its weight in the WTO
negotiation  and  in  Chinese  statistical  system’s  classification  of  service  industry.  Finance
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
is regarded by many at the core of any modern economy. In 1993, at the third Plenary Session of
the 14th CPC Central Committee in 1993, the financial industry was described as the lifeline of
country’s economy. I think this can be attributed to the background at that time. First, the financial
sector, especially the banking industry, played a prominent role in resource allocation; second,
with each specializing in one field, there was little competition among the four specialized banks
in  the  banking  industry;  third,  big  financial  institutions  still  undertook  policy-related  businesses
and were not operating fully on a market-basis; fourth, the absence of stability in the financial
sector might trigger major chaos. Would this affect the market nature of the financial industry? Is
financial industry a competitive service industry?
In  1990s,  according  to  the  50  articles  specified  in  the  third  Plenary  Session  of  the  14th  CPC
Central  Committee,  the  policy  functions  were  split  from  specialized  banks  and  formed
independent bodies; four specialized banks were turned into full service commercial banks in the
competitive market. The Third Plenary Session of the 18th CPC Central Committee has made it
clear  that  the  market  would  play  a  decisive  role  in  resource  allocation,  meaning  all  important
functions  should  adopt  a  market  approach.  We  have  learned  the  lessons  from  the
global economic crisis that, to prevent financial crisis, we should first guarantee the healthiness
of financial institutions, and never tolerate high leverage, low capital adequacy and large chunks
of non-performing loans. When an environment is not open and competitive, it tends to tolerate
low standards. Thus, the attribute of financial service industry as a competitive service industry in
the market economy is obvious.
According  to  global  experiences,  most  financial  industries  are  competitive  service  industries.
When  foreign  banks  were  first  introduced  into  China,  the  initial  aim  was  to    bring  in  foreign
capital. Looking back, domestic commercial banks have learnt a lot from competition, resulting in
a  series  of  changes  in  the  financial  industry,  including  product  evolution,  market  building,
business models, management experience, and etc. Later, competitive joint stock reform and
listing have elevated the operation efficiency, asset quality and governance of Chinese banks.
The  entry  of  foreign-funded  banks  also  exerted  reform  pressure  on  domestic  policy  reform,
including accounting standards, supervisory standards, replacing business tax with value-added
tax, and etc.
For  consideration  of  their  own  interests,  some  individuals  advocated  protecting  the  financial
industry  to  enable  it  to  grow  stronger  before  opening  up  the  market,  and  then  allowing  these
banks  to  participate  in  international  competition.  Experiences  from  many  countries  (including
China’s own experience) show that protection tend to create problems such as laziness, soft
financial  constraint,  rent-seeking,  and  etc.,  damage  the  competitiveness  and  the  industry’s
development,  and  the  market  and  institutions  end  up  becoming  unhealthy  and  instable.  One
example is what happened before and after the Asian financial crisis.
Nowadays,  many  Chinese  financial  institutions  have  gone  global  and  adapted  to  international
competition. Their risk management, pricing and anti-money-laundering have had gone through
substantive changes. Today, five Chinese financial institutions have become global systemically
important financial institutions and operate soundly on a commercial basis with adequate capital.
The  sound  development  of  China’s  financial  market  has  attracted  attention  of  agencies  that
compile international bond and emerging market stocks indices.  These all show that financial
service  industry,  as  a  competitive  service  industry,  has  benefited  from  opening-up  and  needs
further opening-up.
6. The Belt and Road Initiative provides new opportunities for financial sector opening-
up in China
Given the positive reaction China received after the introduction of the Belt and Road Initiative,
various Government ministries has pushed the implementation of relative policies. The initiative
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
is  an  approach  to  opening-up  and  involves  many  new  patterns  of  financial  cooperation  which
requires  further  opening-up.  It  will  also  provide  new  opportunities  for  China's  financial  sector
opening-up and international cooperation.
Development finance can play a positive role in the initiative. China has explored the development
finance as a financial model to better serve national strategies. It operates independently and is
based on market principles. The model emphasizes long term investment and relies on credit
support instead of government subsidy. It only requires marginal profits with principal protection
which is also financially sustainable. This model can play a greater and more active role in the
initiative and will help avoid various problems, such as the crowding out effect, moral hazard and
market  distortion.  The  construction  of  the  Belt  and  Road  could  provide  extra  room  of
development  to  financial  institutions,  for  them  to  open  offshore  branches  and  provide  better
financial services for trade, investment and capital management.
In  short,  looking  back  at  the  reform  experience  at  home  and  abroad,  we  have  a  better
understanding of and stronger confidence in opening up and are determined to continue opening-
up.    Based  on  the  opening-up  experiences  of  both  manufacturing  and  service  industry,  it  is
reasonable to conclude that the rule of competition and opening up also apply to the financial
sector. The financial sector is no exception. In the process of the opening-up, competition will
bring  pressure,  motivation,  progress  and  prosperity,  and  financial  industry  will  have  a  brighter
future.
I  am  confident  that  with  support  and  concerted  effort,  China's  opening-up  will  move  to  a  new
level,  the  experiment  of  SFT  and  its  experiences  will  spread  more  widely,  and  Shanghai  will
make new achievements in building an International Financial Center.
Thank you all.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
