Kevin Stiroh: Misconduct risk, culture and supervision
Remarks  by  Mr  Kevin  Stiroh,  Executive  Vice  President  of  the  Financial  Institution  Supervision
Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Culture  Roundtable  Session  with
Business  Schools  and  Financial  Services  Industry,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  New
York City, 7 December 2017.
Good morning everyone.
 Thank  you  for  joining  us  at  the  New  York  Fed  today  and  for  your  ongoing  participation  in  the
important discussion around culture and ethics in the financial services sector. This workshop
and discussion are a critical part of our ongoing collective efforts on promoting financial industry
culture reform. Business schools serve as a major supply source of the talent pool for mid-level
management  positions  in  the  industry.  This  relationship  makes  aligning  business  education
curricula  and  pedagogy  with  demands  around  improving  industry  culture  a  mutually  beneficial
strategy.
While your conversation today has focused on the role of academia and industry, I want to take
this opportunity to share with you how I’ve been thinking about the role of bank supervisors in the
culture  reform  dialogue.  I  am  the  head  of  the  Supervision  Group  of  New  York  Fed,  but  my
perspective and approach are influenced by my background and training as an economist. You’ll
hear  me  talk  about  frictions  and  market  failures;  about  production  processes  and  intangible
capital; and the conceptual rationale for a role for the official sector.
There  are,  of  course,  multiple  ways  to  consider  the  relationship  between  culture  and  bank
supervision. I hope my remarks, which are based on a whitepaper we published earlier today, will
offer a complementary perspective to the type of work already underway by other supervisors
and regulators, including the UK regulators (FCA and PRA), the Australian Prudential Regulation
Authority  (APRA),  DeNederlandsche  Bank  (DNB),  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary Authority  (HKMA),
and  other  institutions  like  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the  Group  of  Thirty  (G30).  I  am
focusing my remarks today specifically on “misconduct risk,” but the conceptual arguments and
framework apply more broadly to financial sector risk management in general.
Please note that the views I express today are my own and they do not necessarily reflect those
1
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.
Misconduct Risk
A  primary  goal  of  bank  regulators  and  supervisors  is  to  support  the  sustained  provision  of
financial services to households and businesses in a fair and transparent way. In order to do this,
we examine financial institutions, individually and collectively. We assess safety and soundness
to  ensure  firms  have  the  appropriate  risk  identification  and  risk  management  processes  for
prudent banking. We hold them to standards that require them to be resilient to a broad range of
potential risks such as credit, market, liquidity, and operational risk.
One specific risk is employee “misconduct risk.” We define this as the potential for behaviors or
business practices that are illegal, unethical, or contrary to a firm’s stated values, policies, and
procedures. The impact of employee misconduct extends beyond the individual and can impact
the  firm  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  the  economy  and  financial  markets  more  broadly.  That  is,
misconduct risk has both prudential and financial stability implications.
For a firm, employee misconduct can make it less resilient by diverting management attention,
by harming the firm’s reputation in a way that impedes its business, by driving adverse change in
the composition of the workforce, or by depleting its capital through losses or fines. Since 2008,
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  example,  firms  have  paid,  in  aggregate,  in  excess  of  $320  billion  in  fines  related  to
2
misconduct.
For  the  broader  economy  and  financial  markets,  misconduct  can  inflict  harm  directly  on
consumers and employees. In addition, over time, market participants may lose confidence in
the  financial  sector  as  a  whole  and  adversely  impact  the  sector’s  critical  role  in  financial
intermediation.  In  2016,  for  example,  Gallup  found  that  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  had
3
fallen by half over the previous decade.
These  incidents  of  misconduct  can  introduce  frictions  and  raise  the  cost  of  financial
intermediation, which in turn, reduces the flow of productive financial services. These sorts of
external effects that spill over to other firms, consumers, and businesses are a critical rationale
for official sector intervention related to employee misconduct.
In the U.S., official sector concern with the damage inflicted by employee misconduct dates back
to  the  Banking  Act  of  1933.   More  recently,  supervisors  have  traditionally  addressed  firm’s
management of misconduct risk by assessing the effectiveness of firms’ risk management and
internal control functions, such as compliance and audit. Yet, despite regulations, supervisory
focus,  and  firms’  own  efforts,  significant  misconduct  risk  and  bad  outcomes  continue.  Why?
What explains this persistence?
4
One hypothesis is that recent problems are just a stream of idiosyncratic events, random draws
of  “bad  apples.”  Another  hypothesis  is  that  some  firms  have  operational  weaknesses,  “bad
processes,” that allow these outcomes to occur. I don’t believe, however, that either of these
hypotheses tells the whole story.
Root cause analyses of many recent cases of misconduct in the financial sector suggest that
misconduct is not just the product of a few individuals or bad processes, but rather the result of
wider organizational breakdowns, enabled by a firm’s culture. From both a prudential perspective
and a financial stability perspective, misconduct risk threatens our core supervisory objective to
sustain  the  efficient  provision  of  financial  services  to  the  economy.  This  suggests  that
supervisors have an obligation to promote strong internal practices and behaviors that mitigate
misconduct risk and create a healthy culture.
Misconduct Risk and Cultural Capital
One way to think about this is “cultural capital.”  A firm’s cultural capital is a type of asset that
impacts  what  a  firm  produces  and  how  it  operates.  It  is  analogous  to physical  capital,  like
equipment,  buildings  and  property,  or  to human capital,  like  the  accumulated  knowledge  and
skills of workers,  or reputational capital, like the franchise value or brand recognition.  Cultural
capital is an input into a firm’s production process—impacting how it does its business.
6
7
5
Cultural capital is an intangible asset. That is, we generally experience the impact rather than the
thing itself—but its impact can be measured, assessed, and ultimately influenced. For example,
in  an  organization  with  a  high  level  of  cultural  capital,  misconduct  risk  is  low  and  observed
structures,  processes,  formal  incentives,  and  desired  business  outcomes  are  consistent  with
the firm’s stated values. The unspoken patterns of behavior reinforce this alignment. Problems
are escalated to senior managers routinely, as employees feel empowered to raise their hand
and  believe  that  their  efforts  will  result  in  meaningful  responses. And  senior  leaders  advance
through the organization because, in addition to strong business performance, they set a credible
tone from above by modeling behaviors consistent with the firm’s values.
By contrast, consider some characteristics of an organization with low levels of cultural capital.
In these firms, formal policies and procedures do not reflect “the way things are really done.” The
stated values of the organization are not reflected in senior leader behaviors and actions of the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
organization’s  members,  and  misconduct  results  from  norms  and  pressures  that  drive
individuals to make decisions that are not aligned with the values, business strategies, and risk
appetite set by the board and senior leaders. Employees do not speak freely when they have
concerns, and senior managers or the board of directors do not find out about improper conduct
until it is uncovered by the authorities. Rules may be followed to the letter, but not in spirit. All of
this increases misconduct risk and potentially damages the firm and the industry over time.
Like other forms of tangible and intangible capital, firms must invest or its capital will deteriorate
over time and adversely impact the firm’s productive capacity. To be clear, cultural capital is not
loss  absorbing  like  equity  capital,  but  it  can  be  loss  preventing  by  influencing  decisions,
behaviors, and outcomes over time.
Market Failures and Misconduct Risk
If this is the case and misconduct risk is bad for the firm, some obvious questions follow: Why
don’t  firms  invest  in  cultural  capital  and  reduce  the  risk  themselves?  Why  do  regulators  and
supervisors need to get involved?
I believe firms are ultimately responsible for these decisions and we do observe progress. Many
large financial firms have increased their attention to misconduct risk and cultural drivers in the
wake of serious frauds and enforcement actions over the past several years. But, the degree of
commitment and progress in these efforts has not been even across the industry and serious or
persistent misconduct continues in some firms.
So,  why  wouldn’t  a  firm  do  more?  One  can  turn  to  traditional  economic  theory  to  offer  an
explanation for why a firm might underinvest in cultural capital. Firms may operate with levels of
cultural capital beneath both the social optimum and even the private optimum due to different
types  of  market  failures.  Today  I  will  consider  three  well-known  phenomenon—externalities,
principal-agent problems, and adverse selection—that may explain why misconduct risk persists
and why firms might underinvest in cultural capital relative to what might be socially optimal.
Externalities
Externalities are the impact that one actor has on other, unrelated actors. Externalities can drive
a wedge between private and socially optimally outcomes and, from a supervisors’ perspective,
lead firms to underinvest in their own resiliency by ignoring the broader impact of bad outcomes
on the financial sector and the real economy.
In other contexts like environmental policy, externalities such as pollution motivate government
intervention. In banking regulation, externalities are the conceptual driver behind the enhanced
prudential standards for capital, liquidity, and risk management that are currently applied to the
8
largest, most systemically important financial institutions.
Principal-agent problems
Principal-agent problems reflect incentives for employees to act in ways that don’t align with the
broader  interests  of  management  or  shareholders.  This  can  lead  to  excessive  risk-taking,
underinvestment  in  risk-reduction  and  risk-control  mechanisms,  and  a  focus  on  short-term
returns at the cost of long-run viability. Think about the trader who is compensated on short-term
P&L and not long-term value creation.
These  issues  can  be  amplified  by  the  opacity  intrinsic  to  many  financial  activities  that  allows
misconduct to persist and erodes the cultural capital of the firm.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Adverse selection
Adverse selection occurs when those particularly ill-suited for something are the most likely to
participate. This could be a complicating factor in this context if conduct-related events change
the composition of a firm’s workforce. Firms with relatively low cultural capital (and a relatively
high tolerance of misconduct risk) may attract and retain employees and clients more inclined to
take  inappropriate  risks  and  push  beyond  internal  limits  and  controls.  Further,  high-quality
directors, executives, and employees might leave such firms or decline to join them, depleting
the firm’s human capital and contributing to the deterioration of cultural capital.
Role of the Official Sector
These  are  some  of  the  types  of  market  failures  that  may  explain  why  a  firm  might  not  invest
enough in its cultural capital to mitigate risks, including misconduct risk. And they suggest a role
for  the  official  sector  to  encourage  resiliency,  including  investment  in  cultural  capital,  beyond
what the firm would choose to do on its own. That is, if firms don’t have sufficient incentives to
overcome these forces, then the official sector should push toward a better outcome.
In  the  case  of  misconduct  risk,  supervision  seems  like  a  particularly  appropriate  approach
because  the  hard-to-define  and  evolving  nature  of  behavior  likely  prevents  easy  regulatory
solutions.   Though  some  rule-writing  could  help  re-align  incentives,  misconduct  risk  can  take
many different forms and, by its nature, seek to circumvent the rules.
9
Essential drivers of culture and of misconduct risk, for example, relate to leadership and “tone
from  above,”  areas  that  are  inherently  behavioral  and  qualitative  in  nature.  Supervisors  can
assess behaviors in an ongoing manner and help to identify potential risks.
10
I’ll note that the need for a supervisory focus on employee misconduct and its underlying drivers
dates back one and a half centuries to the origins of bank supervision. Then, in the U.S., the
emphasis  was  on  the  “responsibility  and  integrity”  of  bank  managers  and  directors  and  its
relationship “to public confidence.”
 Part of the role of supervisors is to close gaps in the rules
to advance safe and sound banking practices that support the sustained provision of financial
services. Issues like misconduct risk and culture likely fall in these gaps because they involve the
attitudes, norms, and behaviors and suggest a critical role for supervisors in addressing these
risks.
Conclusion
11
To  conclude,  misconduct  risk  poses  clear  threats  to  both  prudential  and  financial  stability
objectives. The work supervisors do to address misconduct challenges is critical because there
are limits to the regulatory or deterrence and enforcement approach. To understand how a firm
manages  misconduct  risk  and  to  improve  resiliency  and  reduce  the  potential  for  unwanted
disruptions  to  financial  intermediation,  we  must  increase  our  focus  on  firms’  decision-making
practices and behaviors as a core aspect of good governance. We can draw from the growing
literature about the root  causes  of  misconduct  and  the  underlying  factors  that  drive  unhealthy
cultures to support this goal.
However,  as  I  am  sure  you  already  appreciate,  addressing  culture  reform  across  an  entire
industry is a complex challenge and there is no one action or approach that will fully address it.
We  all  must  be  willing  to  work  at  this  from  our  various  vantage  points,  as  supervisors,  as
academics, and as industry participants. As you reflect on the conversations you have had today,
the  points  that  were  raised,  and  the  potential  paths  forward,  I  encourage  you  to  consider  the
important  role  you  each  play  and  the  potential  impact  we,  collectively,  can  have  by  working
together toward the ultimate goal of ensuring a safe and sound financial system that supports
economic growth and stability.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
These  remarks  are  based  on  a  whitepaper: Misconduct Risk, Culture, and Supervision.    I  thank  Stephanie
Chaly, Jim Hennessy, and Jackie McCormack for help preparing these remarks.
Gavin Finch, “World’s Biggest Banks Fined $321 Billion Since Financial Crisis,” Bloomberg (March 2, 2017).
Gallup, Confidence in Institutions, In Depth: Topics A to Z (June 1-5, 2016).
Banking Act of 1933, Pub. L. 73–66, 48. Stat. 162, Section 30.
The term “cultural capital” has been defined differently in other contexts—i.e., defined as those symbols, skills
and  tastes  a  person  acquires  overtime  from  parents,  institutions  and  surroundings  that  can  be  used  as
resources to achieve mobility in a stratified society.  See Pierre Bourdieu “The Forms of Capital,” Handbook of
Theory of Research for the Sociology of Education (1986).
Gary Becker, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis (1964).
See Thomas Noe, “A Survey of the Economic Theory of Reputation: Its Logic and Limits,” The Oxford Handbook
of Corporate Reputation, Timothy Pollock and Michael Barnett, eds. (July 2012).  See Rebecca Demsetz, Marc
Saidenberg, and Philip Strahan, “Banks with Something to Lose: The Disciplinary Role of Franchise Value,”
Economic Policy Review, 2 (October 1996) and Michael Keeley, “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in
Banking,” American Economic Review, 80(5), 1183–1200.
See “Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions,” Supervision and Regulation Letter
12–17, December 17, 2012.
See  Beverly  Hirtle,  Anna  Kovner  and  Matthew  Plosser, The  Impact  of  Supervision  on  Bank  Performance,
(February 1, 2014)  for more on the distinction between supervision and regulation and the relative effectiveness
of each.
Financial Stability Board, Guidance on Supervisory Interaction with Financial Institutions on Risk Culture (April 7,
2014).
An Act Supplementary to the Act to Incorporate the State Bank of Ohio, and Other Banking Companies, Chapter
299, Laws of the State of Ohio (January 6, 1846).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
