Jon Nicolaisen: Challenges for the payment system
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the
annual conference on payments systems, hosted by Finance Norway, Oslo, 16 November 2017.
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.
Introduction
The payment system is changing along a number of dimensions. These changes will not only
have an impact on the way we make payments, they will most probably also contribute towards
promoting and even accelerating the structural changes we have already seen in the financial
industry.
Today,  I  will  briefly  outline  some  of  the  most  important  challenges  we  are  facing.  We  can
perhaps call the sum effect of these challenges a change programme. For this programme to
succeed,  cooperation  is  necessary,  both  within  the  financial  industry  itself  and  between  the
business community and the authorities. The authorities and the financial industry largely have
coinciding interests. We all share the same aim: that Norway will continue to have an efficient,
robust and modern payment system.
PSD2 and new payment service providers
In  recent  years,  the  EU  has  issued  a  number  of  regulations  which  we  must  adhere  to.  The
revised  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2)  is  particularly  important.  The  purpose  of  PSD2,
together with other regulation, is to secure cheap, modern and efficient payment services. PSD2
will enter into force in the EU in two months’ time. A consultation process has been initiated on
proposals to implement the directive in Norwegian law. In addition, detailed EU guidelines must
be in place before PSD2 can have its intended effect.
PSD2  takes  account  of  two  new  types  of  payment  services:  payment  initiation  and  account
information services.
Payment initiation permits third parties (in addition to customers and customers’ banks) to
initiate payments from customers’ accounts. A third party may, for example, be a company
that offers a payment application for smart phones.
Account information means that third parties gain access to customer account information
and  can  provide  customers  with  aggregated  online  information  for  multiple  payment
accounts.
This  change  separates  ownership  of  the  account  systems  from  the  provision  of  payment
services. This is intended to facilitate innovation and competition for customer services, on top of
the account infrastructure.
Payment initiation and account information may be offered as independent services or as part of
a  wider  array  of  services.  Platform-based  service  providers  in  particular  will  likely  explore  the
possibilities for offering payment services bundled with other services.
PSD2 will, in principle, promote a more efficient payment system. At the same time, we must be
prepared for the possibility that an altered market structure and technological innovation may lead
to  new  vulnerabilities  and  risks.  This  may  necessitate  further  regulations.  Norges  Bank  will
consider measures if they are required. The aim must be the continued existence of a robust and
efficient payment system.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  payment  market  is  characterised  by  network  effects  and  platform  competition.  Global
technology  companies,  such  as  Facebook  Messenger,  Google,  Apple  and  Samsung,  are
relevant  providers  of  payment  services.  These  companies  are  able  to  capitalise  on  their
popularity among users. In the long term, this may adversely affect competition and efficiency,
since it is difficult for other providers to challenge large networks. There is also a danger that the
owners of popular technological platforms could exclude other payment service providers from
offering  services  on  their  platforms.  If  this  proves  to  be  the  case,  this  is  a  matter  for  the
competition authorities.
Under PSD2, also commercial undertakings can seek authorisation as payment initiation service
providers.  Mobile  phone  apps  can  combine  direct  advertising,  loyalty  programmes,  storage  of
receipts with actual payments.
Even  so,  banks  will  play  a  key  role.  Banks  will  also  be  able  to  provide  payment  services  to
persons who do not hold an account with the bank. This may strengthen interbank competition
for payment customers. 
New technology must be used for the good of society. In principle, it is up to the business sector
and  customers  to  find  suitable  methods  of  payment. At  the  same  time,  we  must  ensure  the
security of the payment system. New payment service providers will increase the dissemination
of payment information. This may also increase the risk that payment information gets into the
wrong hands. Vulnerabilities related to accessing, processing and storing information may affect
the  public’s  confidence  in  the  payment  system.  It  may  ultimately  be  appropriate  to  implement
new measures to ensure that this information is processed in a secure manner.
Fast payment solutions
The general public increasingly expects to be able to transfer funds on any day of the week and
outside traditional opening hours. They also expect that payees will be credited quickly. In the
future, there will have to be a good reason not to credit payees immediately, rather than with a
delay, as is the case currently.
This  means  that  the  payment  system  must  meet  new  requirements.  In  Norway,  there  is  a
provisional instant payments solution, which an increasing number of banks are adopting. It is
positive  that  the  solution  is  becoming  more  widely  used,  but  it  has  its  drawbacks.  For  even
though participating banks have entered into a loss-sharing agreement, banks still incur credit
risk before payments are settled and the solution cannot be used for certain types of payments.
Bits and Norges Bank are therefore jointly developing a better solution, called BRO in Norwegian
“Betalinger  med  raskere  oppgjør”  (payments  with  faster  settlement).  BRO  will  be  an  efficient
underlying infrastructure that is intended for all types of payments. The solution will be in place by
the end of 2019.
Norges  Bank  has  initiated  an  in-house  project  to  make  the  necessary  adjustments  to  the
settlement system. The Bank will do its share to enable banks to settle payments to each other
without  incurring  credit  risk.  Customers  will  also  be  able  to  make  instant  payments  in  larger
amounts.
Customer  services  will  also  have  to  be  modified.  Banks  should  take  the  lead  in  making  the
necessary  improvements  so  that  customers  can  benefit  from  better  real-time  payments  as
quickly as possible. Vipps will replace international credit cards with debiting through BankAxept
and instant account-to-account payments as underlying payment instruments, making payments
more efficient. When real time-payments based on BRO replace the current instant payments
solution, in principle, all payments can be made this way, depending on what customers choose.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Mobile payment technology
Mobile  payment  technology  is  evolving.  User-friendly  smartphone  payment  apps  have  spread
rapidly over the past few years. After a preliminary phase with several payment providers, Vipps
now  dominates  the  Norwegian  market.  Vipps  is  established  as  a  separate  company  and  has
many partner banks. 
Today, mobile apps are primarily used when card terminals are not available. In this respect, up
to now, they have been an alternative to cash. Looking ahead, we must expect that their use will
extend  into  new  areas.  Paying  for  online  purchases  is  one  example  and  paying  in  shops  is
another. In addition to apps such as Vipps, it is likely that banks will develop mobile wallets with a
scroll-down menu of payment solutions. The experience of other countries and the introduction of
PSD2 may indicate that international operators may also enter the Norwegian market.
Interoperability  implies  that  payments  can  be  made  even  if  the  payer  and  payee  use  different
banks or user interfaces. It has been challenging to achieve interoperability between mobile apps.
Vipps’  market  dominance  reduces  these  challenges,  but  this  assumes  that  all  market
participants will be connected to the system. This assumption may be too strict. Other payment
service providers and payment solutions will also wish to enter the market on equal terms.
The  alias  registers  are  important  here. An  alias  register  links  account  numbers  to  telephone
numbers and other ways that identify account holders. Today, separate registers are compiled in
each solution. In my opinion, there are clear advantages to having a central register that is used
by all banks and other service providers in the Norwegian payment market. This should be part of
a  common  infrastructure  and  not  be  part  of  private  closed  systems  where  ownership  can
change.
A common register facilitates interoperability and high register quality. The greater the level of
activity  is,  the  more  up-to-date  the  information  is.  We  would  also  then  avoid  contradictory
information in the various registers, which can arise, for example, when customers do not update
their information everywhere at the same time.
Insufficient  register  information  may  be  a  barrier  to  competition.  An  alias  register  shares
similarities  with  a  public  good  that  should  be  organised  as  common  infrastructure  and  be
available to all service providers, for a price, if necessary. Service providers should compete on
other aspects of the services they offer.
I look forward to seeing initiatives from Finance Norway and Bits in this respect. It is often most
appropriate for the industry to arrive at satisfactory solutions on its own.
Cyber security
The  consequences  of  cyberattacks  can  be  considerable.  What  we  are  now  witnessing  is
probably  just  the  beginning.  We  must  find  a  suitable  way  to  mitigate  risk,  without  making  our
systems  needlessly  expensive.  Cyber-security  challenges  are  among  the  most  significant
challenges to our payment system. Without an efficient defence system, trust in the system can
be undermined over time.
For its part, Norges Bank is devoting considerable resources to securing its systems, oversight
of activities and implementing measures to protect against cyber attacks. As part of oversight
and supervision, we will increase our monitoring of cyber-security risks in the payment system.
This requires cooperation, both nationally and internationally, to identify and combat cyberattacks.
Nationally,  this  takes  place  through,  for  example  NorCERT,  part  of  the  Norwegian  National
Security Authority  (NSM),  and  for  the  financial  sector  through  the  Norwegian  Financial  Sector
Cyber  Security  Center  (FinansCERT)  under  Bits.  The  Nordic  financial  sector  has  established
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nordic  Financial  CERT  as  an  extension  of  the  Norwegian  FinansCERT.  The  need  for
cooperation does not stop at a Nordic level. The challenges are international, and are shared by
private financial undertakings, their service providers and subcontractors and authorities in many
countries.
Measures to promote cyber security are technically complicated and require specialist expertise.
But it is management and boards of directors in institutions and companies that have the final
responsibility and decide strategy and resource use. This responsibility cannot be delegated or
outsourced to others. Owners and managers must be aware of their ultimate responsibility. As
supervisory  authority,  Norges  Bank  will  follow  up  efforts  in  the  area  of  cyber  security,  in
collaboration with Finanstilsynet (Financial Supervisory Authority of Norway).
Here,  the  interests  of  the  authorities  and  the  financial  industry  coincide.  Let  me  once  again
encourage the industry to work out satisfactory solutions. A great deal has already been done
and  collaborative  bodies  have  been  established  at  a  national  level.  However,  initiatives  in  this
area are still rather fragmented. There is a need for an even more coordinated and targeted effort
to obtain overall control and reduce risks.
The system owners must ensure that critical IT providers have established robust contingency
solutions and that these are tested regularly. If this is not done, the system owners are obliged to
assess alternative solutions, also if they are costly.
The responsibility of the system owners is the same, irrespective of whether the entire technical
operation or just parts of it are outsourced.
Offshoring is increasing. More flexibility, lower costs and a larger pool of persons with requisite
skills are good arguments. At the same time, offshoring entails other forms of risk. Norwegian
control is reduced. We become dependent on infrastructure and authorities outside of Norway. It
would  help  if,  in  a  crisis,  operations  can  be  moved  back  to  Norway  at  short  notice.  It  is  still
possible  that  in  the  future,  critical  systems  will  be  required  to  be  permanently  operated  from
Norway.
Electronic central bank money
Making payments electronically involves the use of deposit money (money deposited in banks).
Bank deposits refer to money that is issued by, and is a claim on private banks. Each time a
bank extends credit, new money is created. Bank deposits now account for 98 percent of the
broad  money  supply  (M3).  The  increasing  use  of  new  payment  methods,  such  as  mobile
payment solutions, suggests that this percentage will continue to rise.
We  have  to  ask  ourselves:  should  we  allow  private  solutions  to  compete  freely  in  developing
means of payment, or must the authorities play a role? The crucial factor is whether solutions
based  on  private  money  deliver  the  characteristics  the  payment  system  should  have.  The
system  must  be  able  to  channel  payments  swiftly,  safely,  at  low  cost  and  in  a  user-friendly
manner. The means of payment itself – our money – must be universal, because money is only
useful if it is widely used. This requires trust.
Deposit guarantee schemes and banking regulation promote trust in banks’ deposit money. Trust
is also underpinned by being able to convert to another secure alternative, ie cash. Norges Bank
assists private operators in implementing faster and safer payments. We cooperate with other
authorities  to  oversee  and  supervise  the  payment  infrastructure  to  ensure  robustness  and
efficiency. Privacy rules prevent unauthorised access to payment information.
But there are some characteristics deposit money lacks. Nor is direct and immediate settlement
between two parties, without the involvement of a third party, possible without cash. The system
is vulnerable to advanced attacks. Having more money on deposit than is covered by the deposit
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
guarantee scheme involves risk.
Perhaps new private payment solutions may be able to offer some of these characteristics, but a
possibility which is also being discussed is the introduction of electronic central bank money – in
addition to cash. This possibility raises many questions which Norges Bank and other central
banks are trying to answer. This is a long-term process and we do not yet know what the answer
will be.
Conclusion
The Norwegian payment system was digitalised at an early stage and this has benefited private
individuals,  businesses  and  banks.  We  can  be  justifiably  proud  of  our  payment  system.
Digitalisation  is  now  going  through  new  phases.  The  deliveries  of  customer  services  and  the
underlying infrastructure are being separated from one another, and we are witnessing the arrival
of new market entrants. Global platform providers are interested in the payment market.
We must make full use of the opportunities to improve the payment system and we have made a
start. Further changes will come. Today I have emphasised some of the tasks which the industry
and Norges Bank must solve in the coming years:
Introduce instant payments and develop a better solution through the BRO project.
Mobile instant payments and BRO.
Agreement on a single alias register as a common infrastructure.
A more coordinated and systematic effort to reduce cyber risk. Managers and owners must
be aware of their responsibility, also when operations are outsourced.
We must continue the work on truly reliable contingency arrangements.
We must assess whether it is necessary for risk-mitigating measures related to offshoring.
And we must assess whether electronic central bank money is necessary and desirable.
We all want Norway, also in the future, to have one of the most efficient and robust payment
systems in the world. This will require change and willingness to invest.
We have a job to do, but we have what is required to succeed. 
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
