Norman T L Chan: How to get rid of banking supervisors
Keynote speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority,
at the Lion Rock Institute Freedom Dinner, Hong Kong, 22 November 2017.
 Nick  (Sallnow-Smith),  founders,  directors  and  members  of  the  Lion  Rock  Institute,  Daniel
(Hannan), ladies and gentlemen,
1.  It gives me great pleasure in joining you today.
2.  After accepting the Institute’s invitation conveyed by Peter Wong, I thought hard about what
to talk about in front of such a learned and distinguished audience that support and cherish
economic freedom.  I was also mindful that I should come up with an inviting title that helps
sell the tables.  I hope I have achieved this, at least by attracting a few more senior bankers
to help foot the dinner bill.
3.  Nowadays a common theme that bankers often talk about when they meet each other is
how  their  lives  have  become  so  much  tougher,  thanks  to  ever  more  stringent  standards
demanded by regulators and supervisors.  Not only are banks required to hold a lot more
capital as well as liquidity to meet unexpected contingencies, there is constantly increasing
demand  by  the  supervisors  to  deal  with  conduct  risks.    Everyone  is  familiar  with  the
escalating  compliance  burden  and  pressure  on  banks  in  tackling  anti-money  laundering,
counter-terrorist financing, international sanctions, mis-selling, etc., not to mention the hefty
financial penalties slapped on banks for violations or breaches.  So it is natural and indeed
understandable  that  bankers  harbour  grievances  and  misgivings  towards  bank  regulation
and supervisors.  And this is why the topic I am going to talk about is a very attractive theme
to  them.    They  would  like  to  hear  from  a  supervisor  speaking  on  a  subject  that  they  can
normally only discuss privately amongst themselves.
4.  First of all, let me give you the good news!  As I see it, there are two ways to get rid of bank
supervisors, one fast track and the other a slow track.  Let me start with the fast track!
5.  If you can find a clock or time machine that would allow you to dial back time to 100 years or
so  ago,  then  you  would  find  yourself  in  a  happy  world  where  there  was  little  or  even  no
banking  supervision.    Contrary  to  common  belief,  banking  supervision  as  a  profession  or
industry (or, as some bankers would no doubt have it, a “black art”) does not have a very
long history.  Until the Roosevelt New Deal era 1933 Banking Act in the USA, no depositor in
an  American  bank  could  have  been  assured  of  clear  supervisory  oversight,  following  a
century of uncertainty about state and national authority over banks and the issue of bank
notes.  In the UK, the first statutorily-backed regulatory regime was put in place only in 1979. 
Prior to that time, the Bank of England had exerted only informal authority, including through
the  venerable  “Governor’s  eyebrow”.    Both  the  US  and  the  UK  Acts  were  prompted  by
preceding banking crises.  In Hong Kong, the Office of the Commissioner of Banking was
only established around 50 years ago in the 1960s, after a couple of rather unpleasant bank
failures.  Before then, banking was basically a free for all, although it did not mean that it was
a wild jungle ruled by Tarzan or the Lion King.  Back in those “good old days” during which
banking supervision was not a prominent feature of our financial system, bank customers
and depositors had to take care of their own interests by choosing very carefully who they
could trust and bank with.  It should also be borne in mind that internationally, the first Basel
Capital Accord was only approved by the G10 Governors in 1988, meaning that we are only
just approaching the 30th anniversary of this important milestone.
6.  I know that you are going to say: you cannot find such a clock or time machine.   In that
case, the fast track solution is not quite available.  So you will have to consider the slow
track solution in trying to get rid of the bank supervisors.  As I said earlier, a world in which
there  were  no  banking  supervisors  was  not  a  wild  jungle.    For  a  long  long  time  and  well
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
before  we  had  bank  supervisors,  bankers  needed  to  earn  the  trust  of  depositors  and
customers in order to survive and thrive.  Those who failed to earn the trust of customers
would not and could not last long.  So by and large bankers who managed to survive were
highly trusted and respected by the community in the “good old days”.  Unfortunately this is
no longer the case in recent decades, especially after the Global Financial Crisis (GFC).  So
something  has  changed  that  has  led  to  the  erosion  of  trust  in  bankers.    Only  if  we  can
restore  that  trust,  and  the  fundamentals  underpinning  it,  could  we  have  a  meaningful
discussion on the proposition of getting rid of the bank supervisors.
7.  Banking has indeed changed a great deal from what it used to be.  I would like to focus on a
few key changes over the years relevant to my thoughts on trustworthiness in banking and
the  need  for  supervision.    First  and  foremost,  the  alignment  of  interest  between  the
owners/managers of banks and their customers has weakened significantly.  In the “good
old  days”,  banks  were  often  organised  in  the  form  of  partnership  and  not  as  limited
companies.  The owners or managers individually and collectively had their family wealth at
stake in ensuring that the banking business was run not only profitably but also prudently. 
Any  mismanagement  of  the  affairs  of  the  bank  could  wipe  out  their  family  wealth  and,  in
some instances, lead to imprisonment.  Any partner of a bank had the duty and right to warn
against and take steps to constrain another partner from taking excessive risks, if such risks
could bring down not just the culprit but all the partners who were jointly responsible for the
well-being of the firm.  In contrast, in modern times, banks operate predominantly in the form
of limited companies, often listed on stock exchanges, with very diverse public ownership. 
Senior managers who run the bank do not have most of their personal worth tied up in the
firm  and  the  prospects  for  life-long  employment  have  become  few  and  far  between. 
Nowadays (in particular during the period preceding the GFC), senior bank managers are
generally  rewarded  by  a  combination  of  very  high  salaries  coupled  with  very  substantial
annual bonuses tied to performance in the preceding year.  Even where share options are
included in their remuneration packages, the lock up or vesting period is relatively short –
just  a  couple  of  years  at  most.    The  effect  of  this  change  is  that  the  previously  strong
alignment  of  long  term  interest  between  bankers  and  customers  has  been  materially
weakened, leading to the classic situation of an agency problem, with the bank management
using depositor funds to leverage up the scale of business while the downside risk that they
face in doing so is limited.  The problem became rather apparent thanks to the GFC, which
witnessed cases in which bank managers took excessive risks or otherwise breached the
trust of their customers in the pursuit of profit and bonuses.  In some infamous cases, such
as AIGFP and Merrill Lynch, sizable bonuses, funded by taxpayers’ money, were still paid to
managers even though their actions had arguably contributed to the failure of the firms.  This
“heads I win, tails you lose” regime in modern banking is clearly a recipe for disaster and can
do very little to help enhance the trust and reputation of bankers.
8.  Another material change in banking from the “good old days” is the problem of what I call
“short-termism”  amongst  some  bank  shareholders  (“impatient  capital”  focused  only  on
bolstering their own short-term returns).  It has also become increasingly common for senior
bank managers, especially at the top levels, to be hired on contract basis.  While this might
be justifiable from the point of view of hiring the best talent available in the market, it could
have the unfortunate side effect of cultivating short-termism amongst senior bankers if they
only work for a contract or two and therefore must deliver tangible and quantifiable financial
results  within  a  short  period  of  time,  such  as  a  target  RoE.    In  essence,  like  football
managers,  they  survive  on  their  reputation  for  delivering  fast  results  during  the  current
league season.  The problem has been exacerbated by two more factors.  One is the move
towards higher frequency of financial reporting, from annual, half-yearly to quarterly.  While
this  move  may  have  been  driven  by  good  intentions  of  promoting  transparency  and
accountability, inevitably it compresses further the performance measurement period faced
by bank management and increases the pressure on the senior managers in delivering short
term performance.  The second factor is the emergence of activist shareholders in the form
of hedge funds and, to a lesser extent, certain pro-active fund managers.  The net effect of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
short-termism in banking is that firms would tend to opt for businesses or transactions that
would  boost  short  term  performance  in  profits  or  share  price,  such  as  large  scale
acquisitions or mergers or rapid expansion.  Investments that are necessary for the longer
term viability or competitiveness of the bank, such as upgrading of IT systems and internal
talent development, would tend to be given a lower priority.  We have seen many high profile
cases of massive expansion of business through indiscriminate acquisition or a sharp rise in
proprietary trading by banks, which, as we now know, ended rather badly.  Fast forays into
areas with insufficient expertise or chasing bulge-bracket status by combining aggressive
trading  businesses  with  more  traditional  banking  have  left  banks  exposed  and  created
culture  clashes  in  the  race  for  profit.   Again,  this  short-termism  in  the  modern  corporate
world is not at all conducive to regaining public trust in, and respect for, bankers.
9.  While many bankers did place profit ahead of the interest of the customers they serve, it is
at the same time increasingly true that customers are also treating banking services more
as a commodity.  This means that customers shop around for the best bargain in town. 
They hop from one bank to another without regard to the value of any long term relationship
between bank and customer.  This shift of mindset from relationship banking to transaction-
centric  banking  is  another  change  that  weakens  the  alignment  of  interest  and  of  trust
between bankers and customers.  The introduction of deposit protection schemes in many
parts of the world has been motivated by good intentions, but it does produce the side effect
of  moral  hazard  in  that  customers  no  longer  need  to  care  overly  much  about  the
trustworthiness  of  a  bank  because  their  deposits  are  protected  by  the  schemes. 
Consequently, customers would tend to be drawn to the bank offering the highest interest
rate on deposits or returns on investment products.  Many customers would also opt for very
large banks, regardless of their actual financial strength, in the belief that these banks are
“too big to fail”.  Unfortunately, this belief in “too big to fail” was proved right during the GFC
as some governments in advanced economies spent billions of dollars of public money to
bail out some of the largest failing banks and financial firms.
10.  In summary, the slow track solution to get rid of bank supervisors involves quite a number of
fundamental  changes  to  counter  those  trends  that  arise  from  what  is  now  practiced  in
modern day banking.  The measures required are not new, and are intended to restore a
strong alignment of interest between bankers and their customers.  This would entail, as I
have explained, the creation or re-creation of a balanced and fair compensation system for
bank owners and senior  managers  in  which  good  performance  is  rewarded  and  bad  risk
management  or  conduct  is  punished.    However,  the  crux  of  the  matter  is  that  the
performance  has  to  be  long  term  and  not  short  term.    To  reduce  the  risks  of  senior
managers  and  bank  staff  taking  short-sighted  decisions,  longer  term  or  even  life-time
employment should be encouraged and not discouraged.
11.  I know what you are going to say!  You will say that I am asking for something that is very
hard, if not impossible, to accomplish.  The world has changed so much that it is unrealistic
to go back to the “good old days”.  For example, most banks are limited companies listed on
stock exchanges and it is just not practical for them to return to a partnership structure. 
Moreover,  banks  employ  hundreds  of  thousands  of  staff  at  different  levels  and  it  is
impracticable  to  insist  on  life  employment  for  all  of  them.    Nor  will  employees  in  these
modern times prefer to stick with one company for the whole of their working lives.  As for
the  short-termism  of  the  shareholders  and  the  financial  reporting  cycle,  banks  are  at  the
receiving end and there is not much they can do.
12.  While I agree that it is probably unrealistic to go back to the “good old days” of banking, I am
not fully convinced that there is little banks can do to restore a stronger alignment of interest
with their customers.  But that doesn’t really matter because, without these changes, the
slow track solution to get rid of supervisors also does not seem to work!  So I am bringing
you the bad news!  The bad news is that the public will need an agency entrusted with the
mandate and powers to protect the safety of their deposits, to guard against banks taking
excessive risk in pursuit of profits, to ensure that customers are treated fairly, to deal with
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
bank failure, as and when it happens, in an orderly manner to avoid disrupting the financial
system  and  reduce  the  risk  of  having  to  use  public  funds  again  to  bail  out  failing  banks. 
What happened during the GFC is a very powerful reminder that excessive risk taking in
pursuit of short term profits in modern day banking and finance can and did pose a serious
threat  to  the  economic  well-being  and  stability  of  society  as  a  whole,  even  in  the  most
advanced economies.  The GFC has also undermined the belief that banks can look after
themselves in efficient markets and that “de-regulation” and “light touch supervision” must
be  good  as  they  promote  financial  innovation  and  diversity.    As  a  result  of  these  bitter
lessons, a series of profound reforms championed by the G20 and the Financial Stability
Board, of which the HKMA is a member, have been introduced to make the banking and
financial system much more resilient to shocks.  An informed banker will tell you that banks
nowadays  have  to  comply  with  a  very  long  list  of  stringent  standards  in  capital,  liquidity,
leverage, margining, risk management, derivative trading and reporting, etc.  At the same
time, there are new and strong measures designed to address misconduct risks, ranging
from  anti-money  laundering  and  counter  terrorist  financing,  front-running,  insider  trading,
mis-selling of financial products, etc.
13.  For those bankers who feel disappointed tonight because they cherish the hope that they
would  learn  some  clever  tricks  to  get  rid  of  bank  supervisors,  I  owe  them  an  apology. 
However, the consolation is that, in my view, banking supervision is not an “all or nothing”
game.  While it is true that the kind of “cozy” or “light touch” supervision that was prevalent
before the GFC is now out of the question, there is still a great deal of space in how we
calibrate the “intensity” or “intrusiveness” of banking supervision in order for the process to
be  effective  while  not  creating  an  undue  burden  on  banks.   At  the  HKMA,  we  have  just
introduced  an  initiative  called  “Balanced  and  Responsive  Supervision”.    It  involves  a
mechanism  to  regularly  review  with  banks  possible  execution  issues  arising  from  the
supervisory processes, as well as to collect ideas for streamlining supervisory practices and
requirements.  Through better and ongoing communication with the industry, we should be
able to achieve a more optimal and sustainable supervisory outcome in the longer run.
14.  I would also argue that banking supervision is not the only, and should not become the most
important, means in protecting the interests of bank customers.  It is my strong belief that
regulation and supervision are most effective in prescribing what constitutes unacceptable
behaviours or outcomes, e.g. minimum standards for capital and liquidity ratios, prohibition
of unacceptable market behaviours such as insider dealing and rigging of interest rate or FX
benchmarks, no mis-selling of financial products, etc.  However, supervision is much less
effective or appropriate in setting good corporate culture, values and ethical standards of a
financial firm.  No amount of external supervision or policing can instill and sustain the right
culture and ethics of a bank.  Culture and ethical standards must be from top-down, owned
by the Board and filter down to the senior management and then to all levels of the firm.  A
bank and its staff must internalise good culture and values in such a way that they behave
properly not because they are afraid of being caught and punished by the supervisors but
because they think it is unethical to do otherwise.
15.  But I am not so naive as to believe that good corporate culture alone is sufficient to ensure
proper  behaviour  amongst  all  the  staff.    Good  corporate  culture  and  ethics  must  also  be
underpinned by the appropriate incentive or compensation system.  A compensation system
in  which  bonuses  or  promotion  are  determined  by  short  term  financial  performance  is  a
recipe  for  disaster.    The  unfortunate  episode  of  the  mis-selling  of  Payment  Protection
Insurance (PPI) products in the UK is a clear example.  Banks involved in selling those PPI
products have, between 2011 and May 2017, reached settlements with millions of affected
customers totaling 27 billion pounds, and three of the largest banks involved have been fined
by the UK authorities a total of 117 million pounds.  There are also many instances in which
bad  outcomes  ensued  because  the  firms  had  put  in  place  wrongly  designed  incentive
systems to reward staff for new customers or businesses secured.  According to a report
by  Boston  Consulting  Group,  between  2009  and  2016,  a  total  of  about  US$321  billion  of
financial  penalties  have  been  levied  on  banks,  which  is  a  clear  demonstration  of  the
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
seriousness of misdeeds and misconduct of financial firms.
1
16.  While talking about fines levied against financial firms, there is an interesting argument, by
Professor  Charles  Goodhart  of  London  School  of  Economics  and  Political  Science,  that
imposing hefty fines on banks is actually not a good way of dealing with misbehaviour.  By
the way, for those of you who are not familiar with Professor Goodhart, he is a renowned
British economist with an economic law named after him, the “Goodhart’s Law”.  He had had
special ties with Hong Kong, as he served on the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee of the
HKMA in the 1990’s.  Professor Goodhart was also a long-time advisor to Bank of England,
and a member of its Monetary Policy Committee from 1997 to 2000.  In his recent article
“Has  regulatory  reform  been  misdirected?” ,  he  points  out  that  it  is  individuals  in  banks,
rather than banks as institutions, that take decisions and exhibit bad behaviour.  Following
this  logic,  he  advocates  that  financial  regulation  challenges  should  be  addressed  through
governance  reforms,  rather  than  a  focus  on  just  capital  and  liquidity  management. 
Regulators should apply fines to the people responsible at the time of an offence, whether or
not they have subsequently left the bank.  In Professor Goodhart’s words, “if a bank CEO
knew his own family’s fortune would remain at risk throughout his subsequent lifetime…, it
would do more to improve banking ‘culture’ than any set of sermons and required oaths of
good behaviour.”  Harsh as it may seem, I do see considerable merit in his argument as that
would help tackle the root cause of problems, i.e. the lack of accountability for individuals
incentivised  by  short-term  objectives.    However,  it  would  take  a  drastic  shift  in  regulatory
philosophy  and  changes  to  the  fundamental  fabrics  of  existing  supervisory  regimes  if  we
want to focus more on individuals rather than the firms.  But to achieve to a large extent what
Professor Goodhart proposes, I believe bank regulators could attempt to require banks to
focus more on governance, culture and ethics.
17.  If  a  bank  is  willing  and  able  to  own  good  corporate  culture  and  governance  with  the
appropriate incentive system to induce proper behaviour, then I, as the supervisor, would be
very willing to take a step back and adopt a much less “intrusive” mode of supervision.  My
colleagues in HKMA can keep more of a distance from a bank if they have confidence that
the bank and its staff would not behave improperly, not because of constant and intensive
external policing but because it would be against their core values and culture to harm the
interests of their customers or of the bank through their own misconduct.
18.  Ladies and gentlemen, I truly mean what I say.  This is why in the last few years the HKMA
has been telling banks that they need to cultivate the right culture and values.  Moreover, we
have  instituted  a  new  programme  to  engage  and  equip  the  Independent  Non-Executive
Directors (INEDs) of banks so they can become more effective in providing the necessary
checks and balance on the management.  We have also required banks to improve their
corporate  governance  by  setting  up  a  Board  level  committee,  chaired  by  an  INED,  to
oversee corporate culture and to ensure that their compensation arrangements are aligned
with the culture and values of the bank.  These efforts are ongoing and I am afraid that it is
not a mission that can be accomplished overnight.  So for the time being, there is still a need
for supervisors to be around and so you don’t really have to worry that I will be out of a job
any time soon.
19.  Again, my apologies to those of you who have been attracted to this dinner because of the
title and did not get too much joy from what I have said.  But don’t lose hope yet, as some of
you may still be able to find or invent a time machine that can turn the clock back to the
“good old days”.  I am sure that bankers in Hong Kong would be very willing to pay a high
price for such machine. 
20.  Thank you very much.
1
Charles  Goodhart,  (2017)  “Has  regulatory  reform  been  misdirected?”,  Journal  of  Financial  Regulation  and
Compliance, Vol. 25 Issue: 3, pp.236–240.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
