Hiroshi  Nakaso:  Evolving  monetary  policy  -  the  Bank  of  Japan's
experience
Speech by Mr Hiroshi Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Central Banking
Seminar, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 October 2017.
Introduction
 This year marks an important milestone. Nine years have passed since the collapse of Lehman
Brothers in 2008, which was one of the most visible flashpoints of the global financial crisis, and
ten years have passed since what should be considered as its foreshock — the emergence of
the subprime mortgage problem in 2007. The global financial crisis, which brought about severe
disruptions in the global financial markets and a significant downturn in the global economy, has
had various impacts on the global economy to date, including the European debt problem in the
2010s. During the decade, central banks around the globe have been facing many challenges. In
addressing  these  challenges,  central  banks  not  only  conducted  conventional  monetary  policy
such as reduction of short-term policy interest rates, but also devised and proactively adopted
new  policy  measures  called  unconventional  monetary  policy.  This  reflects  the  fact  that  the
monetary policy framework of each central bank has evolved in accordance with their respective
economic conditions, in order to overcome the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates. At
the same time, however, central banks’ initiatives have a lot in common, and there are many
cases where similar policies have been adopted. Such similarities in the evolution of monetary
policy  are  largely  affected  by  the  fact  that  the  economies  have  been  facing  the  same  policy
challenges during the same period in the wake of the global financial crisis, which brought about
a significant shock on a worldwide scale. However, what seems more important is that central
banks in the meantime have been strengthening their ties and establishing a relationship that has
allowed them to learn from each other, which I think has served as the driving force for many of
their monetary policies to evolve in the same direction during this period.
In my speech today, I would like to express my views on the evolution of monetary policy, while
looking back at the Bank of Japan’s experience to date, and then talk about the importance of
cooperation among central banks. As some of you may not be familiar with Japan’s economy
and  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  monetary  policy  conduct,  I  have  provided  for  your  reference  a  chart
entitled  “Japan’s  Economy  and  BOJ’s  Monetary  Policy”  that  shows  major  events  for  Japan’s
economy and monetary policy since 1985. Please refer to it as needed.
I. Japan’s monetary policy before the global financial crisis
The challenge faced by central banks worldwide in conducting their monetary policy since the
global  financial  crisis  can  be  expressed  in  one  phrase  as  “how  to  overcome  the  zero  lower
bound.” Before the crisis, the zero lower bound was discussed among academics but was not
widely recognized as an actual serious policy challenge.
However, Japan was in an exceptional situation. Let us turn back the clock to the 1990s. At this
time,  Japan’s  potential  growth  rate  had  already  started  to  decline,  due  mainly  to  the  adverse
effects  of  the  burst  of  the  bubble  economy  and  the  aging  population  (Chart  1).  The  potential
growth rate, which had been around 4 percent in the early 1990s, declined to around 1 percent at
the end of the 1990s. Along with this, the natural rate of interest, which is the real interest rate
neutral to economic activity, also declined. Needless to say, the basic mechanism of monetary
easing  consists  of  driving  the  real  interest  rate  below  the  natural  rate  of  interest,  thereby
stimulating economic activity. Amid a decline in the natural rate of interest, the Bank reduced the
policy interest rate incrementally, in pursuit of monetary easing effects. This is how we came to
introduce  the zero  interest  rate  policy  in  1999  (Chart  2).  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  in
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
February 1999 to encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to move “as low as possible,”
which means at virtually zero percent, by providing the market with more funds than necessary
for financial institutions to meet their reserve requirements. In addition, it explicitly committed to
continuing  with  the  zero  interest  rate  policy  “until  deflationary  concern  is  dispelled.”  While  the
impact of that policy was called the policy duration effect at the time, the policy is based on the
same idea as what later was to be called forward guidance, in that it enhances monetary easing
effects by guiding the future policy path.
 2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thereafter, judging that Japan’s economy was showing clear signs of recovery, the Bank lifted
the zero interest rate policy in 2000. However, toward the end of that year, the economy started
to  decelerate  again,  mainly  because  of  the  effects  of  the  burst  of  the  dot-com  bubble  in  the
United  States.  In  response  to  this,  the  Bank  in  March  2001  introduced  the quantitative  easing
policy, which set the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank as the operating target
(Chart 3). This policy was unique, in that it focused on the current accounts, which are on the
liability side of the central bank’s balance sheet. However, it paved the way for the introduction of
large-scale asset purchases in many economies as well as quantitative and qualitative monetary
easing (QQE) in Japan, which I will explain later, as it set not interest rates but quantity as the
operating  target.  In  addition,  under  the  quantitative  easing  policy,  the  Bank  committed  to
continuing the policy “until the annual rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) registers
zero  percent  or  above  in  a  stable  manner.”  This  new  commitment  was  an  evolution  of  the
previous  version  of  the  commitment  that  had  been  adopted  alongside  the  zero  interest  rate
policy, as it linked the condition of that commitment to the observed CPI and thereby aimed at
gaining more powerful monetary easing effects.
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking back, the policy approaches at that time are applicable to the current environment, and I
suppose you may not have much doubt about that. Yet, at that time, it was rather difficult to make
the objectives and effects of these policies well understood. As I recall, they were considered as
unique  prescriptions  for  a  certain  economy,  like  Japan,  with  little  implications  for  other
economies.  In  fact,  as  we  were  a  frontrunner  of  such  monetary  policy,  we  had  no  reliable
precedents or textbooks — it was like navigating uncharted waters. I am aware that whether the
policy had produced the effects as intended is open to debate. However, I take some pride in the
fact  that,  in  the  face  of  severe  economic  and  price  developments,  our  strong  sense  of
responsibility as a policy authority led to the development of new policy instruments, and that this
in turn significantly affected monetary policy making around the globe in later years, both in terms
of theory and practice.
II. Evolution of monetary policy since the global financial crisis
Let us now set the clock forward to 2008. Suffering a severe economic downturn triggered by the
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  that  year,  central  banks  in  major  economies  successively
embarked  on  the  introduction  of  unconventional  monetary  policies. At  the  outset,  the  Bank  of
Japan’s policies, such as the zero interest rate policy and the quantitative easing policy, drew
attention and often were referred to by other economies. However, as the economic downturn
persisted in many economies, central banks started to accumulate their own experiences, which
then allowed them to learn from each other. In the course of this process, various attempts were
made  to  overcome  the  zero  lower  bound,  accelerating  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy.  The
direction of this evolution can be broadly described by the following four approaches.
The first is shifting the operating target to longer-term interest rates. With the zero lower bound
on  short-term  interest  rates,  this  measure  aims  to  pursue  a  decline  in  real  interest  rates  by
setting  the  longer-term  interest  rates,  for  which  room  remains  for  a  further  reduction,  as  the
target for monetary policy. As the longer-term interest rates are essentially the average of the
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
future path of short-term interest rates plus the term premium, there are two possible ways of
reducing these rates. One is to compress the term premium through longer-term lending and the
purchases of government bonds by a central bank, and the other is to affect long-term interest
rates  by  making  commitments  to  the  future  path  of  short-term  interest  rates  and  maintaining
them at lower levels. The latter is called forward guidance, which I mentioned earlier. In tackling
the global financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank (ECB) worked to
enhance the influence on longer-term interest rates through a combination of several methods
such  as  large-scale  asset  purchases  and  the  introduction  of  forward  guidance  on  short-term
interest rates.
The  second  approach  is  influencing  risk  premiums  mainly  through  purchases  of  risk  assets,
amid a situation of less room to reduce interest rates on risk-free assets including government
bonds. This measure, referred to as qualitative easing in Japan and credit easing in the United
States, aims to further reduce firms’ and households’ funding costs by facilitating declines in risk
premiums of such assets as corporate bonds, CP, and equities. It also is an attempt to break the
limit to monetary easing effects resulting from the zero lower bound.
The third approach is removing the zero lower bound by applying a negative short-term nominal
interest  rate.  A  central  bank  in  Scandinavia  for  the  first  time  after  the  global  financial  crisis
developed  a  method  to  apply  a  negative  interest  rate  to  the  central  bank’s  accounts  held  by
private  financial  institutions.  Some  central  banks  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  introduced  this
thereafter, while making their own modifications as appropriate. As is often pointed out, interest
rates  cannot  be  reduced  to  arbitrarily  negative  levels,  given  the  presence  of  banknotes  in
circulation. In addition, we also need to take into account various costs and risks, including the
impact on financial institutions’ profits. However, I think it is of notable significance that the long-
held  belief  that  nominal  interest  rates  cannot  be  negative  was  overturned,  and  that  the  idea
evolved into an actual policy option.
The fourth approach is reducing real interest rates by influencing people’s inflation expectations,
instead of by cutting nominal interest rates. In the case of Japan in particular, where deflation has
persisted and the deflationary mindset has become entrenched among people, it is necessary to
re-anchor  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  by  exerting  influence  on  people’s
expectations.  This  will  require  the  central  bank’s  strong  commitment  to  achieving  the  inflation
target, clear and consistent communication to the public, and determined actions to realize the
commitment.
Let me now explain the Bank of Japan’s monetary policy after the global financial crisis, while
bearing in mind the four measures composing the evolution of monetary policy to overcome the
zero lower bound that I just mentioned (Chart 4). In response to the collapse of Lehman Brothers
in  2008,  the  Bank  immediately  reduced  short-term  policy  interest  rates,  as  did  other  central
banks. As  the  pace  of  economic  improvement  remained  sluggish,  the  Bank  in  October  2010
decided  to  introduce  the comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy.  Specifically,  it  reduced  the
target level of short-term interest rates to 0 to 0.1 percent and committed itself to maintaining the
virtually  zero  interest  rate  level  “until  it  judges  that  price  stability  is  in  sight.”  In  addition,  it
established the Asset Purchase Program, through which it provided longer-term funds at a fixed
rate  and  purchased  various  financial  assets  such  as  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs),
corporate  bonds,  and  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs). As  these  measures  show,  in  order  to
overcome  the  zero  lower  bound,  the  Bank  affected  longer-term  interest  rates  through  JGB
purchases and forward guidance, and started to compress risk premiums through purchases of
corporate bonds and ETFs. In terms of the four approaches that I explained earlier, the Bank
adopted the first two.
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Although the Bank continued to provide accommodative financial conditions through measures
such as an expansion of the Asset Purchase Program and strengthening of forward guidance,
this did not result in a significant improvement in economic activity and prices. Thus, the Bank
newly introduced an extremely powerful policy package in April 2013 — namely, QQE. Under this
framework, the Bank shifted the main operating target from interest rates to the monetary base,
and incorporated all of the four approaches that I outlined earlier. First, it encouraged a decline in
long-term  interest  rates  more  powerfully  than  before  through  large-scale  JGB  purchases  of
which the amount far exceeded that under the comprehensive monetary easing policy. Second,
the purchase amount of assets, such as ETFs, was expanded substantially, thereby significantly
strengthening the effects on risk premiums. Third, while this was introduced at a later date, in
January  2016,  with  reference  to  measures  taken  by  central  banks  in  Europe,  the  zero  lower
bound itself was removed and a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent was applied to a
portion of the Bank’s  current  account  balances.  Fourth,  the  Bank  aimed  to  drastically  change
people’s expectations and thereby increase inflation expectations, by making a strong and clear
commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  This  commitment  also  was
underpinned  by  the  change  in  the  main  operating  target  to  the  monetary  base  and  the
announcement of its large-scale expansion.
QQE has produced remarkable effects. Through the large-scale purchases of 10-year JGBs and
a rise in inflation expectations, the Bank has succeeded in reducing real interest rates to levels
well below the natural rate of interest for the first time in its two-decade-long battle with the zero
lower bound on the short-term policy interest rate (Chart 5). As a result, Japan’s economy has
improved significantly over the past four and a half years (Chart 6). As the output gap improved
steadily, corporate profits have been at historically high levels and the labor market is very tight,
at virtually full employment. Wages have increased steadily, albeit at a moderate pace. On the
price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI excluding fresh food and energy has been
positive as a trend for about four years. This is the first time since the end of the 1990s that such
positive developments are being observed in Japan. We judge that the economy is no longer in
deflation, which is generally defined as a sustained decline in prices.
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
III. Further evolution of monetary policy: QQE with yield curve control
As I just said, QQE has brought about a steady improvement in Japan’s economy, but the price
stability  target  of  2  percent  is  yet  to  be  achieved.  The  main  reason  for  this  is  that  inflation
expectations  remain  weak  after  having  made  a  clear  but  temporary  increase  upon  the
introduction of QQE. Compared to the United States and Europe, inflation expectation formation
in  Japan  is  judged  as  being  largely  adaptive,  meaning  that  the  expectations  are  formed  in
accordance with developments in the observed inflation rate. Against this background, reflecting
a substantial fall in crude oil prices since summer 2014 and a slowdown in emerging economies
from 2015 through 2016 accompanied by turbulence in the global financial markets, the observed
inflation rate declined, dragging down inflation expectations as well. The Bank aims to drastically
convert the deflationary mindset entrenched among people and re-anchor inflation expectations
at 2 percent, but this has met with difficulties.
Given that QQE is unprecedentedly powerful, due attention also has to be paid to side effects
that could materialize going forward. If an excessive decline in and a flattening of the yield curve
were  to  last  for  too  long  under  powerful  monetary  easing,  risks  of  a  pullback  in  financial
intermediation and of destabilizing the financial system through downward pressure on financial
institutions’  profits  could  not  be  ignored.  If  these  risks  were  to  materialize,  the  transmission
mechanism  of  monetary  easing  would  be  hampered  and  it  would  become  more  difficult  to
achieve price stability and sustainable economic growth in a self-fulfilling manner. It was judged
that the Bank has to achieve the most appropriate interest rate level with a view to containing
such side effects to the minimum.
Bearing  these  issues  in  mind,  the  Bank  introduced  “QQE  with  Yield  Curve  Control”  last
September.  This  new  policy  framework  was  established  through  a  further  evolution  of  QQE,
consisting  of  mainly  two  components  (Chart  7).  The  first  is yield  curve  control,  which  was
introduced  with  the  aim  of  realizing  the  combination  of  the  levels  of  interest  rates  that  are
deemed  most  appropriate  for  maintaining  the  momentum  toward  achieving  the  price  stability
target  of  2  percent,  while  also  considering  the  effects  on  the  functioning  of  financial
intermediation. Under this framework, Japan’s yield curve during this one year has been formed
smoothly in a manner consistent with the guideline for market operations, in which the short-term
policy interest rate is set at minus 0.1 percent and the target level of the 10-year JGB yields at
around  zero  percent.  The  second  component  is  an inflation-overshooting commitment,  which
aims  at  ensuring  that  inflation  expectations  will  be  anchored  at  2  percent.  This  is  a  further
powerful  commitment  by  the  Bank;  namely,  it  is  committing  itself  to  expanding  the  monetary
base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI exceeds 2 percent and stays
above  that  level  in  a  stable  manner.  The  key  point  is  that  the  commitment  is  based  on  the
observed CPI, not the outlook. We judged that, in Japan, where inflation expectation formation is
largely  adaptive,  people’s  perception  of  prices  cannot  be  changed  without  experiencing  the
inflation rate actually exceeding 2 percent for some time, and this is why this commitment was
introduced.
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The novelty of yield curve control lies in the feature that it more directly affects long-term interest
rates with setting 10-year JGB yields as the operating target. This is a further reinforcement of
the  first  approach  of  the  aforementioned  category  of  evolution.  The  inflation-overshooting
commitment can be regarded as a further enhancement of the fourth approach, as the aim is to
work  on  people’s  inflation  expectations  more  strongly.  With  these  two  unprecedented  and
innovative  policy  tools,  the  Bank  of  Japan  once  again  embarked  on  navigating  the  uncharted
waters of unconventional monetary policy. As a matter of fact, I received many questions in the
past year, such as those regarding the actual operation of yield curve control. Today, I would like
to take the opportunity to answer some of those key questions.
The first question is whether the Bank’s current operating target is quantity or interest rates. As I
mentioned earlier, the current monetary policy aims to facilitate the formation of a yield curve that
is deemed most appropriate for maintaining the momentum toward achieving the price stability
target of 2 percent, so in that sense, the answer is “interest rates.” The most appropriate shape
of  the  yield  curve  cannot  be  formed  by  fixing  the  amount  of  JGB  purchases  as  an  operating
target. This is because, even though the same amount is to be purchased, the degree to which
interest rates will be lowered depends on the economic and inflation conditions as well as the
conditions of the JGB market. In contrast, yield curve control enables the Bank to purchase just
the right quantity of JGBs in a flexible and effective manner to achieve the operating target of the
policy.  Consequently,  the  amount  of  JGB  purchases  is  determined  endogenously.  In  addition,
even if JGBs to be purchased by the Bank become scarce at some point in the future, the impact
of a unit amount of its JGB purchases on long-term interest rates accordingly should become
more significant, with all else being equal. This means that, under yield curve control, the Bank
can achieve the same interest rate level with a smaller amount of JGB purchases. Yield curve
control is designed to be flexible and highly sustainable, through which the most appropriate level
of interest rates can be achieved in line with developments in economic activity and prices as
well as financial conditions.
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  question,  given  that  interest  rates  are  set  as  an  operating  target,  is  whether
controlling long-term interest rates is operationally feasible in the first place. It is obvious from the
past year’s experience that the answer is “yes” (Chart 8). While central banks have a dominant
power to control short-term interest rates, which can be referred to as prices of the monetary
base,  long-term  interest  rates  are  determined  by  market  participants’  outlook  for  future
developments in short-term interest rates as well as by various risk premiums. Therefore, the
conventional view is that central banks can control short-term interest rates but not long-term
interest rates. However, as I mentioned earlier, many central banks have been making efforts to
exert influence on longer-term interest rates in order to overcome the zero lower bound, and yield
curve control would be the ultimate example in terms of the range of maturity of interest rates to
be controlled and the level of sophistication of such control. Admittedly, controlling the interest
rates is a challenge. But the Bank of Japan has a dominant presence in the market and has built
up its experiences of large-scale asset purchases for the past few years. It conducts purchase
operations  in  different  maturities  across  the  yield  curve  and  is  equipped  with  a  powerful
supplementary tool — the fixed-rate full-allotment operations — through which it can purchase an
unlimited amount of JGBs at a certain interest rate level. Therefore, I believe it is quite possible to
continue to facilitate the formation of a yield curve that is deemed most appropriate for achieving
the price stability target of 2 percent, although not as precisely as controlling short-term interest
rates. That said, in order to form such yield curve smoothly, I want to underline the importance of
closely communicating with market participants. I have full confidence in the operational skills,
including this aspect, of our Market Operations Desk.
The third question, assuming that it is possible to control the level of long-term interest rates, is
how  to  determine  the  desirable  shape  of  the  yield  curve.  Under  the  conventional  monetary
policies, various benchmarks have been devised to determine the desirable level of short-term
interest rates. The Taylor rule would be one of the most famous benchmarks. However, the Bank
of Japan needs to establish a new benchmark that can be applied to the entire yield curve, not to
a  single  short-term  interest  rate  alone.  As  part  of  devising  such  benchmarks,  it  has  been
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
proceeding  with  theoretical  and  empirical  analysis  from  many  aspects.  These  efforts  include
measuring  the natural yield curve,  which  can  be  obtained  from  expanding  the  concept  of  the
natural rate of interest, and comparing it with that during the past easing phase. Although not a
few issues remain in terms of research, the Bank will make adjustments to the shape of yield
curve  as  necessary,  while  making  use  of  the  outcome  of  analyses  and  taking  into  account
developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions.
IV. Expansion of monetary policy
Monetary policy and financial stability policy
I have explained so far how central banks overcame the zero lower bound and their monetary
policy  made  progress.  Let  me  add  that  the  direction  of  our  monetary  policy  evolution  is  not
necessarily limited to what I have described thus far.
During  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  central  banks  were  confronted  with  new  challenges  to
maintaining financial stability. First, it was recognized that not only banks but also nonbanks can
be sources of systemic disruption, as clearly demonstrated by the collapse of Lehman Brothers.
Second, there is a possibility that, once market participants become extremely concerned about
the creditworthiness of counterparties, an entire market could run out of liquidity as a result of
having no counterparties in the market. This situation was realized with the collapse of Lehman
Brothers in 2008. At that time, the liquidity squeeze spread from the interbank market to firms’
major  funding  markets,  including  those  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  It  was  feared  that  the
breakdown  of  corporate  financing  would  stagnate  business  activities  and  thus  the  entire
economy. Third, the central banks had to ensure access by foreign financial institutions in their
own jurisdictions to not only the domestic currency liquidity but also foreign currency liquidity, in
particular U.S. dollars. This was reflective of the fact that more financial institutions came to be
engaged in operations in multiple currencies.
In  order  to  effectively  address  these  new  challenges  to  financial  stability,  many  central  banks
extended liquidity assistance as the lender of last resort beyond what had been considered the
norm under the so-called Bagehot’s rule (Chart 9). Specifically, they provided liquidity assistance
to  nonbanks  to  address  the  risk  that  deterioration  of  business  conditions  at  nonbanks  could
destabilize the financial markets. As a counterparty to many market participants, they conducted
funds-supplying  operations  to  revive  the  markets  that  had  become  dysfunctional,  and  swiftly
provided financial institutions with funding liquidity at a large scale in foreign currencies in addition
to domestic currencies.
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
When one groups the functions of central banks into monetary policy and financial stability policy,
central banks’ policy responses since the global financial crisis fall under the heading of financial
stability policy if one emphasizes the aspect of addressing systemic risks. On the other hand,
since the financial market is one of the key transmission channels of monetary policy, repairing
the  impaired  market  functioning  can  be  deemed  part  of  monetary  policy.  However,  taxonomy
does not really matter; the important thing is what is to be done by the central banks, consistent
with their mandates. The policy of central banks, either in the form of monetary policy or financial
stability policy, is achieved through the provision of liquidity because it is only the central banks
that can provide unlimited liquidity. This is why they are expected to keep evolving in order to
carry out their mission as a central bank irrespective of which policy area they are categorized
into.
Global cooperation of central banks
The significant advancement in global cooperation and coordination has been a big change for
central banks in recent years. As I said earlier, during the global financial crisis, it was recognized
that it was becoming difficult for the central bank of a home country alone to prevent a liquidity
crisis if a financial institution with a global reach faces foreign currency liquidity shortages.
In the meantime, the Federal Reserve entered into a swap arrangement with the ECB and the
Swiss National Bank at end-2007, establishing a scheme that could swiftly provide U.S. dollars.
Right after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan also
entered  into  swap  arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  largely  contributed  to  a
stabilization  in  the  global  financial  markets  as  an  effective  backstop  to  contain  the  U.S.  dollar
liquidity crisis. In 2011, when the tension surrounding the European debt problem heightened, six
major  central  banks  established  a  network  of  bilateral  liquidity  swap  arrangements  so  that
liquidity  could  be  provided  in  each  jurisdiction  in  any  of  their  currencies.  In  2013,  the
arrangements converted to standing agreements, which remain in place (Chart 10).
 12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Although the collective efforts by the central banks resulted in substantial progress in addressing
a  financial  crisis  that  is  global  in  nature,  we  became  aware  of  unsolved  open  issues.  These
include the allocation of responsibility among relevant central banks, the treatment of collateral,
and information sharing, in the case of internationally active banks and nonbanks facing difficulty
in funding. I have discussed these matters over the years with President Dudley of the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  who  also  serves  as  Chairman  of  the  Committee  on  the  Global
Financial System (CGFS) of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Under his leadership, a
report  titled  “Designing  frameworks  for  central  bank  liquidity  assistance:  addressing  new
challenges” was compiled by a working group of the CGFS, at which I took the chair (Chart 11).
This report analyzes in detail the issues that many central banks faced during the global financial
crisis  and  highlights  eight  operational  challenges  that  need  to  be  addressed  going  forward.
Assuming that the next financial crisis — if it were to occur — would have a global impact, I
sincerely  hope  that  central  bankers  in  the  next  generation  will  address  these  challenges  in
advance.
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Closing remarks
It seems we are almost running out of time. Based on the Bank’s long experience of working on
addressing financial crises and overcoming deflation, I would like to close my speech today by
emphasizing the importance of becoming an experienced practitioner.
Over  the  past  decade,  central  banks  have  faced  various  difficulties  and  the  monetary  policy
framework has been changing dynamically. Every time central banks faced tough challenges and
decided to introduce unprecedented policy measures — such as large-scale asset purchases
and negative interest rates — the decision was made based on the operational feasibility, for
example, of monetary operations and whether a close cooperative relationship between a central
bank  and  market  participants  is  well  established.  Needless  to  say,  we,  as  central  bankers,
should study the latest theories and make efforts to enhance analytical ability. However, while
that is necessary, it is not sufficient to swiftly deal with issues that actually unfold. Policymakers
cannot run away from the challenges they face on the grounds that they do not have enough
theoretical  background.  A  central  banker  must  be  strongly  mission-oriented  in  a  manner
consistent with the central bank’s mandate and make necessary and timely decisions, fully being
aware of policy effects and possible accompanying costs, while being accountable. To ensure
the  right  decisions,  we  have  to  constantly  upgrade  our  skills  as  practitioners  while  listening
carefully to what market participants have to say.
Today, I have focused on unconventional monetary policy, although whether the policy is actually
unconventional or not can only be determined on a relative basis and perhaps through the use of
retrospective  wisdom.  After  all,  contemporary  monetary  policy  has  not  yet  allowed  for  the
accumulation of sufficient experience to enable us to define conventional monetary policy. The
evaluation of the experience gained over the decade in the course of monetary policy’s evolution
and the decision of how to move forward shall be made by you, who are responsible for the next
generation.
The central banking community is a very special one in which common values and cultures are
shared. That is why we say “once a central banker, always a central banker.” Looking back at the
almost  40  years  of  my  service  at  the  central  bank,  there  was  not  a  single  moment  when  I
regretted being a central banker. I can assure you that the cooperation and personal relationships
with central bankers in other countries is irreplaceable and invaluable for all of you. I do hope that
you will make the most of the opportunity, like today’s seminar, to meet other countries’ central
bankers of the same generation in person and build ties within the central banking community. I
would  like  to  conclude  my  speech  by  once  again  welcoming  you  all  to  the  central  banking
community  and  expressing  my  hope  that  your  journeys  in  central  banking  life  continue  to  be
interesting and exciting.
Thank you.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
