Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Realising financial well-being
Address by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Federation  of  Malaysian  Consumers  Associations  (FOMCA)
Conference  2017  "Towards  an  Effective  Financial  Education  Strategy  for  Malaysia",  Kuala
Lumpur, 3 October 2017.
 It is my great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at the FOMCA Conference this morning. I
would like to express my appreciation to FOMCA for the commendable initiative to gather the
minds  of  leading  stakeholders  in  the  area  of  financial  literacy  today.  The  theme  of  today’s
conference  —  ‘Towards  an  Effective  Financial  Education  Strategy  for  Malaysia’  —  is  indeed
relevant;  and  will  certainly  provide  a  great  opportunity  for  government  agencies;  corporates;
consumer associations; academicians and all of us present here today to exchange ideas and
discuss this important issue on financial education.
Today, we are living in an environment that is becoming increasingly challenging. “Bits and bytes”
are slowly replacing “brick and mortar”. At the same time, Malaysians are facing socio-economic
changes,  including  demographic  shifts,  urbanisation  and  increasing  life  expectancy.  These
factors  affect,  not  only  the  way  we  experience  financial  services,  but  also  the  necessary
knowledge  for  consumers  to  make  good  financial  decisions  to  realise  financial  well-being.
Therefore,  ensuring  Malaysians  have  the  right  knowledge,  skills  and  behaviour  –  to  make
informed financial decisions – is an important agenda for our nation. Today, I would like to share
with you – our vision to realise financial well-being for Malaysians through financial literacy and
financial education.
Let me begin by sharing four observations on the state of financial literacy in Malaysia.
First,  Malaysians  tend  to  have  low  financial  resilience  and  are  vulnerable  to  financial  shocks.
Among others, based on Bank Negara Malaysia’s Financial Capability and Inclusion (FCI) Survey
conducted  in  2015-  more  than  75%  of  Malaysians  find  it  difficult  to  raise  even  RM1,000  of
immediate cash money for emergencies. 32% of Malaysians – can only cover a week’s worth of
expenses,  at  most,  should  they  lose  their  source  of  income.  In  cases  of  emergencies,
Malaysians resort to cutting down on spending; or borrow from external sources, such as friends
and family members; or even depend on credit lines, such as credit cards and instalment plans.
An ideal situation is to have a financial buffer that is sufficient to cover living expenses of at least
three to six months in the event of loss of income.
Second, the same survey also revealed that a significant number of Malaysians like to “live for
the  moment”  and  display  short-sighted  tendencies  –  focusing  on  “instant  gratification”.  This
observation tends to be true, particularly among the millennial generation. Millennials are more
passionate  in  keeping  pace  with  the  latest  digital  lifestyle.  A  study  by  the  Asian  Institute  of
Finance in 2015 found a majority of youth to be living on high borrowing costs – 38% of youths
rely on personal loans, while another 47% engage in expensive credit card borrowings. Often,
they will soon find these debts to be burdensome and result in financial problems. From January
to August this year, AKPK’s data indicated that above 3,400 borrowers between the ages of 20–
30  years  have  sought AKPK’s  assistance,  as  compared  to  3,450  borrowers  for  the  entire  of
2016.
Third,  majority  of  Malaysians  do  not  practice  long  term  financial  planning.  Only  40%  of
Malaysians consider themselves financially ready for retirement, despite the steadily increasing
life expectancy of Malaysians. The poverty line in Malaysia is currently at RM950 per month, and
based on the Employee Provident Fund (EPF), a retiree would need an estimate of RM228,000
upon retirement to generate sufficient investment income to live above the poverty line for the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
next 20 years. However, according to Khazanah Research Institute, the average EPF savings of
those  in  the  51–55  age  group  is  only  approximately  RM160,000.  Lack  of  awareness  on  the
importance of having sufficient saving for retirement can lead to profound results, including the
struggle to meet post-retirement standard of living.
Fourth, Malaysians still lack understanding on risk and return and are not able to make rational
financial decisions. We remain prone to financial fraud and abuse. According to the Police, the
number of financial scams reported in Malaysia has risen to an alarming 1,883 cases between
2015 up to the 1st quarter of 2017, accumulating a total loss of RM379 million. This suggests that
greed and ignorance can give way to rational financial decisions for many victims.
Based on these observations, a lot more is left to be desired on the state of financial literacy to
realise financial well-being for Malaysians.
It is acknowledged that improving financial literacy is an intricate and long term journey. Through
continuous  and  effective  financial  education,  consumers  would  be  able  to  improve  their
understanding  of  financial  products  and  services,  and  develop  skills  and  confidence  to  make
informed financial decisions in their daily life. Financial education would encourage consumers to
better  manage  their  finances,  plan  for  the  future  and  manage  risks  associated  to  financial
matters.
While  we  agree  that  financial  education  plays  an  important  role  in  elevating  financial  literacy,
engaging  in  financial  education  alone  is  insufficient.  It  is  equally  important  that  the  acquired
knowledge and skills are put into practice and lead to a positive change in behaviour towards a
healthy  financial  lifestyle.  To  this  effect,  initiatives  to  improve  financial  literacy  must  be
implemented holistically. The ultimate aim is to promote sustainable behavioural changes at all
life stages.
Announcing the development of a national strategy for financial literacy
As reflected in the theme of this conference — “Towards an effective financial education strategy
in Malaysia”,  I would like to share with you that work is currently underway to formulate a 5-year
national strategy to elevate financial literacy. The national strategy rests on three main thrusts –
the three “Cs” – clarity, collaboration and commitment:
Clarity: In terms of having a clear vision to realise financial well-being of Malaysians.
Collaboration:  Financial  literacy  is  a  shared  responsibility  and,  therefore,  requires  strong
collaboration of all stakeholders.
Commitment: Is towards having an outcome-oriented approach to implementation.
Let me elaborate on each of these thrusts.
The first is “clarity”. We have a clear vision — to realise financial well-being of Malaysians by
advancing and elevating financial literacy. Our vision aims to shape the society characterised by
– responsible financial behaviour; the ability to manage finances well; and to achieve financial
security.  A  population  with  a  high-sense  of  financial  well-being  has  the  financial  freedom  of
choice to enjoy life.
Financial  well-being  is  a  pre-condition  for  a  more  productive,  resilient  and  inclusive  economy.
Indeed, the journey to attain individual financial well-being is a journey worth taking and it will be a
long journey too. Thus, over the longer run, the implementation of the national strategy will be
aligned  to  the  longer  term  Government  aspiration  under  the  Finance  Cluster  initiative  of  the
Transformasi Nasional 2050 — or the TN50. I therefore welcome further views and ideas from
the  audience  during  this  conference  on  your  aspirations  to  achieve  financial  well-being  of  our
future Malaysia. 
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Financial well-being is not about being rich. Rather, it is about the ability to live within means and
making  responsible  financial  decisions.  The  state  of  financial  well-being  of  an  individual  is  a
reflection of two factors — firstly, his or her level of financial literacy, and secondly, a person’s
economic background.
Unfavourable personal and economic circumstances, for instance, like most of us – coming from
low and middle income families living in a city, may be more dependent on external factors and
are not easily changed. Financial literacy, on the other hand, resides within an individual where
we  have  control.  Given  the  right  intervention,  motivation  and  discipline,  an  individual’s  level  of
financial  literacy  can  be  improved  from  within.  More  importantly,  such  interventions  can  also
become an important element to uplift a person’s personal and economic circumstances.
The reverse is also true – absence of financial literacy may reverse financial well-being. We have
seen  many  situations  where  individuals  with  favourable  circumstances,  such  as  high  income
professionals,  nevertheless,  fall  into  financial  problems  due  to  poor  personal  financial
management.  On  the  other  hand,  we  often  hear  of  people  with  less  favourable  personal  and
economic  circumstances  living  comfortably  within  their  means  by  practicing  a  “prudent  and
modest lifestyle”.
The  aspiration  and  objectives  of  a  national  strategy  for  financial  literacy  have  been  carefully
articulated by the Financial Education Network (FE Network), which was established in late 2016.
Strategic outcomes, priority areas and target groups have been identified. The national strategy
for  financial  literacy  have  identified  five  strategic  priorities  which  cover  all  life  stages  –  from
nurturing values among young children, to inculcating positive behaviour for adults and preparing
Malaysians to retire comfortably. Specific action plans would be formulated to reach out to the
masses as well as meeting the needs of specific target groups.
The second key thrust is “collaboration”. I believe that shared responsibility and concerted efforts
are  integral  to  the  successful  implementation  of  the  national  strategy  to  realise  our  desired
outcome. It requires strong and long-term efforts by all stakeholders, including regulators, private
and public sectors, non-governmental associations and the consumers themselves to realise the
desired outcome of improving financial literacy.
Each stakeholder has its own strength. While some are subject matter experts providing reliable
financial education to the targeted audience, others may have access to critical contact points to
reach out to the masses. Often times, many agencies are also well-positioned to leverage on
“teachable  moments”  such  as  at  the  stage  of  starting  a  job;  getting  married;  or  preparing  for
retirement, where key financial decisions are made. The national strategy will be a catalyst for
the stakeholders to leverage on each other’s strengths, resources, expertise or even authority in
providing a holistic financial education and in reaching out to Malaysians nationwide. We would
anticipate  some  nudges  or  policy  changes  by  relevant  stakeholders  in  order  to  influence
behavioural change in consumers.
Over the recent years, concerted efforts between the private and public sectors have resulted in
a  number  of  specific  financial  education  initiatives  being  implemented.  For  example,  financial
education  elements  are  integrated  into  the  school  curriculum  for  Year  1,  Year  4  to  6  and
Secondary 1 following effective collaboration between the Ministry of Education and Bank Negara
Malaysia. I am pleased that financial institutions and the private sector are also playing their roles
to  strengthen  learning  in  the  classroom  through  extra-curricular  activities  in  their  respective
signature financial education programmes. Moving forward, more can be done to instil positive
financial values among the 5 million school children through greater sharing of responsibility.
I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  FOMCA’s  on-going  initiatives  in  financial  education  over  the
years. Indeed, FOMCA has been a valuable partner in the education segment. I wish to take this
opportunity  to  welcome  FOMCA’s  willingness  to  join  hands  with  the  FE  Network  to  elevate
financial literacy of our consumers under the national strategy.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
FOMCA, through its affiliates and extensive network nationwide, is well-positioned to contribute
on two fronts. The following are my suggestions. Firstly, FOMCA can further expand outreach to
educate and create awareness on the importance of financial literacy, particularly to the informal
sectors. It is important that our financial education initiatives can be reached to the masses.
Secondly, FOMCA can serve as a medium to inspire the thinking and outlook of various non-
governmental consumer groups – in order to place higher importance for financial education in
their  agenda.  Engagements  with  associations  for  women,  parents,  youths,  athletes  and  even
artistes can help convey financial education concerns and realign mind-sets at the organisational
level.
Financial education is also a two-way process. For it to be impactful, consumers themselves
need to play a role and take charge of their financial well-being. Rather than ‘living for today’, the
culture  of  ‘living  within  means’  should  take  centre  stage  in  our  society.  This  paradigm  shift  is
critical to generate a financially responsible society.
The third and final thrust is “Commitment”. Let me quote Abraham Lincoln, “Commitment is what
transfers a promise into reality”. Unless full commitment is made, elevating literacy levels and
achieving financial well-being will remain as only hopes and dreams of Malaysians.
The FE Network is committed to play a leadership role to achieve the targeted outcomes of our
national  strategy.  I  urge  other  stakeholders  to  join  us  and  to  embark  on  this  journey  together.
Commitment from various agencies at different levels is pertinent, especially in areas where they
have the greatest strength.
Financial  education  initiatives  under  the  national  strategy  will  be  inclusive,  be  evaluated  and
enhanced over time to ensure that they remain relevant and impactful. To this end, I encourage
the  agencies  represented  here  today  to  identify  the  levers  that  contribute  to  better  financial
decisions  by  consumers  in  different  circumstances  through  consumer  behavioural  studies.
Results of such studies can help in the improvement of financial education initiatives, and serve
as a powerful tool to instil commitment of consumers. Take the lead from FOMCA, which has the
experience and expertise to embark on this approach.
In  conclusion,  I  have  shared  with  you  our  vision  and  aspiration  for  financial  well-being  of  the
nation. To realise the vision and aspiration, we need to elevate the financial literacy of Malaysians
through  a  national  strategy  for  financial  literacy  which  will  chart  our  journey  in  realising  the
financial well-being of Malaysians.
However, having a national strategy is only meaningful if it delivers what it is designed to achieve.
This journey will indeed take time, but it is worthwhile, as ‘big journeys always begin in small
steps’. Let this conference be the platform for us to share our thoughts and discuss our ideas to
realise  this  vision.  Thus,  let  me  conclude  by  wishing  you  a  fruitful  session  and  an  engaging
conference ahead.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
