Vítor Constâncio: Challenges for euro area monetary policy in early
2018
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  32nd
International ZinsFORUM, Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 2017.
 The Governing Council of the ECB at its October meeting decided to reduce the rate of monthly
asset purchases. In my remarks today, I would like to explain the rationale behind that decision,
and how it remains consistent with our mandate for price stability.
In  short,  as  our  asset  holdings  rise  and  the  growth  outlook  improves,  unchanged  policy
parameters  actually  imply  greater  monetary  stimulus.  Furthermore,  I  am  confident  that  the
apparent disconnect between growth and inflation is a temporary phenomenon and that inflation
dynamics will increase.
It is therefore possible for us to scale back our net asset purchases, while keeping our policy
sufficiently  accommodative  to  support  those  inflation  dynamics.  If  one  extrapolates  from  the
current brighter economic outlook, one cannot imagine that we would need to extend further our
present  purchases. A  symmetric  approach  to  our  inflation  mission  would  therefore  be  more
appropriate than a one-dimensional promise to do more in case of deflation. Managing QExit will
be challenging, however.
While ending the purchase programme quickly could provoke undue market reactions, we should
not overlook the fact that the longer our asset purchase programme continues, the less effective
the programme and the greater the risks attached to it become. Having a credible view of the exit
is important to keep any such risks contained.
The recent policy decision
Let  me  begin  with  the  adjustments  to  our  monetary  policy  parameters  made  in  the  October
Governing  Council  meeting.  The  asset  purchase  programme  will  be  extended  to  September
2018, at the lower amount of €30 billion per month, or beyond if necessary, until the Governing
Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its definition of price
stability.
This  decision  was  made  in  an  environment  of  robust  demand  growth,  but  with  still  modest
increases in the underlying inflation rate. We have now benefited from 18 uninterrupted quarters
of economic growth, with indicators pointing to continued robust growth. The unemployment gap
– an established measure of labour market slack – is now closed, and employment has reached
its highest ever level in the euro area.
In short, our monetary policy has successfully stimulated demand and returned slack resources
into  productive  use.  One  would  expect  this  strong  demand  to  generate  a  marked  increase  in
inflationary pressures. Yet this has not yet fully materialised in the euro area, although signs of
inflationary pressures and limits to the lags have been constant for the last six month. Why then
have we reduced our purchases before without there being a substantial adjustment in inflation?
The decision to reduce the monthly rate of purchases rests on two factors. The first involves
understanding  how  the  stimulus  provided  by  our  asset  purchases  evolves  over  time,  and  the
second relates to the relationship between output and inflation.
The  recessions  caused  by  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis  required
significant monetary stimulus to counter the large degree of slack in the economy and ensure
that inflation remained consistent with our price stability definition. Monetary policy also had to
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
react to a number of headwinds, which reduced the impact of a given level of interest rates on
economic demand.
Some, such as an ageing population and the slowdown in measured productivity growth,  are
longer  term  in  nature.  Others  were  more  temporary.  The  process  of  deleveraging  pushed  up
desired  saving,  uncertainty  weighed  on  investment  and  a  prolonged  period  of  low  inflation
threatened to de-anchor inflation expectations, with a risk of outright deflation.
1
But as the ongoing recovery gains momentum, the influence of these temporary headwinds is
fading. Fears of deflation have dissipated. In these circumstances, unchanged monetary policy
parameters would in fact imply an unwarranted increase in monetary stimulus, and when one
looks at the 10-year German government bond yield since the summer one might conclude that,
despite fewer purchases, we had eased our monetary policy, a step which does not correspond
to our plan.
A further reason why the Governing Council elected to scale back our monthly purchases is that,
as  the  size  of  our  portfolio  increases,  the  marginal  impact  of  a  given  level  of  purchases
increases.  Owing  to  our  already  large  bond  holdings,  the  free  float  of  securities  is  now
substantially  lower  than  when  we  began  our  programme  in  2015.  This  increases  the  relative
share of our purchases in the market, and therefore the impact of those purchases per billion
euro spent. In other words, a slower pace of purchases today can have an equivalent effect on
yields as a higher pace yesterday.
Moreover, as the stock of bonds rises, our reinvestment needs rise in tandem and we have to
increase our gross purchases – that is, our net purchases plus our reinvestments; and do that in
an environment of lower new borrowing in most euro area countries. This means that, even with
a  slower  pace  of  net  purchases,  the  Eurosystem  will  still  have  a  substantial  presence  in  the
market. Indeed, cumulative redemptions of around €150 billion are expected in 2018.
For all these reasons, an adjustment to our policy stance was necessary at our last meeting. By
the  same  logic,  we  should  be  able  to  further  adjust  our  policy  in  the  future  as  confidence
increases about the robustness of the recovery without choking off growth or inflation. And the
more the recovery advances, the less the economy depends on unconventional monetary policy
stimulus and benefits from balance sheets repair, structural reforms and fiscal tailwinds.
As for the current rate of inflation, it is worth noting that the euro area is by no means the only
developed  economy  exhibiting  robust  output  growth  with  inflation  rates  below  historical
experience. I do not have time today to do justice to all the various explanations put forward by
economists. In truth, I’m not particularly persuaded by any of them. I do not believe that such
factors will prevent us from achieving our mandate over the medium term. We may take a little
longer to achieve our objective, but achieve it we will.
Let me focus on just one explanation – that the relationship between domestic slack and inflation,
termed the Phillips curve, has become so flat that changes in output have little effect on inflation.
Prolonged  periods  of  low  inflation  can  reduce  wage  growth,  since  wage-setters  pay  some
attention to past outturns. Moreover, job insecurity, digitalisation and high unemployment have
encouraged  unions  to  prioritise  employment  over  wages. And  the  deep  downturn  has  led  to
broader slack in the labour market – i.e. involuntary part-time and temporary work – that needs to
be reabsorbed before wage pressures rise.
Yet we are going through a transition phase out of a very deep crisis, and these downward forces
should  wane.  Indeed,  the  difference  between  the  headline  unemployment  rate  and  broader
measures of labour market slack has already edged down in the past two years. The share of
firms  that  say  that  labour  shortages  are  limiting  their  production  is  at  its  highest  level  ever  in
manufacturing  and  services.  This  is  translating  into  higher  wage  growth  now,  and  in  turn
contributing to a pick-up in inflation. Various measures of underlying inflation, which is key for
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
assessing durability, appear to have turned a corner.
I say “appear”, because policymakers should be humble in their pronouncements.  Estimates of
the degree of slack in the economy vary widely and are often revised. Model outputs, however
complex they may be, should be treated with due caution, and judgement based on experience
remains an essential part of the policymaking process. We should avoid making unwarranted
statements about points in time too far into the future over which we have little true visibility.
2
It  also  means  that  policy  decisions  not  only  should  be  based  on  the  most  likely  outcome
predicted  by  models,  but  should  also  take  into  account  the  balance  of  risks.  There  are  times
when the risk of inaction far outstrips the risk of action, and the prudent course is to act with
vigour. Introducing asset purchases to stave off the risk of deflation is one recent example. But
there  are  also  times  when  the  balance  of  risks  lies  in  the  opposite  direction,  and  prudence
dictates that policymakers should be more circumspect.
Future challenges for monetary policy
On that note, while I believe that the forces already at work should in due course bring an end to
the need for asset purchases, it is a matter for the ECB’s Governing Council to decide on the
exact  timing  of  such  a  move.  Our  approach  should  evolve  in  tandem  with  our  improved
expectations  for  developments  in  the  real  economy  and  ensure  that  our  mandate  for  price
stability is fulfilled over the medium term.
Let me instead spend a few moments considering some of the risks we face in implementing our
policy over the coming years. I should also add at this point that these risks are likely to grow the
longer our asset purchase programme continues.
The first risk relates to the subsiding deflationary headwinds I have already mentioned. Could it
be that our current monetary setting is suddenly too accommodative? In short, because of the
uncertainties  and  imprecisions  involved  in  measuring  slack  and  inflationary  pressures  in  the
economy, we might find ourselves behind the curve without realising it. Hence, through the long
and variable lags of monetary policy, we will end up with inflation above the rate consistent with
our price stability mandate.
This would require a sharp correction of the monetary policy settings in years to come. Yet such
a correction of interest rates would pose risks to the financial sector. Banks could be hit hard as
funding costs rise faster than interest income on outstanding loans.
The second risk is a related one, in that these factors could have already unwound, and inflation
could turn out much higher than we expect over the course of 2018. We would find ourselves
behind the curve – and realise it – but the optimal monetary policy response would involve us
having to adjust our forward guidance.
This  forward  guidance  was  put  in  place  to  stabilise  market  expectations  and  to  enhance  the
effectiveness of our asset purchases. This is because we indicate that interest rates will rise
only when we are “well past” the horizon for asset purchases. So prolonging asset purchases
pushes  out  market  expectations  of  the  first  rate  rise,  depressing  interest  rate  expectations
across the curve. Of course, the effectiveness of that guidance also relies on market beliefs of
our future actions.
In  effect,  forward  guidance  is  a  promise  not  to  react  to  data  outturns  in  the  future  so  as  to
persuade markets to maintain low expectations for interest rates. But if we offer guidance that
extends too far into the distance, beyond the point where we can form reasonable expectations
about  the  economy,  it  risks  unduly  tying  our  hands  unless  this  is  backed  by  unanimity  in  the
Governing Council.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is a particular risk at present when, as I described earlier, any future increase in interest
rates needs to be gradual, and hence moving late could result in policy remaining too loose for
too long. Certainly as the time comes to reconsider our monetary policy stance during the course
of 2018, we should reflect at length on the degree to which we wish to pre-commit ourselves.
Risks to monetary policy extend beyond the immediate outlook for inflation. Our policies have
reduced the spread over risk-free interest rates paid by households and firms for their borrowing,
and unblocked the flow of credit to the real economy. Such spreads are at their lowest ever level.
Yet reduced spreads may  encourage  investment  in  businesses  that  are  only  profitable  at  low
interest rates, and such loans risk turning sour as interest rates rise. Indeed, banks and investors
may be tempted to “search for yield”, without being adequately recompensed for the risk they are
taking on. The normal place for monetary policy is not at the long end of the yield curve, but at the
short end.
The focus of monetary policy is of course on our price stability mandate, and ensuring financial
stability  risks  are  adequately  mitigated  is  the  role  of  microprudential  supervision  and
macroprudential  policy.  While  there  is  little  evidence  at  present  of  area-wide  credit-fuelled
bubbles,  there  are  some  notable  localised  pockets,  such  as  in  commercial  real  estate,  and
evidence of “search for yield” behaviour.
The financial crisis showed how such risks can interfere with the smooth operation of monetary
policy  through  their  effects  on  banks,  which  remain  a  key  part  of  the  monetary  transmission
mechanism in the euro area. We should therefore bear in mind that these risks could potentially
complicate our ability to meet our price stability mandate in the future.
There are other longer-term risks to monetary policy, namely through the allocation of credit to
both productive and unproductive firms. By reducing interest rates for all firms, monetary policy
may indirectly permit inefficient firms to remain in business – becoming so-called zombie firms.
This blunts the productivity-enhancing function of downturns to bring about “creative destruction”,
whereby  inefficient  firms  are  forced  out  of  business,  freeing  up  resources  to  move  to  more
efficient  firms  and  boosting  aggregate  productivity.  Indeed,  there  is  evidence  that  creative
destruction  was  weaker  during  the  Great  Recession  than  in  previous  downturns   and  that
4
zombie firms have weighed on productivity growth in some euro area countries.
3
Productivity  growth  plays  an  important  role  in  raising  aggregate  living  standards,  but  it  also
affects  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Higher  productivity  growth  spurs  investment,  and
expectations of higher future income encourage households to spend more today. Thus slower
productivity growth requires monetary policy to lower interest rates by more than would otherwise
be the case to stimulate the economy. Given that interest rates are currently low, and our stock
of purchases is quite large, this would restrict our ability to respond to future downward shocks.
What I have just explained are the economic risks arising from a potential misallocation between
productive and unproductive businesses brought about by our asset purchases. But there are
also legal risks for the ECB regarding our Treaty obligations. Article 127 requires that we “act in
accordance with the principle of an open market economy … favouring an efficient allocation of
resources”. Thus, in respecting our price stability mandate, we should only do as much as is
necessary, and be aware of potential side effects from running expansive policy for too long.
An  important  principle  of  an  open  market  economy  is  price  formation  in  markets  through  the
interaction of private sector agents. It should be those interactions that ensure correct pricing,
notably of credit risk, and not the interactions created by our asset purchases.
It is clear that, with the Eurosystem now owning public and private sector assets amounting to
over €2 trillion, we have become a bigger player in the market than ever before. This means that
we  are  now  buying  bonds  from  more  price-insensitive  investors,  such  as  pension  funds  and
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
insurance  companies,  bidding  up  the  price  at  which  we  need  to  pay.  Liquidity  conditions  are
expected  to  become  more  challenging  in  certain  market  segments  the  longer  the  purchasing
programme remains active.
As such, we have to be mindful not to exert an undue influence on price formation.
Another potential complication relates to our public sector purchases. A key safeguard that we
have set up for these purchases is to operate so-called “blackout periods”, where we do not buy
around the date of a new issuance. This facilitates price formation and ensures that Article 123 of
the Treaty is fully respected – the monetary financing prohibition.
Mindful of self-imposed constraints in this respect the remaining space for both net and gross
purchases will largely be in newly issued bonds. This poses some potential complications that
we have to monitor very closely.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
The recovery in the euro area continues at a robust pace, employment has risen strongly. Both
wages and underlying inflation appear to have turned the corner.
At its October meeting, the Governing Council chose to reduce the rate of net asset purchases,
which, as I have explained today, prevented an unwarranted increase in monetary stimulus. We
will continue to monitor developments in the economy and set policy in a way that is consistent
with our price stability mandate.
In doing so, we must also take into account the balance of risks when setting policy.
If we withdraw our monetary policy stimulus too early and too fast, asset prices could drop and
yields rise sharply, with negative spill-over effects to the economy. At the same time, we have to
be  mindful,  as  our  asset  purchase  programme  continues,  that  the  risks  attached  to  it  may
increase  the  longer  it  lasts.  Nourishing  a  market  belief  that  the  exit  might  be  permanently
postponed could exacerbate the potential cliff effects. A credible perspective on exit is needed to
keep these risks contained.
A sense of proportion will therefore be crucial in managing the QExit.
1
2
3
4
See, e.g., Gordon, R. (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil
War,  Princeton  University  Press.  It  is  worth  noting  that  others  contest  the  slowdown,  arguing  it  relates  to
measurement error, e.g. Brynjolfsson, E. and A. McAfee (2011), Race Against The Machine: How the Digital
Revolution is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the
Economy, Digital Frontier Press.
See Mersch, Y. (2017), “Economic Policy and the Need for Humility”, speech at the Conference “Banking and
Financial Regulation”, Bocconi University, 9 October.
Bartelsman, E., López-Garcia, P. & G. Presidente, “Cyclical and structural variation in resource reallocation in
Europe”, mimeo.
See, e.g. See Gopinath et al. (2015): “Capital Allocation and Productivity in South Europe”, NBER Working Paper
No.  21453;  Borio  et  al.  (2016):  “Labour  reallocation  and  productivity  dynamics:  financial  causes,  real
consequences,” Bank for International Settlements Working Papers 534; Andrews, D. & F. Petroulakis (2017),
“Breaking the shackles: Zombie firms, weak banks and depressed restructuring in Europe”, OECD Economics
Working Papers No.1433.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
