Erkki Liikanen: A tribute to Stanley Fischer
A tribute to Mr Stanley Fischer, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, 13 October 2017.
 Stanley Fischer is leaving the Fed today. Not very many people excel during their careers as both
academics and practitioners at the very highest level. Stanley Fischer is an outstanding example
of those rare people: A first-rank researcher and teacher, who is also one of the world’s most
influential policy-makers, a man who has led some of the most important policy institutions on
earth.
Stan Fischer’s experience and achievements are such that they defy all attempts to summarize
them. Larry Summers was right to write that Stan’s departure is the end of an era.
On a personal level, I appreciate our many encounters and our continuing friendship. It is actually
remarkable  how  many  contacts  Stan  has  had  with  my  home  country,  Finland,  and  Finnish
economists. 
I will mention just four of them.
The first goes back to the 1970’s. Stan had just published the famous macroeconomics textbook
he wrote together with Rudi Dornbusch. Soon after that, Stan spent twice two weeks in Finland,
together  with  Dornbusch,  teaching  the  graduate  course  organized  by  the  Yrjö  Jahnsson
Foundation.
These  courses  were  invaluable  for  the  growth  of  the  economics  profession  in  Finland,  and
dominated graduate education in the country for a decade. As the lead instructors of the 1979
course,  Stan  and  Rudi  Dornbusch  made  a  durable  contribution  to  the  development  of  the
burgeoning economics profession in Finland.
The second is linked to his role as a thesis advisor. As we know, Stan is famous for having been
the thesis advisor or teacher of many of the giants of the economic profession. Ben Bernanke,
Larry Summers, Olivier Blanchard and others come to mind.
For us Finns but for others, too, the late Pentti Kouri is a particularly evocative name: a brilliant
Finnish economist who during his short academic career made a big impression in the field of
international monetary economics. Pentti Kouri hailed from Lapland. His career as a researcher
was like the Lapland summer: bright, but did not last long. Stanley Fischer was Pentti’s thesis
supervisor at the MIT. Stan told me about Pentti: “He came almost every day after 4 o’clock to
talk. Pentti had an incredibly wide scope of interest. So it was very interesting. But finally in April, I
told to him that it is nice to talk but not much has happened with your thesis. Only two months
later he came back with a very good thesis.”
That happened in about 1974. The story describes well Stan’s general approach to leadership:
he is one of the friendliest and warmest people, but also firm when needed.
Third,  he  also  made  great  recruitments. At  the  MIT,  Stan  was  the  one  who  recruited  Bengt
Holmstrom,  the  recent  Nobel  laureate  and  a  University  of  Helsinki  alumnus,  from  Yale  to  the
faculty of his department. Bengt has told me that the presence of Stan at the department was an
important attraction for him, so he was actually quite disappointed when Stan was soon asked
move to the IMF.
Stan’s move to the IMF in 1994 occurred on the eve of very momentous events. Together with
managing  director  Michel  Camdessus,  they  navigated  the  Fund,  and  the  global  economy,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
through the turbulence of the 1990’s, which included the Asian and Russian crises, for example.
They also witnessed the formation of the euro area. We all know that Stan, as the first deputy
managing director at the IMF, was much respected and admired in the Fund, by the staff and by
the executive directors.
Stan is one of the fathers of New Keynesian economics, which is now the dominant and evolving
approach in leading economics departments and policy institutions. His choice of approach has
been motivated by the desire to combine theoretical rigor with applicability to real-world problems
of real-world people.
When I was appointed Governor of the Bank of Finland, before starting my term I naturally asked
for some briefings about what was going on in the world of central banks. Our head of research
told me, before you read anything else, start with this. And he gave me a copy of Stan’s essay
written for the Bank of England tercentenary conference of 1994, titled “Modern central banking”.
Indeed, it is all there: price stability, independence, accountability and transparency. That gave
me a good start, for which I am grateful.
Finally, I come to the fourth connection between Stan and Finland. As Governor of the Bank of
Finland, I have had the privilege of meeting Stan often and in different places: in the U.S., at the
BIS  meetings,  in  Israel,  and  elsewhere.  We  were  particularly  honoured  when  Stan,  then
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  took  the  time  to  participate  in  the  Bank  of  Finland’s  200th
anniversary conference in Helsinki in 2011.
In  the  remarks  he  gave  in  that  conference,  Stan  asked  whether  a  more  developed  financial
system is associated with higher growth rates. He expressed some skepticism on the issue. In
his  early  research,  Stan  had  found  a  negative  correlation  between  financial  liberalization  and
economic growth. For example, Japan growing much faster than the U.S. and the U.K. Stan’s
question, does tighter financial regulation necessarily come with a cost in terms of growth, is just
as timely now as then.
I visited the Bank of Israel twice while Stanley was the Governor there. During my first visit, Stan
organized a seminar where I gave a talk about the ECB and the Eurosystem. I told the audience
that it was my first visit to Israel, but I had had a particular opportunity to learn about the country
and the culture. During my high school years, I had been an exchange student in Yeshivah of
Flatbush in Brooklyn, New York. Then a tall man in the audience stood up and asked: “Do you
remember me, I was the captain of the basketball team?” Of course: he was Ed Offenbach, now
a senior economist at the Bank of Israel.
Stanley Fischer has left a deep impact on me and others by his intellectual and moral integrity.
We feel having been in a particularly privileged position to have worked with him.
My  wife Assi  and  I  have  also  enjoyed  our  many  encounters  with  Rhoda  and  Stanley  Fischer
during our many years in the central banking community. They stay in our memory.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
