Gent  Sejko:  Banking  developments  and 
financial  market
infrastructure. The role of structure, size and market infrastructure
in risk mitigation and financial intermediation
Welcome address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Annual Conference
2017 of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 9 November 2017.
 Your Excellency Mr President,
Honourable Mr Minister,
Dear Prof. Anastasakis,
Honourable Governors,
Your excellencies Ambassadors, dear guests and participants,
I would like to warmly welcome you to the Annual Conference of the Bank of Albania. For almost
two decades, the Conference has become a prevalent event in the research and professional
activity of the Bank. Our analyses and conclusions, over the years, have endeavoured to respond
to  many  challenges  and  dilemmas  for  our  national  economy  and  beyond.  Thanks  to  the
cooperation  with  the  University  of  Oxford,  more  specifically  with  St.  Anthony’s  College,  this
Conference has aimed, and I believe it has succeeded in doing so, at exploring and providing
answers for a number of issues, which, given their nature, effect and interlinking, are present
across the region of the South East Europe.
The  theme  of  this  year  focuses  on  similar  issues.  During  the  day,  national  and  international
experts  of  the  economy  and  finance  as  well  as  academics  will  analyse  the  latest  trends  and
developments  in  the  financial  sector  in  the  region,  focusing  on  potential  implications  on  the
macroeconomic  equilibrium  and  financial  stability  of  each  economy.  The  theme  of  the
Conference is relevant to both the current and the future developments. From the international
perspective,  it  seems  that  the  overall  situation  is  increasingly  more  supportive.  Advanced
economies, together with large emerging economies are in a phase of full recovery, underpinned
mainly by the boost in aggregate demand. Interestingly, the euro area, which includes most of
our trading partners, is experiencing an overall positive momentum concerning economic growth,
and forecasts are optimistic.
There is a broad consensus that the economies of the South East Europe region, in the first half
of 2017, registered a satisfactory performance in terms of recovery; in the meantime, according
to key indicators, such performance is expected to strengthen further in the third quarter of this
year. Albania is no exception to the regional context.
In  the  previous  quarter,  the  economic  and  financial  situation  in Albania  was  set  on  a  path  of
constant  improvement.  Growth  and  employment  indicators  followed  an  upward  curve  and
expectations for 2018 remain positive. Consumption and foreign investments have contributed
positively to economic activity and are expected to generate further increase in productivity and
competitiveness. At the same time, income from the export of goods, and especially of services
contributed to the reduction of the current deficit and the strengthening of the external position of
the economy. The effects of the monetary policy have maintained the stimulating trend, aiming at
closing the negative gaps of prices and output.
Financial  stability  is  also  characterised  by  a  positive  situation.  The  notable  decline  in  non-
performing loans in the balance sheet of the banking system is the most prominent achievement
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
in this aspect. The measures taken in mid-2016 have produced a substantial effect, materialised
in the reduction of non-performing loans by around 10 percentage points, below the maximum
level registered in 2015. It is always a pleasure to note that credit growth has been positive. In
particular, the lek credit has grown rapidly, compared to the foreign currency credit, which makes
the banking system and the private sector healthier, and enhances the effectiveness of Bank of
Albania’s monetary policy. Positive developments in the banking sector and the economy have
supported  the  further  improvement  of  capitalisation,  liquidity  and  profitability  indicators.  Two
months from the end of the year, in our assessment, the banking industry in Albania enjoys full
financial soundness, against the backdrop of an optimal liquidity and capitalisation situation, a key
prerequisite for financially supporting the economic developments of the country.
We  have  also  paid  particular  attention  to  legal,  institutional,  regulatory  and  supervisory
developments, notably the drafting and implementation of the resolution law.
Dear participants,
This  year  marked  25  years  from  the  establishment  of  a  two-tier  system  in  Albania,  which
stipulates the banking system as the provider of financial and banking services in the economy,
and the central bank as the administrator of the monetary policy and regulator and supervisor of
the banking system. This first step was followed by other steps related to other segments of the
financial market, such as the securities and capital markets, including the establishment of the
relevant supervisory and regulatory institutions.
Initiatives in these aspects have promoted a constant expansion of the financial market, in terms
of both diverse institutions and number of financial products and trading volumes. Yet, despite
these  developments,  the  financial  system  remains  dominated  by  the  banking  system  and
relevant developments in it. The last financial stability report of the Bank of Albania states that
banks account for around 90% of total financial system assets, equivalent to 92% of the GDP,
whereas the rest of the financial sector shares only 10% of the financial system total assets.
Assessments and studies of the Bank of Albania, as well as comparative studies by third parties,
particularly by the International Monetary Fund, show that the financial distribution and expansion
in the Albanian financial market is close to the equilibrium, dictated by the Albanian economy and
consumers.  Moreover,  financial  intermediation  indicators,  as  a  percentage  of  the  Gross
Domestic Product, are at similar levels to those in other countries of the region.
The dominance of the banking segment has naturally led to a higher level of concentration of
financial  products  and  services  in  its  favour.  More  than  80%  of  resident  investments  in  the
financial system are in the form of deposits and current accounts in banks. Only little more than
12% are in the form of government securities, whereas the rest, around 6.5%, are invested in
investment or private pension funds, accounting for only 0.1% of total financial system assets.
Statistics show that only a small number of companies operate in other segments of the financial
sector,  and  their  activity  in  terms  of  the  Domestic  Product  or  of  the  financial  market  remains
insignificant.
Regarding the above, we may logically conclude that the financial market architecture may not be
considered complete yet. Financial instruments with long-term maturities are rare, whereas the
short-term  ones  outside  the  banking  system  are  apathetic  and  fragmented,  in  terms  of  both
products and markets. An outcome of such a financial architecture is a kind of added pressure
on the banking system, depriving the economy of other financing alternatives, beyond what the
banks offer.
This vacuum may not be filled with strained efforts by the banking system. It has been broadly
accepted  that  each  segment  of  the  financial  market  plays  a  complementary  rather  than
substituting role. I could mention a number of examples to illustrate my point, but for the moment
I would rather not, as in the next panels these issues will be discussed in greater detail by other
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
colleagues and academics during the day.
Overall,  the  above  elaboration  regards  investment-related  financial  institutions  and  financial
instruments. However, it must be noted that similar problems characterise the other extreme of
the  financial  market,  the  corporate  –  or  enterprises  sector  –  as  we  call  it  in Albania.  Bank  of
Albania  surveys  show  that  micro  units  face  shortage  of  financial  resources  and  have  limited
access to credit. Thus, more than 1/3 of respondent enterprises consider the low level of access
to finance and the cost related to it as the main cause for not expanding the activity. These micro
units, which are basically family-run businesses, have a greater need to cooperate with non-bank
financial  institutions,  due  to  difficulties  they  have  in  fulfilling  the  requirements  for  collateral  or
detailed financial documentation, criteria that banks require. This is another argument that leads
to the logical conclusion that, in addition to own capital and bank credit, these enterprises would
benefit greatly from other segments of the financial market.
The  low  level  of  financial  inclusion  of  the  population  is  another  element  that  prevents  the
deepening  and  expansion  of  the  financial  market  in  Albania.  Latest  data  from  the  World
Development Indicators show that only 38% of adults have an account with a financial institution,
while  only  6%  and  22%  of  adults  have  a  credit  card  and  a  debit  card,  respectively.  Financial
inclusion  may  not  be  increased  only  through  the  banking  system.  The  financial  system,
especially the capital market and the corporate securities market should play a significant role in
increasing financial inclusion.
I take this opportunity to emphasise that, in addition to the need for expanding and deepening the
financial  market,  it  is  necessary  to  increasingly  pay  attention  to  the  management  of  risk  that
accompanies  any  financial  investment.  We  are  witnesses  of  a  rapid  technological  evolution,
which has practically eliminated physical boundaries, has eased access to electronic investment
platforms,  and  has  rendered  very  difficult  the  supervision  and  regulation  of  many  innovative
financial instruments that are traded in these platforms. The phenomenon of informality coupled
with the speed of innovation in the field of financial instruments are a real risk for every investor
that is naively driven by profit and does not stop to analyse the magnitude and nature of risk to
which  he  is  exposed.  Anyhow,  inclusion  should  take  place  carefully,  relying  on  specialised
financial intermediaries and auxiliaries, whose activity is regulated and supervised by a legitimate
authority in Albania or abroad.
Dear participants,
The  depth  and  expansion  of  the  financial  markets  determines  the  set  of  financial  instruments
eligible for trading, in a broad spectrum from the maturity perspective. These instruments are
nothing more than consecutive steps in the monetary policy decisions pass-through mechanism.
The whole process of instrument trading serves to determine the value of assets, the price of
risk and savings, and, eventually, the propensity toward consumption, savings or investments. In
this  sense,  the  existence,  completeness,  and  effectiveness  of  the  financial  market  play  a
significant  role  in  the  monetary  policy  pass-through.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  central  bank
places its focus on these markets and on their proper functioning.
Based on these specific reasons, the Bank of Albania has initiated, time ago, a series of actions
for creating a more dynamic financial market. The macro-prudential measures taken with regard
to liquidity and capitalisation; limitations placed on positions with non-resident banks, provisions
and  collateral;  and  the  package  of  measures  for  reducing  non-performing  loans  are  steps  to
remedy  problems  related  to  the  shallowness  and  narrowness  of  the  market,  the  low  financial
inclusion, and the inadequate financial education.
Studies and analyses of the Bank of Albania support the logical conclusion that the development
of  the  financial  market  is  an  important  factor  for  boosting  economic  activity  and  enhancing
welfare in general. At the Bank of Albania, we believe that the current structure of the banking
market promotes competition in relation to banking products and services. However, the further
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
expansion and deepening of the market is a present challenge for all the relevant actors involved.
The banking industry, the Bank of Albania, other segments of the financial market as both as
actors and as regulators, the government, the academia and experts of the field, should be all
involved in this effort. Our ambitions should aim at having a dynamic and liquid financial market,
with upward trading volumes, and a widening spectrum of instruments, including a prolongation
of maturity horizons and prudent risk management. This framework should be accompanied by
added  transparency  in  all  the  phases  of  trading,  with  financial  education  assuming  a  special
place.  Only  in  this  way  would  we  be  able  to  deepen  and  expand,  in  real  terms,  the  financial
market,  and  through  it  a  higher  efficiency  in  implementing  economic  and  financial  policies,  in
mobilising and using national savings, in financial inclusion, in economic activity growth, and in
enhancing the welfare of the population in the long run.
In the hope that the proceedings of this conference will be characterised by a fruitful exchange of
ideas and views by the participants in this room,
Thank you for your attention!
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
