Marzunisham  Omar:  Supporting  the  robust  growth  of  Islamic
finance in Malaysia
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Marzunisham  Omar,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  Malaysia  Country  Showcase  -  IFSB  Summit  2017, 
Kuala Lumpur, 22 October 2017.
 Welcome to Malaysia Country Showcase. I would like to express my sincere appreciation to all of
you for being here today. I hope that today’s showcase will enhance your understanding of the
critical  role  that  professional  ancillary  services  and  talent  development  institutions  play  in
supporting the robust growth of Islamic finance in Malaysia. Indeed, these professional services,
which include Shariah consultancy, legal, accounting and talent development, are an integral part
that make up Malaysia’s vibrant Islamic finance system.
With Islamic finance fast gaining a strong foothold in many countries, Malaysia hopes to be able
to  contribute  to  this  dynamic  phase  of  Islamic  finance  development  by  providing  an  array  of
reliable, high quality professional services; one that is backed by decades of experience.
Today, Malaysia has a competitive Islamic finance that forms part of the mainstream financial
system. Islamic banking assets now account for 28% of Malaysia’s total banking assets, while
more  than  half  of  our  bond  market  comprises  sukuk.  We  have  a  diverse  range  of  Islamic
financial institutions, both domestic and foreign, which provide competitive, innovative products to
meet the varied and unique needs of individuals and businesses.
What we have today was not built overnight. The Islamic finance journey in Malaysia has been
long and its beginnings were humble. It is the product of three decades’ work in building strong
foundations for the sector to thrive and grow. In reflecting on our journey of developing a vibrant
Islamic  financial  system,  imperatives  in  three  areas  stand  out  –  Infrastructure;  Players;  and
Talent.
Allow me to briefly elaborate on these three areas.
First,  infrastructure.  Similar  to  developing  a  conventional  financial  system,  having  a  robust
regulatory  and  supervisory  regime  is  critical  for  the  development  of  a  strong,  resilient  and
inclusive Islamic financial system. What is unique about Islamic finance is the need for a clear
Shariah governance framework to ensure Shariah compliance. In Malaysia, the Islamic Financial
Services Act  2013  sets  out  a  regulatory  framework  for  end-to-end  Shariah  compliance.  Bank
Negara  Malaysia  is  vested  with  comprehensive  legal  powers  under  this  Act  to  regulate  and
supervise the Islamic financial system. Complementary to this is the role of the Shariah Advisory
Council in ensuring greater certainty in Shariah. While our Shariah Governance Framework has
met  its  intended  objectives,  we  are  now  in  the  midst  of  reviewing  and  strengthening  the
framework in response to the evolvement of the industry. The Securities Commission Malaysia
and the Labuan Financial Services Authority are also vested with similar powers, and are equally
committed to building a robust and comprehensive framework for Islamic finance in Malaysia.
Our  policies  also  strive  to  be  forward  looking  and  responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  world.  For
example,  the  Sustainable  and  Responsible  Investment  or  SRI  Framework  developed  by  the
Securities Commission has enabled the issuance of SRI sukuk for education in 2015, and green
sukuk just a few months back, which was the world’s first. Our Islamic finance industry is also
backed  by  robust  market  infrastructure,  including  an  Islamic  Interbank  Money  Market  that
provides funding and liquidity support for the Malaysian Islamic banking system. For Islamic fund
management,  Bursa  Malaysia’s  Islamic  securities  exchange  platform  provides  a  marketplace
that is conducive for Shariah investing.
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, a vibrant Islamic financial system must have a wide array of players and participants.
These range from Islamic financial institutions, fund management companies, takaful operators
and investors – both retail and institutional investors.
Another  key  player  of  a  vibrant  Islamic  financial  system  is  professional  services  firms.  In
Malaysia,  these  firms  play  a  critical  role  as  facilitators  of  growth,  providing  support  to  various
stakeholders of Islamic finance. We have more than 60 experienced professional services firms
offering specialised services in Islamic finance. Collectively, this ancillary network offers a wealth
of expertise – in Shariah advisory, law, I.T, tax, audit, research and training, to name a few. Over
the years, some of these professional services firms have developed a strong reputation for their
technical excellence, and have established an international presence.
Our professional services firms are keen to share their experiences and to assist foreign clients
and  countries  interested  to  develop  Islamic  finance.  Our  experiences  include  provision  of
advisory services to Shariah funds and asset management companies in the U.S, Switzerland
and South Korea; and to sovereigns and corporates on sukuk issuances. Our legal firms have
also played a part in the development of legal and regulatory frameworks for Islamic finance in a
number of countries. Contributions have also been made in the area of research, education and
training, with more than 50 international projects, training and customised programmes delivered
to international clients since 2010.
The third imperative is in the area of talent. The success of an Islamic finance system depends
critically on having the right set of quality talent. This is more so as we aspire for Islamic finance
to  reach  greater  heights,  in  this  new  normal  of  rapid  advances  in  technology  and  changing
demographics.
Accordingly,  Malaysia  has  made  significant  investments  in  developing  a  complete  ecosystem
dedicated  to  meeting  the  human  capital  needs  of  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  Our  talent
infrastructure caters to every level, for both academic and professional needs. Dedicated talent
entities for Islamic finance have also been set up, such as INCEIF – a global university for Islamic
finance  –  and  ISRA,  a  globally  recognised  institution  in  enriching  research  and  knowledge  on
Shariah.
An important aspect of talent development is elevating the quality and professionalism of talents
in Islamic finance – not just in Malaysia, but globally. In realising this vision, the Chartered Institute
of Islamic Finance Professionals was set up to promote the highest standards of professional
practice among Islamic finance practitioners. This is complemented by the establishment of the
Association  of  Shariah  Advisors  in  Islamic  Finance  to  enhance  the  qualification  and
professionalism of the Shariah fraternity. Two specialised certifications will be launched by the
Association  early  next  month  which  aim  to  strengthen  technical  and  ethical  rigour  of  Shariah
advisors and practitioners.
With  an  increasing  range  of  options  for  professional  qualifications  for  Islamic  finance,  the
Finance  Accreditation  Agency’s  Islamic  Finance  Professional  Qualification  Structure  –  to  be
launched today – is a timely and much welcome milestone. As a learning reference structure, it
streamlines and classifies the levels for Islamic finance professional learning programmes. For
Islamic  finance  professionals  and  the  organisations  they  represent,  this  will  help  them  make
better informed decisions when evaluating the suitability of the wide array of professional learning
programmes on offer globally.
I  hope  that  today’s  event  would  help  bring  you  a  step  closer  to  realising  your  respective
organisation’s goals in Islamic finance. With that, I wish you a productive afternoon.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
