 DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF  
THE RETAIL PAYMENTS ECOSYSTEM 
  CYBER SECURITY – THE BALANCE BETWEEN 
COOPERATION AND REGULATION 
KEYNOTE SPEECH BY FABIO PANETTA, DEPUTY GOVERNOR OF BANCA D’ITALIA 
At the joint ECB and Banca d’Italia conference 
Rome, 1 December 2017 
Information  and  communication  technologies  play  a  fundamental  role  for 
people,  businesses  and  the  public  sector.  Digital  transformation  is  modifying 
the economic system and the whole of society at unprecedented speed.  
Innovation is having a powerful effect on the financial sector. The value chain 
is becoming more complex, and the participation of non-financial providers is 
increasing. The tech giants as well as the new fintech start-ups are expanding 
the  supply  of  innovative  services  to  a  broad  and  diverse  customer  base 
through new business models.  
As a result,  confidence in the financial sector  is no longer based on bilateral 
trust  between  customers  and  service  providers  but  is  dependent  on  the 
governance of digitalization and especially on the reliability and safety of the 
products offered. 
Emerging risks in the digital ecosystem 
The increasing role of digital platforms is creating enormous benefits for users. 
At the same time it is offering ill-timed advantages for new groups of hostile 
agents, such as hacktivists, fraudsters and criminal and terrorist organizations. 
By exploiting the vulnerabilities within cyberspace, these agents may endanger 
the provision of digital services or disrupt critical infrastructures. 
The  new  risks  are  exacerbated  by  the  complex  network  of  interconnections 
that forms the digital ecosystem: the ‘Internet of Things’ is exploding and the 
number of interconnected devices is expected to grow  at an unprecedented 
    1
e
g
a
P
 pace,  to  more  than  200  billion  in  2020.1  The  area  at  risk  is  expanding 
enormously. Any weakness in security controls, any vulnerability in technology 
may offer an entry point for cyber attacks.  
In  the  financial  sector,  cyber  attacks  can  create  disruptions  that  propagate 
instantly  and  globally  with  effects  that  are  hard  to  predict.  Recent  cyber 
attacks,  like  the  one  against  the  Central  Bank  of  Bangladesh,  exemplify  the 
vulnerabilities  –  of  both  process  and  technology  –  that  affect  interbank 
payments and core financial infrastructures, which were once considered less 
exposed to cyber risks. As the Financial Stability Board has emphasized, certain 
cyber attacks2 show that the vulnerability of financial institutions is a systemic 
issue, although it is unlikely as yet to represent a real threat to global financial 
stability.   
These  attacks  were  a  wake-up  call  for  regulators  and  financial  authorities, 
emphasizing  that  the  safety  of  cyberspace  is  not  just  a  prerequisite  for  the 
reliability  of  financial  services  but  also  an  essential  element  of  financial 
stability.  Cyber  risks  threaten  the  core  functions  of  the  financial  sector, 
including  banking  operations,  payments  and  securities  settlement.  Central 
banks and, more generally, public authorities may themselves be on the radar 
screen of cyber attackers; cyber security is no longer a matter for specialists 
but a policy priority.   
The pillars of an effective cyber security strategy  
In today’s world, central banks, regulators and supervisors face the formidable 
challenge  of  ensuring  that  the  technological  revolution  does  not  undermine 
trust and confidence in the financial system. This is no easy task: like acrobats 
walking  a  tightrope,  the  authorities  must  strike  the  right  balance  between 
potentially  diverging  forces  such  as  innovation,  complexity  and  the  safety  of 
the system.  
This  entails  enhancing  and  complementing  the  traditional  regulatory  and 
supervisory  approaches  with  the  adoption  of  an  effective  toolkit  tailored  to 
address cyber risks.  
 1   From  2  billion  in  2006.    Source:  World  Economic  Forum,  Mitigating  Risks  in  the  Innovation 
Economy. How Emerging Technologies are Changing the Risk Landscape, (September 2017).  
2   Such as the Wannacry campaign in 2017 and the Corkow Malware in 2015.   
  2
e
g
a
P
 In  2016  the  G7  published  a  set  of  widely  applicable  recommendations 
encapsulating  cyber  security  best  practices  for  public  and  private  financial 
entities.  They  were  followed  last  October  by  the  ‘fundamental  elements  for 
effective assessment of cyber security for the financial sector’.  
Having in mind these G7 principles, I would like to focus the rest of my speech 
on  the  main  pillars  on  which  –  from  a  central  bank’s  view  –  an  effective 
strategy should be based: regulation, cooperation and risk awareness.  
The first pillar: regulation 
is  a  crucial  component  of  an  effective  strategy  to  ensure 
Regulation 
sustainable  innovation  and  preserve  cyber  security.  A  number  of  European 
laws have recently introduced requirements and obligations for both private 
companies  and  public  bodies  in  order  to  increase  cyber  security  in  critical 
sectors of the economy.  
A  general  framework  is  given  by  the  Network  and  Information  Security 
Directive  (NIS-D),  which  establishes  security-related  obligations  for  critical 
service  providers,  including  credit  institutions,  stock  exchanges  and  financial 
infrastructures.  To  guarantee  data  protection  and  the  privacy  of  personal 
information,  the  General  Data  Protection  Regulation  also  imposes  strict 
security requirements for private and public entities, including financial firms.   
Specifically  focusing  on  the  financial  field,  the  second  Payment  Services 
Directive  (PSD2)  has 
introduced  security  requirements  throughout  the 
payment cycle: from payer authentication to communication between service 
providers,  security  risk  management  by  financial  firms  and  the  reporting  of 
major incidents to the authorities. The European Banking Authority (EBA) was 
delegated to issue secondary regulation.  
The  Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial  market  infrastructures  was 
published by CPMI-IOSCO in 2016. To ensure its harmonized implementation 
within the euro area, the Eurosystem has delivered a cyber resilience strategy 
that  national  supervisors  must  adopt  to  enhance  the  cyber  resilience 
framework of financial institutions.   
However, regulation alone is not sufficient to protect the financial system from 
cyber  risks. 
Indeed,  excessive  reliance  on  regulation  may  even  have 
undesirable side effects owing to the complex interactions between different 
regulatory 
legislation  or 
levels,  such  as  domestic  versus 
international 
  3
e
g
a
P
 economy-wide versus sector-specific rules. Hence, other forms of intervention 
are necessary, such as cooperation.    
The second pillar: cooperation  
Owing  to  the  existence  of  externalities,  individual  intermediaries  may  lack 
sufficient  incentive  to  contribute  to  the  supply  of  a  common  good  –  cyber 
security  –  that  would  generate  benefits  for  their  direct  competitors  as  well. 
They may be tempted, therefore, to free ride on the action of other companies 
and  to  under-invest  in  security-enhancing  projects.  In  this  situation,  central 
banks, as third parties entrusted with preserving financial stability, may act as 
a  catalyst  to  stimulate  cooperation,  centralized  cyber  threat  intelligence  and 
information sharing initiatives.3  
At European level, the recent establishment of the European Cyber Resilience 
Board  (ECRB)  under  the  Eurosystem  cyber  resilience  strategy  is  a  valuable 
example  of  virtuous  cooperation  among  public  authorities,  financial  market 
infrastructures and critical service providers to enhance the cyber resilience of 
the European financial ecosystem.  
Financial authorities may also leverage such cooperative initiatives to promote 
effective  practices  and  tools  for  cyber  risk  assessment,  including  simulations 
and tests, which are difficult for individual firms to implement in isolation. This 
is  a  new  paradigm,  in  which  authorities  and  regulated  entities  work  closely 
together,  complementing  compliance  with  a  collaborative  approach.  This 
allows  the  authorities  to  gain  a  deep  understanding  of  the  level  of  cyber 
resilience achieved and of any additional initiatives required.  
The third pillar: promoting risk awareness 
The  third  pillar  of  action  focuses  on  the  human  factor,  as  in  cyber  security 
people are still the weakest link. For example, the spread of cyber extortion 
(ransomware)  –  which  is  becoming  one  of  the  major  threats  to  digital 
businesses – can be attributed to several factors. Some are technical,4 but the 
 3   Threat intelligence may support financial institutions in taking the right decisions to prevent cyber 
attacks,  effectively  protect  their  critical  assets  and  respond  appropriately  in  the  event  of  a 
successful  cyber  attack.  Information  sharing  about  cyber  events  through  trusted  channels 
facilitates  a  sector-wide  response  to  large-scale  cyber  incidents  (CPMI-IOSCO,  Cyber  guidance, 
2016). 
4   We refer to the growth of ransomware-as-a-service, easily and cheaply accessed on the dark-web 
by cyber criminals, or the availability of crypto-currencies as a ransom payment tool.  Today, cyber 
attacks can easily be organized, even by purchasing as-a-service packages and simple downloads 
for  installation  on  rogue  servers.  In  2016,  638  million  ransomware  attacks  were  recorded,  167 
  4
e
g
a
P
 most significant ones are totally human related: the growing habit of working 
remotely on personal devices, combined with users’ lack of attention to cyber 
risks,  can  easily  open  the  door  for  attacks  on  corporate  critical  information 
assets. Employees, consumers and public officials need to be educated about 
the risks that can arise from new technologies. The financial authorities are in 
the  best  position  to  promote  long-term  education  initiatives  and  cyber 
awareness campaigns.  
The role of the authorities: the experience of the Banca d’Italia  
For central banks, translating all these principles into concrete action means 
first  of  all  strengthening  internal  governance  and  cyber  security  capabilities. 
Let me talk about the Banca d’Italia’s experience in this area.  
To ensure a comprehensive strategic vision and the alignment of internal and 
institutional policies, a cyber security steering committee has recently been set 
up at Board level.  
Under this governance, the Banca d’Italia’s three-year strategic plan envisages 
two specific initiatives: one focuses on protecting the Bank’s critical assets by 
reorganizing security functions inside the IT Department; the other focuses on 
enhancing  the  cyber  resilience  of  Italy’s  financial  sector  by  adapting  the 
Eurosystem  cyber  strategy  in  line  with  the  Italian  National  Cyber  Security 
Framework and keeping an open dialogue with the competent national bodies. 
On the cooperation front, the Banca d’Italia and the Italian Banking Association 
have sponsored the establishment of the Italian Financial Cyber Security Unit 
(called  CERTFin),  which  coordinates  information  sharing  and  cyber  threat 
intelligence  among  the  participating  financial  companies,  allowing  them  to 
share  critical  information  and  enhance  the  awareness  of  cyber  risk  beyond 
what would be possible within the perimeter of their own organization.  
Since  January  2017,  CERTFin  has  examined  more  than  800  cyber  events, 
sharing  with  its  members  any  lessons  drawn  and  circulating  more  than  150 
warnings on potential compromises to individual financial firms. It cooperates 
with  similar  national  and  international  cyber  security  bodies.  Furthermore, 
CERTFin  cooperates  closely  with  government  cyber  security  agencies, 
contributing to national cyber security. 
 times 
report 
www.forbes.com/sites/leemathews/2017/02/07/2016-saw-an-insane-rise-in-the-number-of-
ransomware-attacks/#3d5df45558dc).  
SonicWall, 
(source: 
annual 
more 
2017 
2015 
than 
  5
e
g
a
P
 Conclusions   
Digital  innovation  and  cyber  security  are  two  faces  of  the  same  coin  and  so 
cannot  be  addressed  separately.  Hostile  agents  and  criminals  have  always 
existed. However, compared with other threats or other types of crime, cyber 
attacks  are  rapidly  evolving  and,  given  the  central  role  of  cyberspace  in 
modern economies, represent a concrete global risk.  
In  the  final  communiqué  of  the  G7  meeting  held  in  Bari  in  2017  under  the 
Italian  Presidency,  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  stated  that 
they  ‘recognise  that  cyber  incidents  represent  a  growing  threat  for  our 
economies and that appropriate economy-wide policy responses are needed. 
No  point  of  cyberspace  can  be  absolutely  secure  as  long  as  cyber  threats 
persist in the surrounding environment’.  
Transposing this principle into concrete action is challenging and requires us to 
recognize  that  cyberspace  is  a  global  public  good.  Ensuring  its  security, 
openness, reliability and interoperability falls under the joint responsibility of 
governments, public institutions, private industry and researchers. How should 
we tackle this challenge?  
One answer lies in the words of the Roman philosopher Seneca:  Longum iter 
est per praecepta, breve et efficax per exempla.5  
After  two  thousand  years,  this  sentence  is  more  than  ever  pertinent  in 
describing an effective approach to innovation. In the field of cyber security, 
regulatory or supervisory tools may become less effective unless accompanied 
by  other  concrete  action:  as  our  experience  has  shown,  the  authorities  may 
support joint initiatives with the private sector on information sharing and the 
promotion of best practices, playing a role as trust-builder to foster the broad 
and open participation of all stakeholders. This approach may help us respond 
appropriately  to  digitalization  by  reconciling 
innovation,  security  and 
competitiveness.  
Thank you for your attention. 
   6
e
g
a
P
 5  
‘The way is long if one follows precepts, short and effective if one follows examples’. 
