Thomas  Jordan:  Central  bank  independence  since  the  financial
crisis - the Swiss perspective
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss
National  Bank,  at  the  CFS  Presidential  Lectures,  Goethe  University,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  9
November 2017.
 The  complete  speech  can  be  found  in  German  on  the  Swiss  National  Bank’s  website
(www.snb.ch). 
The  financial  crisis  presented  central  banks  with  significant  challenges.  They  resorted  to
unconventional monetary policy instruments and expanded their field of operations. As a result,
central banks have faced growing criticism. In particular, the question has arisen as to whether
their independence is still justified.
The  experience  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  since  the  financial  crisis  has  shown  that
independence  continues  to  be  sensible  and  necessary;  central  banks  can  best  fulfil  their
mandate of ensuring price stability and contributing to the stability of the financial system if they
are protected from political pressure.
Central bank independence will only endure as long as politicians and the public are convinced of
its benefits. To this end, central banks must fulfil their mandate to the best of their knowledge and
ability,  while  retaining  a  sense  of  proportion  and  a  long-term  perspective  when  implementing
measures.  Not  every  short-term  deviation  from  an  objective  requires  an  activist  response.
Moreover, central banks must be conscious of their limits and avoid an accumulation of tasks.
For an independent central bank to be perceived as legitimate in a democracy, it must be granted
a clear mandate against which its performance can be assessed. However, the environment in
which  central  banks  operate  is  highly  complex,  and  conditions  can  change  rapidly.  For  this
reason, mandates usually only sketch out a framework for central banks’ operations. This gives
them much-needed flexibility in difficult situations.
As a counterweight to its independence, a central bank has a duty to report on its actions, and
the results. Indeed, the SNB has regularly provided detailed reports on matters relating to both
monetary policy and financial stability. For example, it has explained the rationale behind deciding
to discontinue the minimum exchange rate or introduce the negative interest rate, and how these
measures have helped it to fulfil its mandate.
As  regards  financial  stability,  the  fact  that  macroprudential  instruments  often  have  powerful
distribution effects speaks against handing over the entire responsibility for such instruments to
the  central  bank.  In  contrast  to  monetary  policy,  these  measures  are  sometimes  targeted  at
specific  sectors  and  groups,  and  thus  also  have  fiscal  implications.  In  Switzerland,
macroprudential  tasks  have  therefore  been  divided  up  between  the  government,  the  financial
market supervisory authority and the SNB. The SNB is responsible for assessing the systemic
importance of banks and financial market infrastructures, and plays a key role in the deployment
of the countercyclical capital buffer.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
