Yandraduth Googoolye: Core elements of banking supervision
Address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the
IMF's Africa Training Institute, Ebene, 17 November 2017.
Course on Core Elements of Banking Supervision
 I  wish  to  begin  by  thanking  the ATI  for  organising  this  very  informative  course  on  the  “Core
Elements  of  Banking  Supervision”.  This  course  is  a  must  for  any  aspiring  bank  supervisor.
However,  allow  me  to  humbly  state  that  this  course  is  but  a  stepping  stone  towards
understanding banking regulation and supervision. To become an astute supervisor, one needs
to  effectively  marry  theoretical  underpinnings  with  practical  insights.  In  this  respect,  I  will
encourage  you  to  constantly  monitor  even  the  minute  anecdotal  information  that  you  come
across during your day at work. And I am able to share these tips because I started my career at
the Bank of Mauritius over three decades ago as a bank supervisor. And during my career, I have
overseen not only the transformation of the banking sector in Mauritius and abroad, but also, the
revolution behind banking supervision and regulation.
Finance  and  banking  are  necessary  for  growth  and  development.  Besides  contributing
adequately to the economy’s gross domestic product, the financial services sector intermediates
between  savers  and  borrowers,  efficiently  allocates  financial  resources,  improves  economic
development, and creates employment opportunities. Thus, the promotion of a sound financial
services sector is central to safeguard the economy’s resilience. Trust and stability are other key
elements that add towards the well-functioning of the financial system. In the absence of these
elements,  the  economy’s  ability  to  mobilize  savings  for  economic  use  would  be  jeopardised.
Stability is key because it gives the assurance for participants to trade in financial markets and
use the services of financial institutions.
Financial market infrastructure refers to the platforms that provide the services and facilities to
support activities, such as exchanges, clearing houses, and payment and settlement systems.
These platforms are crucial in the financial system as they are the nodes to mitigate systemic
risks. The safe operation of these various platforms, even under extreme adverse conditions, is a
prerequisite  to  ensure  financial  system  stability.  An  efficiently  working  financial  infrastructure
would  typically  ease  friction,  diminish  transaction  costs,  and  take  full  advantage  of  financial
intermediation.
The  need  for  regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  system  arises  because  financial
intermediaries  and  markets  are  subject  to  asymmetric  information.  Thus,  the  major  aim  for
financial regulation and supervision is to foster the effective functioning of the financial system in
order to enhance the ability to absorb shocks and maintain financial stability. Financial instability
arises as a result of shocks hitting the financial system, which impede with the payment system
and,  ultimately,  affect  the  smooth  running  of  business  and  trade.  Regulators  and  supervisors
across the globe are charged with managing the health of banks and other financial institutions
and preserving the stability of the financial system for two basic reasons: consumer protection
and maintain financial stability.
Accordingly, the ultimate objective of any regulator is to ensure that the banking sector attends to
its traditional role of a shock absorber to the financial system. The banking sector has to work
towards mitigating any risk between the financial sector and the real economy. Let me remind
you that banks are also the channels through which the central bank transmits monetary policy to
the economy. On this count, the central bank is definitely concerned with bank soundness for the
effective transmission of monetary policy. In addition, thanks to its role as lender of last resort,
the central bank is also compelled to have complete information on the financial soundness of
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
any bank that might call for emergency liquidity assistance.
1
The route towards a framework for bank supervision and regulation can be traced back towards
the end of 1974 , when the then Committee of Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices
was established by the central bank Governors of the Group of Ten countries in the aftermath of
serious  disturbances  in  international  currency  and  banking  markets  (notably  the  failure  of
Bankhaus  Herstatt  in  West  Germany).  The  Committee,  headquartered  at  the  Bank  for
International Settlements in Basel, was established to improve the quality of banking supervision
worldwide, and to serve as a forum for regular cooperation between its member countries on
banking supervisory matters. Starting with the Basel Concordat, first issued in 1975 and revised
several times since, the Committee has established a series of international standards for bank
regulation, most notably its landmark publications of the accords on capital adequacy which are
commonly known as Basel I, Basel II and, most recently, Basel III. . It is surely not my intention to
walk you through these various developments.
In  1997,  the  Basel  Committee  issued  the  Basel  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking
Supervision, which have since been revised from time to time. These BCPs are the very gospel
of effective banking supervision as they provide the lifelines for a sound banking sector. Bank
supervisors naturally have to engage not only in off-site analysis of banks’ performance but also
in extensive on-site inspections to assess the soundness of banks
th
Now,  allow  me  to  share  a  few  notes  on  the  developments  of  supervision  and  regulation  in
Mauritius. This year marks the 50  anniversary of the Bank of Mauritius. The enactment of the
Banking Act 1971 together with attributes in the Bank of Mauritius Act 1966 laid down the basic
legal  framework  governing  the  operations  of  banks  in  the  domestic  financial  system.  The
subsequent  promulgation  of  the  Banking  Act  1988  set  the  basis  for  the  development  of  a
reputable  offshore  banking  sector  in  Mauritius.  In  this  context,  emphasis  was  laid  on  the
supervisory responsibilities vested upon the Bank, providing for mandatory trilateral meetings to
be  held  with  banks  and  their  external  auditors. After  a  few  sporadic  changes  over  the  years,
these  two  Acts  were  completely  overhauled  and  replaced  with  two  pieces  of  legislations  in
November  2004,  namely  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004  and  the  Banking  Act  2004.  The
independence of the Bank of Mauritius was reinforced, together with an added responsibility of
ensuring the stability and soundness of the financial system of Mauritius. The Banking Act 2004
eliminated the separation between domestic and offshore banking activities and provided for a
single banking licence to cover both activities. In 2016, the functions of the Bank were broadened
with the added responsibility of regulating and supervising the locally incorporated, ultimate and
immediate financial holding companies of banks and non-bank deposit taking institutions licensed
by the Bank.
Alive to the fact that the Bank of Mauritius Act and the Banking Act still fall short of meeting the
international standards for bank resolution and crisis management, the Bank sought assistance
from the International Monetary Fund to strengthen the legal frameworks in these areas. In the
same vein, the Bank opted for a review the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 and the Banking Act 2004
in  line  with  international  best  practices  imposed  not  only  by  the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking
Supervision (BCBS) but also the Financial Stability Board (FSB), the International Association of
Deposit Insurers (IADI), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). Here, allow me to extend our deepest thanks to Mr
Ravi  Mohan,  who  was  instrumental  in  this  endeavour  and  supported  us  throughout.  We  also
have a couple of bills in the pipeline, notably, the Deposit Insurance Scheme Bill and the National
Payment  Systems  Bill,  both  of  which  aim  at  strengthening  the  stability  and  soundness  of  the
financial sector.
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  already  adopted  the  macro-prudential  perspective  in  financial
regulation  to  curb  excessive  risk  on  certain  sectors.  Guidelines  have  been  issued  for  the
implementation of macro-prudential policy measures such as caps on loan to value ratio, debt-
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to-income  ratio,  higher  provisioning  and  capital  requirements  for  certain  sectors.  The  macro-
prudential  rules  have  been  reviewed  from  time  to  time  in  the  light  of  variations  in  the
vulnerabilities of the system. One among the essential aspects of supervision that are crucial for
macro-level  monitoring  is  the  efficient  exchange  of  information  between  supervisors,  both  at
home  and  abroad.  Such  an  exchange  provides  an  essential  supervisory  tool  to  support  the
supervision  of  banking  groups.  In  this  respect,  the  Bank  has  signed  Memoranda  of
Understanding (MoUs) with several domestic and foreign regulatory authorities. The Banking Act
2004  allows  the  Bank  to  share  information  with  any  other  central  bank,  under  conditions  of
confidentiality.  We  are  mindful,  at  the  Bank,  that  exchange  of  information  is  crucial  with
regulators of countries where our banking groups hold a regional presence. The Bank has, in this
context, held three Supervisory Colleges since 2013 with its host regulators. 
In Mauritius, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was drawn since December 2002 between
the  two  supervisory  authorities,  namely  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the  Financial  Services
Commission, on information sharing.  Over the years, the cooperation and coordination of these
two institutions have been enhanced through the setup of a Joint Coordination Committee (JCC)
and several working groups to coordinate supervisory work on common supervisory areas. The
JCC typically meets every two months and reviews areas of interest. In addition, as the First
Deputy Governor of the Bank, I have been appointed Vice-Chairman of the FSC since June 2017.
This  appointment  makes  the  cooperation  between  the  two  institutions  more  efficient  and
focused.
As part of its reform strategy to reinforce the domestic banking sector, the Bank also initiated
changes to the corporate structure adopted by the two largest banking groups in Mauritius.  The
separation of banking activities from non-banking activities limits the risk of contagion from non-
banking  business  to  the  bank,  and  allows  management  to  focus  on  their  core  business  of
banking.    In  line  with  Basel  III  requirements,  these  banks  are  made  to  hold  higher  capital
requirements.  Five  domestic  banks  have  been  identified  as  being  domestic  systemically
important banks, and since 1 January 2016, these banks have been required to hold, in a phased
manner over a four-year period, an additional capital requirement ranging from 1 to 2.5 per cent
of their risk weighted assets depending on their systemic importance.
An area, where we, at the Bank, are very mindful is the improvement in AML/CFT processes. We
have  a  zero  tolerance  approach  for  breach  of AML  /CFT  rules  and  offending  institutions  are
subject to fines. We have also instructed our banks to put in place a fully automated system for
the  detection  of  suspicious  transactions  and  monitoring  of  the  level  of  activity  in  customers’
accounts.
The legal and regulatory landscape will, undoubtedly, undergo further changes driven primarily by
innovative companies and applications – such as fintech companies and start-ups, distributed
ledgers, blockchain and other crypto-currencies, which are transforming the financial services
and banking sector landscape. The recently issued Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
consultation  document  on  the  implications  of  fintech  for  the  financial  sector  assesses  how
technology-driven  innovation  in  financial  services,  or  “fintech",  may  affect  the  banking  industry
and  the  activities  of  supervisors  in  the  near  to  medium  term  and  advocates  10  key
recommendations for banks and bank supervisors to address the challenges of fintech.  I will
urge you to go through these documents and to keep abreast of such developments as they will
be of key importance in the near future.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  regulation  and  supervision  should  not  be  limited  to  only  banks  and/or
financial institutions. We often make this mistake of holding a narrow view on this subject matter.
We have to see the bigger picture, instead. There is the need to focus on financial stability, which
is  encompassing  and  also  address  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  market
infrastructure.  Going  forward,  the  domain  of  bank  supervision  and  regulation  will  keep  its
dynamism and a potential issue is the challenges for regulators which new technology is bringing
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
to the banking industry. The emphasis on financial technology would entail identifying where risks
lie. Putting forward a pro-active framework for regulation and supervision is high on the agenda.
And  this  requires  the  collaboration  and  cooperation  of  stakeholders.  We  must  not  forget  that
gains  achieved  over  years  of  development  can  be  wiped  out  through  lax  financial  regulatory
standards.
Thank you.
1
Source: History of the Basel Committee, Bank for International Settlements
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
