Opening Address 
SEACEN-BIS High-Level Seminar 
Veerathai Santiprabhob, Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Bangkok, Thailand 
15 September, 2018 
Governor Subbarao, 
Deputy Governors of SEACEN central banks, 
Executive Director Genberg, 
Members of SEACEN Executive Committee, 
Executives from the BIS, 
Distinguished participants and speakers, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Good morning. I am delighted to welcome all of you to the Bank of Thailand 
for  the  SEACEN-BIS  High-Level  Seminar.  The  theme  of  this  seminar  is  Digital 
Technologies, Financial System and Central Bank Policy. These are very important 
topics, especially for the members of the SEACEN Executive Committee who will play 
critical roles  in shaping  strategic  direction of  the  SEACEN  and  how  its  programs 
evolve over the years. 
The  impact  of  rapid  transformation  of  technology  is  powerful  and  far-
reaching. Advancement in information technology has given rise to various data 
technologies  and  network  platforms,  changing  many  facets  of  our  lives  and 
helping uplift productivity for firms and individuals. These developments have 
led  to  greater  connectivity  between  nations,  cultures,  and  people  and  break 
down the barriers of international trades, supply-chains, and capital flows.   
At  the  same  time,  these  digital  transformations,  along  with  new 
landscapes they introduced, bring new forms of risks for firms and individuals 
and pose challenges for central banks. Firms will face greater operational risks 
from  IT  transformation  and  cyber  threat  while  being  at  risk  of  increased 
competition and disrupted business models. Widening adoption of automotive 
process  could  lead  to  work  displacement;  a  large  number  of  individuals, 
especially those in mid-career, will need to be re-trained and equipped with new 
skill  sets.  These  changes  in  business  and  labor  market  conditions  will  have 
considerable impacts on central bank policies and how central banks operate, 
including  those  in  macroeconomic  analysis,  payment  systems,  and  financial 
supervision.  Moreover,  growing  interconnectedness  in  trade,  finance,  and 
supply-chains  have  resulted  in  increased  real  and  financial  spillovers  and 
globalized price-level, thus complicating central banks’ job of maintaining price 
and financial stability.  
1/4 
Many powerful developments are taking place today, from the growing 
influence  of  FinTechs  and  BigTechs  to  introduction  of  cryptocurrencies  and 
electronic payment technologies. For many of us, central bankers, when dealing 
with new developments that can transform our financial system and how we 
conduct our policies, several key policy questions are often brought up:  
What are the risks and rewards of these developments? Should we regulate 
them? If so, how best to regulate them? How can we make use of these digital 
developments in our policy setting? And, what roles could central banks play in 
promoting new technologies and new digital platforms?  
To  begin  approaching  these  questions,  we  first  have  to  admit  that  the 
boundary  for  new  innovations  or  technologies  is  limitless  and  their  potential 
impacts, at current juncture, may not be fully uncovered. There are things that 
we know and things that we don’t. And even what we know and can identify 
today, our perceptions may be obscured by our perceived understanding based on 
past  world  views.  There  is  a  fine  line  between  the  knowns  and  the  unknowns. 
Navigating through these will require striking the right balance between having an 
open mindset to allow innovations to prosper while ensuring that key risks can 
be contained.  
For the “known territory,” essentially developments that we have begun 
to  identify  use  cases,  can  control  the  risks,  and  believe  that  the  benefits  will 
outweigh the costs, we must continue to refine our understanding, expand our 
knowledge, and find ways to streamline  them into our  policymaking process. 
This is so that the perception or the extent of what we know becomes clearer.  
For  instance,  growing  popularity  of  internet-of-things—from  usage  of 
smartphones to various data-transmitting devices—has created massive amount 
of individual-level and transaction-level data. These “big data” can help unlock 
our  understanding  of  the  behavioral  patterns,  perhaps,  not  even  realized  by 
individual data owners. At the Bank of Thailand, we have begun employing big 
data analysis in macroeconomic, banking sector, and financial market assessments 
to complement our policymaking process. This has helped ensure that our policy 
actions are evidence-based and timely. At the same time, necessary steps are 
taken to validate the integrity and quality of data used as well as to safeguard 
data privacy. We are just scratching the  surface of the potential usage of big 
data and much more work will be done in this area in the years to come.  
Many other “known” areas still require further refinement:  
  from understanding the impacts of deepening adoption of digital 
technology on productions, labor markets, inflation dynamics, and 
hence conduct of monetary policy; 
2/4 
  to  the  emergence  of  cryptocurrencies  and  associated  payment 
technologies that may improve financial inclusion and incorporate 
‘smart-contracts’, but may have implications on financial stability, 
consumer protection and even the environment; and  
  to the various proof-of-concept initiatives using DLT or Blockchain 
on wholesale Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC), where design 
and technology choices are being explored.  
Meanwhile, there remain many puzzles and unknowns, where the costs 
and benefits are unclear and require much more research, study, and debate to 
identify potential impacts or to assess whether a particular development should 
be pursued. These include unknowns such as introduction of retail CBDC, which 
can have implications on the business model of banks and the financial sector 
and on transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Or, broader issues such as 
the autonomy of central bank’s policy, which will be challenged by BigTechs and 
cross-border technologies, as much of central banking has been designed based 
on a world with national borders. Other unknowns will arise in the future; all of 
which dictate that we have to be nimble and forward looking. 
Ultimately, when facing the challenges from the knowns and unknowns, 
the  role  of  central  banks  is  not  only  to  understand  key  issues  and  provide 
stewardship in the right direction but also to ensure that benefits and costs are 
well balanced and unintended consequences minimized. During the period of 
rapid digital transformations, there is no denying that digital divide can worsen, 
especially in emerging economies. There will be those with access, are able to 
take advantage of technological advancement, and prosper; and those who lack 
access or capability to leverage on modern technology, fall behind, and perish. 
Finding that right balancing will certainly be a challenge for us, central bankers, 
but  it  can  be  an  area  where  international  collaboration  and  networking 
platforms, like the SEACEN Centre, can play a role.  
Refining the knowns, looking ahead for the unknowns, and balancing our 
actions. These are how we should approach our policy questions.  
I am glad the SEACEN and its organizers have selected a number of topics 
that will allow us to think deeply about digital transformations and implications 
for central banks and encourage that future SEACEN activities put even greater 
emphasis on how we can balance our policy actions and enhance collaboration 
among members in this new area. I would also like to thank the group of scholars 
and  practitioners  here  with  us  today,  who  will share  their  thoughts  on  many 
important topics, help broaden our perceptions of the knowns, and shed some 
lights on the unknowns. 
3/4 
And  on  this  note,  allow  me  to  introduce  Governor  Duvvuri  Subbarao, 
Former  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  currently  a  Distinguished 
Visiting Fellow at the Institute of South Asian Studies of the National University 
of Singapore. Governor Subbarao has been a staunch advocate of RBI’s pro-active 
role in addressing financial inclusion to help those underserved. As the world’s 
second most populous country, India has faced an uphill task to expand financial 
inclusion, especially to individuals in remote areas. But the numbers speak for 
themselves: in 2011, just 35 percent of adults have bank accounts according to 
the World Bank’s Global Findex Report. By 2017 that number has dramatically 
risen to 80 percent. In his keynote address this morning Governor Subbarao will 
share with us India’s remarkable experience on improving financial inclusion by 
using digital technologies.  
Please join me in giving a warm welcome to Governor Subbarao. 
4/4 
