Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Navigating the digital frontier
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Chamber of Thrift Banks Annual Convention, Makati City, 10 April
2018.
 President Gregorio B. Anonas III, officers and trustees of the Chamber of Thrift Banks (CTB),
colleagues from the banking industry, fellow Monetary Board Members, fellow BSPers, Deputy
Governor Chuchi G. Fonacier, friends from media and financial services industry, guests, ladies
and gentlemen, good morning.
I am honored to be your keynote speaker in this year’s annual convention and induction of the
new set of Officers and Trustees of the CTB. This is my first speech with CTB since becoming
Governor last year.  A lot of things have changed since then including physical change as well.
I assure you that my focus of the heart and mind remains the same.
Your theme, “Banking on Disruptive Technologies”, strongly resonates with me because of the
BSP’s openness to financial innovation and digital technology.
The digital transformation of the financial services industry is the new frontier. New technologies
such as mobile banking, social networking, big data, and cloud computing are advancing quickly
and causing “disruptions” in the industry.  To remain competitive and relevant, and to optimize
benefits,  banks  need  to  understand  the  trends,  identify  growth  opportunities  and  establish
synergies with new players and industries and with each other.
It is my pleasure to share how we can collectively navigate the opportunities and challenges of
disruptive technologies in the age of digital banking.
The domestic economy on even keel
We confidently face change on the back of strong economic fundamentals.  First, the Philippine
economy is robust and resilient against internal and external shocks.  At present, we are sailing
through 76 quarters of consecutive economic growth. In 2017, gross domestic product (GDP)
grew  by  6.7  percent  in  real  terms.  This  makes  the  Philippines  one  of  the  fastest  growing
economies in Asia!  Real GDP per capita grew by 5.0 percent in 2017.
This  economic  growth  is  driven  by  strong  several  engines.  Sustained  growth  in  consumption
spending, strong outturn in exports performance and increased public spending propelled broad-
based expansion in the economy.
The Government’s “Build, build, build” program leads to higher contribution of social services and
public  spending.    Growing  tourist  arrivals,  rising  business  process  outsourcing  receipts,  the
boom  in  real  estate  and  construction,  a  growing  trade  with  partner  nations,  and  the  steady
stream  of  remittances  from  Overseas  Filipinos  (OF)  support  current  domestic  economic
expansion.
Increasing domestic and foreign investments provide assurance of sustainable growth. We have
posted record high foreign direct investments for two years in a row: USD 8 billion in 2016 and
USD 10 billion in 2017.
On the external front, the country’s balance of payments is firmly under control and is supported
by  a  GIR  level  of  USD  80.1  billion  as  of  end-March  2018.  This  level  assures  payment  for  7.8
months’ worth of imports of goods and services for the economy under the worst case scenario.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  movement  of  the  peso  remains  market-driven  and  supported  by  sound  macroeconomic
fundamentals. High demand for the dollar can be attributed to higher import payments, residents’
outward investments, and public and private sector debt repayment. These developments are
fundamentally healthy, aid the country’s competitiveness and strengthen the economy in the long
run.
The latest inflation outturn for March 2018 at 4.3 percent led to an average of 3.8 percent for the
first quarter of 2018. This remains within the Government’s target range of 2 to 4 percent. Recent
inflation reading shows an elevated path in 2018, with baseline forecast nearing the high-end of
the  target  range  before  decelerating  to  the  midpoint  in  2019.    We  are  closely  monitoring  the
situation. 
Amidst  the  pick-up  in  inflation,  we  will  carefully  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  a  measured
policy response to firmly anchor inflation expectations so that inflation targets will continue to be
met in 2018–2019.
Thrift banking industry remains an anchor of stability
Amidst increased competition and evolving technologies, the thrift banking industry has exhibited
sustained stability, resilience and commitment to support inclusive growth –
Thrift  banks  resources  stood  firmly  at  P1.17  trillion  at  end-2017,  mostly  funded  by  retail
deposits, indicative of continued trust and confidence in the thrift banking industry.
Thrift banks continue to support MSMEs, real estate development and consumer financing,
with  a  loan  portfolio  equivalent  to  about  71  percent  of  industry  assets.  Nevertheless,  the
industry’s asset quality remains solid,  with the NPL ratio at 4.7 percent in 2017 and NPL
coverage at 67 percent .
Retained  earnings  boosted  the  industry’s  overall  capital  position  as  the  capital  adequacy
ratio (CAR) stood at 16.7 percent as of end-2017.  This is higher than the BSP standard and
the global norm.  This is evidence of the industry’s commitment to build adequate buffers for
risk-taking.
Net Income of P17.9 billion in 2017 yielded 12.7 percent return to shareholders. This came
about from the steady growth in net interest income (NII) and more cost-efficient operations.
These performance results should encourage the industry to stay on its healthy course.
Fostering stronger partnership for sustainable growth
At  this  juncture,  I  would  like  to  express  gratitude  to  CTB  for  its  exemplary  dedication  and
commitment in supporting BSP’s mandate and advocacies.  Notable is CTB’s pivotal role in the
industry’s  adoption  of  the  ULAMA  and  the  Lendr  platform.  For  this,  CTB  was  chosen  as  the
Outstanding Strategic Industry Partner in the 2017 Awards for BSP Stakeholders.
We reaffirm our continued partnership with CTB in the pursuit of prudential reforms, particularly
risk and corporate governance standards.
We recently issued the minimum prudential liquidity requirements for stand-alone TBs and other
small banks. The Minimum Liquidity Ratio (MLR) will promote resilience to liquidity shocks.
To differentiate risks among bank borrowers, we are currently studying adoption of the risk-based
pricing  framework  for  bank  loans.  This  will  encourage  good  borrowers  to  avail  of  more  loans
because of the lower interest on account of their good credit standing. Moreover, the proposal
aims  to  reduce  potential  systemic  risk  from  competitive  pressures  that  may  result  in  lower
interest rates even for customers with poor credit quality.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Parallel to this, the BSP fervently hopes to on-board all Filipinos into the financial system. To
make banking services more accessible, we issued the framework for basic deposit accounts.
We trust that thrift banks will be at the forefront of opening basic deposit accounts.  We trust that
thrift banks will be at the forefront of opening basic deposit accounts. Part of our strategy is the
deepening  of  financial  education  and  consumer  protection  initiatives,  as  well  as  leveraging  on
available digital technology to have greater scale in banking.
Charting the course towards digitalization
A FINTQ Inclusive Digital Finance Report for 2017–2018 highlighted the huge opportunities for
financial  service  providers  to  innovate  financial  products  and  services  that  offer  the  greatest
potential in transforming the country’s financial landscape.
Thrift  banks  can  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities.    Smaller  institutions  can  leverage  on
cloud  technology  and  shared  services  to  lower  operational  costs.   A  rural  bank  has  already
launched  a  pilot  project  on  cloud-based  core  banking  solution.    Thrift  banks  can  certainly
leverage on similar solutions. The opportunities are huge.  However, the risks have to be carefully
considered and managed.
On a grander scale, the BSP has set its sights on the digitalization of the financial system.  We
are  working  closely  with  the  industry  in  implementing  the  National  Retail  Payment  System
(NRPS) to establish a safe, reliable and affordable retail payments system.  The goal is to enable
businesses  and  consumers  to  make  payments  and  transfer  funds  electronically  from  one
account to any other account using any digital device.  The envisioned inter-operable payment
ecosystem is going to be a platform for fintech innovations.  Thrift banks should be part of this!
The launch of Instapay, the country’s second retail payments clearing house after the PESONet,
is  scheduled  on  23  April  2018.  Industry  players  are  already  signing  up  to  provide  real  time
electronic payments to clients.
The BSP remains committed to establishing a regulatory environment that allows innovations to
flourish.  Our  ‘test  and  learn’  approach  or  regulatory  sandbox  remains  useful  in  dealing  with
increasing digital financial innovations in the market.
While  the  BSP  is  embracing  growth  opportunities  from  fintech  innovations  and  related  digital
transformation  for  the  banking  system,  we  are  mindful  of  attendant  risks  and  any  unintended
consequences. Thus, we have regulations aimed at mitigating effects of technology-related risks,
to promote financial integrity, transparency in financial transactions and consumer protection.
Some of these are:
An enhanced regulatory framework for pawnshops and money service business (MSBs) to
ensure that even non-banks are properly supervised for effective compliance with AML and
internal control rules and guidelines.
Circular 950 allows covered institutions to implement reduced Know-Your-Customer (KYC)
rules for certain low-risk accounts and use technology to facilitate frictionless customer on-
boarding.
Circular 940 allows banks to use third party cash agents as a cost-efficient service delivery
channel.    With  cash  agents,  banks  will  be  able  to  leverage  on  innovative  digital  banking
solutions to on-board clients even in hard-to-serve areas.
Under  Circular  944,  the  BSP  regulates  entities  that  use  Virtual  Currency  (VC)  as  the
underlying instrument for remittance.
Circular No. 949 provides guidelines to ensure that risks resulting from social media use are
adequately assessed and managed.   
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Circular  No.  982  provides  an  enhanced  information  security  framework  to  consider
cybersecurity controls. This calls  for  a  renewed  focus  on  information  security  in  line  with
technological  developments  and  innovations,  dynamic  risk  profiles,  and  a  rapidly  evolving
cyberthreat landscape. 
You can be assured that the BSP is on constant surveillance mode for fintech activities by new
market players.  We are monitoring industry developments on crowd-funding and peer-to-peer
lending. While crowd-funding has the potential to expand financial access for new businesses
and MSMEs, there is also heightened risk of investor and consumer abuse.  We are ready to
take regulatory action if necessary to maintain fair and healthy competition.
The  BSP  is  also  actively  engaging  regulators  from  other  jurisdictions  for  possible  information
sharing  specifically  focused  on  fintechs.    Currently,  the  BSP  has  a  FinTech  Cooperation
Agreement  with  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  which  provides  a  framework  for
collaboration  by  referring  promising  FinTech 
trends  and
developments, and facilitation of cooperative work on FinTech projects.
firms,  sharing  of  emerging 
We  ourselves  are  exploring  adoption  of  RegTech  solutions  to  strengthen  BSP’s  risk-based
regulatory and supervisory activities. 
We  are  piloting  two  RegTech  solutions  to  automate  some  of  BSP’s  work,  enhance  analytical
staff capability, create greater accountability and amplify “customer voice” in the policy-making
process.  These  include  an  application  programming  interface  (API)  system  to  improve
supervisory reporting; and an automated complaint-handling system.
Finally,  to  cope  with  all  the  rapid  change,  the  BSP  is  undergoing  strategic  reorganization  to
enhance our mission focus, foster better collaboration and promote better accountability. Even in
the BSP, disruption is occurring to improve and transform our capabilities, structures and more
importantly, our culture.
To make the BSP more capable, agile, and stakeholder-oriented, we are reviewing our nautical
charts  to  reach  the  objectives  of  becoming  a  more  credible  central  bank,  of  having  dynamic
stakeholder  engagement,  of  achieving  organizational  agility,  and  of  possessing  organizational
capability.
Closing remarks
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  disruptive  technology  is  gradually  reshaping  the  financial  services
industry.  It offers opportunities as well as challenges for all.  Let us embrace it.  Manage it.  And
make it work for all Filipinos, and your customers.
Anchors away!  We are with you in the journey.
Again, congratulations to the new set of Officers and Trustees of CTB. Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
