Benoît Cœuré: The euro area's three lines of defence
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the conference "Deepening of EMU", Ljubljana, 2 February 2018.
 For  a  long  time,  the  European  Central  Bank  has  been  at  the  forefront  of  macroeconomic
stabilisation in the euro area. There’s broad agreement that without our unprecedented actions,
the  euro  area  would  have  fared  far  worse.  Even  more  people  would  have  lost  their  jobs,  and
wages and prices would have stagnated for much longer, or would even have fallen. Although our
actions were bold and unparalleled, we acted within our mandate, as confirmed by the European
Court of Justice.
The establishment of the European Stability Mechanism, and the progress made in setting up a
banking union, have fixed some of the shortcomings in euro area governance and instruments.
These steps were important in easing the pressure the crisis has put on the ECB. But many of
the institutional failings that caused and perpetuated the crisis remain unresolved. Incentives to
pursue sound policies remain too weak and stabilisation of shocks too difficult. These are deep-
rooted issues that cannot be resolved by a few years of above-trend growth. To assume that the
current economic expansion will heal all wounds is naive. The euro area needs reform.
As the central bank of the euro area, the ECB should not interfere in the details of what is mostly
a political debate. But we have a stake in the success of the current discussion. Without further
reforms, the next crisis may well force the ECB to test the limits of its mandate. Depending on
the nature of the next crisis, policy action might require taking short-term rates much deeper into
negative territory. Or it might require purchases of assets that are riskier than public or corporate
debt. Or it may draw us dangerously close to monetary financing of governments.
As things stand today, and given member states’ still limited fiscal policy space, even a small
downturn  could  create  large  economic  and  social  costs.  It  could,  once  again,  test  the
cohesiveness of the currency union. Unless the euro area finds a way to change direction, to
reform itself and to regain space for active macroeconomic policy, the same fractures we saw in
2012 could reappear and widen when the next downturn comes.
Many ideas for reforms are being floated, of course. Some are bolder than others. The recent
proposals by German and French economists are a worthwhile attempt to bridge differences and
surmount  trade-offs.  Today  I  will  not  offer  another  blueprint.  What  I  will  offer  instead  are
requirements  than  any  euro  area  reform  will  have  to  pass.  I  will  call  them  the  three  “lines  of
defence”  that  any  well-functioning  monetary  union  depends  on.  They  are  needed  to  deliver  a
stable currency. They are needed to protect the ECB and its mandate. And they are needed to
keep belief in the future of the euro strong.
Flexible markets form the first line of defence.
They  are  indispensable  for  a  currency  union.  They  reduce  the  need  for  macroeconomic
stabilisation and curb contentious debates about crisis management. Markets that can absorb
shocks  efficiently  do  not  waste  costly  political  capital. And  they  create  more  policy  space  in
downturns, for both fiscal and monetary policy.
To bolster the first line, the way we implement economic policies needs to change. The current
system  has  clearly  not  delivered  its  intended  benefits.  Take  the  European  Commission’s
country-specific 
the
recommendations  were 
the
recommendations,  rather  than  the  incorrect  identification  of  the  main  issues,  has  made  the
existing framework fail.
than  5%  of 
implemented  by  Member  States.  Limited  enforcement  of 
recommendations  as  an  example. 
In  2016, 
less 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Why?  Because  recommendations  from  outside  a  country,  even  if  correct  on  substance,  are
typically  dismissed.  Sovereign  governments  don’t  accept  what  they  see  as  diktats  from
Brussels. Economists should have known better. Incentives are the drivers of our actions. So, if
outside  recommendations  are  perceived  as  being  politically  too  costly,  then  we  need  to  find
solutions  that  promote  national  “ownership”  of  reform  efforts.  Money  is  not  the  answer.  It  is
political incentives that need resolve.
The other key domain to spur the catalyst function of our market economies is the Single Market.
It is incomplete as we all know. Take services as an example. They account for over 70% of the
EU’s GDP and an equal share of its employment. But we still face significant barriers when it
comes  to  cross-border  service  provision  in  the  EU.  The  Services  Package  that  was  adopted
about a year ago was a step in the right direction but more needs to be done.
Efficient and integrated financial markets are part of the first line of defence. In the United States,
around 60% of a shock to a state’s GDP is cushioned by financial markets. In the euro area, the
share is currently closer to 20%. Country-specific shocks remain unsmoothed to a large extent,
mainly because cross-border equity risk-sharing is hugely underdeveloped in Europe.
A true capital markets union could significantly help to diversify and reduce risk. It would thereby
limit the financial burden to be levied by governments in the case of adverse shocks. And it would
broaden the scope of monetary policy transmission beyond the banking sector, making policy
less vulnerable.
Finally, to avert banking collapses, governments in the past were forced to disburse large sums
of public money in the pursuit of economic and financial stability. Completing banking union will
reduce  risks  for  taxpayers  and  break  the  remaining  link  between  banks  and  national
governments.  A  European  deposit  insurance  scheme  is  a  precondition  for  a  truly  integrated
banking  system  and  single  money.  Let  us  not  forget  that  86%  of  our  money  is  created  by
commercial banks. The transmission of the ECB’s monetary policy will always be incomplete as
long as differences in depositor confidence prevail across the euro area.
The second line of defence relates to the role of governments.
Even  the  most  flexible  and  efficient  markets  cannot  fully  absorb  very  large  shocks  without
imposing  economic  hardship  on  a  considerable  number  of  people.  In  other  words,  flexible
markets  come  at  a  price.  They  increase  uncertainty  for  employees  and  often  require
relinquishment.
Uncertainty,  for  example,  is  born  of  the  fear  of  a  loss  of  employment  or  of  not  being  able  to
respond  to  today’s  fast  pace  of  change.  But  it  is  also  born  of  the  fear  that  governments
themselves have been pushed to the sidelines as globalisation has proceeded. Recent election
outcomes  around  the  world  bear  witness  to  this  fear.  The  more  exposed  individuals  are,  the
more likely a political backlash.
Governments can mitigate these effects. Unlike the United States, however, the European Union
is not a federation. This means that, as a rule, stabilisation and the provision of security in the
form  of  social  services  takes  place  first  at  national  level.  Keeping  governments  solvent  is  a
precondition for achieving that. As we saw during the crisis, if perceptions of sustainability among
markets decline, then counter-cyclical spending can quickly become constrained. So we need to
regain fiscal space, which means building adequate national fiscal buffers.
The  current  broad-based  economic  expansion  is  contributing  a  lot  to  this  end.  But  many
countries are emerging from the crisis still bearing legacy burdens that could take decades to
resolve. This leaves us vulnerable to divergence and fragmentation when a crisis strikes – and in
some ways, even more so than before.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fiscal consolidation therefore needs to go hand in hand with efforts strengthening our area-wide
defences. Of course, the ESM is already an important safeguard. But we need to enhance its
competences in the field of crisis management and make it more agile. This includes making full
use of its existing instruments, such as the direct bank recapitalisation tool and precautionary
financial assistance, and moving away from the unanimity requirement. And in the long run, it
means bringing the ESM into the community framework. The stability of the euro area cannot be
in the hands of one, or a few, Member States and their parliaments. Ultimately, the ESM needs to
be accountable to the people of Europe.
But union stabilisation cannot stop with the ESM. The euro area needs a fiscal instrument that
can help it cope with large shocks without having to rely excessively on the ECB.
Such an instrument would be the third line of defence of our monetary union.
It  would  support  aggregate  demand  in  countries  experiencing  a  crisis,  drawing  on  common
funds. It would thereby provide an additional layer of stabilisation that safeguards trust in national
policies. EU solidarity would then take on a whole new meaning.
Whether  such  an  instrument  would  directly  support  national  safety  nets,  or  would  instead
undertake  investment  projects  that  create  jobs  and  income,  will  be  subject  to  much  debate.
Whether it should be balanced by stronger market discipline will be even more heatedly debated.
These discussions will take time. However important, they should not obscure what should be
governments’ urgent priority: strengthening the first two lines of defence of our monetary union.
Achieving lasting economic stability must involve finding a balance of discipline and flexibility in
our economies. This will both strengthen support for the euro and help alleviate the pressure and
burden on the ECB in crisis times.
Realpolitik will dictate the speed of reforms. What we do need is broad agreement that they will
be built on these three lines of defence, and visible progress on the first two.
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
