Mojmír Hampl: A digital currency useful for central banks?
Speech  by  Mr  Mojmír  Hampl,  Vice  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  7th  BBVA
Seminar for Public Sector Investors and Issuers, Bilbao, 27 February 2018.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Let me begin by thanking BBVA for their kind invitation to this event. It is a pleasure to speak in
front of this knowledgeable and receptive audience, and it is a pleasure for me in particular to be
in Bilbao for the first time in my life.
Cryptocurrencies,  digital  currencies,  and  especially  bitcoin  have  become  almost  household
names over the last couple of months.
What is especially interesting and curious for this place – as some of you might know – is that
among  the  hundreds  of  cryptocurrencies  introduced  in  the  last  couple  of  years  is  one  called
“bilur”, which means “chain” in Euskara, the Basque language. Bilur is unique for being the first
cryptocurrency explicitly linked to the price of oil.
By  the  way,  the  second  part  of  the  label  “cryptocurrency”,  namely  the currency  part,  is  a
misnomer in my eyes. No existing cryptocurrency for the time being conforms to the three basic
functions of money: a store of value, a unit of account, and a medium of exchange. One cannot
store value in an asset that can get 30%–50% cheaper or more expensive in a matter of days.
One cannot use cryptocurrencies to measure value in economic transactions, because prices
are mostly not displayed in cryptocurrencies and transaction costs are high and hidden for most
people who would like to pay this way. One cannot, at least so far, use cryptocurrencies as a
medium of exchange, because not many counterparties accept them.
Therefore,  cryptocurrencies  are  not  currencies.  To  me,  rather,  they  resemble  commodities  –
pieces of code with some value for enthusiastic collectors. Which is fine. Its founders wanted to
create something that – through the process of mining and the costs associated with it – would
resemble a physical commodity or something physical. I would call it a commodity of the new
digital  era.  But  compared  to  vintage  wine,  art,  or  postage  stamps,  the  amount  of  digital
commodities is never really fixed, as proved, for instance, by last year’s split (or “fork” – I very
much  like  this  particular  word)  between  bitcoin  and  bitcoin  cash  or  the  recent  split  between
litecoin and litecoin cash. A piece of code is, in effect, easier to duplicate and improve upon.
The  fact  that  cryptocurrencies  are  rather  commodities  also  shapes  our  light-touch,  liberal
approach to regulation at the CNB. We do not want to ban them and we are not hindering their
development, but we are also not actively helping or promoting them and we are not protecting
them or the customers that use them. Like in a casino, everyone investing in a cryptocurrency
must be prepared to lose the entire bet. And central banks do not regulate casino visits.
As  you  can  see,  I  could  easily  spend  all  of  my  time  today  talking  about  the  problems  of
cryptocurrencies, and of bitcoin in particular. I could talk about how much energy it consumes –
at some points last year, the bitcoin ecosystem consumed twice as much energy as Nigeria, an
oil giant with 190 million people. By the way, the energy consumed on a single bitcoin transaction
until  2017  could  power  a  typical American  household  for  more  than  three  weeks.  I  could  talk
about  how  a  seven-fold  increase  in  the  value  of  bitcoin  some  time  ago  was  driven  by  the
manipulation of a single trader. I could talk about the volatility of bitcoin, which surpasses that of
any other commonly traded commodity and which renders bitcoin useless for the vast majority of
people. I could talk about the funny thing that bitcoin as a quasi-currency was created to make
payments cheap and fast, while in reality it is more often than not expensive and slow.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  instead,  I  will  stress  –  and  this  is  my  point  today  –  the  positive  philosophical  influence  of
bitcoin on the conservative world of central banking. True, it is far from clear that anytime soon a
full-fledged  digital  currency  (be  it  blockchain  based  or  not)  will  be  created  by  a  central  bank
(some of you may be following the debate in the Riksbank in Sweden), but the last three years
have seen an explosion of research on this idea in many central banks. Bitcoin must be credited
for  this  powerful  intellectual  stimulus.  When  so  many  professors  at  the  most  esteemed
universities  of  the  developed  world  are  not  thinking  about  potential  reforms  of  the  current
monetary order, we have received a stimulus from the libertarian IT guys instead. Fine.
To  be  sure,  a  hypothetical  digital  currency  issued  by  a  central  bank  may  have  very  little  in
common with the cryptocurrencies that currently exist. These two things are mixed up quite often
in  the  public  space.  Cryptocurrency  is  in  fact  a  different  concept  than  a  digital  currency  of  a
central bank and yet a different concept than electronic money such as pre-paid cards. They are
all digital in one way or another, but they are conceptually separate.
Central bank digital money does not have to be based ultimately on a blockchain at all, but, to
enable price stability, it will certainly be linked to the value of conventional elastic currency. To
keep  the  current  system  of  elastic  money  working,  even  the  concept  of  central  bank  digital
currency will have to allow the amount of money to change, not to be fixed or constant over time.
Indeed, in our current system, bank deposits are essentially an existing “digital currency” that we
all use.
What some central bankers have in mind, however, is a more substantive change. But it seems
to  me  that  the  need  for  this  change  is  often  expressed  quite  vaguely.  What  problems  of  the
current  monetary  system,  and  especially  what  challenges  to  monetary  policy,  should  central
bank digital currencies address? And how should these digital currencies be designed if they are
to be useful in practice? These are other topics of my talk today.
The big problem of the current monetary policy framework is the effective lower bound on interest
rates. The underlying neutral rate of interest has probably started to rise recently, but it will hardly
reach the levels we were used to in the 1980s and 1990s anytime soon. In other words, during
the next recession all major central banks will hit the effective lower bound again. How could a
digital currency help?
One thing a digital currency can enable is the possibility of deeply negative interest rates. I am
not a fan of negative rates at all, but of course one can imagine a scenario in which some central
banks replace cash with a digital currency. Then consumers would have nowhere to hide from
negative  rates,  if  they  do  not  want  to  leave  their  local  currency  entirely  If  the  central  bank
guaranteed the anonymity of transactions conducted in the new digital currency (Nobody knows if
this is possible), it would behave much like cash – with the significant possibility of a non-zero
interest rate charged on balances deposited in it.
By the way, I do not think it is a good idea to push forward the concept of central bank digital
currency just as a response to the fall in the use of cash in society. As I noted earlier, households
already  have  access  to  a  digital  currency:  they  can  deposit  their  cash  on  accounts  at
commercial banks. If a central bank starts to compete with commercial banks in this arena, it
may stop the fall in seigniorage revenues, but of course at the expense of the profitability or even
the very stability of the banking sector.
Even  worse,  such  “safe  haven”  digital  currency  accounts  at  the  central  bank  available  to  all
citizens  would  probably  guarantee  a  “digital  bank  run”  in  any  crisis  –  although  deposits  at
commercial banks are fully insured, accounts at central banks, if no cap is set, will always be
seen as safer. This is why the concept of central bank digital currencies has been criticized by,
among others, Mark Carney, and why Danmarks Nationalbank concluded in December it had “no
plans to issue central bank digital currency.”
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
But central bank digital currency brings another potential response to the problem of the effective
lower  bound:  an  easily  implementable  “helicopter  money  drop”,  i.e.,  direct  support  of
consumption. Of course, this is an even more controversial idea than negative interest rates, at
least in the world of central banking. But I believe it is a real and viable possibility in the event of a
deep  crisis  akin  to  the  one  of  the  late  2000s.  In  this  way,  central  banks  could  stimulate
consumption  directly  at  the  individual  level,  circumventing  the  transmission  uncertainty
associated with quantitative easing. Moreover, such a windfall for all households could also boost
consumer confidence at a time when optimism is most needed.
The immediate consequence of helicopter money would be a financial loss for the central bank,
but central bankers should value the price stability of the nation above their income statement.
 Financial history of my home country seems to be indicating that there is little interplay between
the  central  bank’s  financial  position  and  inflation  or  financial  stability  performance.  So,  central
banks  with  less  capital,  perhaps  depleted  by  helicopter  money  drops,  are  unlikely  to
underperform in the future.
In addition, this operation would be financially neutral at the national level, since the recipients of
helicopter  money  would  simply  be  the  country’s  citizens  –  a  bit  like  in  the  case  of  dividend
payments with all households receiving the same amount. Critics might say that it is not the role
of central banks to decide on the distribution of funds and that any helicopter money drop should
be executed by the government with mere central bank backing. But in fact, any change in the
interest  rate,  just  like  any  other  change  in  the  monetary  policy  stance,  inevitably  redistributes
funds, and indeed does so in a much less transparent way.
A helicopter money drop is probably possible even without a digital currency – for example, using
central registries of personal bank accounts, often operated by central banks on behalf of the
government.  But  the  benefit  of  using  a  digital  currency  is  that  the  central  bank  would  not
theoretically need to work with the government, so its independence would not be put in danger.
Moreover,  the  digital  currency  could  be  designed  specifically  to  smooth  the  transmission  of
helicopter money to consumption.
Again, I stress that I only consider this a realistic scenario in a deep recession. The central bank
could also limit the possibility of transferring these funds to bank accounts (and vice versa, in
order to eliminate any risk of digital bank runs). If the central bank allowed transfers from bank
accounts to the digital currency, it would have to cap the amount a single individual could hold in
the digital currency, perhaps at the level of the median monthly salary. In the absolute extreme,
the central bank could also determine what goods the helicopter money could be spent on. For
example, real estate might be excluded in order to prevent a buildup of bubbles in the housing
market.
In a nutshell, any digital currency used by central banks for monetary policy purposes would have
to be heavily customized and tailor-made. It would hardly resemble any of the cryptocurrencies,
from bitcoin to bilur, as we know them.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
