  An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the SwissCham Southern Africa General Assembly 
 Zurich 
8 May 2018 
 Recent developments in South Africa: 
has the country turned for the better? 
 Introduction 
 Good  evening,  ladies and  gentlemen,  and  thank  you for  the  opportunity  to address 
you tonight. 
 Switzerland  and  South  Africa  have  close  economic  ties,  and  there  are  numerous 
opportunities to improve and expand on these.  
 The outlook for the South African economy has improved  significantly over the past 
few  months.  Recent  political  developments  have  generated  renewed  business  and 
consumer confidence, and investment prospects have been enhanced considerably.  
 However, a number of domestic challenges remain, and the global environment, while 
favourable,  is  becoming  more  volatile  and  increasingly  unpredictable.  From  the 
perspective of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), inflation appears to be under 
control, but there are incipient risks.  
 In  my  remarks  this  evening,  I  will  highlight  some  of  these  domestic  and  global 
developments,  and  how  we  see  them  impacting  on  the  South  African  growth  and 
inflation outlook. 
 Page 1 of 10 
The South African political and economic landscape 
 The political and economic landscape in South Africa has changed remarkably since 
December  2017.  At  that  time,  both  business  and  consumer  confidence  were  at 
alarmingly low levels, and the economic growth outlook was very weak. Standard & 
Poor’s  had  recently  downgraded  the  country’s  local-currency  debt  rating  to  sub-
investment grade, while Moody’s1 had placed the country on review for a downgrade 
to  sub-investment  grade.  The  rand  exchange  rate  was  trading  at  around  R14.20 
against  the  US  dollar  in  the  face  of  increased  portfolio  capital  outflows.  Long-term 
bond yields were at around 9.5% and risk premiums were elevated. The Medium Term 
Budget  Policy Statement of October 2017  had signalled a departure from the fiscal 
consolidation path, contributing to these unfavourable conditions. Overshadowing this 
environment was the high degree of uncertainty regarding the outcome of the African 
National Congress (ANC) leadership electoral conference in mid-December.  
 Let us fast-forward four months or so to 2018. The ANC leadership outcome was well 
received,  followed  by  a  Cabinet  reshuffle  that  contributed  to  restoring  economic 
confidence  and  growth.  The  national  Budget  tabled  in  February  reaffirmed 
government’s  commitment  to the fiscal  consolidation path,  a  move  which  has  gone 
some way in restoring confidence in the country’s commitment to sustainable public 
finances. There has also been a positive response to the new President’s commitment 
and actions to start rooting out corruption in various spheres of society, particularly in 
government and state-owned enterprises.  
 Business  confidence  indicators  improved,  with  the  ‘Expected  business  conditions’ 
category in the Absa Purchasing Managers’ Index surging in February  to its highest 
level since 2001.  Similarly, the FNB/BER2 Consumer Confidence Index reached an 
all-time high in the first quarter of this year. Moody’s affirmed the country’s investment 
grade rating and changed the negative outlook to stable, preventing South Africa from 
falling out of the Citibank World Government Bond Index, an event that could have 
precipitated large-scale selling of South African government bonds by non-residents. 
                                                      
1 Moody’s Investors Service 
2 First National Bank / Bureau for Economic Research 
 Page 2 of 10 
The  rand  is  currently  trading  at  around  R12.50  against  the  US  dollar,  after  having 
appreciated to a low of around R11.60 in late February. There has been a resurgence 
of capital inflows against the emerging market trend, while credit default swap spreads 
have narrowed by over 50 basis points.  
 Economic growth outcomes surprised on the upside in the fourth quarter of 2017, and 
the growth outlook has improved. The key question is: is South Africa finally  on the 
road to a sustained recovery? Furthermore, are these developments ‘real’ rather than 
just a reflection of ephemeral euphoria?  
 It  has  been  a  very  positive  start,  and  no  doubt  an  important  turning  point  for  the 
country. But it is too early to declare that we are on a new growth trajectory. Most of 
the  economic  growth forecasts  have been  revised  upwards,  with  the  latest  Reuters 
consensus  forecasts  expecting  growth  of  1.6%  and  1.9%  for  2018  and  2019 
respectively,  up  by  almost  0.5 percentage  points  since  November  last  year,  and  a 
forecast  of  2.3%  for  2020.  The  SARB’s  growth  forecast  for  2018  has  been  revised 
upwards  from  1.2%  in  November  to  1.7% in  March.  Our  model  predicts  a  slight 
moderation  to  1.5%  in  2019  due  to  tax  effects,  but  reaching  2.0%  in  2020.  The 
Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) assessment is that the risks to these forecasts 
are on the upside. 
 The improved outlook is based, together with upward revisions to past economic data, 
on the strong improvement in confidence. Recent research conducted at the SARB3 
suggests that the collapse in levels of confidence in the past few years had shaved off 
around one percentage point from growth in both 2015 and 2016. In a similar vein, the 
National Treasury estimates that the rebound in confidence could add 0.4 percentage 
points to potential output. But a cyclical recovery based on a rebound in confidence, 
however  welcome,  is  not  enough.  Raising  potential  output  significantly  and  in  a 
sustained  way  requires  not  just  a  commitment  to  structural  reforms,  but  actual 
implementation. This should go hand in hand with increased fixed capital formation. 
                                                       
3 Theo Janse van Rensburg and Erik Visser (2017). ‘Decoupling from global growth – is confidence 
becoming a scarce commodity?’ South African Reserve Bank Occasional Bulletin of Economic Notes, 
October. 
 Page 3 of 10 
Underlying the subdued growth performance of the South African economy has been 
the  weak  trend  in  gross  fixed  capital  formation,  particularly  by  the  private  sector. 
Following two years of annual contractions, private-sector fixed capital formation grew 
by 1.2% in 2017 and by 9.9% in the final quarter of the year, mainly due to expenditure 
on  transport  equipment  and  machinery.  It  is  still  too  early  to  tell  whether  this 
unexpected  increase  is  the  beginning  of  a  positive  trend.  However,  we  do  need  to 
reverse  the  downward  trend  in  the  ratio  of  gross  fixed  capital  formation  to  gross 
domestic product (GDP), which had declined to 18.7% in 2017, down from a peak of 
23.5% in 2008. This is some way off the 25% target set in the National Development 
Plan.  
 The South African government has committed itself to a range of structural reforms, 
many  of  which  are  contained  in  the  National  Development  Plan,  which  remains  a 
‘living’ document. Some of the necessary interventions require longer time frames, for 
example  fixing  the  education  system  and  ensuring  broader  skills  development. 
However,  a  number  of  selected  reforms have  been  identified  as  the  so-called  ‘low-
hanging fruit’ – these could be implemented relatively quickly and yield high returns.  
According to the National Treasury, these reforms could increase potential output by 
two to three percentage points from the current estimate of 1.5%. Telecommunications 
reforms,  which  would  entail  the  much-needed  release  of  additional  broadband 
spectrum,  could  add  an  additional  0.6  percentage  points  to  potential  output.  Other 
reforms  include  lowering  barriers  to  entry  by  addressing  anti-competitive  practices, 
transport sector reforms, and prioritising labour-intensive sectors such as agriculture 
and tourism.  
 In addition, there are reports of significant pent-up private-sector investment which has 
been waiting for increased policy certainty. A notable sector is mining, which has not 
seen  any  investment  of  significance  for  a  number  of  years.  Regulatory  and  policy 
uncertainty,  coupled  with  disagreement  around  the  new  Mining  Charter,  has 
undermined one of the  key sectors in the  South African economy. According to the 
Chamber of Mines, the resolution of these issues could unlock a significant amount of 
investment capital.  
  Page 4 of 10 
Government  has  also  expressed  commitment  to  addressing  the  problems  of  poor 
governance at some of the major state-owned enterprises. In turn, these issues have 
resulted  in  costs  borne  by  the  broader  economy  and  ultimately  consumers. 
Governance issues are also of great concern to foreign investors, particularly those 
who already hold, or are considering buying, bonds of these corporations. The fragile 
state of Eskom’s finances has potential fiscal consequences. All these issues need to 
be sorted out and have been identified as priorities. A start was made when the boards 
of some of these companies were changed and when audits of previous procurement 
decisions were conducted. Much work still needs to be done at the operational level 
to improve efficiencies and  reduce costs. These corporations cannot simply rely on 
unsustainable  tariff  increases,  as  in  the  case  of  Eskom,  or  on  further  government 
bailouts, as in the case of South African Airways.  
 The role of the South African Reserve Bank 
 Achieving higher potential output growth is not within the power of the central bank. 
The SARB can, however, contribute to an improved environment in a number of ways. 
For  some  time,  ratings  agencies  and  investors  identified  South  Africa’s  institutional 
strength  as  one  of  the  stand-out features of  its  economy. The  past  few  years  have 
seen  a  steady  erosion  of  some  of  our  key  institutions.  Fortunately,  there  is  now 
renewed focus on reversing this negative trend. In fact, this renewed focus is part of 
the reason forwarded by Moody’s for retaining the country’s investment grade rating. 
The  SARB,  specifically  its  independence  coupled  with  its  mandate  on  price  and 
financial  stability,  is  seen  as  an  important  part  of  the  institutional  strength  of  the 
country. We have  vigorously  and  successfully  defended attempts  to  undermine  our 
independence and integrity, and we will continue to do so.  
 The SARB’s longer-term role, as set out in the South African Constitution, is to achieve 
price stability in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth. As we have 
emphasised on numerous occasions, interest rate policy is not the appropriate policy 
lever to achieve higher potential output. However, lower inflation brings about lower 
nominal interest rates, and because of lower risk premiums, real rates can decline as 
well.  
 Page 5 of 10 
Low  inflation  also  creates  an  environment  that  is  more  conducive  for  making 
investment  decisions,  which  is  essential  for  growth.  Furthermore,  a  low-inflation 
environment protects the poor in particular; they are least able to protect themselves 
against the ravages of high inflation. 
 Although  the  SARB’s  key  objective  is  price  stability,  we  have  explicitly  adopted  a 
flexible inflation-targeting framework, which implies that we are sensitive to the impact 
of any policy actions on cyclical growth. Our approach also recognises the importance 
of  distinguishing  between  demand  and  supply  shocks.  In  the  event  of  significant 
exogenous supply-side shocks, we generally try to look through the first-round effects 
of these shocks and focus instead on how these shocks feed through to higher inflation 
expectations as well as higher wage and price setting. 
 At  the  same  time,  however,  we  recognise  the  importance  of  inflation  expectations 
declining  to  lower  levels.  Unless  the  wage  and  price  setters  in  the  economy  adjust 
their expectations lower, wage and price setting will be at higher levels, creating a self-
fulfilling  outcome  of  higher  inflation.  We  would  prefer  to  see  inflation  expectations 
anchored closer to the midpoint of the inflation target range of 3-6%. 
 Recent  inflation developments  have  been  generally  favourable.  Headline  consumer 
price  index  (CPI)  inflation  moderated  to  3.8%  in  March,  its  lowest  level  since  early 
2011.  However,  this  benign  environment  is  not  expected  to  continue  as  the 
expectation is that the most recent reading was the low point in the current inflation 
cycle due to a combination of base effects and tax increases (including the VAT4 and 
fuel levy increases) is expected to confirm that the most recent reading was the low 
point of the current inflation cycle. The SARB’s most recent forecast was for inflation 
to average 4.9% this year, and 5.2% and 5.1% in the next two years respectively. So 
while  headline  inflation  is  currently  well  below  the  midpoint  of  the  target  range,  the 
longer-term outlook is slightly above 5%.  
                                                        
4 value-added tax 
 Page 6 of 10 
There are admittedly a number of other positive developments. First, core inflation (i.e. 
headline  inflation  excluding  food,  fuel  and  electricity)  is  more  benign,  indicative  of 
subdued underlying demand pressures in the economy. Core inflation measured 4.1% 
in March and is forecast to average 4.6% this year and 4.9% in both 2019 and 2020.  
 Second, there has been a welcome decline in inflation expectations, as reflected in 
the survey conducted by the BER. For some time, these expectations had been stuck 
at around the upper end of the target range. In the most recent BER survey, however, 
the average declined by half a percentage point to 5.2% and 5.3% for 2018 and 2019 
respectively.  Similarly, 
the 
five-year-ahead 
inflation  expectations  declined 
to 
5.3%, their lowest since they were first surveyed in 2011.   
 The SARB recognises, however, that one reading does not constitute a trend, and we 
would need to see further declines, or at least a stabilisation at these recent levels, to 
feel  confident  that  inflation  expectations  have  fallen  on  a  sustained  basis. 
Furthermore,  to  the  extent  that  inflation  expectations  are backward-looking,  it  could 
take some time for these expectations to move  to lower levels, particularly if actual 
inflation is expected to trend upwards from here on. In other words, it is too early to 
declare victory in our quest to anchor inflation expectations closer to the midpoint of 
the target range. 
 This  improved  inflation  environment  has  contributed  to  a  sounder  macroeconomic 
environment, one where earnings are not eroded at an excessively fast rate. It has 
also afforded some room for monetary policy to remain accommodative for now and 
help  foster  improved  economic  growth.  At  the  most  recent  MPC  meeting,  the 
repurchase rate (repo rate) was reduced by 25 basis points to 6.5%. With medium-
term inflation expectations at just over 5%, this implies a real repo rate of around 1.5% 
compared with the SARB model’s estimate of the current neutral rate of around 2%.   
 The  MPC’s assessment at that  time  was  that  the  risks  to  the  inflation outlook  were 
more or less balanced. In  its deliberations, most of the upside risks emanated from 
external sources. These risks are transmitted to the economy via the exchange rate 
and, by extension, to the risks to inflation.  
 Page 7 of 10 
As an inflation-targeting central bank, the SARB does not target the exchange rate but 
rather  focuses  on  the  second-round  effects  of  exchange  rate  changes  (in  both 
directions) on the inflation outlook.   
 This  implies  that  our  assessment  of  the  risks  to  the  rand  is  an  important,  although 
certainly not the only, determinant of how we see the inflation trajectory going forward. 
At the March 2018 MPC meeting, when the rand was trading at around R11.80 against 
the US dollar, the exchange rate was assessed to be somewhat overvalued, and we 
viewed further appreciation potential to be somewhat limited. Since then, this view has 
been reinforced by a number of global developments that have clouded the outlook. 
 The global outlook and risks 
 For  some  time  now,  the  global  context  has  been  relatively  supportive  and  benign. 
Global growth has been picking up in a steady but synchronised manner, and global 
inflation has remained low, allowing monetary policies in the advanced economies to 
remain  broadly  accommodative.  This  environment,  together  with  unusually  low 
financial  market  volatility,  has  contributed  to  the  continued  strong  capital  flows  to  
emerging markets. 
 There are, however,  a  number  of  indications  that  this  Goldilocks  period  is probably 
over. Financial market volatility has re-emerged. Some investors appear concerned 
about  potential  upside  inflation  surprises  in  the  US,  which  could  usher  in  a 
considerably faster pace of normalisation than the one currently being signalled by the 
US  Federal  Reserve  (Fed).  Furthermore,  fiscal  expansion  in  the  US  could  place 
additional  upward  pressure  on  both  US  short-  and  long-term  interest  rates,  with 
negative spill-over effects on most emerging market currencies and bonds.  
 Additional risks to many emerging-market assets stem from the recent rise in oil prices 
and international trade tensions. The recent increases were underpinned by OPEC’s5 
resolve to continue restraining supply in order to support prices. It is too early to tell 
whether the US shale oil producers, as the new swing producers in the market, will 
                                                      
5 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
 Page 8 of 10 
respond in a meaningful way and either cap or moderate these increases. And while 
the trade conflict  seemingly developing  between the US and China is perhaps best 
described (for now) as a skirmish, it could easily develop into a larger-scale trade war. 
Any  broader  retreat  from  a  multilateral,  rules  based  global  trade  system  would  not 
leave  emerging  markets  unscathed.  Global  value  chains  would  be  affected,  while 
reduced risk appetite could undermine cross-border capital flows.  
 I should note that while these recent developments are likely to create challenges for 
South Africa and emerging markets in general, not all emerging market economies are 
equally vulnerable to higher advanced economy interest rates. In fact, it is generally 
accepted that most have become more resilient since the so-called ‘taper tantrum’ of 
2013. Their macroeconomic fundamentals have generally improved,  their real policy 
rates are generally higher, and their current account and fiscal deficits have narrowed. 
Inflation is within target in most of the inflation-targeting emerging markets.  
 In South Africa’s case, our current account deficit has narrowed from its widest level 
of almost 6% of GDP in 2013 to 2.5% of GDP in 2017, while growth prospects have 
improved and positive policy signals should reduce the risk premium investors require 
in domestic assets. In that respect, we are encouraged that the recent weakening of 
the  rand  (from  relatively  strong  levels)  seemed  more  a  reflection  of  dollar  strength 
rather than idiosyncratic factors.  
 Conclusion 
 In the context of a supportive global environment, a strong financial sector and recent 
developments that reinforce the strength of South African institutions, our assessment 
is that South Africa’s investment case remains compelling. The South African outlook 
is currently far better than has been the case for some time now. Enormous potential 
can be unlocked by further reforms and improved policy coordination, which will open 
up numerous investment opportunities for foreign investors in the country. In addition, 
Government remains committed to improving the investment climate, as highlighted 
in  the Presidency  announcement of  our  intention  to  host  an  investment  conference 
around September 2018. As the South African Reserve Bank we support this through 
 Page 9 of 10 
ensuring  a  prudent  and  transparent  policy  approach  which  is  consistent  with  our 
constitutional mandate. 
 I  have  no doubt  that  the  trade  and  investment  ties  between  Switzerland  and  South 
Africa  can  improve  even  further.  SwissCham  Southern  Africa  has  been  playing  an 
important role in fostering these ties, and I wish you all the best in promoting trade and 
investment in our country. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 10 of 10 
