Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Ten  years  after  the  2008  financial  crisis  –
where are we heading now?
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the
International Finance and Banking Society Conference 2018, Porto Business School, Porto, 30
June 2018.
1
Good morning ladies and gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure to open this weekend’s Conference, in which a wide variety of topics will be
covered ranging from the more micro ones such as asset pricing to the broader issues related to
financial stability and regulation.
In the spirit of the Conference’s title and against the background of the post-crisis financial sector
reforms, in my remarks this morning I will ask you to ponder where we are heading and what
needs  to  be  addressed  to  mitigate  persisting  financial  stability  risks  in  the  context  of  an
incomplete architecture of the European Union (EU).
The European project as you know is a political endeavour that has involved waves of integration
over the last few decades. Each step determines the next, with the institutional set-up limited to
what is required but without sufficient capacity to react to the unforeseen. In many cases the
deepening  of  the  integration  process  was  motivated  and  steered  through  successive  crises.
Some may argue the crises were often existential. 
Despite renewed calls in recent years for the completion of the European architecture, starting
with the completion of the Banking Union, the outcome of yesterday’s Euro Summit is a clear
evidence of the hurdles we are facing. Do we need another crisis to steer further integration?
In  advance  of  yesterday’s  Euro  Summit,  the  Meseberg  Declaration    and  the  ministerial
agreement   between France and Germany was a welcome development as it was the first time
in six years (since 2012) that concrete steps forward were proposed by elected politicians. 
3
2
However, the Meseberg declaration and yesterday’s Euro Summit, by falling short of delivering on
further risk sharing while adding additional layers of risk reduction measures, lead us to consider
whether the costs of attaining additional risk sharing are worth the risks to financial stability in the
interim period. If not, what do we need to revisit and reassess to ensure it?
During the crisis, governments had to resort to bailouts when banks that had become too big,
complex  and  interconnected  were  at  risk  of  failure.  Letting  them  fail  would  have  meant  that
households  and  businesses  would  have  been  unable  to  access  their  money,  finance  their
projects or make payments. 
As highlighted by Tim Geithner, “by not imposing losses or ‘haircuts’ on non-deposit unsecured
and secured claims on banks, by not bailing them in, [the US authorities] helped stabilise the
financial system at much lower cost and recapitalised it largely with private, rather than public
4
money.” 
In  the  euro  area,  at  the  beginning  of  the  crisis,  the  affected  banks  were  mostly  located  in
Germany,  France  and  the  Netherlands.  In  2009,  bank  bailouts  totalled  around  8%  of  GDP  in
5
Germany, 5% in France and 12% in the Netherlands.
In view of the growing discontent that followed, in order to reduce the risk of moral hazard and
protect the taxpayer from shouldering private sector losses, there was a strong impetus against
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
using  public  money  in  establishing  a  safety  net  for  the  financial  system.  Bail-in  principles  in
resolving banks prevailed, and there was a general aversion to bailout provisions.
The post-crisis financial sector reforms were thus designed to strengthen financial stability by
focusing on improving banks’ resilience, ending too-big-to-fail, breaking the sovereign/bank loop
and reducing financial fragmentation.
Efforts went into developing a harmonised regulatory framework, with stricter requirements on
capital  and  (private)  loss-absorbing  capacity  to  protect  taxpayers,  while  reinforcing  risk
prevention and reduction. 
In this context, Basel III reforms   strengthened certain components:
6
Enhancements to risk capture by revising areas of the risk-weighted capital framework that
proved  to  be  acutely  miscalibrated,  including  the  global  standards  for  market  risk,
counterparty credit risk and securitisation;
Introduction of macroprudential elements in the regulatory framework;
Specification of a minimum leverage ratio requirement to constrain excess leverage in the
banking system and complement the risk-weighted capital requirements;
Introduction  of  an  international  framework  to  mitigate  excessive  liquidity  risk  and  maturity
transformation, through the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Net Stable Funding Ratio.
In  the  EU,  the  Single  Rulebook  and  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  were
introduced. The euro area went further, launching the first steps of the Banking Union and its
institutions,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism
(SRM) at an amazing speed. 
The  firm,  cohesive  European  commitment  towards  Banking  Union  helped  counter  financial
fragmentation. However, as the first two pillars of Banking Union were put in place, the political
will to build the third pillar – a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS) – and complete the
overall  architecture  waned  as  policymakers  got  stuck  in  the  risk  reduction  vs.  risk  sharing
debate, losing sight of the final objectives.
This lack of determination in completing Banking Union in accordance with the agreed timelines
has seriously jeopardised its key benefits. 
Today  Banking  Union  means  that  supervisory  and  resolution  decisions  are  mostly  European,
whilst the ultimate guarantor of financial stability remains national, with limited tools to act also in
view of the existing rules for State aid from the European Commission. 
This asymmetry could have had serious consequences in a series of recent cases, in which
decisions were ultimately redirected to individual nations.
We need to ask ourselves what political landscape we would have today, had certain authorities
not acted the way they did in order to preserve financial stability – the central objective of Banking
Union. 
Few things can be more destructive to citizens’ trust in the European institutions than threats to
financial  stability,  perceived  as  risking  their  savings.  Such  threats  can  have  direct  effects  on
citizens’  frustration  with  European  institutions  and  traditional  political  parties  associated  with
them.  Such  frustration  can  push  voters  to  support  populist  platforms  and  endanger  the  trust
7
between Member States built over decades.  
The history of European integration should serve as a constant reminder of the consequences of
the  rise  of  extreme  forms  of  nationalism.  The  rise  of  Euroscepticism  that  we  have  been
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
witnessing across countries is a wake-up call for European leaders and authorities. 
So, while those authorities were criticised for acting on their own to preserve financial stability, by
acting the way they did, were they not ultimately complying with the spirit and safeguarding the
future of Banking Union? 
9
8
Can we also expect that authorities, which at the beginning of the crisis bailed out banks without
in  some  cases  even  extending  losses  to  junior  creditors ,  would  (re)act  differently  faced  with
similar  risks?   Or  do  these  authorities  retain  instruments  that  ensure  financial  stability  is
preserved? Should these be emulated?
As we stand, in view of the existing mismatch between European oversight and national
liability, the objectives and interests of the several stakeholders involved are not aligned. With
the  benefit  of  six  years  of  hindsight, it  is  now  clear  that  several  links  and  stabilising
elements are missing in the Banking Union.
As the political will to move forward with the integration process is insufficient, policymakers and
co-legislators need to fine-tune the regulatory framework to preserve financial stability.
I will now address some of the issues we have faced with the implementation of the post-crisis
management framework.
In view of the absence of EDIS, if Banco Popular Español had actually failed, the Portuguese
Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme  would  have  had  to  reimburse  depositors  in  the  Portuguese
subsidiary,  even  though  the  problems  had  not  emerged  in  the  Portuguese  subsidiary  and
Portugal was neither supervising nor resolving Popular.
As banks are to a large extent still “national in death”, this example shows us that we need to
rethink the Single Point of Entry (SPE)/Multiple Point of Entry (MPE) resolution model in
tandem with the strengthening of the supervisory powers of host national competent
authorities (NCAs) and debate the contentious topic of ring-fencing measures. 
10
  
Additionally,  a  generalised  entry  into  force  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive
(BRRD)  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  Regulation  (SRMR),  irrespective  of  the  banks’
business  models,  has  meant  that,  as  of  today,  many  institutions  would  only  be  deemed
resolvable if bail-in would be extended to the level of senior debt or even deposits.
This, in turn, can have destabilising effects, by amplifying the incentives for a bank run at the
earliest sign of distress.
Although  one  may  support  and  push  for  credit  institutions  to  increase  their  loss  absorption
capacity, it is simply not reasonable to expect that compliance with Minimum Requirements for
own funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL) can be achieved by all credit institutions in the short to
medium  term  without  seriously  aggravating  their  financing  costs  and  profitability,  while
incentivising them to take higher risks. 
Resolution  authorities  therefore  need  to  be  able  to  rely  on  alternative  sources  to
support  resolution  actions,  such  as  resolution  funds,  especially  in  the  current  period  of
transition during which loss-absorbing capacity is not yet available. However, the current internal
loss absorption requirements (8% of total liabilities and own funds) and limitations on the amount
of the resolution funds that can be used (5% of total liabilities and own funds) prevent this, by
potentially  subjecting  senior  debt  and  even  unsecured  deposits  to  risks  incompatible  with
financial stability.
Moreover,  the  decision  to  establish  a  wider  scope  for MREL  than  for  TLAC  (Total  Loss
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
11
to  comply  with 
Absorbing  Capacity)  cannot  be  ignored.  Whereas  TLAC  applies  only  to  G-SIBs  (Global
Systemically Important Banks), MREL applies to all credit institutions in the EU, regardless of
  Proportionality and flexibility are thus crucial, in order to maintain the level
their size.
playing field and avoid distortions in banking businesses. 
Regulatory-driven consolidation has thus become an imminent risk: if only larger banks are
able 
increasingly  complex  regulation  and  potentially  disproportionate
requirements, we could be fostering the comeback of too-big-to-fail – which we were trying to
avoid  in  the  first  place.  In  the  context  of  Banking  Union,  consolidation  is  desirable  but  as  a
market-driven process resulting from advances in technology and the integration of markets.
As we stand, the approach adopted in the EU regarding MREL, combined with a set of
other  regulations,  may  challenge  the  sustainability  of  the  business  model  of  medium-
sized  institutions  particularly  those  that  are  predominantly  financed  by  capital  and
deposits. 
 The financing of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which are the core
of the EU economy and job creation, may thus become harder – with the ensuing social and
political consequences. This is a concrete threat stemming from the persisting risk reduction vs.
risk sharing debate.
12
Ultimately,  the  incomplete  set-up  of  the  Banking  Union  and  the  full  implementation  of  the
resolution regime are a dangerous combination. One that calls for a comprehensive rethinking
of the existing framework of safety nets 
 – especially when monetary and fiscal policy have
limited room for manoeuvre.
13
The establishment of a fully-fledged EDIS continues to be very difficult politically, despite the fact
that  it  is  a  necessary  risk  reduction  instrument  that  reduces  moral  hazard 
,  and  should  be
recognised as such to build confidence and trust between Member States. Recent research by
the ECB has shown that with proper risk-based contributions from banks, an almost negligible
cross-border subsidisation occurs.
  The fear that EDIS could imply significant transfers across
countries in case of a new banking crisis is therefore unjustified. 
Without  EDIS  we  need  to  debate  if  there  is  the  need  and  space  for  alternatives. Are
(private) Institutional Protection Schemes desirable or do we need to consider other options?
14
15
Recent experiences have also put the topic of harmonising EU banks’ liquidation regimes on the
agenda of policymakers. But what does bank liquidation mean? And do we have the tools
to ensure that bank liquidations are orderly in the current context?
Before jumping into the harmonisation of liquidation regimes, it must be acknowledged
that this is not a silver bullet. Indeed, the considerable social and economic impact ensuing
from the failure of a bank with systemic relevance at local level would remain.
It seems clear that the BRRD creates a comparative advantage for larger banks.
 As recently
stressed by Fernando Restoy, and experienced first-hand by Professor Panicos Demetriades
during his tenure as Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus, there is no clear room for a ‘middle
class’ of institutions whose failure, and eventual liquidation, could be considered systemic but
whose  business  model  may  be  incompatible  with  the  satisfaction  of  MREL  requirements.
Authorities thus need to be confident that the regular insolvency procedures could be applied to
them without jeopardising financial stability.
17
 
16
But how to accomplish that? Recent calls to form a sort of European FDIC (a version of the
American Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), merging the Single Resolution Fund (SRF)
and EDIS into one single entity,
 are welcome in this regard, provided that the legal framework
is  fixed  and  that  financial  stability  –  both  at  European  level  as  well  as  at  national  level  –  is
18
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
enshrined as the first and fundamental objective of any intervention. 
However, as the political will to proceed with such a broad reform is currently non-existent, a
question arises as regards countries’ discretion on how to ensure financial stability. Whereas the
public  debate  on  harmonisation  of 
liquidation  regimes  was  motivated  by  perceived
circumventions to the existing regulation, in view of the persisting risks, should we not instead
discuss alternatives to a further straightjacketing of nations’ room for manoeuvre?
Ben Bernanke’s current research points to the fact that the financial panic of 2007–09 was the
most dangerous part of the crisis. Bernanke is thus of the view that future work needs to take into
account  how  severe  the  costs  of  financial  instability  are  –  in  particular  panics  that  lead  to
massive disintermediation.
19
In the same spirit, in 2016 Tim Geithner noted, and I quote, “[i]n a panic, there will be no source of
private funding or equity capital available at an economic cost or on a scale that can substitute
for the resources of the State. You can choose to let the panic play out and allow the financial
system  to  collapse  and  the  economy  to  fall  into  depression.  But  if  you  want  to  avoid  that
outcome,  you  have  to  recognise  that  only  the  government  has  the  ability  to  arrest  a  general
panic,  to  offset  the  collapse  in  private  demand,  and  to  preserve  the  functioning  of  the  credit
system that is a necessary foundation for economic recovery.” 
20
In this context, shouldn’t we discuss the taboo of making use of public funds? We cannot forget
that by limiting policy options on the usage of public funds, legislators and regulators may have
ended up exacerbating risks in the event of a (systemic) crisis.
Against this background, should we not discuss:
the  application  of  the  BRRD  in  its  current  form  only  to  banks  that  are  eligible  for  the
European safety net? 
the revision of the BRRD and State aid requirements for medium-sized banks with systemic
relevance  where  national  authorities  are  willing  to  engage  in  the  burden  sharing  without
distorting competition?
alternative  ways  to  ensuring  the  exit  of  medium-sized  and  small-sized  banks  from  the
market while preserving value and protecting creditors and non-financial borrowers? 
special insolvency proceedings as an alternative to the ‘atomistic’ liquidation regime with a
limited usage of public funds as a bridge to safeguard financial stability? 
While the absorption of losses by private stakeholders should be the norm, flexibility should be
preserved  as  the  financial  system’s  network  structure  plays  a  fundamental  role  in  deciding
whether there is the need for a government to intervene. 
 We should not forget that financial
stability and public trust are in fact a public good.
21
To  inform  these  discussions,  a  clear  definition  of  what  constitutes  public  interest  and  critical
functions is required. 
A  comprehensive  approach  across  legislation  and  stakeholders’  interactions  thoroughly
analysing  cross-implications  is  thus  required  to  minimise  moral  hazard  and  vested  interests
while preserving the market discipline necessary.
Let me conclude.
Much  has  been  achieved  since  the  inception  of  the  crisis  ten  years  ago.  Nevertheless,  the
foundations of the European architecture are still not sufficiently robust to withstand the impact of
a future crisis. This should be the focus of policymakers and relevant institutions.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As the political will to steer further the integration progress is currently insufficient, it is urgent,
and in the best interest of European citizens, that we revisit the existing rules now. 
If it is not possible to complete the Banking Union as originally foreseen, we must structurally
revisit the project to ensure that we have sufficient tools to safeguard financial stability when the
next crisis hits.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
As prepared for delivery.
www.bundesregierung.de/Content/EN/Pressemitteilungen/BPA/2018/20...
 minefi.hosting.augure.com/Augure_Minefi/r/ContenuEnLigne/Downloa...
Geithner, T. (2016), “Are We Safer? The Case for Strengthening the Bagehot Arsenal”, Per Jacobsson Lecture,
IMF–World Bank Annual Meetings, 8 October.
Draghi, M. (2018), “Risk-reducing and risk-sharing in our Monetary Union”,Speech at the European University
Institute, Florence, 11 May.
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2017),  “High-level  summary  of  Basel  III  reforms”,  available  at
www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d424_hlsummary.pdf.
Guiso, L., Herrera, H., Morelli, M. and Sonno, T. (2018), “Global Crises and Populism: the Role of Eurozone
Institutions”, CEPR Discussion Paper DP12944, 20 May.
Véron, N. (2018), “Bank crisis management and resolution: what is missing?” in “Towards a More Resilient
Euro Area: Ideas from the ‘Future Europe’ forum”, CEPS, and Véron, N. (2018), “EU financial services policy
since 2007: crisis, responses and prospects”, Global Policy Volume 9, Supplement 1, June 2018.
Klaus Regling recently noted that: “Germany should not forget that its banks received more public money during
the financial crisis than almost any other European banking system – with the exception of Spain and Ireland.
Taxpayers  had  to  shoulder  high  losses.  It  is  wrong  to  assume  that  German  banks  would  never  need  any
money”, Interview published in Süddeutsche Zeitung, 25 June 2018.
Nouy, D. (2017), “Banking union, three years on – has it lived up to its promises?”, statement at the Single
Resolution Board Conference, Brussels: “Banks are supervised and resolved at European level, but in the event
of a failure, the negative consequences are felt mainly at national level. (…) If, for instance, the Spanish Banco
Popular had actually failed, Portugal’s deposit insurance scheme would have had to refund depositors in the
Portuguese subsidiary. That is a consequence of having supervision and resolution at European level. The
Portuguese authorities would not have been involved in either process.”
Restoy, F. (2018), “Bail-in in the new bank resolution framework: is there an issue with the middle class?”,
speech  at  the  IADI-ERC  International  Conference  “Resolution  and  deposit  guarantee  schemes  in  Europe:
incomplete processes and uncertain outcomes”, Naples, 23 March.
Restoy, F. (2018), op. cit.
Geithner, T. (2016), op. cit.
Smaghi, B. (2018), Financial Times Op-Ed “European banking union needs its final leg”, 21 October 2017.
Carmassi, J., Dobkowitz, S., Evrard, J., Parisi, L., Silva, A., Wedow, M. (2018), “Completing the Banking Union
with a European Deposit Insurance Scheme: who is afraid of cross-subsidisation?”, ECB Occasional Paper
208, April.
Demetriades, P. (2017), “A Diary of the Euro Crisis in Cyprus: Lessons for Bank Recovery and Resolution”,
Palgrave Macmilan: Cham Switzerland.
Restoy, F. (2018), op. cit.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
18
19
20
21
Constâncio, V. (2018), “Completing the Odyssean journey of the European monetary union”, remarks at the ECB
Colloquium on “The Future of Central Banking”, Frankfurt am Main 16–17 May. In fact, the establishment of
Banking Union was inspired by the American FDIC. However, it fell short of providing the SRF or EDIS with the
right instruments and means to guarantee financial stability.
Bernanke,  B.  (2018),  “The  real  effects  of  disrupted  credit:  evidence  from  the  global  financial  crisis”,  Per
Jacobsson Lecture, BIS Annual General Meeting, Basel, 24 June.
Geithner, T. (2016), op. cit.
Bernard, B., Capponi, A, and Stiglitz, J. (2017), “Bail-ins and bailouts: Incentives, connectivity, and systemic
stability”, VoxEU.org, 18 October.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
