William  C  Dudley:  Welcoming  remarks  at  the  Community  Bankers
Conference
Remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Community Bankers Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
New York City, 18 April 2018.
 Thank you for joining us today for our 16th Annual Community Bankers Conference.  This is my
last opportunity to address this fine group of community bank leaders in my role as president of
the New York Fed.  As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily
1
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System.
Since  becoming  head  of  the  New  York  Fed  in  2009,  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  watch  the
evolution of community banking up close.  I observed the resilience of community banks at the
height of the financial crisis and how your organizations managed during those turbulent times.  I
also have had the privilege of meeting with many of you during my regional visits, and I remain
impressed  with  how  small  banks  remain  important  pillars  of  economic  support  for  their
communities.
The  past  decade  has  seen  significant  change  for  your  industry.    There  has  been  significant
consolidation among institutions and the remaining community banks are much healthier.  Back
in 2009, there were 191 community banks in the Second District with an aggregate of $223 billion
in total assets.  In contrast, there are 135 community banks today.  Despite this contraction in
number, the remaining firms have continued to grow and thrive, and now have assets totaling
$291 billion, which is an increase of about 30 percent.  Community banks are much stronger
financially today.  In 2009, troubled assets were 26 percent of capital, primarily reflecting a large
volume  of  construction  lending.    That  ratio  has  declined  significantly,  to  8.5  percent  today—
demonstrating that community bank leaders have the capacity to take action, effectively work out
troubled assets, and generate capital.  These data tell a welcome story regarding your ability to
successfully conduct business through the economic recovery.  
So, where does the industry go from here and what challenges lie ahead?  That is the theme of
today’s  conference,  and  I  expect  a  robust  and  enlightening  series  of  discussions  from  both
panelists and presenters.  From my perspective, there are two challenges that I would highlight:
ongoing advances in technology, and interest rate risk.
First, major technological changes are compelling banks to embrace technology to better meet
the needs of their customers.  Today’s customer expects increased digital access, and a bank’s
failure to advance technologically would be very damaging for its franchise value. But, the use of
new  technology  comes  with  its  own  risks  that  require  significant  investment  and  attention—
especially around cybersecurity.
Second, in today’s low interest rate environment, we have observed that some community banks
have taken on more interest rate risk by increasing the maturity of their assets and the average
duration of their loan portfolios.  In the last rate tightening cycle, we observed that banks with
larger concentrations of long-term earning assets experienced lower margins.  It will be important
for community banks that are very sensitive to interest rate risk to evaluate the risk management
of their loan portfolios.
Finally, when I meet with community bankers, I am often asked the following question: “When will
we see regulatory relief?” My simple answer is soon, I hope.
There  is  wide  ranging  consensus—across  party  lines  and  among  regulators,  the  Federal
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Reserve included—that we need to reform the regulatory requirements for small banks.  As I
have said, I favor regulatory relief for smaller banking organizations.   Their size and complexity
do not pose a significant risk to the system, and they lack the scale to absorb large compliance
and other regulatory costs.  Given broad agreement on this issue, I am hopeful that relief will be
forthcoming. 
2
Let me conclude by saying that we continue to recognize the important role community banks
play in our economy.  According to a study by our colleagues at the Kansas City Fed, the U.S.
banking system is unique because of its balance between a small number of large banks and
thousands of community banks.   That balance helps serve the needs of a large and diverse
U.S.  economy  that  includes  businesses  of  all  sizes  and  consumers  with  different  needs  and
preferences.   As  the  U.S.  economy  continues  to  grow  and  expand—as  I  expect  it  will—your
personalized  customer  service,  commitment  to  relationship  banking,  and  adaptability  to
technological advances will serve you and your communities well.
3
I will miss many aspects of my role at the New York Fed, particularly the opportunities I’ve had to
interact with the community bankers in our district.  Please enjoy today’s conference, and thank
you for coming.
1
2
3
Sumeet Batra, Richard Ciccotelli, and Jacqueline Fenton assisted in preparing these remarks.
See  William  C.  Dudley, The Importance of Incentives in Ensuring a Resilient and Robust Financial System,
March 26, 2018.
Keeton, William & Kahn, George A. & Schroeder, Linda & Weiner, Stuart E., 2003. “The role of community banks
in the U.S. economy,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, issue Q II, pages 15–43.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
