Philip  Lowe:  Opening  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives
Standing Committee on Economics
Opening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Canberra, 17 August 2018.
Chair
Members of the Committee
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  the  Committee  today.  These  hearings  are  an
important  part  of  the  accountability  process  for  the  Reserve  Bank  of Australia. As  usual,  my
colleagues and I will do our best to answer your questions.
Since  we  last  met,  the  Australian  economy  has  continued  to  move  in  the  right  direction.
According to the most recent data, GDP growth is 3.1 per cent, inflation is around 2 per cent and
the unemployment rate is now below 5½ per cent. In the broad sweep of our economic history,
these are a pretty good set of numbers. We would, of course, like them to be better – we are still
short of full employment and we would like to be more confident that inflation will be sustained at
a level consistent with the target. But if things work out as expected, we are likely to make further
gradual progress on both fronts over the next couple of years.
The Australian economy looks to have grown strongly over the first half of 2018. GDP increased
by 1 per cent in the March quarter and a reasonable increase is expected in the June quarter.
Business conditions are positive and we are in the midst of an upswing in non-mining business
investment.  Increased  spending  on  infrastructure  is  also  helping.  Resource  exports  are  also
increasing  strongly  as  new  capacity  comes  on  stream,  particularly  for  LNG.  One  important
offsetting factor is the drought in eastern Australia. While the prices of some farm products are
currently quite high, the dry conditions will limit farm production.
I thought it might be useful to make some introductory remarks on four topics the Reserve Bank
Board  has  devoted  considerable  attention  to  over  recent  times:  the  global  outlook;  household
debt and the housing market; wages growth; and the outlook for inflation.
The global outlook remains positive, although a number of risks have increased. The advanced
economies are growing faster than trend and unemployment rates are at multi-decade lows in
some countries. A gradual pick-up in wages growth is also now taking place. As is appropriate,
the considerable monetary stimulus that has been in place in the United States is being steadily
withdrawn. At  the  same,  though,  official  interest  rates  in  the  euro  area,  Japan,  Sweden  and
Switzerland are still negative, more than a decade after the onset of the financial crisis. In China,
growth has slowed a little. The authorities have responded to this, although they also face the
challenge of addressing risks in the financial system.
There are a few uncertainties that are worth highlighting.
One is the possibility of an escalation in global trade tensions. The measures announced so far
are unlikely to derail the global expansion. Even so, in some countries, businesses are delaying
investment because of the additional uncertainty. It is possible that this becomes a more general
story. If this were to occur, this could be the channel through which the trade tensions sap the
current positive momentum in the global economy.
Another uncertainty is the possibility of a larger-than-expected pick-up in inflation in the United
States. The US economy is experiencing a sizeable fiscal stimulus at a time of limited spare
capacity,  so  growth  there  could  surprise  on  the  upside. At  the  same  time,  financial  markets
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
remain relaxed about the implications of this for inflation. I am less relaxed: it is highly unusual to
have such stimulatory fiscal policy when the economy is already operating at a very high level of
capacity.  One  can’t  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  Federal  Reserve  will  have  to  withdraw
monetary  accommodation  more  quickly  than  currently  projected,  with  possibly  disruptive
consequences in financial markets.
A third set of global risks originate from a number of individual economies with country-specific
structural and/or institutional vulnerabilities, including Argentina, Brazil, Italy and Turkey. Over the
past  month  there  have  been  episodes  of  market  volatility  associated  with  each  of  these
countries. We are watching developments closely as a further escalation of problems could be a
catalyst for a period of increased stress in the global financial markets.
The second issue is the housing market and household debt.
The housing markets in Sydney and Melbourne have clearly slowed and prices are coming down.
While this has concerned some people, we need to keep things in perspective. Not so long ago,
there was concern in the community about rapidly rising housing prices and debt and declining
housing affordability. These earlier trends were not sustainable and were posing a medium-term
risk to our economy. So a pull-back is a welcome development and can put the market on a
more  sustainable  footing.  It  is  good  news  that  this  adjustment  is  taking  place  at  a  time  when
global growth is strong, the labour market is positive and interest rates are low. All these things
are helping with the adjustment. We are nevertheless continuing to keep a close eye on housing
market developments across the country.
The slowing in the housing market has reduced the demand for credit by investors. There has
also been some tightening in the supply of credit, partly in response to the Royal Commission,
although the main story is one of reduced demand. The average variable interest rate paid by
borrowers has declined further over the past six months, to be about 10 basis points lower than a
year ago. You would not have expected to have seen this if supply constraints were the main
reason for slower credit growth.
A third issue that the Board has focused on recently is growth of wages. As I have discussed
previously,  a  lift  in  aggregate  wages  growth  would  be  a  welcome  development  from  several
perspectives. It would contribute to inflation being closer to the midpoint of the inflation target.
Stronger income growth would also help in the context of high levels of household debt. It would
also  be  of  benefit  to  government  finances  and  more  generally  would  strengthen  our  sense  of
shared  prosperity.  And,  to  the  extent  that  stronger  wages  growth  is  backed  by  stronger
productivity growth, it would boost our real incomes.
We  had  another  reading  on  the  Wage  Price  Index  a  couple  of  days  ago,  which  showed  a
welcome uptick. Over the past year, the Wage Price Index increased by 2.1 per cent and the
broader measure, which captures bonuses, increased by 2.5 per cent. These figures are both up
from a year ago. This week, we also received employment data for the month of July. While the
month-to-month employment data are volatile, the unemployment rate has fallen to 5.3 per cent,
which is the lowest it has been for some years.
Taken together, these data are consistent with our view that wages growth and inflation will pick
up  gradually  over  the  next  couple  of  years  as  the  labour  market  continues  to  tighten.  This
tightening is evident in a number of indicators. The number of job vacancies, as a share of the
labour force, is at a record high. Firms are reporting that it is harder to  find  workers  with  the
necessary skills, and survey-based measures of hiring intentions remain positive. In our liaison
program we also hear reports of larger wage increases for certain occupations where workers
with the necessary skills are in short supply. We expect that we will hear more such reports over
time.
Even so, the pick-up in wages growth is still expected to be fairly gradual. We still have some
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market,  including  part-time  workers  who  would  like  more  hours.
There are also structural factors at work, arising from technology and competition that we have
discussed at previous hearings.
The fourth and related issue is the outlook for inflation.
The CPI inflation rate – at 2.1 per cent – is higher than it was a couple of years ago, but still
below  the  medium-term  average.  Strong  competition  in  retailing  from  new  entrants  is  holding
down the prices of many goods and low wage increases are holding down the prices of many
services. Rent inflation is also at a very low level. Working in the other direction over the past
year has been higher prices for electricity, fuel and tobacco.
We  are  expecting  inflation  to  move  gradually  higher  over  the  next  couple  of  years  as  the
economy strengthens. We remain committed to achieving an average rate of inflation over time
of between 2 and 3 per cent.
In  the  short  term,  though,  we  are  expecting  the  headline  rate  of  inflation  to  dip  a  little  in  the
September quarter. Utility prices have declined recently in some cities and policy changes are
likely to reduce the measured price of child care. There have also been some policy changes at
the state government level that will reduce other measured prices. Collectively, these changes
will help with cost-of-living pressures and free up income to spend on other things. From this
perspective, these changes are good news.
So these are some of the main issues we have been working our way through.
As you are aware, the Reserve Bank Board has held the cash rate steady at 1½ per cent since
August 2016. This setting of monetary policy is helping support economic growth, allowing for
further progress to be made in reducing the unemployment rate and returning inflation towards
the midpoint of the target range. We have not sought to fine-tune outcomes, but rather to be a
source of stability and confidence as the economy moves along this path.
For most of this year, I have emphasised three points in communication about monetary policy.
The first is that things are moving in the right direction. We are making progress towards full
employment and having inflation return to around the midpoint of the target range, and further
progress is expected.
The second point is that if we continue to make progress, you could expect the next move in
interest rates to be up.
With the central scenario being for the economy to continue on its recent track, it is more likely
that the next move in interest rates will be an increase, not a decrease. The last increase in the
cash  rate  was  back  in  late  2010,  so  an  increase,  when  it  occurs,  will  represent  a  significant
change for many people. It is important to remember, though, that higher interest rates will be
accompanied by faster growth in incomes than we have seen over recent times. In this sense, it
will be a sign that things are returning to normal. Of course, higher rates will also be welcomed
by many depositors, who have been earning low rates of returns on their savings over recent
times.
The third point is that because the progress that is being made is gradual, and is expected to
remain so, there is not a strong case for a near-term adjustment in interest rates.
The Board’s view is that it is likely that we will hold steady for a while yet. It is likely to be some
time before we are at full employment and the inflation rate is comfortably within the target range
on a sustained basis. We are prepared to maintain the current monetary policy stance until these
benchmarks are more clearly in sight.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
So these are our three recent messages on monetary policy.
On other matters, we are planning to release the upgraded $50 banknote in October. The new
note will have the same high-tech security features as the new $5 and $10 notes. All up, there
are around 700 million $50 notes on issue – that’s around 28 per person – so it is a big logistical
exercise.  You  may  have  read  in  the  press  that  there  has  been  an  industrial  dispute  at  Note
Printing Australia,  which  manufactures Australia’s  banknotes  in  Craigieburn,  Melbourne.  I  am
pleased  to  be  able  to  report  that  an  in  principle  agreement  on  a  new  enterprise  bargaining
agreement was reached earlier this week and that we have sufficient notes to launch the new
$50 in October as planned.
Finally,  at  previous  hearings  we  have  spoken  about  the  New  Payments  Platform  –  the  new
payments  system  that  allows  Australians  to  easily  make  information-rich,  real-time,  24/7
payments to each other, without having to know BSB and account numbers. Since the system
was launched in February, 1.8 million Australians have registered a PayID – usually their mobile
phone number – that can be used easily to address payments in the new system. The take-up of
the system has, however, been less than earlier industry projections. This partly reflects the fact
that a number of the major banks have been slow to make the new system available to their
customers. They are now making it available, so we expect take-up to increase. Interestingly,
many of the smaller financial institutions have done a better job, with more than 50 of them ready
from day one. Despite the relatively slow start, we still expect that the new system will provide
the  bedrock  upon  which  further  innovation  in  Australia’s  payment  system  will  be  built.  The
Payments System Board is keeping a close eye on access arrangements so that those with new
ideas and better ways of doing things can use the new system.
Thank you. My colleagues and I are happy to answer your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
