Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Mobile payment – the next wave
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the Payment System Forum & Exhibition 2017 "Mobile Payment: The Next
Wave", Kuala Lumpur, 8 December 2017.
 Welcome to the Payment System Forum & Exhibition 2017. This year’s theme ‘Mobile Payment:
The Next Wave’ is the continuation of our country’s e-payment transformation that started seven
years  ago.  In  2011,  we  launched  the  10-year  e-payment  roadmap  in  the  Financial  Sector
Blueprint  2011–2020.  Various  reform  measures  were  instituted  to  remove  pricing  distortions,
instill  market  incentives  and  induce  competition  to  reduce  costs  in  our  effort  to  create  a
conducive environment to accelerate migration to e-payments.
These measures have been effective in reducing Malaysia’s usage of cheques and fostering the
adoption of e-payments. The total cheque volume has declined by 42% from 205 million cheques
in 2011 to an estimated 120 million cheques in 2017.
Electronic fund transfers have increased from 66 million transactions in 2011 to an estimated
329  million  transactions  in  2017,  surpassing  the  number  of  cheques  issued  by  almost  three
times. At the current rate of decline, we are likely to achieve the Financial Sector Blueprint target
of reducing cheque usage to 100 million in the year 2019, one year ahead of schedule.
Encouraging progress has also been made in the expansion of the point-of-sale (POS) terminal
network. The reform measures in the Payment Card Reform Framework (PCRF) implemented
since 2015 have enhanced transparency and competition, bringing about a continued decline in
the average merchant discount  rates  (or  MDR).  Merchants  have  benefited  from  lower  cost  of
accepting card payments, with an estimated cost savings of about RM422.4 million from 2015 to
September this year. Consequently, the annual growth of POS terminals has more than doubled
from about 6.8% for the period between 2011 and 2014, to 17% for the period between 2015 and
2017.
Key trends shaping our payment landscape today
Since  the  Payment  Forum  in  2015,  many  developments  have  taken  place  in  the  payment
landscape both domestically and internationally.
Firstly, society has become increasingly digital and connected, driven by the Internet and mobile
revolution.  For  a  population  of  32.1  million  in  Malaysia,  there  are  42.8  million  mobile  phone
subscriptions while smartphone penetration stands at 70% and is increasing.
Secondly, payment technology has become more advanced, scalable and increasingly low-cost.
For  instance,  innovations  in  the  area  of  merchant  acceptance  has  lowered  the  cost  for
merchants to embrace electronic payments through the use of Quick Response (QR) codes.
Likewise,  the  advancements  in  biometric  and  tokenisation  technologies  and  the  shift  towards
greater publication of Application Programming Interfaces have enhanced the ability of payment
service providers to develop new use cases and deliver superior customer experience.
Thirdly, the market players in our payment landscape have become more abundant, diverse and
increasingly  non-traditional.  In  2017  alone,  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  processed  applications
from 43 new non-bank players, an increase of 91% compared to the past two years. This is in
line with global developments where the size of the global payments industry has increased to
account for 34 percent of overall banking revenues in 2016 and is projected to become a USD$2
trillion  dollar  industry  by  2020.  This  is  a  significant  turning  point.  In  essence,  the  traditional
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
payment  channels  are  increasingly  being  replaced  by  nimble,  innovative  and  lower  cost
alternatives.
We must embrace the next wave of technological and e-payment transformation. As a nation, we
need to rise and seize this exciting opportunity, take a proactive rather than a reactive role, and
benefit from the enormous opportunities brought about by technology to improve our payment
system’s  security,  efficiency,  productivity.  We  need  to  bereft  ourselves  of  the  inertia  to  move
forward with the times.
There are a few strategies we ought to adopt, to reduce further the wastage arising from the cost
of maintaining two parallel systems by accelerating the displacement of cheques, harness the
pervasiveness of mobile payments to ensure reach, and focus on solving the last mile obstacles
to enhance migration to e-payments.
The enormous cost of maintaining two parallel systems
Cheque is a very costly payment instrument to process compared to electronic fund transfer.
Our study shows that the unit cost for cheque processing by banks has increased from RM3 in
2011 to RM4 in 2016, and is estimated to be about RM6 by 2020. At around 120 million cheques
currently, this translates into an enormous cost of around RM480 million, a sheer wastage to the
economy.
It is also costly for businesses to handle cheques. We estimate an average processing cost of
about RM6.80 per cheque due to expenses incurred on delivering, depositing, reconciling and
handling of returned cheques. On the contrary, the cost of processing an Interbank GIRO and
Instant  Transfer  (IBFT)  are  around  30  sen  per  transaction.  Such  unit  cost  is  likely  to  decline
further due to economies of scale as e-payment adoption gains further traction.
In Scandinavian countries, higher cost has been the one of the key factors that drove the cheque
volume  to  a  negligible  level.  Denmark,  for  example,  turned  off  its  interbank  cheque  clearing
system on 1 January 2017 once cheque usage was widely displaced by electronic fund transfers
and debit cards. In the case of Malaysia, we estimate that at the current rate of decline, it will take
us about 27 years before cheques can be reduced to a negligible level of 0.1 per capita, with an
estimated cost to the banking and business community of about RM12.9 billion. This is a huge
amount of prodigality. By accelerating the pace of cheque decline, we can shorten the number of
years needed to reduce cheque usage to a negligible level and derive greater cost savings for the
country.
Harness the prevalence of mobile payments to expand reach
Most Malaysians are likely to carry both a debit card and mobile phones and there are 45.4 million
debit cards and 42.8 million mobile phone subscriptions. For a population of 32.1 million this is
considered high. We need to take advantage of this. In particular, for debit cards. We need to
optimise the use of this medium.
In  the  case  of  debit  cards,  the  Merchant  Discount  Rates  are  still  very  high  despite  the  direct
debiting  of  the  users’  account.  Acquirers  should  reduce  the  rates  further.  There  are  certain
segments of the merchant community that are cost-sensitive and may not be able to afford the
MDR of card payments. In this regard, mobile payment has the potential to complement the debit
card as a low-cost alternative to accepting cash. Mobile e-wallet is a strong alternative to debit
cards as merchants can accept payment through a QR code. 
The use of QR codes has enormous potential. Out of 24 million adults in Malaysia, there are only
12  million  active  online  banking  accounts.  We  estimate  that  there  are  about  10  million  bank
accountholders who are not using online services, while the remaining 2 million adults are likely
to be unbanked. In this regard, I am encouraged by the fact that non-bank e-money issuers are
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
targeting to increase their product penetration in these unserved segments since the banks are
not servicing this particular segment. The QR code could be a catalyst to reach this group.
To encourage QR code payment, avoid market fragmentation and broaden financial inclusion,
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  issued  an  Interoperable  Credit  Transfer  Framework  (ICTF)  for
consultation. The ICTF aims to connect both banks and eligible non-bank e-money issuers to
ensure reachability of bank accounts and e-money accounts. For the first time in our history,
customers of both banks and non-banks will soon be able to transfer funds across the network
seamlessly by just referencing the mobile number and IC numbers of the recipients or scanning
the QR code of the recipients.
In this regard, PayNet, the merged entity of MEPS and MyClear, as the operator of the country’s
shared payment infrastructure would provide open and fair access to its clearing system and
other shared payment utilities to both banks and eligible non-bank e-money issuers. This would
enhance  the  network  multiplier  effects  and  foster  better  allocation  of  industry  resources,  as
market  players  would  be  able  to  compete  based  on  value-added  services  rather  than  on  the
basis of infrastructure. 
In  addition,  the  Interoperable  Credit  Transfer  Framework  would  level  the  playing  field  between
banks  and  non-bank  players,  by  subjecting  them  to  risk  management  requirements  that  are
proportionate  to  the  nature,  scale  and  complexity  of  their  business  activities.  The  framework
would enhance consumer protection and confidence in the use credit transfer services.
Focus on solving the last mile obstacles to enhance migration to e-payments
To remain relevant, it is important for all stakeholders to step up their game to drive innovation
and  new  use  cases  to  accelerate  the  displacement  of  cash  and  cheques.  PayNet,  as  the
operator  of  shared  payment  infrastructure,  will  facilitate  the  pooling  of  resources  to  develop
innovative use cases to meet the evolving needs of end-users. For this to happen, PayNet might
need  to  establish  an  innovation  lab  and  publish  open  APIs  to  leverage  on  the  creativity,
resourcefulness and innovativeness of the fintech community.
Banks and non-bank players should focus on solving last mile obstacles by alleviating the ‘pain
points’ faced by consumers and businesses. Subject to the observance of data protection laws,
market players should mine customers’ data to develop innovative solutions and deliver superior
customer experience. Customers can now look for digital solutions that enrich their quality of life.
This may necessitate entities to forge strategic alliances to deliver innovative services leveraging
on each other’s competitive advantages.
Equally important, are efforts to enhance cyber security and promote greater public awareness
of the security features and safety tips to mitigate fraud. Bank Negara Malaysia will work with the
payment  industry  to  take  preemptive  actions  to  protect  the  security  of  customer  funds  and
financial market infrastructures.
Conclusion
In our quest to engage in the digital economy, migration to e-payments is a critical component. It
will benefit Malaysia through greater efficiency and productivity, thereby enhancing our country’s
competitiveness. We have no choice but to improve the way we conduct our financial affairs.
The banking system has allocated huge amount of resources. From 2009 to 2017, the industry
has  invested  RM893  million  to  enhance  the  e-payment  infrastructure.  Moving  forward,  the
industry will invest a further RM346 million to expand the POS terminal network and RM40 million
to develop the Real-time Retail Payments Platform to spur the usage of mobile payments.
By  the  end  of  2020,  it  is  envisaged  that  individuals  and  businesses  will  be  able  to  make  and
receive payments seamlessly via online banking, payment cards and mobile payments. There
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
are  no  reasons  whatsoever  for  us  not  to  migrate  from  a  costly  and  inefficient  payment
mechanism to a cheaper, safer and more efficient payment mode.
To  reflect  the  higher  cheque  processing  cost,  hasten  the  migration  away  from  cheques,  and
incentivise individuals and businesses to migrate to a lower cost of doing business, beginning 2
January 2021, the cheque fee will be increased from 50 sen to RM1.00 and gradually thereafter,
to reflect the actual cost of cheque processing. However, users of financial services will continue
to be given a choice of using cheques, if they prefer to use an expensive and inefficient option
rather than a cheaper one.
To  support  businesses  and  individuals,  over  the  next  three  years  a  few  initiatives  will  be
implemented.  To  drive  the  migration  to  e-payments  during  the  transition  period,  the  Instant
Transfer fee of 50 sen would be waived for transactions up to RM5,000 per transaction made by
individuals and SMEs effective 1 July 2018.
The e-Payment Incentive Fund (ePIF) will be enlarged with an additional contribution of RM198
million  from  financial  institutions.  The  funds  will  be  used  to  assist  account  holders  to  migrate
efficiently  to  e-payments.  Individuals  and  businesses  are  advised  to  take  advantage  of  these
incentives and engage their respective financial institutions.
In line with this year’s theme of ‘Mobile Payment: The Next Wave’, we have invited a total of 18
exhibitors comprising both banks and non-banks to showcase their new and innovative payment
solutions. Do take the opportunity to visit the booths to gain further insights on how the solutions
would benefit your business and cater to your payment needs. With this, I wish you a productive
forum ahead.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
