REMARKS  BY  JAVIER  GUZMÁN  CALAFELL,  DEPUTY  GOVERNOR  AT  THE 
BANCO  DE  MÉXICO.  PANEL  ON  “END  OF  QE  AND  RISING  INTEREST  RATES: 
IMPLICATIONS FOR ADVANCED AND EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES”. UBS 
24TH RESERVE MANAGEMENT SEMINAR. Thun, Switzerland, June 26, 2018.1 
I am very glad to have the opportunity to participate in another UBS Reserve 
Management Seminar. I thank the organizers for their kind invitation. 
Over the several years that have followed the outburst of the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC), Emerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) have been 
able to sustain a satisfactory pace of expansion, with 2018 expected to record 
the third consecutive year of accelerating activity.  
The expansion of EMDEs has been partly nurtured by the aggressive relaxation 
of monetary policy stances in the Advanced Economies (AEs), which implied a 
significant  easing  of  external  financial  conditions,  as  evidenced  by  the  vast 
amounts  of  international  funds  made  available  to  emerging  markets  at 
historically  low  costs.  For  instance,  bond  spreads  on  EMDE  sovereign  debt 
were around 137 basis points lower in 2010-2018 than in the years preceding 
the GFC. 
Given the prolonged period over which such a situation was sustained, as well 
as  the  magnitude  of  the  adjustment  needed  to  accommodate  the  surge  in 
global liquidity, it comes as no surprise that this phenomenon has given rise to 
a gradual, albeit significant, buildup of vulnerabilities in the global economy 
and financial system. In fact, since the early stages of this process, warnings 
                                                            
1 The views and opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not 
necessarily represent the institutional position of the Banco de México or of its Board of Governors as a 
whole. 
1 
 have  been  made  about  its  likely  pernicious  effects  on  the  performance  and 
stability of EMDEs and their financial markets, including through the potential 
acceleration  of  domestic  credit  cycles  and  appreciation  of  local  asset  prices 
(notably  exchange  rates)  beyond  what  fundamentals  would  suggest.  Thus, 
challenges have emerged as this process is reversed. 
Since  the  onset  of  the  global  market  correction  of  mid-April  this  year,  the 
accumulated  portfolio  flows  (in  both  equity  and  debt)  of  foreign  capital  to 
emerging  markets  have  been  negative.  Portfolio  flows  exiting  EMDEs 
amounted to USD 17.1 billion over the 40-day period that followed the start of 
the event, a figure comparable in magnitude to that observed in the equivalent 
period after the 2013 “taper tantrum” and the 2016 US presidential election 
(USD 18.7 billion and USD 18.8 billion, respectively).2 Furthermore, continuing 
with  the  deceleration  that  has  been  registered  since  2011,  foreign  direct 
investment (FDI) inflows to EMDEs declined from 2.0 percent of GDP in 2016 
to 1.8 percent in 2017, and a further reduction, albeit marginal, is expected 
this year. 
This has been the result of an atmosphere of uncertainty and a consequent 
higher perception of risk deriving from a combination of factors.  
To start with, the withdrawal of monetary stimulus in the US and other AEs, 
either  through  the  unwinding  of  their  heavily-expanded  balance  sheets  or 
hikes in their  reference rates, is exerting upward pressures  on  international 
interest  rates  at  all  maturities.  The  situation  is  considered  as  particularly 
                                                            
2 These figures pale in comparison to the portfolio outflows recorded during the GFC, at nearly USD 150 
billion between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. 
2 
 perilous since the tightening of monetary policy in AEs may proceed at a faster 
pace than currently anticipated by market participants. This is especially the 
case  of  the  United  States,  where  fiscal  stimulus  measures  are  being 
implemented in an economy that appears to be operating at, or very close to, 
full capacity. In this context, any direct benefit to commodity-exporting EMDEs 
of the recovery of commodity prices would be partially offset, as this would 
also exert additional pressures on inflation in AEs. 
Upward  pressures  on  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  have  been 
accentuated by the rapid widening of the fiscal deficit in this country. In fact, 
a  number  of  analysts  have  noted  that  both  the  government’s  increased 
borrowing  and  the  expected  increase  in  public  debt  are  already  increasing 
long-term interest rates. The deficit of the Federal Government is projected to 
rise by 3 percentage points of GDP from 2015 to 2022, and remain at elevated 
levels  thereafter.  Consequently,  the  upward  trend  of  public  debt  would 
accelerate over the next decade, to 96.2 percent of GDP by 2028, nearly 20 
percentage  points  above  the  level  recorded  last  year.3  Notwithstanding  the 
short-term  boost  of  these  measures  to  economic  activity,  their  potential  to 
accentuate  vulnerabilities  in  both  the  US  and  the  global  economy  is 
substantial.  In  addition  to  the  already  mentioned  challenges,  the  risk  of  a 
future recession in the US cannot be discarded as the effects of the current 
stimulus fade and the need for a fiscal correction accentuates.4 
                                                            
3 Congressional Budget Office (2018): “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028”, 9 April. 
4 International Monetary Fund (2018): “United States of America: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2018 
Article IV Mission”, 14 June. 
3 
 As a result of the above,  and of other concurrent forces,  long-term interest 
rates in the US have recently displayed a marked, and generalized, upturn. For 
instance,  the  yield  on  10-year  US  Treasury  bond  has  shown  an  increase  of 
about 160 basis points from a record low of just 1.37 percent nearly two years 
ago.  Although  part  of the adjustment associated  to  the  electoral process  of 
2016 reverted in subsequent months, the above-noted upward trend in long-
term yields resumed in September last year. Since then, they have increased 
by  nearly  a  full  percentage  point.  To  add  some  perspective  to  these 
developments, the corresponding figure during the “taper tantrum” episode 
of 2013 amounted to some 130 basis points between May and September of 
that year.  
Not surprisingly, under a situation of pressures on interest rates from several 
sources  and  a  general  environment  of  uncertainty,  concern  about  the 
potential  decompression  of  term  and  other  risk  premia  has  increased. 
Although a misalignment of term premia with economic fundamentals in the 
United  States  is  far  from  evident,  the  possibility  of  a  sudden,  significant 
tightening  of  financial  conditions  is  clearly  present  given  the  sensitivity  of 
those premia to expectations about inflation, growth and monetary policy. 
The observed increase in interest rates in the United States, the prospects that 
this trend will continue during this year and the next, and the materialization 
of  a  higher  risk-aversion  environment,  have  led  to  an  appreciation  of  the 
dollar.  In fact, since  mid-April of  this year emerging market currencies have 
shown  a  generalized  weakening.  Naturally,  the  accompanying  risks  are 
particularly manifest in those countries with a disproportionately large share 
of foreign currency liabilities, currency mismatches and other vulnerabilities.  
4 
 Uncertainty in the world economy has also been significantly affected by the 
rising trend in trade protectionism. In addition to adversely affecting resource 
allocation  and  economic  activity,  this  may  have  an  impact  on  confidence. 
According  to  recent  estimates,  an  escalation  of  tariffs  up  to  legally-allowed 
rates could translate into a decline in global trade flows of around 9 percent, 
a drop similar in magnitude to the one recorded during the Global Financial 
Crisis of 2008-2009.5 Other factors that have impinged on the perception of 
risk include geopolitical tensions, notably in Asia and the Middle East, as well 
as recent and upcoming electoral processes, both in advanced and emerging 
market  economies,  given  their  potential  implications  for  global  economic 
integration.  As  per  some  measures,  economic  policy  uncertainty  has 
continuously  increased  during  2018,  although  it  is  still  below  the  historical 
maximum reached in 2016.6 
Going forward, there is little doubt that external financial conditions faced by 
EMDEs are set to tighten further. Obviously, projections for capital flows to 
these countries in the next couple of years are subject to a lot of uncertainty. 
However, recent estimates by the IMF provide an idea of the challenges faced. 
According  to  this  institution,  portfolio  inflows  to  emerging  markets  would 
decline by about USD 40 billion on average per year over 2018-2019 under a 
smooth  Fed  normalization  scenario,  and  by  up  to  USD  60  billion  if  policy 
tightening were to be accompanied by a rise in risk aversion.7  
                                                            
5 Kutlina-Dimitrova, Z., and C. Lakatos (2017): “The Global Costs of Protectionism”, World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper No. 8277, December. 
6 World Bank (2018): Global Economic Prospects, June. This and other related indexes can be obtained from: 
http://www.policyuncertainty.com/.  
7 International Monetary Fund (2018): Global Financial Stability Report, April. 
5 
 Naturally, a substantial degree of heterogeneity underlies these projections, 
as  global  investors  can  be  expected  to  differentiate  amongst  individual 
countries depending on the strength of their economic fundamentals. Indeed, 
a  number  of  EMDEs  took  advantage  of  benign  conditions  in  international 
financial markets to move in this direction. However, it is also true that even 
for these economies the outlook may prove to be challenging in view of the 
following: 
  A  decompression  of  term  premia  in  the  United  States  may  have 
important global ramifications, given their close correlation with those 
in other major advanced economies.  
  A  significant  overvaluation  of  risky  assets  across  a  wide  spectrum  of 
market segments is observed.  
  Recent structural changes and rapid growth in the asset management 
industry may be leading to an underpricing of liquidity risks, increased 
interconnectedness  and,  in  general,  accentuate  financial  stability 
challenges.  
  Crossover  investors  not  specialized  in  emerging  economies  have 
enlarged their presence in the markets for these countries’ instruments, 
thereby increasing  the potential for wide  fluctuations  in  these assets’ 
prices. 
  For  the  already  noted  reasons,  the  balance  of  risks  for  the  world 
economy is clearly tilted to the downside, especially in the medium and 
long terms.  
 6 
One must add to the above the emergence of vulnerabilities in a number of 
EMDEs. One of the most important among them is the protracted rise of debt 
owed by these countries, which has been heavily concentrated in, and thus 
largely driven by, their non-financial corporate sectors. Although the situation 
varies considerably from one country to another, non-financial corporate debt 
in EMDEs as a group is at present comparable in magnitude to that of these 
countries’ sovereigns as, by some accounts, it has risen from about 60 percent 
of GDP in 2006 to 86 percent in 2017, reaching an all-time maximum at levels 
considerably  above  pre-crisis  levels.  Although  the  bulk  of  the  increase  is 
explained by China, whose corporate sector debt rose from 107 to 163 percent 
of  GDP  during  the  same  period,  a  similar  trend  is  observed  in  many  other 
EMDEs.8  
The increased leverage of EMDE non-financial corporates acquires particular 
relevance as a source of concern for at least a couple of reasons. First, global 
factors  (such  as  low  interest  rates  and  compressed  risk  premia)  have  been 
more  important  drivers  of  this  development  than  firm-  or  country-specific 
ones.9 Second, the contribution from foreign currency-denominated debt has 
been sizable, at around half of the observed growth since 2010.  
Thus  far,  notwithstanding  the  generalization  of  financial  volatility  among 
EMDEs, the presence of severe problems has been concentrated in a few of 
them. Overall, international institutions remain relatively optimistic about the 
                                                            
8 International Monetary Fund (2018): “The Riskiness of Credit Allocation: A Source of Financial 
Vulnerability?”, Chapter 2 of Global Financial Stability Report, April; and World Bank (2018): “Corporate 
Debt: Financial Stability and Investment Implications”, Special Focus 2 of Global Economic Prospects, June. 
9 Ayala, D., M. Nedeljkovic and C. Saborowski (2017): “What Slice of the Pie? The Corporate Bond Market 
Boom in Emerging Economies”, Journal of Financial Stability 30:16-35. 
7 
 prospects for the group in coming years. For instance, in its baseline scenario, 
the  IMF  is  projecting  growth  in  EMDEs  in  the  medium  term  at  close  to  the 
levels observed  in  2018-19.10  However,  it  is clear  that  these  projections  are 
surrounded by considerable uncertainty. Furthermore, even in the absence of 
a  major  disruption  to  world  economic  activity,  average  potential  growth  in 
EMDEs over the next decade is expected to be slower than during 2013-17.11 
What should EMDEs do? 
In  my  view,  the  adage  “there  are  no  easy  answers  but  there  are  simple 
answers” seems to apply, underscoring the appropriateness of looking at what 
we  have  learnt  from  the  past  and  putting  into  practice  the  lessons  from 
episodes such as the GFC. Indeed, most of the conclusions derived from these 
experiences remain valid today, i.e. strong macroeconomic foundations, solid 
financial  systems,  flexible  policy  frameworks  and  a  firm  basis  for  sustained 
growth are the best antidote to an adverse external environment. In fact, the 
current episode of volatility is once again showing that rather than looking for 
magic formulas, countries should concentrate on meeting these requirements. 
Furthermore, the need to adhere to this path is far more evident at present, 
since  the  complexities  of  external  conditions,  if  anything,  are  likely  to 
accentuate in coming years.   
Having  said  this,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  responsibility  for  overcoming  the 
current difficulties, and more generally for ensuring a healthy evolution of the 
world economy, does not lie on EMDEs only. In fact, we should bear in mind 
                                                            
10 International Monetary Fund (2018): World Economic Outlook, April. 
11 World Bank (2018): Global Economic Prospects, June. 
 8 
that the challenges faced by the world economy today are mostly a result of 
actions  undertaken  in  AEs.  Indeed,  these  countries  have  a  fundamental 
responsibility 
in  ensuring  that  their  monetary  policies  are  properly 
implemented  and  communicated;  in  avoiding  inadequate  fiscal-monetary 
policy mixes; in adopting any measures needed to increase productivity and 
the  potential  for  growth; 
in  properly  taking 
into  consideration  the 
international repercussions of their policy actions in the monetary and other 
fronts; and in leading by example to continue with the push towards a more 
integrated  world  economy.  In  the  face  of  financial  turmoil  resulting 
fundamentally from policy measures in the AEs, like the current one, it could 
hardly  be  argued  that  the  implications  of  such  actions  should  not  be 
exaggerated. 
 9 
