Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Mindfulness and vigilance
Keynote speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the 
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Money  Market  Association  of  the  Philippines,  Inc. 
(MART) MART First General Assembly, Makati City, 22 March 2018.
 Good evening everyone.  I thank the officers and members of the Money Market Association of
the Philippines, Inc. (MART) led by Mr. Christopher Salazar for the invitation to speak today about
the current operating environment, the BSP’s monetary policy actions ... our direction ... and our
mindful approach in the implementation of monetary, prudential and financial reforms.
Mindfulness.  The concept of “mindfulness” has gained so much popularity.  It is a buzz word
that frequently crops up in online articles, magazines, newspapers, TV programs, podcasts and
conversations. But what does it mean?  Does “mindfulness” have application in Central Banking
and monetary policy formulation?  I believe so.
“Mindfulness” is not a new idea.   The concept is core to Buddhism, traced as far back as the
fifth  century  BC.    A  widely  used  definition  is  by  Dr.  Jon  Kabat-Zinn  of  the  University  of
Massachusetts Medical School.  He defines mindfulness as “paying attention in a particular way:
on purpose, in the present moment and non-judgmentally.” 
What is monetary policy’s “present moment”?
Monetary policy stance
Just this afternoon, in our latest monetary policy assessment, the BSP maintained its key policy
rate  steady  at  3.0  percent  for  the  overnight  borrowing  or  reverse  repurchase  (RRP)  facility. 
Corresponding rates on overnight and deposit facilities were also kept unchanged.
Our decision is based on our assessment that while recent inflation outturns show elevated path
in 2018, latest baseline forecasts continue to show inflation remaining within the target in 2018
and  moderating  further  in  2019.    We  also  considered  that  prospects  for  domestic  activity
continue to be firm on the back of robust domestic demand, strong growth in credit and liquidity,
and sustained recovery in global economic growth.
As such, monetary policy action is not warranted at this time, at this present moment.
Vigilance
Tsong-kha-pa,  a  famous  Teacher  of  Tibetan-Buddhism,  wrote  in  his  Great  Treatise  on  the
Stages  of  Path  to  Enlightenment,  that  mindfulness  is  a  non-distracted  focal  attention  on  the
present.  Vigilance, on the other hand, is the close monitoring of that very awareness.
Practicing vigilance, we at the BSP, note that inflation expectations have started to rise and will
therefore  need  to  be  closely  monitored  in  the  coming  months.    Remaining  watchful,  we
acknowledge that on balance, risks to the inflation outlook remain weighted toward the upside. 
With  circumspection,  we  observe  that  there  are  potential  second  round  price  pressures
emanating from pending petitions for adjustments in minimum wages and transportation fares. 
Nevertheless,  non-monetary  measures,  such  as  targeted  subsidies,  are  expected  to  mitigate
these  inflationary  impulses.    Proposed  tariffication  reforms  in  the  rice  industry  could  also
positively surprise and help significantly temper price pressures especially in 2019.
Looking  ahead,  we  stay  alert  to  any  signs  of  second-round  effects  and  inflation  becoming
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
broader  based.    We  stand  firm  in  our  intent  to  take  immediate  and  appropriate  measures  to
ensure  that  the  monetary  policy  stance  supports  our  price  and  financial  stability  objectives. 
Economic growth remains solid enough to absorb some policy tightening if warranted.  Further,
we observe that market mechanisms are working well to enable the economy to automatically
adjust to fluid conditions efficiently and avoid serious imbalances, as well as overheating risks.
Our decisions on the monetary policy stance will continue to be data-dependent.  Focus will be
on domestic conditions while taking into account external developments only to the extent that
these impact the domestic inflation outlook and financial conditions.
Need for vigilance in face of risks
Why is vigilance important? English writer J.A. Baker, in his work, “The Peregrine: The Hill of
Summer Diaries” wrote that, “Binoculars, and a hawk-like vigilance, reduce the disadvantage of
myopic human vision.”
We cannot afford myopia. We must always be mindful of the risks all around us.
World economic activity finally started to gather speed after years of subpar growth following the
Global Financial Crisis.  The IMF revised its global growth forecasts for 2018 and 2019 to 3.9
percent, 20 basis points higher than the previous forecast.
At the heart of external risks is the US Federal Reserve’s normalization of its monetary policy.
Further, other major central banks are also considering exit from expansionary monetary policy. 
Geopolitical tensions and rising protectionist sentiments further complicate the global operating
environment.
Zen in the resent: strength of the economy
The existence of risks is not a negative thing.  Risks will always be present.   The good news is
that the present reality imbibes confidence in us.
The  Philippine  economy  is  strong.    We  continue  to  deliver  gains  amidst  monetary  policy
divergence and uncertainty. Our macroeconomic fundamentals are robust and sound.  Further,
our financial system is more sophisticated, disciplined, and resilient. 
Real  GDP  has  registered  positive  growth  for  76  consecutive  quarters,  covering  a  span  of  19
years  since  1999!  In  2017,  GDP  grew  by  6.7  percent,  making  the  Philippines  one  of Asia’s
fastest and most consistently growing economies.
This growth performance is in line with the economy’s potential output, currently estimated at
around  6.0-7.0  percent.  The  improvement  in  potential  output  reflects  declining  incremental
capital-output ratio, rising total factor productivity, and improving workforce capacity.  As we pour
in  more  investments  in  physical  infrastructure  under  Build,  Build,  Build,  and  more  soft
investments in our young population to provide better health, high quality education, and skills
development, we can expect further accelerated growth in potential output.  These investments
are sustainable because they are supported by a prudent fiscal position characterized by lower
National  Government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  of  around  42  percent  and  additional  revenues  to  be
generated from the recent tax reform (TRAIN). 
There is thus strong basis for asserting that the economy can sustain its growth momentum.
Likewise, higher output capacity should allay concerns of potential overheating.
The country’s external position is manageable despite global headwinds.  The country’s overall
balance of payments (BOP) for the year 2017 posted a deficit of US$863 million. This is just
0.3% of GDP.  The underlying widening of the trade-in-goods gap stems from rising imports of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
goods that support domestic capital formation and production.  This development is consistent
with  the  country’s  growth  narrative.  One  should  expect  that  the  economy’s  expansion  will  be
accompanied by stronger demand for imports. Over time, investment led economic activities will
support  needed  infrastructure  development,  raise  domestic  competitiveness,  increase  goods
exports, and alleviate the trade gap.
The sustained resilience of foreign direct investments, overseas Filipino (OF) remittances, and
business  process  outsourcing  (BPO)  receipts  provide  additional  buffers  to  the  domestic
economy. External debt metrics have also improved as reflected in the continued decline in the
external debt-to-GDP ratio to around 23 percent.  Gross international reserves (GIR) of US$80.6
billion as of end-February 2018 provide ample manoeuvring room to manage shocks.
The Philippines’ robust economic growth has been accompanied by manageable inflation.  We
have established since 2009 a solid track record of meeting our inflation targets.
Headline  inflation’s  year-to-date  average  rose  to  3.7  percent  (using  the  2012  series)  in  2018. 
This is at the high end of the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point in 2018. But we
expect it to revert to the target midpoint in 2019.
The Philippine banking system remains safe and sound, with robust performance and sustained
expansion in credit.  This is complemented by improved asset quality, firm liquidity position, and
strong capitalization.
The road to a resilient banking sector has not been easy.  Systematic structural reforms were
implemented to get the financial system to where it is now.  We have seen significant progress in
the  adoption  of  Basel  III  reforms,  particularly  in  the  areas  of  capital,  leverage,  liquidity  and
regulation of systemically important banks. 
We have rolled out a four-phased program for liquidity risk management. We continue to upgrade
our  corporate  governance  and  risk  management  standards  and  remain  committed  to  pursue
prudential  reforms  amid  changing  market  conditions  and  increasing  sophistication  of  financial
services.  
Today, our comprehensive risk-based supervision approach ensures that our banks operate in a
safe and sound manner. We use a range of tools and techniques in deploying our supervisory
resources on a proportionate basis, including deployment of calibrated enforcement actions. 
Indeed,  our  financial  system  demonstrates  discipline  and  sophistication.    It  operates  in  a
regulatory environment that promotes innovation.  At the same time, it provides mechanisms to
correct  misbehaviour.    This,  together  with  strong  economic  foundation,  affords  us  more
confidence to forge ahead with bold market-oriented reforms and liberalization efforts.  This will
allow  financial  institutions  to  seize  more  opportunities  to  support  our  growing  economy;  to  be
more innovative, competitive and flexible and to adjust rapidly to the needs of their customers.
We recognize that transformative reforms are needed to gear up the financial system to be more
efficient and responsive to the changing economic landscape.
Taking the next (confident) steps – expanding policy toolkit and bold financial reforms
As challenges evolve globally and domestically, the BSP continues to expand its policy toolkit,
including enhancing price discovery and self-correcting mechanisms. 
As early as 2016, we have committed to a more progressive and market-oriented framework with
the operational shift in our monetary operations to the interest rate corridor (IRC) system. 
Since then, we have seen the success of the IRC as an effective liquidity management tool.  This
is evident in the substantial migration of placements in the overnight deposit facility (ODF) to the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Term Deposit Auction Facility (TDF).  It has allowed us to provide more effective guidance to
short-term  market  interest  rates  by  promoting  healthy  price  discovery  as  the  BSP  calibrates
auction volumes.
Indeed, for the past months, market rates have seen a stronger anchoring to the BSP’s policy
rate.  Universal/commercial  banks’  time  deposit  and  short  term  interest  rates  have  trended
upwards, aligning with BSP’s IRC. 
The effective implementation of the IRC now provides the BSP sufficient flexibility to increase
reliance on market-based instruments for liquidity management. 
As  a  result,  we  were  able  to  initiate  another  major  financial  market  reform:    the  phased  and
gradual reduction of the reserve requirement ratio (RRR), to allow for more efficient absorption
and mobilization of liquidity, starting with a one percentage point reduction effective last March 2,
2018. 
As  with  the  shift  to  the  IRC  system,  the  phased  reduction  in  reserve  requirements  is  an
operational adjustment and will not materially affect prevailing monetary policy settings.  Excess
liquidity released to the market will be re-absorbed through offsetting adjustments in our open
market operations (OMO) that are informed by our updated liquidity forecasts.
Initial  evidence  based  on  the  last  three  TDF  auctions  since  the  first  RRR  cut  took  effect  are
encouraging and indicative of the potency of the IRC facilities for liquidity absorption. We can
definitely do more as the system continues to mature.
Ultimately,  the  BSP  has  many  options  to  maintain  firm  monetary  control.    Shifts  in  monetary
policy stance will continue to be signalled through changes in the policy rate. But we can also
adjust  monetary  conditions  without  necessarily  changing  the  policy  rate,  by  adjusting  auction
volumes to move the market-determined TDF rates.
A flexible exchange rate is another integral part of our policy toolkit to maintain monetary stability
and to ensure the sustainability of the balance of payments.  We do not target an exchange rate
level but we carefully watch out for excessive volatility that can disrupt the economy.  Our ideal is
a market-determined exchange rate that offers no persistent one-way bets to anyone.
Mindful of the potential build-up of systemic vulnerabilities, we have also deployed and continue to
develop  various  macroprudential  measures.    Currently,  we  have  exposure  drafts  on  the
countercyclical  capital  buffer,  the  debt-to-earnings  borrowers  test  (DEBT)  that  is  akin  to  the
existing real estate stress test (REST), and the borrowers interconnectedness index. 
Furthermore,  we  continue  to  enhance  our  surveillance  tools.    We  are  also  exploring  new
technologies such as big data analytics to further improve our surveillance. 
Finally, we are reinforcing our model-based assessments with qualitative and expert judgments
on current macroeconomic and financial conditions.
Other game-changing financial sector reforms
Part of our transformative policy reform agenda is to accelerate financial market development. 
We give particular focus to foreign exchange (FX) and local currency debt markets. We envision
a more balanced financial ecosystem where the banking system is complemented by a deep
and liquid debt market.
Our bold financial sector reform agenda includes ambitious FX reforms toward a more organized
FX market that supports a flexible and market-determined exchange rate.  This includes further
liberalizing FX rules to reduce the cost of doing business and to improve data capture. 
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition,  we  will  enhance  governance  and  oversight  over  the  FX  markets,  including  the
USD/PHP market.  This will further improve transparency, price discovery, and market conduct. 
We  are  currently  drafting  the  governance  framework  for  FX  markets  with  a  set  of  general
principles  that  shall  apply  not  only  to  the  existing  USD/PHP  market,  but  also  to  any  third
currency/PHP market that may be established in the future.  We have initiated engagement with
the industry so that existing trading markets can conform to the new framework within a mutually
agreed timeframe.
As you know, the BSP is also collaborating closely with other government agencies and industry
associations  such  as  MART,  to  implement  the  Philippine  local  currency  debt  market
development  roadmap.    Immediate  focus  is  on  deepening  liquidity,  enhancing  price  discovery
and strengthening regulatory oversight.  
Recently,  the  Bureau  of  the  Treasury  released  the  implementing  guidelines  for  the  enhanced
Government Securities Eligible Dealers (GSED) Program outlining incentives and accountability
of market-makers.  We count on your continued support in this endeavour, including providing
effective two-way quotes to support market liquidity. 
Even  as  we  move  towards  further  liberalization  and  increased  market  incentives,  we  likewise
expect responsible behavior among market players, by adhering to market standards and rules in
order  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  financial  markets.  We  have  a  collective  responsibility  to
consistently build our markets to rise above the craving for short-term gains.
Conclusion
Indeed, maintaining mindfulness and practicing vigilance will allow us to manage risks. And even
beyond this task of risk management, we are positive that our favorable fundamentals and ample
policy tools give us the confidence to pursue proactive and bold financial sector reforms towards
a more efficient, flexible, and market-oriented environment.
As I close, I leave you with a principle that guides us in the BSP as we fulfil our mandates: 
With  mindfulness,  we  are  aware  of  the  present  moment,  but  with  vigilance,  we  are  alert  and
watchful at all times. 
It is a good principle to live by, whether in central banking or in all other concerns of life. Thank
you and mabuhay!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
