    Press conference of Monday, 28 May 2018 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France,  
Chairman of the ACPR 
 Presentation of the 2017 annual report  
of the Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR)  
         Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr).
Page 1 of 4 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to welcome you for the presentation of the 2017 annual report of the Autorité de 
contrôle prudentiel et de résolution (ACPR), alongside Bernard Delas, Vice-Chairman of the 
ACPR,  Rémi  Bouchez,  President  of  the  Sanctions  Committee,  and  Edouard  Fernandez-
Bollo, Secretary General of the ACPR.  
Once  again  in  2017,  the  ACPR  strived  to  make  finance  more  secure.  I  wish  to  thank  the 
more than 1,000 women and men at the ACPR – 1,026 FTEs at the end of 2017 – for their 
exceptional efforts in working to accomplish this goal and I would like to emphasise certain 
key achievements from the past year.  
 I. The ACPR has been heavily involved in the implementation of common international 
standards, capable of reinforcing financial stability 
On  the  international  stage,  the  ACPR  made  a  decisive  contribution  to  the  finalisation  of 
Basel  III.  I  repeat,  the  agreement  of  7  December  2017  is  the  best  possible  outcome  for 
France and Europe. The resulting prudential framework will limit the unjustified variability of 
weighted  assets  while  remaining  risk  sensitive,  which  was  one  of  our  main  concerns.  It  is 
fully  compatible  with  the  smooth  financing  of  the  French  economy.  I  am  pleased  that  the 
European Commission has launched initiatives to ensure its application in Europe.  The first 
step  will  see  the  European  Banking  Authority  present  its  assessment  report.  Data  will  be 
necessary for certain business areas and I encourage all institutions to actively contribute to 
their collection.  
In  Europe,  the  ACPR  has  continued  to  provide  firm  support  for  the  work  of  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism.  The  harmonisation  of 
banking  supervisory  practices  within  the  euro  area  is  one  of  the  ACPR's  primary 
objectives. As for the insurance sector, the ACPR is actively involved – particularly within the 
EIOPA  –  in  the  preparation  of  the  reform  of  the  Solvency  II  directive  and  the  long-term 
guarantee  package measures  planned for  2018 and  2020, respectively.  The goal  will  be  to 
better  reconcile  prudential  requirements  with 
increased 
investment 
in  equity  and 
infrastructure: reform cannot be a status quo. 
European  developments  have  also  been  shaped  by  work  stemming  from  Brexit  and  the 
United  Kingdom's  upcoming  loss  of  its  "European  passport".  The  ACPR  will  take  particular 
care  to  ensure  that  activities  transferred  to  France  will  be  operated  by  entities  that  are 
capable of managing the associated risks. Empty shell corporations will not be tolerated, nor 
will failures to comply with the prudential regulations that guarantee our financial stability. 
Page 2 of 4 
 
In  2018,  we  must  keep  up  our  efforts  to  encourage  the  consolidation  of  the  European 
financial  sector.  This  must  of  course  have  an  institutional  component  and,  consequently, 
completing the Banking Union is crucial. The agreement reached last Friday on the review of 
CRR2  –  and  particularly  MREL  –  is  an  excellent  step,  but  we  are  not  finished  yet.  In  this 
respect,  the  priority  is  the  second  pillar  on  resolution  even  more  than  the  third  pillar  on 
deposit guarantees.  A  common  backstop for the  Single  Resolution  Fund  is  needed quickly, 
as is a common framework to better ensure that financially sound entities have an adequate 
level  of  liquidity  following  resolution.  Once  the  work  on  resolution  is  finalised,  the 
environment  must  be  favourable  to  the  emergence  of  cross-border  banking  and  insurance 
groups  and  pan-European  savings  products. This means  that  we  will  have  to  work towards 
removing  the  regulatory  impediments  that  currently  hinder  cross-border  mergers.  In  the 
context  of  a  "Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation",  a  more  integrated  financial 
sector will help to better steer the abundant savings – a surplus of almost EUR 400 billion in 
the euro area – towards productive investment, equity and innovation across our continent.  
Alongside  appropriate  regulation  and  appropriate  microprudential  supervision,  appropriate 
macroprudential  policy  now  completes  the  post-crisis  trifecta.  The  ACPR  has  actively 
contributed  to  the  discussions  of  the  High  Council  for  Financial  Stability  (HCSF).  Given 
the rapid and excessive increase in the indebtedness of certain large corporations, the HCSF 
adopted  a  measure  that  will  take  effect  on  1  July  2018  and  will  impose  a  limit  on  the 
exposure  of  French  systemic  banks  to  the  most  indebted  large  resident  non-financial 
corporations.  Nevertheless,  the  HCSF  remains  vigilant  with  regard  to  the  rapid  increase  in 
bank  lending  to  the  private  sector,  which  rose  by  5.5%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2018.  French 
private sector debt amounted to 130.2% of GDP at the end of 2017, which is the highest of 
the  major  euro  area  countries.  Since  2014,  it  has  increased  in  France  by  9.4%  of  GDP, 
compared  with  an  average  reduction  of  5.4%  in  the  euro  area.  On  29  March,  the  HCSF 
stated  that  it  was  ready  to  act.  In  particular,  if  we  have  to  determine  the  countercyclical 
capital  buffer,  it  would  obviously  not  be  to  stop  credit  today,  but  rather  –  as  the  name 
suggests – to prevent it from drying up in the future in the event of a turnaround in the cycle: 
banks  with  insufficient  capital  could  manage  the  increased  risks  thus  materialising  in  their 
balance sheets by restricting new lending. The aim of a moderate capital buffer is to smooth 
this excessive credit cycle – the risk of "go and stop" experienced during financial crises.  
    
II.  The  ACPR  was  particularly  active  in  the  area  of  emerging  risks  and  new 
Page 3 of 4 
technologies 
In  2017,  the  ACPR  paid  particular  attention  to  the  risks  and  opportunities  for  the  financial 
sector related to new  technologies, especially via its FinTech Innovation Unit. Its aim is to 
provide guidance to new players and to do so it has met with over 300 such players since it 
was  created  in  2016.i But  it  is  equally  important for  well  established  players to  adapt  to  the 
digital revolution and remain as prepared as possible to deal with cyber-security risks. In this 
regard,  I  welcome  the  creation  of  a  G7  group  for  the  conduct  of  cross-border  cyber  crisis 
simulation exercises. And the Banque de France will coordinate the G7 test in 2019. Indeed, 
cyber-security will be one of the priorities of the French presidency of the G7 next year.  
As  regards  the  adaptation  of  existing  banks  and  insurers  to  digital  revolution,  the  ACPR 
published in  March 2018 an influential study. ii These players now all agree that this is their 
overriding or even vital challenge, far greater than low interest rates or prudential regulations. 
The ability of institutions to retain customer relationships, from branches to the smartphone, 
has been particularly put to the test. The response must come first of all from the institutions 
themselves,  their strategy,  their  customer  offering,  their governance,  and  their  investments. 
But  regulations  must  also  adapt:  "same  activity,  same  regulation"  of  course,  and  the  Big 
Techs  will  have  to  apply  the  same rules  as  banks  and  insurance  companies  if they  start to 
perform the same regulated financial activities. The challenge nevertheless extends beyond 
financial regulation alone; it will be how to apply to all players, in a fair and proper manner, 
regulations 
in 
three  broader  areas:  data  protection,  monitoring  competition  and 
concentration, and cyber-security. We are aware that the only way to meet this challenge is 
through  international  cooperation.  However,  when  adapting  to  the  digital  revolution,  no  one 
should  expect that these  necessary  regulations will  protect  existing  situations.  Innovation  is 
naturally the only effective response.  
We  must  also  take  a  long  term  view  and  that  is  why  the  ACPR  has  strived  to  improve  the 
monitoring of climate risk. Notably, it participated in the creation of the international  Central 
Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System, building on the One 
Planet  Summit  which  was  held  in  Paris.  This  has  already  proved  a  success.  The  nine 
founding members were rapidly joined by four new members, including the European Central 
Bank, and two observers: the BIS and the OECD. Other major central banks and supervisors 
are also about to join. 
   
III.  Enduring  requirements:  customer  protection,  and  anti-money  laundering  and 
Page 4 of 4 
counter-terrorist financing  
Anti-money  laundering  and  counter-terrorist  financing  (AML/CTF)  remains  a  key 
objective.  ACPR  staff  pursued  their  work  in  this  area,  aiming  notably  to  ensure  that  all  the 
activities  performed  by  French  banks  through  their  foreign  affiliates  are  subject  to  active 
monitoring  by  their  parent  companies.  Obviously  banking  groups  must  implement  their 
AML/CFT  policy  with  the  same  rigour  in  their  foreign  affiliates  as  they  do  in  their  French 
entities. 
As regards banking inclusion and the supervision of business practices, the Banque de 
France  continually  strives  to  improve  access  to  suitable  banking  services  for  vulnerable 
populations  and  fight  against  the  exclusion  of  people  in  financial  difficulty,  which  may  also 
result from being overcharged for banking services. It is imperative to make further progress 
in this area. Bernard Delas will also discuss FPS in the construction insurance sector. 
 To conclude, I would like to share a few figures that illustrate the soundness of our financial 
system.  In  2017,  the  net  banking  income  of  the  six  main  French  banking  groups  stood  at 
EUR 146.4 billion. Admittedly, it was up just 0.5% on  2016, but the cost of risk is extremely 
low, and fell further by a significant 18% in 2017. The share of impaired outstandings also fell 
to stand at just 3.45% of the loan portfolio. The enhancement of the quality of banks' balance 
sheets, combined with continued capital growth, has led to further improvement in prudential 
ratios. The aggregate CET1 solvency ratio of these six groups reached 13.8% at end-2017, 
against 13.3% at end-2016 and notably 5.8% at end-2008. In the insurance sector, I am also 
pleased to note that the solvency capital requirement coverage ratio of the main groups rose 
to 212% at the end of 2017.  
All  in  all,  the  French  financial  system  is  one  of  the  soundest  in  Europe.  I  have  every 
confidence  in  its  ability  to  meet  any  forthcoming  challenges  and  take  advantage  of  future 
opportunities.  I  will  now  give  the  floor  to  Bernard  Delas,  who  will  present  the  prudential 
developments  in  the  insurance  sector.  Rémi  Bouchez  will  then  discuss  the  work  of  the 
Sanctions Committee. Thank you for your attention. 
                                                            
i Figures at end-May 2018. At the end of 2017, meetings had been held with 200 players.  
iiSurvey on the digital revolution in the French banking sector, ACPR, Analyses et synthèses No. 88, March 2018. 
