 The Path to Exchange Control Liberalisation:  
Completing the Journey in One Piece 
 Remarks by John A Rolle, Governor 
 Bahamas Business Outlook 2018 
 18 January, 2018 
 
Introduction 
A special thanks to the Counsellors for inviting me to make this presentation on exchange 
control liberalisation.  I intend to keep the focus narrowed to issues related to capital and 
investment  flows,  as  these  are  the  areas  where  policies  and  administrative  practices  have 
the  most  substantive  impact.    Rather  than  argue  that  The  Bahamas  should  resist 
liberalisation,  I  would  instead  like  to  convince  you  that  we  should  make  more  credible 
preparations to do so—but in a stable fashion.  I would also like to convince you that some 
of  the  roadblocks  to  liberalisation  are  matters  related  to  our  national  investment  policy 
regime,  which  defines  the  limits  of  property  rights  enforcements  for  those  who  might 
otherwise, already be able to circumvent the exchange control regulations.  Finally, there is 
the question of dollarization, and whether this option would allow The Bahamas to speed up 
the process of liberalisation.  
 Purpose and Scope of Exchange Controls 
The  system  of  exchange  controls,  and  the  monetary  policy  tools  available  to  the  Central 
Bank  are  to  ensure  that  The  Bahamas  is  able  to  maintain  the  fixed  exchange  rate,  with 
B$1.00 = US1.00.    The  parity  with  the  US  currency  provides  a  necessary  convenience  for 
tourism,  which  is  mostly  transacted  in  US  dollars  and  mostly  with  US  clientele.    The  fixed 
exchange  rate  has  also  provided  a  stable  anchor  for  domestic  inflation,  which  has  closely 
mirrored the inflation rate in the United States.  This is an achievement almost unrivalled in 
independent countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, or in most developing countries. 
 1 | P a g e  
It  should  also  not  be  so  quickly  discounted  given  the  importance  of  stable  inflation 
expectations in the medium and long-term decision making processes of the private sector--
whether it is about investments, savings or wage negotiations.1 
 Our  exchange  controls  have  been  effective,  not  because  they  are  fool  proof,  but  because 
they  provide  safeguards  around  very  liquid  and  mobile  financial  flows,  which  if  shifted 
rapidly could destabilise the exchange rate.  Given enough time, people do manage to evade 
controls  but  the  short-term  fallout  from  such  movements  is  not  felt.  Meanwhile,  the 
national  investment  policy provides  a  check  on  restricted  categories  of  inflows, because  it 
determines  the  ease  of  forming  legally  binding  commercial  contracts  with  non-residents.  
The  downside,  however,  is  that  protection  can  reduce  the  incentives  for  expedited 
structural  reforms  that  would  have  longer-term  benefits.    More  liberal  capital  flows  do 
expose policies and policy makers to greater market scrutiny and accountability.  It is to our 
advantage  to  subject  ourselves  to  such  discipline,  and  to  push  for  reforms  that  positively 
reinforce good policies.  
 The  exchange  rate  peg  has  only  survived  because  the  Central  Bank,  with  the  help  of 
exchange controls, has consistently been able to assure a supply of foreign currency to the 
public  at  the  official  rate.    The  system  also  allows  excess  inflows  from  tourism  and  other 
export activities to accumulate in the external reserves until they are needed.2   
 In  accommodating  foreign  exchange  demand,  the  system  then  distinguishes  between 
international transactions that are current in scope, versus those of a capital or financial in 
nature.    Current transactions,  most  commonly  cover  goods  and  services  (including travel), 
interest and profits on investments and remittances such as expatriate workers’ income or 
                                                           
1 The benefits of the fixed exchange rate and the longstanding ability to maintain the currency peg is an 
achievement on which The Bahamas receives repeated commendation from the IMF, in the Fund’s Article IV 
Consultation Reports on the country.  See for example the 2015 Assessment by the IMF’s Executive Board: 
http://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2016/12/31/The-Bahamas-Staff-Report-for-the-2015-Article-
IV-Consultation-43125. 
2 Except where the policies have been relaxed, the law requires that exporters and those permitted to raise 
funds in foreign currency must sell the proceeds to the Commercial Banks.  Beyond the amounts required for 
immediate use by their customers for external payments, commercial banks must sell the excess to the Central 
Bank.  
 2 | P a g e  
transfers.  Capital  transactions  cover  both  portfolio  and  direct  investment  flows,  and  the 
contracted liabilities of individuals, financial institutions and businesses.  
 The use of foreign exchange is permitted freely to pay for current transactions. In this area, 
there  has  been  significant  delegation  of  authority  to  commercial  banks  to  approve 
payments  without  prior reference  to the  Central  Bank.  A  forthcoming  round  of  delegation 
will provide additional flexibility to banks to approve commercial payments, and particularly 
benefit medium and larger businesses. For individuals, small businesses and most medium-
size businesses, there is already virtually no direct contact with exchange controls for these 
trade related transactions. 
 There is, however, a more selective approach in dealing with private financial transactions.  
Policies  have  always  embraced  private  direct  investment  inflows  in  the  foreign  exchange 
earning  sectors,  but  paced  slower  to  accommodate  outflows  by  Bahamians.  The  ability  of 
Bahamians  to  make  outward  direct  investments  that  were  not  assessed  an  investment 
currency  premium,  only  started  to  be  embraced  as  a  policy  in  2006,  and  is  now 
accommodated up to a limit of $10 million, per investment, every three years.  The approval 
process  considers  whether  such  investments  would  produce  returns  that  would  be 
repatriated to The Bahamas.3  In 2017, access by Bahamians to financing in foreign currency 
for  domestic  ventures  was  also  strategically  relaxed,4 with  a  limit  of  up  to  $5  million  per 
business firm every 5 years.5  This is available for businesses operating in sectors generating 
positive net foreign exchange impact or where expressed national development goals have 
been articulated. 
 On portfolio or potentially liquid investments, the approach has been one-sided.  Inflows are 
still  not  very  much  embraced.  However,  since  2006,  Bahamians  have  been  able  to  invest 
abroad without paying the investment currency premium, once they purchased instruments 
marketed through local broker dealers and traded on the  local stock exchange (BISX).  The 
                                                           
3 This covers the ability to establish ownership in international financial institutions operating in The Bahamas, 
which have to be capitalised in foreign currency. 
4 The relaxed measures are published in the following report on the Central Bank’s website: 
http://www.centralbankbahamas.com/download/013616000.pdf 
5 Borrowing from the private sector arms of the IDB or World Bank are not subject to any limit. 
 3 | P a g e  
collective annual accommodation limit for these vehicles is now $35 million.  Other portfolio 
transactions  still  incur  an  investment  currency  premium.    The  premium  used  to  be  at  25 
percent, but was reduced to 12.5 percent in 2006 and will be reduced further to 5 percent in 
2018.  That  said,  the  Investment  Currency  Market  exists  primarily  to  limit  speculative 
pressures that could deplete the supply of foreign exchange and render the exchange rate 
unsustainable. 
 Figure 1: Bahamas Utilisation of Investment Currency and  
Stock Exchange (BISX) Linked Facilities 
     
Note:  Cumulative capital outflows for selected vehicles area as follows:- ICM: more than $50 
million; BISX vehicles: $150 million; NIB: $109 million.  
 
Source: Central Bank of the Bahamas 
 Another reform that has already been foreshadowed is that greater access is being opened 
up  for  residents  and  businesses  to  maintain  foreign  deposits  accounts,  but  with  built  in 
protections  for  the  exchange  rate  regime.    In  particular,  business  will  be  able  to  retain  a 
portion  of  their  foreign  currency  revenues  to  meet  ongoing  trade  payments.    Also, 
Bahamians  who  have  accumulated  foreign  currency  assets  abroad  will  be  permitted  to 
repatriate these and, if they desire, maintain the deposits in foreign currency.  The holders 
of these facilities will not be able to fund them with foreign exchange that is purchased on 
the  local  market.    This  ensures  that  inflows  of  foreign  exchange  remain  for  the  most  part 
available for the private sector’s current account needs.   
  4 | P a g e  
A Stable, Sustainable Path to Further Liberalisation 
It  is  the  continued  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  to  which  we  should  aspire  in  The 
Bahamas,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  able  to  stimulate  higher  rates  of  national  savings  and 
investment and provide more diversification opportunities for local investors.  The proviso is 
that the flows, whether inward or outward, ought to be sustainable.  We ought also to be 
able  to  maintain  relative  exchange  rate  and  financial  stability.    The  Bahamas  must  be 
prepared  to  move  in  this  direction  only  as  fast  as  we  are  able  to  erect  the  appropriate 
safeguards  around  highly  liquid  capital  flows.    At  the  same  time,  we  should  strive  to  put 
such frameworks in place. 
 Compared  to  the  present  environment,  the  outcome  for  liberalisation  could  include  the 
following: 
   The ability of Bahamians to invest outside The Bahamas in foreign currency, absent 
the investment currency market premium; and the ability of non-residents to invest 
more freely inside The Bahamas in both long-term and short-term capital. 
   The ability of residents to hold foreign currency deposits in local banks and for non-
residents to maintain deposits in local currency. 
   The  ability  for  residents  to  borrow  in  foreign  currency  and  for  non-residents  to 
borrow in local currency, irrespective of source. 
 These  would,  of  course  imply,  no  restrictions  on  converting  into  and  out  of  Bahamian 
dollars. 
 To  be  sustainable,  net  capital  inflows  must  be  able  to  pay  for  themselves.    That  is,  their 
deployment  should  generate  enough  foreign  currency  returns  to  repay  both  the  initial 
inflows and the required returns on those flows.  Otherwise, they could become a net drain 
or burden on a country’s stock of foreign reserves.  Now, when the decision is left to banks, 
there  should  be  less  of  a  concern  about  whether  financing  of  a  particular  currency 
 5 | P a g e  
denomination should be given to a firm, because from a best practices or regulatory point of 
view, banks would be required to match their lending to the currency in which the revenues 
of the business are denominated.  
 Outside of banks and similarly regulated entities, policy makers would have to orchestrate 
this sustainable outcome at a national level through direct incentives or disincentives to the 
sectors of strategic concern.  If the government lacked tools such as tax policy to influence 
financing  behaviour,  it  would  continue  to  have  to  rely  on  direct,  though  less  efficient 
intervention  to  influence  external  financing  patterns.    This  is  the  positon  in  which  The 
Bahamas still finds itself, and will likely have to focus if we are to further optimise external 
financing inflows to locally owned businesses over the medium-term. 
 As  to  stability,  The  Bahamas  must  still  be  able  to  accommodate  the  volume  and  speed  of 
capital  flows,  without  losing  control  of  the  exchange  rate  or  the  solvency  of  financial 
institutions.    Funds  that  move  through  capital  markets  or  sit  in  liquid  bank  deposits  are 
examples of flows that can relocate swiftly.  Again, from a regulatory point of view, the risk 
of bank insolvencies can be suppressed, by requiring that banks do not rely on  short-term 
foreign currency deposits inflows to finance  long-term lending.  Reserve requirements can 
also be placed on banks to reduce  such tendencies and to provide some insurance against 
sudden  outflows.    That  said,  there  could  also  be  vulnerability  to  sudden  outflows  if,  en 
masse, residents are allowed to shift out very liquid funds they hold in local currency. Faced 
with  such  developments,  the  exchange  rate  could  be  allowed  to  depreciate—that  is,  the 
price  of  foreign  exchange  could  be  allowed  to  increase.  Such  an  outcome  would  not  be 
desirable for The Bahamas.6 
 Therefore,  we  should  be  striving  for  an  outcome,  where  other  than  for  diversification 
residents are indifferent between holding deposits in local or foreign currency.  This would 
be  an  outcome  where  portfolio  decisions  are  not  materially  driven  by  speculative 
movements to outrace expected depreciations in the exchange rate.  Among other factors, 
                                                           
6 Given high import reliance, a fluctuating exchange rate would affect prices but little else, as it would not 
confer any competitive advantages to the economy.  Instead in tourism, for example, depreciation would be 
offset by higher local currency costs on imported inputs, and in negotiated wages which would also respond to 
exchange rate generated increases in the cost of consumed goods. 
 6 | P a g e  
speculations  about  whether  the  currency  would  maintain  its  value  would  depend  on 
whether it is believed that the government was doing a credible enough job of keeping its 
finances  in  order;  whether  it  is  believed  that  public  sector  debt  dynamics  would  be  kept 
within a comfortable zone, or whether misaligned finances were viewed as having a credible 
chance of being remedied. 
 The monetary authority is also part of the fiscal picture.  Failed public finance dynamics can 
show up in unchecked borrowing from the central bank and in growing gaps between local 
currency  liabilities  of  the  monetary  authority  and  foreign  reserves,  which  are  held  to 
support  the  currency.    Central  bank  lending  to  the  government  can  also  be  a  source  of 
accumulated  bank  liquidity,  of  the  sort  that  might  seek  to  flee  the  jurisdiction,  if  they  are 
allowed to become mobile.   
 The confidence boost that a financial system would need, before  opening itself unchecked 
to short-term financial flows would be, in a case where deficits and debts are a concern, to 
quiet  such  concerns.    Deficits  or  debt burden  need not disappear at the  outset, but  there 
has  to  be  an  anchored  belief  that  such  reduction  would  occur  within  a  comfortable  time 
frame.   
 At the Central Bank, we are focused on gradually reducing the amount of outstanding credit 
provided  to  the  government.    It  will  also  achieve,  as  a  side  benefit,  some  important 
reduction  in  surplus  liquidity  within  the  banking  system.    Over  the  medium-term  it  is  also 
expected that a new Central Bank Act would put stronger governance arrangements in place 
to  continue  to  reduce  lending  to  government.    At  the  same  time  the  public  finances  will 
have  to  support  some  of  the  liquidity  reduction  in  the  medium-term  through  direct 
slowdown and eventual reduction in the debt burden.7 
 Aside from exchange control, liberalisation also has to be considered in  the context of the 
national  investment  policy.    If  certain  sectors  are  constrained  from  foreign  participation, 
then  Bahamians  operating  in  those  sectors  would  also  be  constrained  in  how  they 
                                                           
7 A costly option that many countries have taken is to have the central bank issue its own securities to soak up 
liquidity.  However, if done aggressively the institution could incur losses.   
 7 | P a g e  
collateralise access to foreign currency financing.  If majority  ownership in a venture must 
be  Bahamian,  then  the  majority  financing  source,  unless  it  is  domestic  would  not  be 
permissible  in  foreign  currency.8   Also,  to  the  extent  that  restrictions  apply  to  how  non-
residents acquire real estate in The Bahamas, use of  such assets as security for mortgages 
would be subject to a layer of processing and approval that is independent of any EC rules. 
Figure 2: Central Bank Financing to Government 
  As the government debt burden increased, reliance on central bank financing, especially over the last decade, has also 
increased…. 
    
The balance sheet impact for the Central Bank has been that the coverage provided by external reserves for B$ currency 
liabilities has declined.  
    
Note:  The Reserves to demand liabilities coverage spiked in 2009 because of the Bahamas’ share of the Special Drawing 
Rights allocation that the IMF provided to its membership during global financial crisis. 
 
Source: Central Bank of the Bahamas 
                                                            
8 The Central Bank had to take this into account in how the 2017 liberalisation measures were framed. 
 8 | P a g e  
The question will still come up as to how far The Bahamas should go with liberalisation, both 
for direct investments and portfolio transactions.  The extensive work that the IMF has done 
has been to advise that countries should sequence liberalisation at least one step after the 
upgrade to institutional and policy arrangements has been made, which allow the country 
to optimally manage the transformed environment.9  At the extreme, the IMF’s view is that 
a  flexible  exchange  rate  would  be  ideal  to  allow  a  country  to  absorb  the  effects  of  large 
movements  in  short-term  capital.    This  assumes  that  a  country  has  well  developed  and 
functioning  financial  markets,  and  that  the  regulatory  frameworks  exist  to  ensure  that 
financial  institutions  operate  in  a  sound  fashion.    Adequate  fiscal  policy  tools  should  also 
exist  to  incentivise  the  right  course  for  the  private  sector.    This  would  also  mean  less 
reliance on administrative measures, in favour of tools that affect a wider cross-section of 
the  markets  directly.10   Being  able  to  pre-empt  adverse  outcomes,  which  is  critical,  also 
means  that  sufficient  capacity  must  exist  to  collect  timely  data  to  monitor  private  sector 
activities. 
 The Central Bank and policies affecting the banking sector are a subset of the elements in 
this required stronger framework.  Indeed there is already progress in on the banking side.  
Our  local  banking  system  is  sound,  with  the  required  regulatory  framework,  and  high 
frequency reporting requirements to ensure safety and soundness, even if the composition 
of balance sheet flows were to change or become more fluid.  Moreover, the Central Bank is 
developing  expanded  frameworks  to  monitor  economy-wide 
indicators  of  financial 
soundness.    With  modernisation  of  the  government  securities  market,  the  Bank  will  also 
have a more flexible set of tools to manage financial sector liquidity.  That’s said, we have to 
continue to improve data quality and coverage for activities outside of the banking sector.11 
 Consideration also has to be given to harmonised policies that influence other parts of the 
financial  sector.    This  means  progressing  to  a  legal  framework  for  financial  stability  that 
                                                           
9 See The Liberalization and Management of Capital Flows - An Institutional View (IMF, 2012).  
http://www.imf.org/en/publications/policy-papers/issues/2016/12/31/the-liberalization-and-management-of-
capital-flows-an-institutional-view-pp4720 
10 For example interest rates and tax policy. 
11 The Bahamas now aspires to meet the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) of the IMF.  (See link 
here).  This would impose more rigor on statistical systems, with more frequent and broader coverage of 
private sector activities. 
 9 | P a g e  
draws  in  all  of  the  other  financial  sector  regulators,  so  that  prudential  measures,  when 
required, have a uniform impact.  Alternatively, The Bahamas needs to move to consolidate 
the supervision of the financial sector, at a minimum, along prudential lines. 
 The operating frameworks in the government sector also need more evolution, to be able to 
intervene  in  capital  flows  in  a  non-administrative  fashion.    As  it  stands,  the  system  is  still 
skewed  towards  consumption  taxes.    Moreover,  for  well  into  the  medium-term  the 
government’s  flexibility  will  be  constrained  by  the  necessary  emphasis  on  fiscal 
consolidation.  
 Is Dollarisation an Option? 
The  working  assumption  is  still  that  The  Bahamas  would  want  to  avoid  the  nuisance  of 
exchange  rate  flexibility.    Reliance  on  other  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  tools  therefore 
becomes  more  important.    Many  have  suggested  that  dollarisation  would  be  an  option.  
Giving  up  the  B$  entirely  and  adopting  the  US  currency  by  default  would  eliminate  the 
exchange rate concern.12  It is true that the government would no longer be able to borrow 
from  the  central  bank,  but  it  would  not  alter  much  else  of  what  would  be  required  in 
policies and frameworks to ensure stable and sustainable capital flow trends.  It would not, 
for example, make a financial stability framework less relevant or relieve the government of 
the need when necessary to use fiscal policies to maintain macro-economic stability. Indeed, 
this outcome, if we aspire to such, would increase the imperative for good and sound fiscal 
frameworks.   
 Going  the  route  of dollarisation  also does not  shorten the  time  required  to  get  to  a  more 
liberalised  state.    The  B$  currency  liabilities  of  the  central  bank  would  still  have  to  be 
extinguished at the promised rate of one-to-one.  The process of deficit reduction and debt 
reduction therefore has to run its course.  The outstanding balance of central bank lending 
to government would still need to be eliminated and the government entirely reliant on the 
                                                           
12 A case for dollarisation could be advanced on the basis of the high structural linkages between The Bahamas 
on the US economy.  Forgone monetary policy independence would not be a strong reason for dissuasion, 
however the need for policy independence could increase if the Bahamian economy were to diversify in ways 
that were less dependent on the US. 
 10 | P a g e  
market  and  on  market  pricing  to  finance  its  shortfall.    In  fact,  the  government  has  to  go 
much further than just eliminating its debt to the central bank.  Much of the attractiveness 
to the private sector of holding government debt rest on the ease at which it can be sold to 
the Central Bank.  Reliance on the central bank as the “buyer of last resort” for government 
debt  will  also  have  to diminish,  maintaining  the overall focus  therefore on  comprehensive 
debt  reduction.        Even a  persistent  balance  budget  rule  would  not  outweigh  expenditure 
prudence  and efficiency.  Uncompetitive high  rates  of taxes  as  a percentage  of  GDP  would 
still be a recipe for capital flight. 
 Conclusion 
To  conclude,  there  are  justifiable  economic  reasons  to  push  for  increased  capital  account 
liberalisation for The Bahamas.  Where this process could end is much further than where 
the economy sits at present.  However, there is no shortcut to the pre-requisite reforms to 
develop stronger institutions and policy frameworks, and healthier economic fundamentals.  
Added to how the central banking framework is strengthened, a more consolidated view of 
the financial sector regulations would support this outcome.  Improved public finances and 
stronger fiscal management systems underscore the central role that the government must 
also  play  in  any  transformation.    Finally,  the  speed  at  which  we  are  able  to  reform  will 
determine the stable and sustainable pace at which we tackle our capital controls. 
  11 | P a g e  
