Norman  Chan:  Welcome  remarks  -  2018  Green  and  Social  Bond
Principles Annual Conference
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary
Authority, at the 2018 Green and Social Bond Principles Annual Conference, Hong Kong, 14 June
2018.
Financial Secretary, Martin, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
 1.  Welcome to the 2018 Green and Social Bond Principles Annual Conference, co-organised
by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA)  and  the  International  Capital  Market
Association, supported by the Hong Kong Financial Services Development Council.
2.  Today’s conference is the flagship event in the world of green finance, and rightly so.  Since
the  publication  of  the  Green  Bond  Principles  (GBP)  in  2014,  it  has  become  the  de  facto
global standard for green bond issuance.  These days, a majority of the green bonds issued
globally follow the GBP framework, and many major markets base their local green bond
standards on the GBP.  In this Conference, we will have the opportunity to hear more about
the  latest  enhancements  to  the  GBP,  and  how  green  standards  have  been  developing  in
different parts of the world.
3.  Today’s conference is notable also because of its location.  As Martin said, it is the first time
that the conference is held in Asia.  Looking at the turnout, it is a good choice.  I am not just
referring to over 900 registered attendees – this is clearly impressive.  I am also referring to
the geographical mix, with a large showing from Asia, in addition to delegates from Europe. 
This is a testament to the rapid growth of the green bond market in region. 
4.  Indeed, over the past few years, the green bond market has grown exponentially, including
the green bond market in Hong Kong, and we are very pleased about this development.  For
many years, the HKMA has been working to promote the development of the Hong Kong
bond market.  Today, Hong Kong is the third largest bond issuer in Asia ex-Japan, behind
only the Mainland of China and South Korea.
5.  The HKMA plays more than just the promoter role in green finance.  As many of you may
know,  the  HKMA  is  the  investment  manager  of  the  Exchange  Fund.    With  assets  under
management over USD500 billion at the end of last year, we are one of the world’s largest
asset  owners.    The  HKMA  has  been  very  supportive  of  responsible  investment,  and  has
incorporated environmental, social and governance, or ESG, principles into our investment
processes.  Our disclosure rules would not allow me to give too many details.  Suffice to say
that items from green bonds to renewable energy projects such as wind farms feature in our
portfolio.
6.  As a long term investor, the HKMA considers risk and return over a long horizon.  We believe
looking at an investment proposal through the ESG lens would complement our normal risk-
return analysis, and help unveil the long-term value and risk of an investment.
7.  In particular, we invest in green because we see it as a driver of long-term value, in addition
to  wanting  to  do  the  right  thing.    Contrary  to  some  perception  that  investing  in  green
undermines return, our experience shows that many green investments that are good for the
environment can also be good for investors over the long term.  I see the application of green
and ESG in investment as just another balancing act that investors have to perform.  Exactly
where  and  how  to  draw  the  line  depends  on  the  specific  circumstances  at  hand.    While
some  green  bonds  may  produce  slightly  lower  yield  or  returns  as  compared  with  the
conventional  bonds,  I  truly  believe  that  time  has  come  for  asset  owners  to  take  a  more
progressive and proactive stance in supporting green finance.  I don’t think there is much
disagreement amongst the stakeholders on whether green finance can make a difference in
promoting  long-term  environmental  sustainability.    The  big  question  is  whether  the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
stakeholders, especially the asset owners, be they pension funds or sovereign wealth funds,
want to make a difference by taking concrete steps to invest in green finance.  We in the
HKMA are prepared to play our part and I sincerely hope our peers will join us in owning and
pursuing the goal of supporting green finance. 
8.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  today  a  rich  agenda  and  the  presence  of  many
distinguished speakers.  I hope that this will be a successful conference and all of you will
have a fruitful and productive discussion. 
9.  Thank you very much.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
