  30 November 2017 
 Speech on the 60th Anniversary of the National Association of Specialised 
Lending Institutions (ASNEF) 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Good evening everyone.  
It is a pleasure for me to take part in this celebration of the 60th anniversary of the National 
Association of Specialised Lending Institutions. As your president, Fernando Casero, has 
just mentioned, throughout its history your Association has played a very important role in 
promoting  and  enhancing  consumer  lending,  which  is  a  key  factor  in  driving  economic 
growth.  
Indeed, consumer lending has a series of characteristics that make it especially relevant 
both for the financial system and economic activity. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  highly  cyclical  and is,  therefore,  a  leading  indicator  of  confidence 
among both consumers and financial institutions. On the other, it generally leads the way in 
terms of adaptation to innovation. As is well known, in the past consumer lending played an 
important part in the expansion of credit cards, and more recently it has been at the forefront 
of the incorporation of new technologies.  
In the expansionary phase that began after 2000, consumer lending grew rapidly in Spain, 
reaching  a  balance  outstanding  of  €106 billion  in  mid-2008.  The  financial  crisis  reduced 
these figures, down to almost half that amount by early 2015. Since then, in keeping with 
the economic recovery, consumer lending has been very dynamic. 
Spain  stands  out  as  the  euro  area  country  where  consumer  lending  has  grown  most  in 
recent years, with year-on-year growth rates since April 2016 of between 10% and 16%, 
well above the euro area average of 5%. This growth is making an important contribution to 
economic recovery in Spain.  
In September, the balance outstanding of consumer lending was €76 billion, 6.7% of GDP. 
In  addition,  this  growth  in  consumer  lending  is  being  achieved  in  a  more  competitive 
environment, with lower interest rates, accommodative conditions and narrowing margins 
on average loans. Moreover, default rates are below the average for lending as a whole in 
Spain. 
Another feature of this expansion is its adaptation to the new environment resulting from 
the entry into the financial system of firms that make intensive use of new technologies, with 
a  particular  impact  on  the  financial  sector.  Your  Association  has  attached  particular 
importance to analysis of the challenges that these firms pose, through seminars, the work 
of  various  committees  and  the  preparation,  last  year,  of  a  comprehensive  report  on 
consumer  lending  and  the  digital  society,  initiatives  that  the  Banco  de  España  naturally 
applauds.  
Financial institutions must take up the challenge of responding to the new digital reality, with 
e-commerce (which is growing at rates of over 20% and amounted, in 2016, to €24 billion) 
now being used by more than one-third of consumers for their purchases.  
Clearly, these new firms with their strong technological capabilities pose a challenge and 
also an opportunity for established firms. The new technologies are making lending more 
efficient, for example by enhancing the way in which information on consumer behaviour 
 3/4 
 and requirements is managed, facilitating new data management processes, or by applying 
automation processes to loan origination, thus speeding up its management.   
As these new firms make their entry, a new map will be drawn for this financial sector. The 
most  recent  trends  highlight  the  importance  of  collaboration  and  strategic  agreements 
between new and established firms, to harness the competitive advantages of each: the 
new  technologies  of  the  new  firms  and  the  sector  experience  and  knowledge  of  the 
established ones. 
And here I conclude. It is now time for a toast to celebrate your 60th anniversary, in the hope 
that the National Association of Specialised Lending Institutions will continue its fruitful work 
for many years to come.  
I now pass the floor back to your president, who has the pleasurable task of proposing the 
toast.  
 4/4 
 