1st Biennial Banca d’Italia and Bocconi University Conference  
on Financial Stability and Regulation
Welcome address by Ignazio Visco 
Governor of Banca d’Italia
Rome, 5 April 2018
It is a pleasure for me to open this conference on “Financial Stability and Regulation” and 
welcome all of you who are here today. This will be the first of a biennial series of conferences 
on financial stability that Banca d’Italia has decided to organise with the Baffi Centre for 
Applied Research on International Markets, Banking, Finance and Regulation. I would like 
to thank the organisers, the contributors to the four sessions, the keynote speakers and the 
panellists of the policy roundtable that will conclude the conference tomorrow afternoon.
In the last ten years or so the objective of promoting and maintaining financial stability 
has strongly returned to being at the centre of the attention of policy makers in governments, 
central banks and supervisory and regulatory authorities. Since the global financial crisis, the 
regulatory  framework  has  been  substantially  reformed,  through  the  work  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board,  international  standard-setters,  regional  bodies  such  as  the  European 
Commission, and the new laws and regulations established in jurisdictions all over the world. 
A question that is now often raised is whether enough has been done to safeguard 
our economies and financial systems from the risks we face from the financial complexity 
and  interconnections  that  characterise  our  rapidly  changing  global  environment.  But  a 
symmetrical question is also raised, i.e. whether we have gone too far with the introduction 
of  new  requirements  for  financial  intermediaries’  capital,  liquidity,  leverage,  not  to 
mention disclosure, reporting and so on. In a nutshell, the issue is whether all this might 
unfavourably affect the financing needs of the real economy.
Answers to these questions are now being debated in international fora such as the 
Financial Stability Board and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. But they are 
also very much the subject of substantial research, carried out for academic purposes but 
also by central banks, supervisory agencies and international institutions. 
This is confirmed by the very large number of papers submitted to this conference 
and the exceptional quality of the ones that will be presented today and tomorrow. Indeed, 
1
benefiting from the perspective of academics and of policy makers, this conference focuses 
on some of the most hotly debated financial stability issues. Evidence will be presented 
on  how  regulation  and  policy  interventions  may  lead  to  spillovers  that  could  produce 
unintended consequences, requiring careful analysis of the policy design and calibration.
As  the  opacity  and  complexity  of  structured  financial  products  were  among  the 
culprits of the global financial crisis, their impact on financial stability has also been very 
much scrutinised. In recent years the regulatory landscape for these instruments has been 
overhauled, with the objective of increasing their transparency and standardisation. The 
overall impact of these reforms is now the subject of careful evaluation.
Other  more  traditional  issues,  such  as  maturity  mismatches  and  the  reduction  of 
banks’ fragility to runs coming from the transformation of shortterm deposits into longterm 
loans,  have  also,  again,  been  studied  in  depth. The  relevance  of  liquidity  and  leverage 
risks  has  continued  to  underpin  the  introduction  of  new  requirements  in  the  banking 
sector. However, more should most likely be done, as the issue is not limited to banks that 
are generally subject to strict regulation and careful supervision, but extends also to the 
large  and  somewhat  unexplored  shadow  banking  sector. The  global  financial  crisis  has 
forcefully reminded us that excessive leverage, dramatic shortages of liquidity and bank 
runs are not just a matter of interest solely to economic historians. Indeed, new research has 
been fostered to understand how runs could be generated in a much deeper and extended 
financial environment, which tends so much to reflect the effects of the extremely rapid 
and profound technological innovations that are changing our everyday lives.
Three areas of interest not only for policy makers and regulators but also for current 
and future academic research seem to me particularly important today.
The first is about macro-prudential policy and tools. To tame systemic risks in the 
banking sector, banks’ resilience to shocks is being increased with the introduction of 
countercyclical and other capital buffers. In particular sectors where price misalignments 
may become extremely severe, the reduction of the build-up of risks is pursued through 
the use of specific sectoral constraints. To limit funding risks, the recourse to new liquidity 
tools is recommended. Yet, much should be done to shed light on the costs and benefits of 
each tool, on how to best calibrate the ones which are currently being used, and on how 
new, more effective, macro-prudential instruments, if needed, should be developed.
As has long been recognised, the possibility of conflicts between the mandate of macro-
prudential policies and that of micro-prudential supervision of financial intermediaries is 
compounded by the fact that the two policies share some of the same instruments while 
their objectives, however, might be conflicting in some points of the cycle. For instance, 
2
during  downturns  macro-prudential  policy  interventions  would  imply  the  loosening  of 
equity buffers, while a purely micro-prudential perspective may aim to preserve or even 
tighten capital requirements. How to best coordinate the two approaches is a matter which 
is still unresolved. In the European Union this difficulty combines with the institutional 
framework, which is characterised by different layers of central and domestic authorities.
Also,  most  importantly,  the  interaction  of  macro-prudential  policy  with  monetary 
policy,  both  in  its  conventional  and  unconventional  forms,  provides  ample  possibilities 
for future research. In the medium run they reinforce each other. Monetary policy aims at 
maintaining price stability, which is a pre-condition for a sustained and balanced growth. 
At the same time, financial stability cannot easily be achieved in a persistently depressed 
economy. In the short run things are however a bit more controversial. On the one hand, 
macro-prudential policy can mitigate unintended consequences of monetary policy, such as 
excessive risk taking in times of very low interest rates. On the other hand, macro-prudential 
policy can interfere with the transmission of monetary policy to economic activity through 
its tightening or loosening effects on credit conditions. Research can provide insights on 
the  extent  to  which  macro-prudential  authorities  should  internalise  the  macroeconomic 
consequences of their decisions, and on how to smooth short-run conflicts between monetary 
and macro-prudential policies (as well as those of the latter with other policies and measures 
in fields such as those of taxation and environmental protection).
Dramatic developments in financial technology (Fintech) are creating new services, 
enlarging  the  pool  of  potential  competitors  of  traditional  intermediaries,  and  setting 
new challenges for macro-prudential authorities. There are many issues that could be 
fruitfully explored in this second area of interest. Perhaps this is where possible conflicts 
may arise between traditional banking institutions and new institutions operating in the 
shadow banking system. There might also be complementarities, the more so if banks 
learn how to take advantage of instruments such as crowd-funding and/or lending based 
on major advances provided by technology, for instance the use of big data, the diffusion 
of machine learning or the recourse to distributed ledgers.
A field that is very much under investigation at a policy level is that of the so-called  
cryptoassets,  as  the  best-known  of  which  being  bitcoin. At  present,  as  we  concluded 
two  weeks  ago  in  the  G20  meeting  in  Buenos  Aires,  these  assets  do  not  appear  to 
provide serious financial stability risks. However, besides raising concerns from an anti 
money laundering and counter terrorist financing viewpoint, today’s cryptoassets are all 
characterised by a number of fundamental problems, such as huge energy consumption, 
limited scalability and high price volatility, which prevent their use as a reliable means 
of payment, store of value or unit of account. This also explains why some of us prefer 
3
to refer to them as crypto-assets rather than crypto-currencies, as they are more often 
called, and why issues like the need to preserve market integrity and to ensure consumer 
protection, are emphasised so much.  
However,  some  of  these  ‘first-generation’  cryptoassets  might  evolve.  It  cannot  be 
excluded that stable, sustainable, nonanonymous crypto-assets may end up contributing 
to  the  efficiency  of  the  payment  systems  and  to  the  stability  of  financial  institutions. 
And perhaps a regulatory framework for Initial coin offerings which guarantees investor 
protection may foster the use of crypto-assets as a source of fundraising for innovative, 
high-tech  start-ups,  promoting  innovation  and  helping  new  firms  to  differentiate  their 
sources of funding, with benefits for the overall stability of the financial system. All this 
clearly deserves serious investigation.
There is also a more general question about the future of the technology underlying 
the functioning of most crypto-assets, the distributed ledger technology (DLT). In financial 
markets, a complicated system with lots of intermediaries is required to transfer assets, 
verify  who  owns  what,  and  reconcile  the  various  records:  banks  providing  custodian 
services,  brokers  processing  trade  orders,  exchanges  and  clearing  houses  settling 
transactions. A DLT has the potential to combine the services of these various layers in one 
single technology, resulting in a cheaper, less intermediated, and potentially more secure 
system. Transparency in transactions and asset holdings stored on distributed ledgers can 
also improve regulators’ ability to assess financial system risks and monitor compliance 
with regulations. The DLT certainly holds the promise of significant economic benefits 
in the future, but it is still relatively immature and untested. More research is needed to 
determine whether these changes will ever actually take place.
The third area of research that seems to me to deserve further, important consideration 
concerns  the  management  of  banking  crises.  This  issue  will  certainly  be  discussed  at 
length tomorrow morning in the last session of this conference, on bank resolution, and 
in the policy panel on banking crises in the afternoon. As is well known, the response 
to the global financial crisis also addressed the regulatory landscape for bank recovery 
and resolution. In Europe, the substantial costs of the public recapitalisation of banks in 
many countries motivated the introduction of a new bank resolution framework (Bank 
Recovery and Resolution Directive, BRRD), which increases the burden of losses borne 
by the private stakeholders of institutions in distress, with the aim of reducing the cost 
for  taxpayers.  The  use  of  bail-in  tools  as  a  general  principle  is  certainly  welcome  as 
long as it is expected to reduce banks’ risk-taking incentives and to reduce distortions to 
competition associated with too-big-to-fail market perceptions. Yet, when it comes to the 
specific use of the BRRD, the old saying of “the devil is in the detail” remains valid, as 
4
witnessed by the inadequacies of the new framework that emerged during recent cases of 
bank crisis. As I have mentioned on other occasions, the use of public funds could be less 
restrained to avoid financial stability risks and economic disruptions that may be caused 
by a routine recourse to private burden sharing. 
Of course, this is not to say that, in the different forms that banks’ resolution and 
liquidation  may  take,  shareholders  should  not  bear  the  cost  of  the  resolution  or  the 
liquidation,  administrators  and  managers  should  not  be  removed,  or  careful  recovery 
plans should not be required. But I am still worried that the straightforward application to 
banks of the insolvency proceedings normally applied to non-financial companies could 
lead to unintended consequences, via confidence disruption and contagion, to the rest of 
the system and to the real economy. And I believe that the issue of how to resolve banking 
crises in the European banking union in an orderly, quick and efficient manner, also given 
the difficulty of effectively coordinating all the authorities and institutions involved, still 
needs to be satisfactorily addressed.
This is not to dispute that a well-thought out implementation of bail-in procedures 
or a proper application of state aid rules in the case of well identified threats to market 
competition  would  not  be  useful.  However,  theoretical  and  empirical  research  should 
foster a better understanding of the conditions under which a bailin approach is socially 
optimal. In-depth empirical analysis of the impact of the current implementation of the 
BRRD on the banking sector and on the real economy is of the utmost importance. The 
development of effective analytical tools to assess the potential systemic spillovers from 
different private loss absorption requirements in real-life cases is necessary to guide the 
decisions  of  resolution  authorities.  More  generally,  how  different  approaches  to  loss 
absorption in the resolution of failing banks affect (and are affected by) the degree of 
sustainability of public finances is a subject that should be further investigated. As I have 
said, I expect that the contributions of the papers presented in the bank resolution session 
and the policy panel that will conclude the conference will provide useful and meaningful 
grounds to discuss these issues.
To conclude, the post-crisis regulatory overhaul that has de jure or de facto provided 
central banks with a new or a renewed financial stability mandate is here to stay. High 
quality research, both theoretical and empirical, and fora like this conference, in which 
recent experiences and new ideas are exchanged in an open minded atmosphere, speed 
up the pace at which policymakers can learn how to most effectively fulfill such financial 
stability mandates. 
With  this  expectation,  I  wish  all  the  participants  in  this  conference  two  very 
constructive days of open discussion and fruitful exchanges.
5
Designed by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
