Andreas Dombret: Addressing proportionality in Europe
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the 13th BCBS-FSI High-level Meeting for Africa on "Strengthening financial sector supervision
and current regulatory priorities", Cape Town, 24 January 2018.
 1. Introduction
Dear Fernando Restoy
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to the second half of the day. I am very happy to be here – both here to discuss with
you, and here in South Africa.
It’s no secret that speakers customarily try to set a good mood when they begin their remarks
with a few nice words about the places they visit to speak. I’m usually not one of those persons –
except in South Africa.
South Africa is truly one of my favourite destinations in the world, and I visit this country several
times each year. Now it’s not always fun and games: I usually have some work to do when I get
here. But the fruitful interactions with my valued colleagues from the SARB and others from the
African  central  banking  and  supervisory  community  have  always  made  the  trip  worthwhile.
Saying that, I am also looking forward to the discussion with you today.
Before the lunch break, Bill Coen and Adam Farkas already spoke, among other things, about
Basel III. I would like to follow up on that and – given that, as a member of the Basel Committee, I
was involved in the negotiations – say a few words from my own perspective as well. With that, I
will lay the groundwork for the remainder of my talk, in which I will focus on implementation of the
Basel rules and state my case for proportionality.
2. The long road to Basel III
Many observers of the Basel negotiations – journalists, politicians, industry representatives and
fellow colleagues from the central banking and supervisory community – have repeatedly asked
me the same question: Why did it take so long to finalise Basel III? After all, significant parts of
the  reform  had  already  been  agreed  upon  in  2010,  yet  it  took  us  about  seven  more  years  to
finalise the reform.
As I can understand this question very well, let me try to answer it. I see two main reasons why it
took so long.
First,  our  task  was  extremely  complex  on  a  technical  level.  We  had  to  balance  multiple,
intertwined goals – always with an eye on potential unintended consequences. There were plenty
of open questions. Do the new rules distort risk-taking behaviour? Do they truly resolve threats –
or simply shift problems? How can we level the playing field for a diverse global banking sector?
And so on.
So the finalisation package was about achieving a balanced overall set of rules. This required us
to study the details, to review every single rule with great thoroughness, often multiple times. And
this is essentially what we did in the past years.
The second reason why finalisation took so long lies in the diversity of the views of the countries
involved  in  the  negotiations.  Countries  differ  in  the  characteristics  of  their  national  banking
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sectors, in their supervisory cultures, in their policy traditions. These differences lead to a mix of
opposing opinions that are, by nature, difficult to reconcile.
Other members of the Committee and I were convinced that having common global rules is a
crucial long-term investment in financial stability at both the global and regional level. This is the
view we very much had in common. We agreed that even if agreeing to compromise sometimes
hurts, there is great value to it.
This  holds  even  more  when  we  consider  that  many  parts  of  the  Basel  agreements  are
implemented not only by the members of the Committee like South Africa, but by over a hundred
countries  worldwide.  These  include  many  other  African  countries,  of  course  –  countries  as
diverse as Kenya, Malawi, Egypt, Nigeria and Mozambique, to name just a few.
Therefore,  I  am  convinced  that  the  effort  we  have  put  into  the  post-crisis  reforms  and  the
compromise we have found will pay off for all of us. It will contribute to  a  healthier  and  more
sustainable global financial order.
With respect to the regulatory agenda, it is now time to take a step back, to wait and see how the
new  rules  play  out.  There  are  a  few  areas  where  action  is  called  for,  such  as  the  regulatory
treatment of sovereign bonds. But apart from that, we should not tighten the screws of regulation
further. Financial institutions need regulatory certainty, and they need a period of respite.
We should use this break to thoroughly evaluate the impact of our recent reforms, and to amend
and improve them where gaps and errors are found.
3. Getting implementation right
In parallel, we need to focus our energy on the comprehensive and consistent implementation of
the  Basel  rules.  Good  rules  are  not  worth  the  paper  they  are  written  on  without  good
implementation.  The  success  of  Basel  III  depends  crucially  on  whether  or  not  we  get  the
implementation right.
But what characterises good implementation? First and foremost, implementation must be full
and consistent with the agreed standards. I say very openly that in the past, we didn’t always get
implementation right. Basel II, for example, was not fully implemented either in the US or in the
European Union. And other member states of the Committee weren’t fully compliant either.
We shouldn’t repeat these  mistakes.  Implementing  only  what  suits  you  –  implementation  à  la
carte, if you like – goes against the very idea of having a common regulatory standard. During the
negotiations, my European colleagues and I insisted that the US commits to fulfilling all parts of
Basel  III.  In  return,  of  course,  this  means  that  the  Europeans  and  every  other  member  must
consistently implement all parts, too. And the Bundesbank is interested in that this happens.
There is another central aspect to getting implementation right. It is that regional differences and
local circumstances are accounted for.
Let me give you an example from Europe. The banking sectors of Germany and our neighbour
France are more or less the same size in terms of total assets. But look closer and you will find
that they are quite different from each other. Profitability of German banks, measured by return
on  assets  at  the  end  of  2016,  was  at  .11  percent  whereas  their  French  peers  reached  .42
percent.  Germany  has  about  1,700  credit  institutions  and  foreign  branches  while  France  has
fewer than 500. Germany has one global systemically important bank while France has three.
The German banking system is very diverse – in particular, there are a large number of small
banks. The French banking system is more dominated by large banking groups, similar to South
Africa’s.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
The important thing is that, as supervisors and regulators, we must remain neutral towards such
differences.  No  regulation,  no  supervision  should  aim  to  change  the  structure  of  the  financial
sector  or  put  a  particular  sector,  a  particular  business  model  or  a  particular  size  at  a
disadvantage. The shape of the financial sector should be determined by market forces only.
4. Complexity and proportionality
When I look at the European regulatory framework with this condition in mind, I see room for
improvement. With some notable exceptions, we currently more or less apply the same rules
and procedures to all banks, irrespective of their size and their relevance for financial stability. In
practice,  this  puts  small  institutions  at  a  disadvantage  compared  to  their  larger  peers.  It  runs
counter  to  the  idea  of  a  level  playing  field  and  creates  problematic  incentives  in  terms  of
uniformity and size in the banking sector. This needs to change. I am convinced that we need to
strengthen the principle of proportionality in banking regulation.
Now some of you might want to stop me at this point and ask: How do you reconcile that with the
full and consistent implementation of Basel III that you just advocated?
To  answer  this,  let  me  point  to  the  original  idea  of  the  Basel  rules.  The  task  of  the  Basel
Committee  was,  from  the  outset,  to  create  globally  harmonised  rules  for  large,  internationally
active banks to ensure that they are stable and operate on a level playing field. Over time, and
especially  with  Basel  III,  this  resulted  in  an  increasingly  complex  regulatory  framework  –  a
reflection of the mounting complexity of the global banking business.
This complexity is warranted for large, interconnected banks, and the sector’s global players are
certainly in a position to get to grips with the complex rules. But in actual fact, the bulk of these
rules, especially in Europe, apply not only to major multinational institutions but to every single
bank including small savings banks and the majority of cooperative banks. And that has turned
out to be quite a problem. Because small and medium-sized institutions do not benefit from the
same economies of scale  that  their  larger  rivals  can  harness.  For  example,  small  institutions
face  much  heavier  costs,  relatively  speaking,  when  they  invest  in  ITinfrastructure  or  hire
additional employees for their compliance department.
The implementation of the Basel framework in European regulation today already takes account
of proportionality to a certain degree. But in practice, I repeatedly encounter situations where, in
my view, the existing gradations are inadequate. So the proportionality principle is nothing new,
but it hasn’t been anchored deeply enough yet.
I am very convinced that proportionality is important – for several reasons:
It ensures fair competition on a level playing field.
It prevents the unwanted side-effect of structural policy through regulation.
It strengthens the principle of risk-oriented supervision.
It prevents regulation from unnecessarily hampering efficiency.
All in all, I think that proportionality is necessary to safeguard the original goals and spirit of the
Basel framework.
5. Addressing proportionality in Europe
The European Union is acknowledging this, and we are taking action. The process started back
in 2016 with an initiative launched by the finance ministers from the UK and Germany. As we at
the Bundesbank also felt strongly about the topic, we went public with the first set of specific
proposals for addressing proportionality in Europe shortly afterwards. Since then, we have been
working on enhancing and refining our proposals.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the European level, we have seen the European Commission likewise table its proposals for
strengthening proportionality as part of the general overhaul of EU banking regulation. The latest
development is a draft report by the European Parliament, to which amendments could be made
up until today and which I expect to be finalised in the near future. This will not be the last step,
but it will be an important one in the legislative process.
Without pre-empting the final result of the legislative process, I want to give you an idea of how
we will be approaching proportionality in the European Union. I will address the “Who", the “How”
and the “What".
Let’s start with the question of “Who", namely who are the relief measures intended for. I have
already  said  that  we  are  targeting  small  institutions,  meaning  that  the  targeted  group  should
consist  of  institutions  with  a  moderate  amount  of  total  assets.  However,  what  qualifies  as  a
“moderate amount” is different in each of the member states of the European Union. To account
for  this  heterogeneity,  we  will  probably  combine  an  absolute  threshold  for  total  assets  with  a
relative one that takes the size of the national GDP into account.
This quantitative threshold should be supplemented by additional criteria that prevent institutions
with  riskier  business  models  from  benefiting  from  simplified  rules.  For  example,  banks  that
qualify must not use internal models. They should have a small trading and a small derivatives
book. And  they  must  not  engage  in  any  notable  capital  market  or  cross-border  activities. And
because experience has taught us that there will almost never be a perfect list of criteria that
covers every eventuality, the final decision should always rest with the supervisors.
When it comes to the question of “How", you basically have the choice between two alternatives
for improving proportionality. One is to change the fine print, that is, to introduce simplifications to
and exemptions from individual rules. The other is to create a whole new framework tailored to
small and low-risk banks. I personally believe the latter approach to be the more appealing, as it
is  the  more  fundamental  and  clear-cut  alternative.  The  Bundesbank  has  been  involved  in  the
development of a concept for such a framework, and we call it the “Small Banking Box".
It remains to be seen whether the Small Banking Box will be the way forward for the European
Union. At the moment, we seem to be steering more towards the “fine print” approach, which the
Financial Stability Institute calls the “specific standard approach".
But in the end, it’s not the name that matters, and the form is only of secondary concern. What
matters  is  the  content,  i.e.  the  question  of  “What".  And  here,  the  most  recent  European
Parliament report is promising.
Importantly, the focus lies on reducing the administrative burden. We will aim to literally reduce
the paperwork the complex regulatory requirements create in various areas for small and low-
risk  institutions.  Among  the  measures  we  are  looking  at  are  exemptions  from  disclosure
requirements, reductions in the granularity of reporting requirements, and a simplified form of the
net stable funding ratio (NSFR). All of this is very close to what the Bundesbank has proposed
and supported in the past.
When assessing potential areas for simplifications, we must weigh the benefits of regulation –
that is, ensuring financial stability – against the burden it creates for the private sector. As a rule
of  thumb,  we  can  say  that  any  rules  that  are  dispensable  for  effective  supervision  are  up  for
debate.
Conversely, however, this also means that a lot of rules are not up for debate. Most importantly,
there can be no concessions in terms of risk-based capital ratios, the leverage ratio or the short-
term liquidity ratio. And the list goes on.
Small banks’ business models are neither per se simple nor automatically low-risk – and that is
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
particularly  true  when  looking  at  them  as  a  whole.  A  proportional  regulatory  regime  must
therefore be simple yet robust. Financial stability must not be put at risk.
6. Taking proportionality to the international level
Ladies and gentlemen, I am convinced that proportionality is a highly relevant topic – for Europe
as well as for other countries and regions.
For this reason, I welcome the fact that the Basel Committee, too, recently addressed this topic.
The Committee has reaffirmed two important things. First, it will stick to its original purpose of
being a standard setter for the regulation and supervision of large, internationally active banks.
Second, it considers proportionality as being a relevant topic.
Therefore,  the  Committee  wants  to  examine  the  topic  further,  for  example  by  conducting  a
stocktake of existing proportionality approaches. This will provide us with greater transparency as
to  how  banking  regulation  works  for  smaller  institutions  in  different  countries  including  non-
members of the Committee.
I  welcome  this  approach.  We  should  try  to  learn  from  each  other  and  turn  the  differences
between our financial sectors and the different perspectives resulting from them into an asset.
The Financial Stability Institute has already carried out an insightful cross-country comparison on
proportionality in banking regulation. I am sure that Stefan Hohl will tell you more about it in a few
minutes. Let me just say that I highly value this work of the FSI, and that I would appreciate to see
more such work on proportionality from the FSI or the Basel Committee in the near future.
Now  I  am  looking  forward  to  your  questions,  and  to  learning  from  your  perspectives  on
proportionality.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
