Yannis Stournaras: Recent economic and financial developments in
Greece
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 85th Annual Meeting of
Shareholders, Athens, 26 February 2018.
 TOWARDS THE COMPLETION OF THE THIRD PROGRAMME AND A RETURN TO THE
MARKETS
The successful completion of the third programme in August 2018 will signal the end of a long
period of economic adjustment, allow a return to normality and could, under the right conditions,
prove to be a starting point for strong and sustainable growth.
The crucial issues which, from now on, will have a decisive impact on the course and prospects
of the Greek economy are the following four:
(a) Public debt sustainability
The high level of public debt feeds uncertainty, undermines confidence in the prospects of the
economy,  weighs  on  Greece’s  credit  rating  and  hinders  the  smooth  exit  from  the  current
programme.
The  debt  sustainability  report  by  the  institutions  and  the  adoption  of  the  medium-term  debt
restructuring measures by the Eurogroup need to be made as soon and as clearly as possible,
so  as  to  further  strengthen  financial  markets’  confidence  and  ensure  a  smooth  exit  from  the
programme.
(b) Consolidating confidence
In  order  to  ensure  its  return  to  the  markets  on  favourable  terms,  Greece  must  consolidate
investor confidence in the continuation of reforms and convince that fiscal policy will not relapse
once  again  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  commitments  made  must  be  kept  and  decisive  steps
must be taken to continue reforms and privatisations, starting with the removal of obstacles to
large investment projects that have already been agreed to, but are lagging. Land-use legislation
should play an important role in this area.
The formulation of a national strategy integrating the fiscal and structural targets already agreed
for the post-programme period, will boost confidence. It will have a positive impact on the terms
of Greece’s return to the markets, improve market sentiment and help attract investment. It will
also facilitate the return of deposits to banks and will enhance their lending capacity. The above
will set in motion a virtuous circle for the economy and the banking system and will create the
necessary conditions for a full lifting of capital controls.
(c) A smooth return to the markets
After  the  end  of  the  programme,  Greece  will  have  to  secure  the  funds  required  to  cover  its
financing needs by resorting to international financial markets on sustainable terms. As already
mentioned,  the  consolidation  of  confidence  is  a  sine  qua  non. At  the  same  time  however,  a
financial safety net will need to be put in place to assure that Greece is able to weather adverse
developments that could temporarily drive borrowing costs up to unsustainable levels.
The  envisaged  “cash  buffer”  is  one  such  safety  net,  that  would  enable  Greece  to  avoid  a
recourse to the markets at times of heightened volatility and high refinancing costs. This cash
buffer is currently being built up with the trial bond issues before the end of the programme, as
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
well as with disbursements from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). At the current stage,
the first trial return to the markets took place in July 2017 with a five-year bond issue, while in
November 2017 a bond exchange was conducted for an amount of €25.8 billion. Subsequently,
after the completion of the third review, a seven-year bond issue was launched, as part of the
government’s plan for Greece’s return to international markets before the end of the programme.
This issue, which took place amid turbulence in international financial markets, was successful.
However,  episodes  of  turmoil  such  as  the  recent  ones  appear  to  have  a  greater  impact  on
countries with poor credit ratings and a weaker economy. These countries saw the yields on
their  government  bonds  rise  considerably.  This  suggests  that,  in  the  present  uncertain
conditions, the Greek State’s return to the markets, as necessary as it may be for a return to
normality, must proceed with caution.
International experience has shown that trial bond issues for the purpose of creating a sound
cash buffer prior to the expiry of a programme helps bolster confidence and paves the way to the
exit from the programme. Nevertheless, the need for a complementary precautionary assistance
programme must also be considered. The possibility of a recourse to a precautionary support
programme, especially if financial market conditions call for one, must not be overdramatised, as
the  European  mechanisms  are  there  to  be  used  if  needed.  Such  a  precautionary  assistance
framework  can  be  expected  to  support  the  Greek  economy,  by  helping  to  reduce  borrowing
costs, since it will provide assurance of the Greek government’s and banks’ access to funding
beyond the end of the current programme in August 2018. Under an ESM precautionary credit
line, funds would become available, without necessarily having to be raised beforehand, whereas
the build-up of a cash buffer necessarily entails additional borrowing, which would increase the
annual debt service costs. Moreover, this precautionary financial assistance framework would
ensure  that  the  waiver  on  Greek  government  bonds  stays  in  place,  so  that  the  latter  remain
eligible  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem  monetary  policy  operations  until  Greece  regains  an
investment grade credit rating. Furthermore, in such case, the buffer for systemic banks should
remain available beyond August 2018. Finally, the maintenance of the waiver, along with the debt
sustainability  measures,  would  enable  the  purchase  of  Greek  government  bonds  by  the
European Central Bank under its public sector purchase programme either in its regular duration
or during the reinvestment period, thereby exerting a downward effect on the borrowing costs of
Greek government.
(d) The post-programme surveillance framework
According to the European institutional framework, the end of the Greek programme in August
2018 does not relieve Greece of its obligations vis-à-vis its lenders. What changes is the form of
the surveillance framework for Greece, which must conform to the general surveillance terms
and regulations in force in the European Union.
Regulation  (EU)  No.  472/2013  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  provides  for
automatic post-programme surveillance until the country repays 75% of the loans it has obtained
from  other  Member  States,  the  European  Financial  Stability  Fund  (EFSF)  and  the  European
Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  reserves  the  right  to
subject  a  Member  State  to  enhanced  surveillance,  if  it  judges  that  this  is  warranted  by  the
circumstances.
Apart from these provisions, already in force, the European Commission has proposed changes
to the economic governance of the euro area, some of which could be relevant for the type of
post-programme surveillance that the Greek economy would be subject to, and will be discussed
by  the  European  Council  within  the  first  half  of  2018.  The  aspects  of  potential  relevance  to
Greece concern the enhanced role of the ESM and the possible support to Member States for
the implementation of structural reforms.
Therefore, it is clear that Greece’s smooth exit from the programme and its successful course in
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
new post-crisis European normality entail a commitment to safeguard the achievements made
so far, to pursue sound economic policies and to continue and complete the structural reforms.
Rebalancing and adjustment of the economy from 2009 to 2017
The positive indications of a sustainable return to growth are the result of a long-standing and
painful economic adjustment effort. The progress made since the beginning of the debt crisis in
2009  is  remarkable  and  unprecedented  by  international  standards.  More  specifically,  Greece
achieved:
The full elimination of the twin deficits, i.e. the very high fiscal deficit and the large current
account deficit.
The  full  recouping  of  competitiveness  in  terms  of  labour  costs  and  its  considerable
improvement in terms of prices. It is worth noting that this was achieved through a painful
process  of  internal  devaluation,  involving  significant  reductions  in  nominal  wages  and
salaries, mainly in the private sector.
At the same time, a bold reform, privatisation and economic modernisation programme is
being implemented in areas such as the labour and product markets, the healthcare and
social security systems, the fiscal framework, the tax system and public administration.
As a result of all these major reforms during the eight years of the crisis, the economy has
become more extrovert and the production model has begun to rebalance towards export-
oriented sectors.
Finally,  the  restructuring  and  consolidation  of  the  banking  system,  characterised  first  and
foremost by significant recapitalisation, following stringent stress tests and in-depth asset
quality reviews, ensure high capital adequacy ratios (Common Equity Tier 1-CET1), higher
than  the  European  average,  which,  along  with  a  satisfactory  NPE  coverage  ratio,  enable
Greek banks to effectively manage their high stock of NPEs.
It should however be noted that, despite the progress made, the crisis has had significant costs
in terms of output and employment losses and a marked decline in household wealth. Between
2008 and 2016, Greece lost over one fourth of its GDP at constant prices, and unemployment
rose by nearly 16 percentage points. Furthermore, per capita GDP in purchasing power parity in
2016 came to merely 68% of the EU average, down from 93% in 2008. Meanwhile, a large brain
drain has taken place, depriving Greece’s society and economy of one of its productive parts,
with devastating demographic, economic and social consequences.
DEVELOPMENTS AND PROSPECTS OF THE GREEK ECONOMY IN 2018
2017  marked  the  return  of  the  Greek  economy  to  positive  growth  after  several  years  of
recession, with the exception of 2014. GDP growth is expected to come to 1.6% in 2017 and to
pick  up  further  to  2.4%  and  2.5%,  respectively,  in  2018  and  2019.  Therefore,  there  are
reasonable grounds to anticipate that, after a protracted and very painful economic adjustment,
growth  is  now  taking  hold,  on  the  back  of  favourable  domestic  developments  and  a  positive
European context.
The improved prospects for the domestic economy have bolstered the economic climate and led
to an increase in bank deposits, to upgrades of the credit ratings of the Greek sovereign and to
successive reductions in Greek banks’ dependence on Emergency Liquidity Assistance (ELA).
These  better  prospects  also  resulted  in  sovereign  bond  yields  falling  to  January  2016  levels,
thereby allowing the Greek government to return to the markets in July 2017 for the first time in
three years. Corporate bond yields also fell and Greek banks returned to international financial
markets with covered bond issues.
Against this background, it is reasonable to anticipate a pick-up in growth for 2018, with GDP
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
growing  by  2.4%,  driven  by:  (a)  the  solid  performance  of  tourism;  (b)  stronger  manufacturing
output,  reflecting  the  improved  business  environment  and  heralding  a  rise  in  business
investment; (c) increased exports; and (d) favourable global economic conditions.
HICP  inflation  returned  to  positive  territory  in  2017,  posting  an  average  annual  rate  of  1.1%,
compared with 0% in 2016. The weakening of deflationary pressures is mainly attributed to the
sharp upswing of international oil prices, particularly in the first five months of the year, and to the
inflationary impact of new indirect taxes, effective from early 2017. In 2018, domestic inflation is
expected to be determined largely by base effects, which will keep inflation in positive territory,
but lower than in 2017.
It is, however, worth noting that the favourable projections rely crucially on the assumption that
the  fourth  and  last  review  of  the  current  economic  adjustment  programme  will  be  completed
smoothly and according to schedule, without delays or setbacks, and that the implementation of
reforms will continue unabated in the post-programme period.
FISCAL POLICY
In 2016, Greece’s general government primary balance – as defined in the Economic Adjustment
Programme – overshot the target set in the programme, for the second consecutive year. More
specifically,  the  general  government  primary  balance,  according  to  the  programme  definition,
turned  out  at  a  surplus  of  3.8%  of  GDP  in  2016,  against  a  target  of  0.5%  of  GDP.  This
overachievement  reflected  the  better-than-expected  performance  of  direct  and  indirect  tax
revenue, as well as the containment of social expenditure and of public investment. In the course
of 2017 and in the context of the second review of the programme, a number of fiscal measures
were  adopted  aimed  at  bolstering  tax  revenue,  curbing  tax  evasion  and,  in  the  medium  term,
rebalancing the current fiscal policy mix. Legislation of fiscal measures continued into 2018 with
the enactment in January of Law 4512/2018 in the context of the completion of the programme’s
third review.
According  to  the  Introductory  Report  to  the  2018  Budget,  the  primary  surplus  for  2017  is
projected to reach 2.44% of GDP, against a target of 1.75%. However, based on the available
fiscal  data,  it  is  estimated  that  the  2017  primary  budget  balance  will  exceed  this  forecast.
Nevertheless,  budget  execution  data  for  2017  indicate  that  the  overachievement  of  the  fiscal
target  for  2017  is  mainly  driven  by  increased  revenue  from  tax  arrears  (forced  collection,
additional taxes from the voluntary disclosure of income, tax arrears settlement), which are in
large part conjunctural, but also by public expenditure cuts. On the other hand, the increase in
direct and indirect tax revenue is marginal, despite higher tax rates and the introduction of new
taxes. This confirms the view that the tax-paying capacity of the country’s productive forces has
been exhausted and points to a need for change in the fiscal policy mix.
THE BANKING SYSTEM AND PRIVATE INSURANCE UNDERTAKINGS
The  main  developments  in  the  domestic  banking  sector  in  2017  were  a  gradual  recovery  of
operating profitability; the maintenance of capital adequacy at satisfactory levels; a diversification
of banks’ funding sources; and a small decline in the stock of non-performing exposures (NPEs)
in line with the targets set, although this stock remains high (€100.4 billion in September 2017). It
is worth noting that, according to December 2017 provisional data, there was a substantial pick-
up in the pace of NPE reduction in the fourth quarter of 2017 (with the NPE stock amounting to
roughly €95 billion).
Bank deposits by non-financial corporations and households increased in 2017, as a result of the
economic  upturn  and  the  gradual  recovery  of  public  confidence  in  the  banking  system.
Furthermore, the slowdown in credit growth observed during the crisis years now seems to have
abated. Bank deposit rates continued to fall, albeit at a slower pace, and lending rates to non-
financial corporations continued to decline.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Non-performing exposures
The effective management of NPEs is the most crucial legacy problem that banks now have to
tackle, if they are to fully consolidate their loan portfolios and become capable of increasing their
lending. To this end, the legal and regulatory framework has been strengthened, and banks have
taken important action. Specifically, electronic platforms for out-of-court settlement of debts and
e-auctions of real estate were launched; the authorisation framework for credit servicing firms
was simplified; and the first sales of loan portfolios were conducted. Moreover, new legislation
now protects bank officers involved in bad loan restructuring against criminal prosecution, and
the  rights  of  secured  creditors  have  been  enhanced.  The  progress  achieved  in  removing  the
obstacles  to  the  management  of  NPEs  and,  in  particular,  the  impact  on  strategic  defaulters’
behaviour from the launch of e-auctions was a main factor behind the favourable picture in the
fourth quarter.
Banks are complying with a specified time schedule to gradually reduce the stock of NPEs, with
a  view  to  driving  down  the  total  outstanding  stock  of  NPEs  by  about  37%  from  June  2017  to
December  2019.  Furthermore,  the  coverage  ratio  of  NPEs  by  accumulated  provisions  is
satisfactory, and the Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio was 17.1% in September 2017, higher
than the EU average of 15%.
In the period immediately ahead, banks must step up their efforts to attain their NPE operational
targets.  The  targets  for  the  next  two  years  are  high  and  ambitious,  yet  feasible,  now  that  the
economy has returned to positive growth. Banks must, as soon as possible, broaden the scope
of workouts offered to borrowers and move towards more drastic decisions, in particular with
respect to the restructuring of viable businesses, the conclusion of multi-creditor workouts, the
identification of strategic defaulters and the implementation of definitive solutions in the case of
non-viable businesses. After the publication of relevant guidelines by the European Commission,
the possibility of transferring NPEs to one or more central entities to be set up for this purpose
could be considered. Moreover, banks should revise their business plans with an emphasis on
developing new operations and further cost-cutting.
However, there is no room for complacency. The domestic financial system remains vulnerable
to  macroeconomic  and  financial  shocks.  Banks  will  be  facing  new  challenges  in  2018,  most
notably the implementation of International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9), the stricter
treatment  of  loan-loss  provisions  for  new  NPEs,  as  well  as  the  EU-wide  stress  test  to  be
conducted by the ECB. Against this background, it is important that a cash buffer be available
under the third support programme, to ensure financial stability by supporting the banking sector
if need be.
Insurance undertakings
According to the new framework of Solvency II for insurance undertakings and with a view to
increased transparency and consumer protection, as from 2017 Greek insurance undertakings
publish an annual report  on  their  solvency  and  financial  condition.  The  industry’s  key  financial
indicators for 2017 remained stable, whereas solvency ratios are expected to improve. With a
view, however, to mitigating the risks stemming from the low interest rate environment and the
resulting search for yield, insurance undertakings have adjusted their investment strategies and
modified  their  traditional  life  products  by  offering  reduced  interest  rate  guarantees  and  by
focusing on promoting mostly unit-linked products.
RISKS AND SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY
Despite  the  progress  made  so  far,  as  reflected  in  key  economic  indicators,  domestic  and
external risks remain, which could jeopardise the course of the Greek economy.
In the short term, the main risks relate to a delayed implementation of the measures agreed in
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the third review, which would in turn delay the completion of the fourth and last review of the
current  programme,  as  well  as  to  an  underachievement  of  the  fiscal  targets.  In  addition,  the
absence of a timely specification of the debt relief measures could rekindle uncertainties.
Equally significant is the risk of a reversal of the so far downward trend of Greek government
bond yields. The recent upgrading of the country’s credit rating is a positive development towards
a restoration of investment grade ratings for Greek bonds; also, 2017 saw a significant decline in
the high yields of Greek government bonds. The fact, however, that Greece still has the lowest
credit  rating  in  the  euro  area,  five  notches  below  investment  grade,  means  that,  as  soon  as
Greece exits the programme, Greek bonds will no longer be eligible as collateral for access to
low-cost refinancing from the ECB. Considering that the yield on the 10-year Greek government
bond currently exceeds 4%, compared with 2% for the Portuguese and Italian counterparts, the
risk  to  the  debt  dynamics  is  all  too  clear.  This  problem  could  be  further  exacerbated,  as  the
factors behind the favourable conditions of 2017 appear to be reversing.
There  are  also external risks, which give rise to concerns about the preservation of the very
favourable  global  economic  conjuncture  and  global  stability.  More  specifically,  some  of  the
matters pending at the EU level that could hinder the smooth development of the EU economy
are: the Brexit preparations after the agreement of 15 December 2017 for an orderly exit, and the
need to reach a mutually acceptable agreement on how to address the refugee crisis ahead of
the revision of the Dublin Regulation in June 2018. Furthermore, at the euro area level, significant
changes to its architecture are expected to be carried out this year, such as the setting up of the
European Monetary Fund and the completion of the banking union. Any delays to the scheduled
changes  could  stoke  uncertainties.  Turning  to  the  global  level,  the  deterioration  of  relations
between the United States and both North Korea and Iran has given rise to turmoil. Finally, the
surge  of  populism  in  several  countries  across  the  globe  erodes  public  trust  in  democratic
institutions and the rule of law.
A STRATEGY FOR SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: THE NEW PRODUCTION MODEL
Today, Greece faces the historic challenge of returning to normality and to a path of convergence
with  its  European  partners.  A  return  to  strong  economic  growth  calls  for  maintaining  and
implementing the structural reforms already legislated, as well as further crucial reforms in areas
still lagging behind, such as the tax system, public administration, the judicial system and the
goods and services markets. For all of the above to materialise and for Greece to once again
become  a  friendly  place  for  doing  business  and  an  attractive  destination  for  productive
investment,  the  end  of  the  current  adjustment  programme  will  have  to  mark  the  launch  of  a
comprehensive national plan of economic restructuring, whose authorship and ownership will lie
with the Greek government. Economic policy planning for the ‘day after’ Greece’s exit from the
economic adjustment programmes will have to focus not only on actions to smooth out cyclical
shocks, but also, and more importantly, on a medium-to-long-term growth policy geared towards
the dual goal of fully utilising the economy’s productive potential and safeguarding fiscal stability.
This  plan  must  aim  for  high  and  sustainable  growth  rates  by  encouraging  private  initiative,
extroversion  and  broader  social  engagement.  The  success  of  such  a  plan  will  require  radical
changes in the fabric of the economy. The implementation of these changes requires effective
and broader consensus and consultation across all social groups as well as across European-
oriented political forces in the country. Today, at this critical juncture for the Greek economy, it is
important to avoid a halt of the positive momentum or, worse yet, a situation where the lack of
social consensus or a polarised political climate could jeopardise what has been achieved after
nine years of great sacrifices. More specifically, what is needed is:
First,  a  drastic  overhaul  of  public  administration  with  clear  delimitation  of  state  intervention  in
private initiative. The state’s role should be to regulate the institutional framework governing the
private  economy  and  provide  oversight  of  performance  and  monitoring  capacity  rather  than
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
acting as an entrepreneur-producer. Furthermore, the use of public-private partnerships in a wide
range of administrative procedures and in the delivery of public services would shift costs from
taxpayers onto users, while at the same time enabling care to be taken to support the weaker
groups of the population.
Second, speeding up the privatisation programme and the development of public property. With
government intervention under the new productive model being limited to the role of overseer-
regulator, privatisations will increase public revenue, while also strengthening competition to the
benefit of the consumer.
Third, changes in the tax system with a view to creating a clear and stable tax regime with lower
tax rates for households and businesses and to broadening the tax base.
Fourth, expanding the use of electronic transactions to all types of economic activity, so as to
effectively reduce the informal economy and increase public revenue with a fairer distribution of
the tax burden. The success of this endeavour will crucially hinge upon citizens’ familiarisation
with digital technology applications, as well as upon building a taxpaying culture.
Fifth, emphasis on the “knowledge triangle” (education-research-innovation), with evaluation of
higher  education  and  linking  research  to  funding  and  to  the  production  process.  This  is  so
because  linking  higher  education  with  the  production  process  promotes  innovation  and  the
country’s competitive advantages.
Sixth, and most important, strengthening the operational independence of key institutions and
the rule of law. For this to become possible, society and the political forces must understand that
strong and sound inclusive institutions, which do not serve the interests of specific groups at the
expense of others, promote the welfare of society as a whole. For the restart of the economy to
be  a  success,  the  status  of  institutions  –  which  is  synonymous  of  confidence  –needs  to  be
elevated in future. Weak and closed institutions generate uncertainty and disorientation, whereas
strong, open and socially accepted institutions are necessary for a return to normality.
 Today,  the  Greek  economy  is  close  to  an  exit  from  the  crisis  and  a  return  to  normality.  The
economic  fundamentals,  as  recorded,  so  far,  in  the  evolution  of  economic  indicators,  are
encouraging.  However,  making 
for  a
comprehensive plan for the future, within a climate of social consensus and normality, capable of
convincing the productive forces and the international markets that Greece has broken once and
for all with past practices and is back on track to its convergence with Europe.
Related link: Annual Report of the Bank of Greece (in Greek).
favourable  conditions  calls 
the  most  of 
these 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
