Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian:  Digital  developments  in  Malaysia's
financial sector and the broader economy
Opening  address  by  Ms  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia (Bank Negara Malaysia), at the Asian Banker Digital Finance Convention 2018, Kuala
Lumpur, 22 March 2018.
 It is my great pleasure to be here today at the 2018 Asian Banker Digital Finance Convention.
Many of us here would remember what a “Kodak moment” is. I believe the term for that these
days is “Insta-worthy”.
Kodak’s story is a familiar one, now infamous as a classic case of digital disruption. At the turn of
the century, film was still very much the technology of choice. But within years, the digital camera
quickly took over the mass market, eventually putting Kodak out of business. And the story does
not end there, as we all know. Very soon, most people were taking pictures with their phones
instead.
This  may  be  an  old  cautionary  tale,  but  its  message  continues  to  be  relevant.    The  digital
revolution is real. It is inevitable. And it is pervasive in ways that change the way we live today,
and in ways we cannot yet imagine.
At its most fundamental level, perhaps the most significant change brought about by the digital
revolution has been the change in paradigm.  By this, I mean the basic assumptions that shape
our thinking – whether in a business, social or political context. 
In the world of finance, some of the questions being asked today are: What makes a bank a
bank? Will digital currency ever replace central-bank issued money? Or more likely, will central
banks issue their own versions of digital currency and in the process, disintermediate banks? Are
banks selling financial products, or are they offering a lifestyle, opportunity and the freedom to
pursue a new and different path in life? What business are banks really in?
When  everyone  stopped  using  film  in  cameras,  one  wonders  if  Kodak  realised  that  it  was
actually  in  the  business  of  capturing  memories.  Or  when  smartphones  burst  into  the  mobile
handset  market,  did  Nokia  realise  that  their  business  was  not  selling  mobile  handsets,  but
connecting people with the world around them?  
Three  years  ago,  McKinsey  predicted  that  technological  advancements  will  redefine  the
landscape of finance, and then went on to argue that incumbents had – at most – a brief window
of five years to adapt or risk becoming obsolete. You may or may not agree with this, but I think it
would be hard to deny that a shake-up of the industry is already present.
To some extent, the finance industry has been responding. Total IT spending is estimated at over
$200  billion  every  year  across  the  regions  of  North America,  Europe, Asia  Pacific  and  Latin
America. In 2016, a single global bank spent $9.5 billion, or 16% of its expenses on technology.
The impact of these investments are becoming increasingly visible – banking without branches,
investing without brokers, paying without paper.
Technological advancements are also redefining the landscape of finance in ways that we are
only  beginning  to  understand.  Distributed  ledger  technology  offers  the  potential  to  transform
longstanding practices in areas such as correspondent banking, trade finance and remittances.
Big data analytics continues to uncover new ways to understand and access untapped markets.
Innovations in mobile technology are also challenging the status quo, particularly in the area of
payments. Alipay and Tenpay quickly come to mind as examples of companies that took a single
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
mobile app and went on to build an international ecosystem from scratch.
These  trends  are  now  increasingly  commonplace  across  the  globe,  driven  by  a  multitude  of
factors – from the drive to improve efficiencies, deliver a superior customer experience, break
into new markets, or combat fraud. 
In the face of these tectonic shifts, most of us are finding ourselves in unchartered waters. Within
the central bank, we are doing work across a range of issues that we believe will be important to
inform our thinking on digital developments, both in the financial sector and the broader economy.
Within  your  own  institutions,  I  trust  this  is  also  the  case.  In  that  sense,  we  share  a  common
interest – to keep our sights fixed on the future so that we can step forward confidently. 
With that in mind, today I would like to touch on four areas of particular relevance as we navigate
this digital world:
First, the role of digital leadership;
Second, ensuring the quality of growth in the financial sector;
Third, future-proofing the workforce; and
Fourth, preparing our society for digital finance
Digital leadership in the face of changing market dynamics
Let me turn first to digital leadership. Strong digital leadership starts with an acceptance of a new
normal. Historically, finance has been a close-knit community. But the barriers to entry are being
lifted by technology. As I alluded to earlier, this has blurred the boundaries of what it means to be
a bank, or a financial services provider.
As a result, banks are no longer just competing with other banks. Non-traditional players – such
as  fintech  firms  and  platform-based  companies  –  are  increasingly  well-positioned  to  offer
financial  services.  Digital  disruptors  want  to  not  only  gain  market  share,  but  to  transform  the
market itself. This is reflected in the willingness to take loss-leading positions when entering a
market.
The changing market dynamics raise some important strategic questions for banks – including
how  banks  will  choose  to  fundamentally  approach  competition,  what  this  means  for  existing
business models, and what outcomes this will entail both in the short and longer term.
One  strategy  has  been  to  leverage  opportunities  for  collaboration  –  whether  among  existing
players or new entrants. We see this emerging as an increasingly important, if not inevitable,
response globally on several fronts.
In the blockchain space, the industry in a number of jurisdictions has pooled resources to defray
the  cost  of  experimentation  involved  in  developing  scaleable  use  cases  for  the  technology’s
application.  In  Malaysia,  nine  banks  have  done  this  by  coming  together  to  develop  blockchain
applications for trade finance.
Establishing  shared  networks,  or  opening  up  previously  closed  ones,  is  also  gaining  traction.
This can be seen in the growing use of Open Application Programme Interfaces (or Open APIs).
Over the last five years, publications of APIs in the financial sector have increased exponentially,
with an estimated 200 new APIs published every year. In a survey that we conducted earlier this
year, more than half of banks and insurers in Malaysia indicated plans to roll out open APIs in the
near to medium term. 
At the industry level, the Bank has established an open API implementation group with members
drawn from the industry, fintech community and key stakeholders to develop open API standards
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  the  financial  sector  as  part  of  efforts  to  broaden  access  and  promote  innovation  and
competition.
On the risk management front, the World Economic Forum announced less than three weeks
ago  the  creation  of  a  consortium  to  facilitate  more  coordinated  efforts  in  addressing
cybersecurity risks. This entails developing common principles for risk assessments, guidance
for implementation, and a scoring framework.
In the area of payments, the Bank has just last week issued the Interoperable Credit Transfer
Framework  (ICTF),  which  promotes  collaborative  competition  or  ‘co-opetition’  for  mobile
payments.  Under  this  framework,  banks  and  non-banks  alike  collaborate  at  the  infrastructure
level through a shared payment infrastructure, while individual players compete at the product
level by developing innovative value-added features. This approach is envisioned to expand the
network  reach  at  a  lower  cost,  while  promoting  competition  in  areas  that  advance  financial
inclusion, higher service levels and the delivery of a superior customer experience.
There are clear synergies to be gained from such collaborative efforts. They enable technological
infrastructure  to  be  shared  across  the  industry.  This  shifts  the  competitive  focus  towards
improving the value created for customers and the economy at large, rather than a race towards
building proprietary networks that ultimately leads to market fragmentation.
However, the effect of this is also a sharp laser focus on bottlenecks within individual firms.  By
levelling the playing field, firms will face a greater urgency to address internal constraints that
prevent them from capitalizing on opportunities for higher growth and productivity. This may well
be the most important challenge for digital leaders.
Elevating the quality of financial sector growth
This brings me to the quality of financial sector growth.
There are two perspectives to this. First, digitisation offers enormous potential for the financial
sector  to  achieve  what  was  not  possible  before,  at  least  not  without  prohibitive  costs.   And
second, the transition to a digital economy itself calls for a re-orientation of the financial sector to
meet the new business demands for financial services. On both counts, the financial industry
can, and in fact ought to be, powerful agents of change.
With a little ingenuity, digital finance can unlock new growth opportunities that were previously
deemed to be not  commercially  viable.  Indeed,  disruptive  innovations  –  whether  in  banking  or
beyond  –  often  begin  at  the  fringes  of  the  market,  such  as  the  underserved  and  unserved
segments.
The much-lauded success of M-Pesa in Kenya is a shining example of this, where the humble
mobile phone was transformed into a bank account for millions of people who were otherwise
excluded by the financial system. We have our own success story in Malaysia with agent banks
that  were  made  possible  with  technology.    Through  the  vastly  expanded  network  of  access
points at a fraction of the cost involved to set up a branch, over 30,000 individuals who did not
have bank accounts before now have access to banking services through agent banks.
This is just the tip of the iceberg, with considerable potential that remains untapped –
to achieve full financial inclusion with access to bank accounts for all Malaysians;
to make it easier, through psychometric and big data analysis, for businesses that have no
track  record  or  collateral  to  qualify  for  financing  as  Malaysia  embraces  an  innovation-led
growth model; and
to practice and influence sustainable business practices that protect our future.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
With  digital  finance,  these  are  commercially  viable  possibilities.  From  Africa  to  London,
technology  and  finance  are  being  combined  in  unprecedented  ways  to  deliver  solar  power  to
communities,  drive  investment  decisions  based  on  sustainability  metrics  and  break  down
barriers to access. 
With growing inequality, environmental degradation and more uncertain global developments, the
stakes are high.  If banks do not take up the mantle of leadership within the community, at risk is
their legitimacy in the longer term as vehicles for the efficient allocation of economic resources. 
Future-proofing the workforce for digital finance
One can hardly talk about the quality of growth without addressing the workforce.  This brings me
to the third area that I would like to touch on.
In a sense, the financial sector is arguably better positioned than most to transition its workforce
as job profiles change in response to technological disruptions. For one thing, the financial sector
has already been moving for a while in the direction of higher skilled jobs. Over the past three
years, 91% of total jobs created in the financial sector were in high-skilled positions. As at the
end  of  last  year,  high-skilled  workers  continued  to  comprise  the  majority  of  the  workforce  –
representing  74%  of  the  banking  sector  employees  and  83%  of  the  insurance/takaful  sector
employees. 
That said, more substantive considerations of the implications of technological disruptions for the
financial sector workforce have generally been lacking. Beyond talk of hiring more data scientists
and cyber-security experts, or automating counter and customer services, most institutions have
not  fully  examined  how  changes  to  workflows  or  business  strategies  under  different  digital
scenarios will impact existing jobs. It is also not uncommon for institutions to chiefly focus on IT-
related technical skills as a core competence for future workers. Yet we all recognise the speed
at  which  technical  knowledge  becomes  quickly  obsolete.  In  reality,  learning  agility,  creative
thinking and behavioural insights may be far more important in future workers. 
In responding to technological disruptions, the implications for the workforce therefore demand
much more rigorous attention than the cursory acknowledgement that it is getting today.
We  intend  to  work  with  financial  institutions  over  the  coming  months  to  take  this  forward,
beginning with a holistic assessment to better understand the dynamics of the financial sector
workforce as a basis to forecast skill demand and supply under different scenarios. This in turn
aims  to  support  the  formulation  of  strategies  –  both  an  the  institution  and  industry  level  –  to
effectively transition the workforce.
For Malaysia, with a significant majority of jobs in the high-skilled category, technology is more
likely to augment and redefine job roles in the financial sector, rather than eliminate occupations
altogether over the next decade.  Nevertheless, some segments will inevitably face the risk of
displacement. We aim to work with the industry to establish appropriate mechanisms to re-skill
workers and enhance their prospects for gainful employment in different roles.  I should add that
we will also expect individual financial institutions to design and implement appropriate programs
for transitioning employees affected by digital disruptions, beyond compensation arrangements.
Preparing society for digital finance
My final point has to do with preparing society for digital finance.  The consumer experience of
financial  services  is  changing  dramatically.    This  is  happening  on  several  levels.    Customer
interfaces are shifting online. The basic commodity of finance – money – is being replaced by
electronic forms. Financial products are offered as part of a seamless solution for customers
buying property, subscribing to a mobile phone or data package, going on a holiday or enrolling in
university.  This in turn alters the relationships that a consumer develops, which can be several
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
layers removed from the entity that is ultimately providing a financial product or service.
Frameworks and business practices designed to protect consumers have not fully kept up with
these  changes.    This  can  increase  risks  to  consumers  –  from  a  lack  of  transparency,
misrepresentations,  the  inappropriate  use  of  data  to  unfairly  discriminate  against  consumer
segments,  legal  loopholes,  and  financial  fraud.    Greater  access  to  financial  services  itself
through 
to  over-
indebtedness.     
the  entry  of  new  and  unconventional  players  can  also  contribute 
More  needs  to  be  done  to  better  prepare  society  for  digital  finance.    This  must  address  the
information  needs  of  consumers  in  the  context  of  digital  financial  services,  clear  parameters
adopted  by  financial  institutions  for  offering  financial  products  through  a  new  interface,  and
expanded  arrangements  for  handling  complaints  which  also  cover  the  role  of  intermediaries
through which financial services are offered.  Most importantly, we need to increase efforts to
educate consumers on how to protect themselves against fraud, and the implications of giving
consent for their data to be collected and used. 
Drawing  on  lessons  from  our  engagements  with  financial  service  providers  and  fintech
companies in the regulatory sandbox, the Bank intends to clarify and enhance existing standards
expected  of  financial  institutions  in  these  areas  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  use  of  digital
financial services.     
Ultimately, what really matters is how effective your customer engagements are in addressing
potential consumer risks. We look to financial institutions to preserve, if not further improve on, a
positive  consumer  experience  for  your  customers.  At  the  industry  level,  financial  institutions
should also collaborate on public communication strategies to educate and raise awareness on
digital financial services. 
Conclusion
It has been said that not since the digital revolution in the 1990s has technology placed such a
comprehensive burden on business, employees and individuals to reinvent themselves. In the
process,  a  vast  range  of  possibilities  and  challenges  will  open  up  for  the  world  of  finance  to
deliver  stronger,  higher  quality  and  more  inclusive  growth.  Individually  and  collectively,  we  will
face stark choices that will shape the future of financial services in Malaysia. It is critical that we
move  forward  thoughtfully  to  ensure  a  financial  system  for  the  ages  and  for  all  segments  of
society.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
