Benoît  Cœuré:  Financial  regulation  and  innovation  -  a  two-way
street
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank, at a roundtable organised by FinLeap, Berlin, 14 March 2018.
Let me thank FinLeap for organising this roundtable.
 It is no surprise that we are having this discussion here in Berlin, which has quietly emerged as a
European capital when it comes to fintech. Over 200 fintech companies already call Berlin home,
and  this  number  is  growing  by  the  day.   I  hope  that  this  morning’s  roundtable  can  provide  a
platform to exchange experiences and stimulate discussion.
1
That central banks take a keen interest in fintechs should not come as a surprise. As evidenced
by  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  crowd  funding  and  peer-to-peer  lending  have  the  potential  to
affect  bank  lending  services.  E-trading  and  robo-advice  may  change  the  way  banks  provide
investment management and advisory functions and therefore the way savings are channelled to
the economy.  And  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  current  frontier  of  innovation  falls  squarely  within
3
central banks’ remit – that is, the provision of payment services.
2
The challenge for regulators is to balance the obvious benefits that fintech innovations may have
for  growth  and  welfare  with  their  potential  risks. After  all,  the  history  of  financial  innovation  is
littered with examples that led to early booms, growing unintended consequences, and eventual
busts.
The interaction between financial regulation and innovation is a two-way street, however. It is not
just that change in the financial sector will impact the way we do regulation. Regulatory initiatives
will  also  affect  the  direction  and  speed  of  transformation  in  the  financial  sector,  with  all  the
repercussions  this  implies  for  monetary  policy,  financial  stability  and  the  way  firms  and
households manage their finances.
Pre-emptively drawing in the reins in the name of financial stability could stifle innovation, prevent
fintechs  from  developing  important  economies  of  scale,  and  deprive  small  businesses  and
households of the benefit of technological progress.
On  the  other  hand,  allowing  risks  to  accumulate  in  an  unregulated  sector  may  undermine
financial stability and undo the benefits of past regulatory efforts. Banking services could migrate
to less-regulated parts of the financial system unless the provision of similar services with similar
risks  is  regulated  in  a  similar  way.  We’ve  been  here  before:  decisions  taken  20  years  ago  to
leave OTC derivatives largely unchecked created lasting economic damage.
And not all financial innovations may provide lasting social benefit. Bitcoin and other blockchain-
based digital tokens are a case in point. They are an early sign of what could be a sea change in
payment and settlement technologies, which central banks have started to embrace. But so far,
they have been poor imitations of money, risky stores of value, and have often been used as
4
vehicles for illicit purposes.
Making  our  existing  payment  systems  faster  and  cheaper,  particularly  for  cross-border
transactions, would likely deliver many of the benefits expected from such tokens. More radical
innovations, such as central banks issuing their own digital coinage, entail costs and benefits
which  we  are  carefully  considering.  The  report  released  earlier  this  week  by  the  Bank  for
5
International Settlements sets the scene for these reflections.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
New  technologies  entail  new  risks.  Although  risks  related  to  cyberattacks,  data  theft  and
breaches of data integrity are what first spring to mind, regulators also have to understand the
risks these technologies pose to the stability of the financial system as a whole. Finding the right
balance between facilitating innovation and ensuring financial stability and consumer protection is
an inherently difficult task. There are no quick or easy solutions.
But  so  far  –  and  I  am  interested  to  hear  your  views  on  this  –  I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the
regulatory approach here in Europe has generally been supportive. It is built on the assumption
that  opening  up  market  access  to  fintech  companies  will  help  increase  competition,  lower
charges and spur innovation, as we have seen happen in other network industries.
The fintech action plan recently published by the European Commission is testimony to the EU’s
positive attitude towards innovation in the financial sector.  It sets the stage for targeted initiatives
to  address  diverging  licensing  requirements  with  a  view  to  allowing  fintech  products  and
solutions to be rapidly rolled out across the EU and thereby benefit from the economies of scale
of the Single Market.
6
The  action  plan  also  builds  on  previous  significant  initiatives,  most  notably  the  revision  of
Europe’s  Payment  Services  Directive  (PSD2),  which  has  already  been  transposed  in  11  EU
Member  States.  The  new  Directive  gives  bank  customers  the  right  to  share  their  account
information with third parties and use them to initiate payments, while maintaining high standards
of personal data and consumer protection. It opens up a level playing field where fintechs can
grow, gain scale and leverage other parallel technical advances, some of them promoted and
developed by the ECB.
To give just one example, the newly released SEPA instant credit transfer scheme that enables
transfers of up to €15,000 in less than ten seconds will benefit as of November 2018 from the
TARGET  instant  payment  settlement  (TIPS)  service  ensuring  pan-European  reach  of  instant
payments. With the scheme layer and the clearing and settlement layer in place, it provides a
good opportunity for fintechs to build efficient and innovative end-user solutions.
The ECB is also investigating the potential of distributed ledger technologies (DLT) in the context
of our real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system. Like other central banks experimenting with
the technology, though, we have come to the interim conclusion that the technology is not yet
7
mature enough.
And  in  our  separate  role  as  banking  supervisor,  we  apply  a  technology-neutral  approach  that
ensures  that  the  use  of  new  technology  in  the  banking  sector  is  not  discouraged.  We  have
developed a “Guide to the assessment of fintech bank licence applications”. The purpose of the
guide  is  to  make  the  process  more  transparent  for  potential  fintech  bank  applicants  and  to
increase their understanding of the procedure and criteria applied by the ECB when assessing
licence applications. This initiative is part of a broader effort by European Supervisory Authorities
to map current authorising and licensing approaches by national authorities and the launch of so-
called “fintech facilitators” in several Member States.
Just  last  week  we  established  the  Euro  Cyber  Resilience  Board  for  pan-European  financial
infrastructures  to  create  a  regular  forum  to  enhance  the  cyber  resilience  of  financial  market
infrastructures, their critical service providers and the wider EU financial sector.  Such efforts
are critical in an environment where both the level and scope of cyberattacks are growing rapidly.
In this context, I would also be interested in hearing how you ensure cyber “hygiene” and to what
extent information on common cyber threats is exchanged within the wider fintech community.
8
So, overall, fintechs here in Berlin, and in the EU more generally, can thrive in an innovation-
friendly  environment.  But  this  does  not  mean  that  we  ignore  the  risks.  Should  regulatory
loopholes emerge, we would need to close them to ensure that financial intermediation outside
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
the banking sector remains safe and sound.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
See Comdirect FinTech study, November 2017.
See e.g. FSB (2017), “Financial stability implications from FinTech”, 27 June.
See e.g. CPMI (2017), “Distributed ledger technology in payment, clearing and settlement”, February, and CPMI
(2018), “Cross-border retail payments”, February.
See also Cœuré, B. and J. Loh (2018), “Bitcoin not the answer to a cashless society”, opinion piece in the
Financial Times, 12 March.
See CPMI and Markets Committee (2018), “Central bank digital currencies”, March.
See European Commission (2018), “FinTech action plan: For a more competitive and innovative European
financial sector”, 8 March.
See ECB and Bank of Japan (2017), “Payment systems: liquidity saving mechanisms in a distributed ledger
environment”,  a  joint  research  project  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  –  STELLA,
September.
See Cœuré, B. (2018), “A Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures”, introductory
remarks at the first meeting of the Euro Cyber Resilience Board for pan-European Financial Infrastructures,
Frankfurt, 9 March.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
