Stephen S Poloz: Let me be clear - from transparency to trust and
understanding
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Greater  Victoria
Chamber of Commerce, Victoria, British Columbia, 27 June 2018.
Introduction
 I  am  happy  to  be  here  in  Victoria,  a  city  with  a  beautiful  natural  setting  and  an  economy  that
successfully blends old and new. You have the benefits of being a provincial capital and a natural
tourist destination. And, today, the high-tech sector is your largest private industry.
The Bank of Canada is also a blend of old and new. For those who have not seen our Ottawa
headquarters,  at  its  centre  is  the  original  granite  building,  which  was  completed  in  1938.  Its
classical architecture projects a sense of security. Its aim was to establish trust in challenging
times. The building also embodies the approach that central banks took toward communications
back then—meaning it is basically impenetrable. This approach can be summed up in a phrase
attributed  to  Sir  Montagu  Norman,  then  Bank  of  England  Governor:  “Never  explain,  never
excuse.”
But times change. By the mid-1970s, trust in central banks was low as inflation was high and
rising.  That  was  when  renowned  British  Columbia  architect  Arthur  Erickson  designed  the
expansion of our headquarters. Erickson created two glass towers to flank the original granite
building,  linked  by  a  towering  glass  atrium. All  that  glass  foreshadowed  the  modern  idea  that
central banks needed to be transparent to be trusted.
Building trust with transparency
As usual, Erickson was ahead of his time. The Bank rarely felt obliged to explain its actions to
Canadians. This remained true even after moving from a fixed exchange rate to a floating one in
1970, which meant that the Bank no longer had an obvious anchor to guide its policy. During the
1970s  and  1980s,  Bank  governors  typically  gave  one  public  speech  per  year,  while  deputy
governors gave none.
A big step toward increased transparency came in 1991 with the first inflation-control agreement
between the Bank and the federal government. That agreement gave us a clear focus for our
monetary  policy.  It  also  gave  people  a  simple,  easily  understandable  way  to  judge  our
performance over time.
Many  other  important  advances  in  transparency  followed.  We  started  publishing  a  regular
Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR)  to  detail  our  economic  forecasts  and  explain  our  policy.  We
moved to a system of fixed dates for announcing interest rate decisions, with press releases that
explained our rationale.
Governors and deputies began speaking in public much more often—going from one speech a
year  to  dozens.  We  started  webcasting  the  audio  of  public  appearances,  and  added  video  in
2011. In 2014, we began to offer frank opening statements at press conferences to help people
understand  our  policy  deliberations—explaining  how  the  information  contained  in  the  MPR
contributed to the decision itself.
This year, we began offering four economic progress report speeches per year. They happen the
day after each interest rate decision that is not accompanied by an MPR. This innovation means
that the media can now ask questions of a member of Governing Council after every interest rate
decision.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now,  I  am  not  suggesting  that  more  is  always  better  when  it  comes  to  transparency  and
monetary policy. Transparency is not about the volume of communications, it is about clarity. We
should  always  give  our  straightforward,  honest  views  of  the  economy  and  interest  rates.  We
believe that these efforts help build Canadians’ trust in us.
Importantly,  our  policy  framework  holds  the  Bank  publicly  accountable. At  least  twice  a  year,
Senior Deputy Governor Carolyn Wilkins and I make public appearances before committees of
the House of Commons and of the Senate, which are webcast. Parliamentarians grill us on our
track record on inflation and the Bank’s other functions.
Furthermore, the inflation-target agreement is subjected to a thorough review every five years.
During  this  time,  anyone  can  offer  new  thinking  on  our  framework.  This  consultation  process
ensures widespread buy-in.
But  perhaps  the  most  important  way  to  build  trust  is  through  results.  Because  we  kept
successfully reaching our inflation goals, by the late 1990s, inflation expectations had become
solidly  anchored  on  our  2  per  cent  target.  Those  expectations  even  held  steady  through  the
trauma of the global financial crisis a decade ago. This level of trust has meant that fluctuations
in  economic  growth  and  unemployment  have  become  less  severe  than  before  the  inflation-
targeting era.
To illustrate, consider our experience in late 2014, when oil prices collapsed. We knew this would
hit the economy hard, leading to cuts in investment spending and layoffs. We needed to respond
to prevent inflation from undershooting the target, so we cut interest rates twice, starting in early
2015. The combination of lower oil prices and lower interest rates caused a significant decline in
the Canadian dollar, and this pushed up prices of imported goods. Inflation quickly moved higher,
but we explained that it would be temporary, and inflation expectations remained well anchored at
2  per  cent. As  a  result,  the  economy  adjusted  to  lower  oil  prices  much  more  quickly  than  it
otherwise would.
Working toward understanding
All that being said, transparency is only helpful if people can understand what we are saying.
As  a  central  bank,  we  have  multiple  audiences.  They  all  go  about  their  daily  lives  making
economic and financial decisions in the environment we create for them. Yet, not everyone has
the same level of interest or familiarity with economics. The father rushing to pick up the kids and
get  dinner  on  the  table  before  soccer  practice  is  not  as  focused  on  our  interest  rate
announcements as, say, a bond trader on Bay Street.
So, we need to tailor our communication to various audiences and deliver consistent messages
through  the  right  channels.  These  audiences  include  business  leaders  such  as  yourselves,
business  economists,  financial  market  participants,  academics,  students  and,  of  course,  that
soccer dad and other members of the general public, regardless of their occupation.
Consider  how  we  communicate  with  the  academic  community.  We  have  hundreds  of
economists  on  staff  publishing  cutting-edge  research.  This  work  must  be  credible  with
academics, because we rely on them to do research that complements ours, and to train the
next generation of central bankers. So, the Bank is making its data and models more open, in
multiple  digital  formats  that  let  researchers  more  easily  verify,  enhance  and  challenge  our
findings. But, believe me, if the Bank were to communicate with non-specialists the same way
we do with academics, we would not seem transparent at all. If you doubt me, just browse a few
of the research papers on our website.
We recently commissioned some public opinion research to help us tailor our communications.
It showed that about half of Canadians are interested in economic issues. But only about one-
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
third  say  they  understand  how  the  economy  works.  This  means  there  are  roughly  6  million
Canadians  who  are  interested  in  the  economy,  but  who  are  having  trouble  understanding
economic issues. The challenge for us is to make sure that when we have a message to deliver,
you will not need a degree in economics to understand it.
Research by Bank staff shows that we have some work to do on this front. We have been using
software to analyze the readability of our speeches and other communications. It turns out that
most of our speeches score at university reading levels. That is fine for many people, but not for
everyone.  This  is  also  true  for  our  interest  rate  announcements,  the  MPR  and  the Financial
System  Review. Only  a  handful  of  our  public  speeches  over  the  past  couple  of  years  had  a
readability score at the high school level—in other words, a level that would be accessible to the
majority of Canadians.
Of course, our subject matter is complex. But we can, and we will, make our communications
more widely understandable. We want our content to be accessible to everyone who wants to
understand our issues. We want those already reading our content to read even more of it. And
we  want  the  media  to  continue  to  report  on  our  issues  accurately  and  to  engage  us  in
constructive commentary.
This speech, in case you are wondering, rates at about a Grade 12 level in terms of vocabulary
and  sentence  structure.  Even  so,  not  everybody  will  read  this  speech  or  hear  about  it  on  the
news.  We  have  to  be  creative  to  reach  more  people  who  are  interested  and  help  them
understand what we do. 
Social media is an important element in this effort—through Twitter, LinkedIn and other platforms.
But it is only part of the effort. Last year, we re-opened the Bank of Canada Museum in Ottawa.
The museum helps Canadians understand all the work we do. It takes a hands-on approach—
encouraging  people  to  interact  with  the  exhibits.  Plus,  it  is  the  best  deal  around,  because
admission is free!
The museum is working with educators across Canada to help develop material for classrooms.
Tied in with that effort is the museum’s website, aimed at the whole country. The bottom line is
that we want Canadians, especially youth, to understand what the Bank does as part of a solid
grounding in basic economics.
We are also replacing one of our regular publications, the Bank of Canada Review, which has
always been aimed at a specialized audience. In its place, we will be launching a new digital-only
publication: The Economy, Plain and Simple. It will explain key economic concepts and issues in
an understandable way for the general public. We want this publication to stand out for its use of
plain language, infographics and other visual content that will make what we do more accessible.
In fact, you will see more visual elements—including videos and interactive charts—in the digital
versions of all our publications.
And as we announced earlier this month, we are changing how we communicate about financial
stability issues. Starting this autumn, a new financial system hub on our website will offer clear
and up-to-date reports on the financial system, also aimed at a broad audience.
Let me make one last point about connecting with the general public. Yes, we want people to
understand our views on the economy and its prospects. But it is equally important that we get
out across the country and listen to people. These two-way conversations help fill in the gaps
that economic statistics leave behind.
We organize this effort around our Business Outlook Survey, which is based on conversations
between our regional representatives and business leaders. Members of Governing Council also
engage in these conversations. I am here in British Columbia not just to give a speech—I am
also here to meet with business leaders and with students.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Understanding and financial markets
Given the subject matter, getting people more interested in the Bank’s work may be a challenge.
But there is no shortage of interest in what we do and say from financial market participants.
Financial  market  participants  trade  securities  based  on  their  understanding  of  the  economic
outlook and the Bank’s monetary policy. The Bank controls only one interest rate—the overnight
rate—so its policy actions are transmitted to the economy through financial markets. This means
that market expectations for monetary policy and the economy are embedded in market prices
and interest rates. As a result, fluctuations in financial markets provide very useful signals about
the future—they summarize the views of a multitude of market participants.
In recent years, many central banks have tried to enhance their impact on financial markets and
the economy by giving explicit direction about future policy, or what we call forward guidance.
Since this is a speech about transparency, let me be absolutely clear what I mean by that.
Central banks make forward-looking statements all the time because monetary policy takes time
to  affect  inflation.  I  could  say  something  like:  “The  economy  is  running  close  to  capacity,  so
higher interest rates will be needed to keep inflation on target.” That does not meet the textbook
definition of forward guidance. Forward guidance is more specific than this. It usually ties future
interest rates to an explicit condition, such as a specific time frame or an economic statistic.
The most definitive form of forward guidance in Canada’s experience came in 2009, during the
global financial crisis. We cut our policy rate effectively to zero, but we believed that the economy
required more stimulus than that. So, we committed to keep the policy rate at the lower bound for
an  extended  period,  provided  that  the  outlook  for  inflation  remained  unchanged.  Because  this
anchored expectations for the overnight rate for some time, it caused longer-term interest rates
to decline, too. This stimulated the economy even more. Today we think of this kind of forward
guidance as an unconventional policy tool, to be deployed only in extraordinary times.
Some central banks routinely offer financial markets forward guidance about interest rates that is
less specific. The Bank of Canada has done so at times in the past. Back in 2005, for example,
our interest rate announcements mentioned the need to lower the policy rate “in the near term”
and “over the next four to six quarters.” The most complete form of this routine forward guidance
is  to  publish  a  projection  for  the  future  path  of  policy  rates.  This  is  the  practice  of  Sweden’s
central bank, for example. Similarly, the US Federal Reserve publishes so-called “dot plots” to
indicate how its Federal Open Market Committee views the likely future path of interest rates.
Offering routine forward guidance obviously makes it easier for financial market participants to
predict the actions of the central bank. Arguably, this makes markets more efficient by reducing
uncertainty  about  future  policy.  However,  this  comes  at  a  cost:  by  anchoring  financial  market
expectations, forward guidance reduces the reaction of markets to economic news. In short, it
suppresses the signalling role of financial markets.
As Canada recovered from the global financial crisis, the Bank gradually moved away from the
most definitive form of forward guidance to a softer form. By 2013, though, we were becoming
increasingly uncomfortable with offering even soft forward guidance to markets. The economy
was struggling to return to full capacity, and we could not fully explain why exports and business
investment  were  weaker  than  our  economic  models  were  projecting.  We  wanted  markets  to
appreciate the uncertainty we were facing, and were concerned that providing forward guidance
was giving participants a false sense of certainty.
Therefore, during the second half of 2013 we gradually toned down the forward guidance that we
were  providing  in  our  interest  rate  announcements.  This  had  the  effect  of  shifting  the  Bank’s
uncertainty back out into the marketplace, which caused some market volatility. By 2014, we had
stopped providing routine forward guidance altogether. Not everyone was happy about this. But
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
we have seen signs that financial markets have become more responsive to data surprises as a
result, particularly over the past year. In other words, market signalling has become stronger.
Since 2014, we have begun drafting each interest rate announcement on a blank page. This is to
avoid getting locked into repeating specific language that, when changed, can create big market
disruptions. We choose the words that best communicate our expectations for the economy and
monetary policy.
Our  latest  interest  rate  announcement  at  the  end  of  May  is  a  case  in  point.  Some  observers
noted that instead of repeating that we would be cautious about future policy adjustments, we
said that we would take a gradual approach to raising interest rates. In fact, this shift in language
represented increased confidence that the economy was performing as we expected, and that
higher interest rates will indeed be warranted. Financial markets understood our message.
Let me stress that the Bank’s decision not to offer routine forward guidance does not mean we
want  to  keep  markets  in  the  dark.  Indeed,  we  want  markets  to  understand  very  well  the
relationship  between  how  the  economy  is  evolving  and  the  likely  future  of  monetary  policy.
Economists call this the policy reaction function. Economic models will not work without one.
Our model specifications are documented on our website, and our policy reaction function is a
form of what economists call a “Taylor Rule,” named for the economist John Taylor. According to
the Taylor Rule, the policy interest rate depends on projected inflation and economic growth. Our
version is calibrated for the Canadian economy. We use it each quarter to calculate a path for
interest  rates  that  is  predicted  to  keep  inflation  under  control  within  our  economic  model  and
given the numerous assumptions we must make.
But  this  exercise  gives  us  only  a  starting  point  for  our  interest  rate  deliberations.  We  cannot
mechanically  follow  the  rate  path  provided  by  our  models  because  there  is  simply  too  much
uncertainty in the world. We consider it misleading to pretend that uncertainty does not exist.
There is always a degree of uncertainty when using economic models, but these days there is a
litany of things we simply do not know. These include the degree to which uncertainty about trade
policy  is  holding  back  business  investment,  how  new  guidelines  for  mortgage  lending  are
affecting the housing market, and how sensitive the economy is to higher interest rates given the
accumulation of household debt.
With all these uncertainties, setting monetary policy is a matter of risk management. We need to
understand the upside and downside risks to the outlook for inflation and determine how best to
manage and balance those risks. Over time, we learn more about some of these issues as we
receive new data.
This  is  why  we  say  that  the  Bank  is  particularly  data-dependent  right  now.  Providing  routine
forward guidance in such a setting would not, in my view, enhance our credibility. Rather, it would
put it at risk.
We have taken many steps to be more transparent about our decision making. We explain in
detail the reasons for our interest rate decisions, both in statements following the publication of
our MPR and in our economic progress report speeches. In the MPR, we now provide details on
the most important risks to our projections. We spell out how we have seen these risks evolving
and what we will watch so that we can judge their continuing evolution.
Of  course,  there  will  always  be  a  desire  for  the  Bank  to  be  more  forthcoming  about  our  own
interest  rate  expectations,  including  by  publishing  a  projected  interest  rate  path.  Ironically,  the
case for doing so is usually based on economic models that are so simple they exclude most
financial  markets.  This  means  that  they  cannot  even  consider  the  idea  that  forward  guidance
might suppress the signalling role of financial markets, which we consider of high value.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given the complex uncertainties we face today, market signals have never been more valuable to
policy-makers. To continue to benefit from those signals, we must be honest and transparent
about what we know and what we do not know. We are committed to explaining what issues we
are looking at and how we are thinking about them.
Today,  as  we  approach  our  next  interest  rate  decision,  we  are  working  to  incorporate  in  our
projections  the  effects  of  the  recently  announced  US  steel  and  aluminum  tariffs,  along  with
retaliatory measures, both in Canada and globally. We are also analyzing individual-level data to
understand  how  the  new  lending  guidelines  in  Canada  are  affecting  the  housing  market  and
mortgage renewals. We expect these issues to figure prominently in our upcoming deliberations.
Conclusion
It is time for me to conclude. I hope that my talk about transparency has clarified our work at the
Bank.  We  realize  the  importance  of  transparency,  along  with  accountability  and  credibility,  in
building  understanding  and  trust  among  all  our  audiences.  We  have  worked  hard  at  being
transparent, and these efforts have been recognized as world-leading among central banks.
But we acknowledge that we have more work to do. We can be clearer in our communications
with  the  general  public. And  we  will  be  as  clear  as  we  can  be  with  financial  markets,  always
guided by what we know and by what we do not know.
My  bottom  line  is  this:  being  transparent  is  not  only  the  right  way  to  operate  in  a  modern
democracy, it also helps us meet our inflation-control target and our commitment to a stronger,
more resilient Canadian economy.
I would like to thank Toni Gravelle for his help in preparing this speech.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
