Dimitar Bogov: World Savings Day - the importance of savings in
Macedonia
Speech by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, in
front of the Banking Association of the Economic Chamber of Macedonia, marking 31 October -
the World Savings Day, Skopje, 31 October 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen, dear bankers and guests,
 It is a great pleasure to address you on the occasion of marking the World Savings Day. This is
the  day  when  we  emphasize  the  important  role  of  savings,  not  only  in  terms  of  its  role  as  a
source of funding for the banks, but also its immediate importance for the economy as a whole
and for maintaining financial stability. All of us, you as bankers and we in the National Bank, as
regulators,  have  many  times  been  convinced  in  the  truth  of  the  saying  that  maintaining  bank
stability  reflects  the  depositors’  confidence.  This  year,  the  banks  enjoyed  the  trust  of  the
population, regardless of the unfavorable influence of the domestic political developments on the
ordinary  citizen  and  the  depositor.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  latest  available  data  on  the
movement  of  household  deposits.  As  of  September,  household  deposits  show  a  very  solid
growth rate of 5.8%, which is an important indicator for stabilizing depositors’ expectations and
perceptions amid unstable environment and restraint of economic agents from investment in the
first half of this year. The positive movements in household savings contributed to the growth of
the  lending  activity,  so  according  to  the  latest  available  data  as  of  September  2017,  loans
increased  by  4.3%  on  an  annual  basis,  with  a  solvency  that  is  almost  twice  as  high  as  the
statutory levels and volume of liquidity that enables optimal day-to-day operation. It is also worth
noting that in spite of the political environment, the deposit growth and the trust in banks have
been  achieved  in  the  environment  of  historically  lowest  interest  rates,  both  on  the  financial
markets in the euro area and on the domestic interbank market.
Also, allow me to mention that in the forthcoming medium-term period, the deposit market will
urge banks to make even greater efforts to modernize and increase their offer. We live in times
of  global  digitalization,  great  advancements  in  information  technology  and  its  daily  use  in  the
financial  sector.  Innovation  and  application  of  modern  technologies  globally  put  competitive
pressure  on  the  traditional  forms  of  banking,  and  encourage  banks  to  constantly  adapt,  be
proactive  and  inventive,  and  by  changing  their  business  models  to  new  phenomena  and
conditions, ensure their market success.
Such  processes  will  inevitably  touch  the  bank  operations  in  the  Republic  of  Macedonia.  In
perspective,  the  use  of  modern  technologies  will  not  only  affect  the  market  performance  of
banks, but will probably change radically their relationship with depositors and other clients. In
fact,  even  for  countries  such  as  the  Republic  of  Macedonia,  with  relatively  modest  financial
education and low utilization of modern technologies in the financial area, the question that arises
is not whether, but when the digitization process will engulf the domestic banking system. In this
light, I would like to point to the process of digitization and use of information technology not as a
threat  against  the  competition  in  banking,  but  as  a  new  opportunity  to  bring  financial  services
closer  to  as  many  clients  as  possible,  to  raise  financial  inclusion  and  literacy,  and  to  ensure
better allocation of resources, as phenomena of greater economic and social significance.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the other hand, the application of new technological solutions brings changes in the range of
risks that banks face and manage in their day-to-day operations. In addition to the conventional
bank risks such as credit risk, interest rate risk, currency risk, the importance of non-financial
operational risks will gradually increase. Increased use of modern technical solutions will mean
greater significance of the risks related to the information systems security, the confidentiality of
the data, the storage of information content, the access and the maintenance of the payment
systems.
At  the  end,  before  awarding  the  Best  Counter  Officers,  allow  me  to  express  gratitude  on  my
behalf  and  on  behalf  of  the  National  Bank  for  their  daily  and  painstaking  work  in  the  banks’
branches.
Thank you for your attention and congratulations on the World Savings Day!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
