 Prof. Dr. Claudia M. Buch  
Vice-President of Deutsche Bundesbank 
Financial Literacy and Financial Stabilityi 
 Speech prepared for the 5th OECD-GFLEC Global Policy Research 
Symposium to Advance Financial Literacy 
Paris, 18 May 2018 
  Seite 1 von 27 
  Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Abstract 
Financial (il)literacy is an important channel through which financial instabilities can arise. Yet financial liter-
acy is not a sufficient condition for financial stability. Even if all actors in financial markets are fully financially 
literate, they may ignore the impact of their own decisions on the functioning and stability of the financial 
system. This has implications for academia and central banks. Further analytical work is needed to under-
stand the link between micro-decision making and macro-economic outcomes. Academia can also contrib-
ute  to  designing  good  policy  evaluation  studies  and  improving  teaching  of  financial  stability.  For  central 
banks, acknowledging the role of communication for financial stability is important. While policies related to 
financial consumer protection and financial stability need to be delineated in order to ensure accountability 
and transparency, synergies between these policy areas can be exploited. This includes developing com-
mon narratives, common data strategies, and frameworks for policy evaluation. 
1  Motivation 
Well-functioning financial markets can have significant positive welfare implications. For 
the individual, saving and borrowing allow consumption to be smoothened over time and 
across states of nature. Wealth can be accumulated over time by the power of compound 
interest. Differences in financial literacy across individuals can thus be a relevant factor 
behind differences in wealth across individuals (Lusardi, Michaud, Mitchell 2017). Not 
least, good financial planning helps ensure financial independence. For society as a 
whole, well-functioning financial markets contribute to growth, allow innovative projects to 
be financed, and risks associated with these projects to be shared and diversified. 
In order to reap these benefits, individual market participants must have a basic under-
standing of relevant financial concepts, and appropriate regulations must be in place in 
order to prevent the build-up of risks in the financial system. The household sector is par-
ticularly important in this regard, given that credit-driven business cycles often operate 
through household demand (Mian and Sufi 2018). 
Financial exuberance can thus have severe negative implications, both at the individual 
and at the aggregate level. Understanding the factors that prevent excessive financial risk 
 Seite 2 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
taking and improve financial resilience is important. So what do we know about the links 
between financial literacy and financial stability? Is financial literary a precondition for fi-
nancial stability? And how do policy decisions that target micro-level incentives affect ag-
gregate outcomes?  
Financial literacy is an individual trait, related to the capability of individuals to deal with fi-
nancial concepts, to take sound financial decisions, and to balance the risks and returns 
of these decisions. Measures that mitigate the adverse effects of limited financial 
knowledge can take various forms, ranging from educational interventions to consumer 
protection legislation. Policy interventions can be justified if they correct market failures, 
including externalities (i.e. effects on third parties that are not consenting), if exchanges 
take place without full information or knowledge, or if market power prevails (Tirole 2017, 
Chapter 6). 
By contrast, analysing financial stability issues requires taking an aggregate perspective. 
Risks to financial stability emerge if distress in parts of the financial system threatens the 
functioning of the entire financial system. When a financial system becomes impaired, 
there may be dire consequences for economic activity such as losses in output, resource 
misallocation, and social costs. Hence, the ability of the financial system to perform its key 
macroeconomic functions is the focus of financial stability surveillance and, ultimately, 
policy.  
Post-crisis, macroprudential policy has been established as a new policy field that explicit-
ly targets financial stability. Such macroprudential policies can take various forms, e.g. 
bank-based instruments that internalise systemic risk externalities or borrower-based in-
struments that allow imposing minimum standards for the granting of (mortgage) loans.  
In this paper, I will begin by discussing the links between financial literacy and financial 
stability. I will argue that financial (il)literacy is an important channel through which finan-
cial instabilities can arise. Uninformed investors may take on excessive risk. This risk-
taking behaviour can become systemic if there are common exposures to the same risk 
factor, or if risks cluster in specific institutions or market segments. In this sense, lack of 
financial literacy is an important factor behind financial instabilities. Yet financial literacy is 
 Seite 3 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
not a sufficient condition for financial stability. Even if all actors in financial markets are 
fully financially literate, they may ignore systemic risk externalities, i.e. the impact of their 
own decisions on the functioning and stability of the financial system. Relatedly, financial 
market participants may have full knowledge of financial concepts but may make mistakes 
in forecasting future market developments.  
From these observations, several conclusions for research and policy follow. For academ-
ia, these include a greater emphasis on analysing the link between micro-decision making 
and macro-economic outcomes, designing good policy evaluation studies, and improving 
teaching of financial literacy and financial stability. For policy-makers, I see the need to 
clearly delineate different policy areas – in particular, financial consumer protection and 
financial stability. This is important in order to ensure accountability and transparency. At 
the same time, synergies between these policy areas can be exploited by developing 
common narratives, common data strategies, and frameworks for policy evaluation. I will 
use policy measures targeting the housing market as an example to illustrate my points. 
2  How are Financial Literacy and Financial Stability Relat-
ed? 
Financial literacy and financial stability are related to financial resilience. Financial resili-
ence ensures that risks are manageable and do not threaten individual wellbeing or socie-
tal welfare. If an adverse shock hits, financial structures and systems should be sufficient-
ly robust to buffer the shock and provide insurance against adverse events.  
Micro- versus Macro-Perspectives 
Yet the perspective taken by financial literacy and financial stability differs. Financial liter-
acy is a concept related to the individual. It denotes appropriate skills and knowledge that 
enable individuals to make sound financial decisions. Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a, 2011b) 
developed three questions measuring fundamental concepts measuring fundamental 
concepts necessary to financial decision making, related to interest rates, inflation and the 
benefits of investment diversification. These questions have been widely used and added 
 Seite 4 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
to several national surveys, including the Panel on Household Finances (PHF) in Germa-
ny (Schmidt and Tzamourani 2017). A related concept is financial capability, which in-
cludes economic behaviour such as managing day-to day spending well, looking ahead 
and planning unanticipated expenditures, selecting and using available products appro-
priately.2  
Financial stability is a concept related to the financial system. Financial instabilities can 
arise if shocks to individual financial institutions or market segments have repercussions 
throughout the financial system, thus threatening its functioning and having adverse impli-
cations for the real economy. Financial instability thus describes a situation in which the 
financial system does not perform its key macroeconomic functions, including the alloca-
tion of financial resources and risks as well as the smooth functioning of the payments 
systems.  
Is financial literacy a necessary condition for financial stability, and can financial stability 
be achieved only if financial decisions at the individual level are sound? Sound financial 
decisions at the individual level are obviously conducive to financial stability. But they are 
not a sufficient condition — because individuals will tend to ignore the systemic risk exter-
nalities of their decisions and actions.  
The Role of Expectations  
Studying the link between (financial) decision making and aggregate outcomes is not a 
new field in the macroeconomic literature. Researchers have looked into investment bias-
es such as home bias or habit formation for a long time — but often without directly linking 
these insights to the stability of the financial system. The behavioural finance literature 
shows that departing from the assumption of full rationality can help explain many real 
world phenomena. Distorted beliefs, excessive trading, insufficient diversification, or other 
examples of suboptimal investment behaviour can be attributed to psychological biases 
(Barberis and Thaler 2003). Implications of behavioural models for the financial system 
depend on the ability of informed, rational traders to offset the induced distortions. 
Recent literature has made advances by linking decision making at the individual level to 
macroeconomic outcomes. Mian and Sufi (2018) argue that one major lesson of the re-
Seite 5 von 27 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
cent financial crisis is the importance of credit-driven business cycles that operate through 
household demand – and that systematic mistakes in the formation of expectation are 
crucial. This channel has three elements. The first is an expansion of credit supply which 
fuels household demand for consumption goods and housing, thus filtering through to 
economic activities. The second ingredient is an expansion in the real economy which is 
driven by an increased demand of households. The third element is a bust which is ag-
gravated by nominal rigidities, distress in the banking sector, and legacies of the boom 
phase such as a resource mis-allocation towards the non-tradables and housing sector. 
Distorted expectations can be a particularly powerful channel for the propagation of 
shocks. Dynamics of the credit cycle might be driven by agents that overestimate the 
probability of good future states of the world and, thereby, neglect risks (Bordalo, Gen-
naioli, and Shleifer 2018). If investors extrapolate past trends and rely too much on past 
returns to predict future returns, financial bubbles might arise (Barberis, Greenwood, Jin, 
and Shleifer 2018). A number of studies find evidence for extrapolative behaviour, for in-
stance, in the stock market (Greenwod and Shleifer 2014) and the US housing market 
(Case, Shiller, and Thompson 2012).  
Dynamic asset pricing model can be used to link the degree of investor experience to dis-
tortions in expectations and to the probability of financial bubbles (Adam, Beutel, Marcet, 
and Merkel 2015). Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models (DSGE) with extrapola-
tive expectations can generate excessive house price booms and household debt (Gelain, 
Lansing, and Mendicino 2013). Extrapolative expectations imply that credit constraints are 
believed to be loose (tight) for a longer time than would be assumed under rational expec-
tations. Extrapolative expectations can act as a powerful financial accelerator which am-
plifies microeconomic frictions and has strong financial and macroeconomic effects (Win-
kler 2016). Empirical evidence shows that overly optimistic expectations fuelled house 
price growth in the U.S. in the up-run to the financial crisis. This price behaviour is con-
sistent with search models in which a small fraction of overly optimistic agents push up 
house prices (Piazessi and Schneider 2009).  
Essentially, these theoretical models link distorted expectations to excessive asset price 
bubbles and excessive household debt. Empirical studies using aggregate data support 
Seite 6 von 27 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
the mechanisms stressed by these models, in particular the link running from asset price 
bubbles to financial crises (Reinhart and Rogoff 2008, 2009; Brunnermeier 2009). Moreo-
ver, early warning models also link asset price and credit bubbles to financial crises (Beu-
tel, List, and von Schweinitz 2018). Also, several asset pricing anomalies can be ex-
plained by the fact that households typically do not participate in financial markets directly 
but rather operate through financial intermediaries (He and Krishnamurty 2018). Hence, 
the relevant marginal investor is not the individual household but the intermediaries facing 
various constraints. 
Financial Literacy and Expectations 
Essentially, all ingredients of financial crises – balance sheet effects, runs, and network 
effects – can be linked to and are potentially aggravated by limited financial knowledge. 
Identifying the exact channel running from distorted micro-economic decisions to aggre-
gate outcomes is inherently more difficult. One key question is whether financial literacy 
has an impact on the degree of distortions in expectations. Empirical evidence supports 
that individuals with better financial education have less distorted expectations. For ex-
ample, typical households (in the U.S.) are excessively optimistic during booms and ex-
cessively pessimistic after busts (Adam, Marcet, and Beutel 2017). At the same time, bet-
ter informed professional investors do not suffer from the same systematic biases (Beutel 
2017). Moreover, experience with investing in financial markets (in years) and personal 
experiences (good or bad past returns) have a strong impact on households’ expectations 
(Malmendier and Nagel 2011; Vissing-Jorgensen 2004). 
Financial experience, in turn, is related to higher financial knowledge. In surveys, half of 
the respondents stated that personal financial experiences have been their most im-
portant way of “learning about financial topics”, followed by learning from friends or family 
(22%), and the media (13%) (Hogarth and Hilgert 2002). Only 10% stated high school or 
college courses (5%), or training courses outside of school (5%) as their most important 
source of financial knowledge. Similarly, financial knowledge rises with experience and 
decays at older ages (Lusardi and Mitchell 2011a). Experience with financial instruments 
is a more important driver of financial knowledge than college or high school education 
 Seite 7 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
(Peng, Bartholomae, Fox, and Cravener 2007), which could be one reason for why finan-
cial literacy is so low and remains low among large groups of the population. 
Summing up, the behavioural finance literature has contributed to an improved under-
standing of the link between distorted expectations, which can stem from limited investor 
experience and thus limited financial literacy, to financial bubbles or house price booms 
and household debt. Improved financial literacy and education can mitigate some of these 
effects but cannot alleviate systemic risk externalities. Also, financial education is targeted 
at consumers, not financial intermediaries. These insights are particularly relevant for the 
housing market, given that investment into housing is one of the most important financial 
decisions taken by most individuals. How borrower incentives and financial knowledge af-
fect aggregate outcome on the housing market is thus an issue to which I will turn next. 
3 
 Micro- and Macro-Perspectives of the Housing Market 
Real estate assets are a significant component of the financial wealth of households and 
household debt is dominated by mortgage loans. In Germany, mortgage loans account for 
about 70% of household debt, and for about 50% of loans issued by banks to the non-
financial private sector.3  The Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS) 
shows that about 20% of households in Germany have taken out mortgage loans; this 
number is slightly higher (23%) in the euro area. In Germany, the share of mortgage debt 
to total household debt is 88% according to the survey.4  The corresponding figure for the 
euro area is in a similar range (86%) (HFCN 2016). Financial mistakes related to housing 
finance can, therefore, have important implications for individual wealth and consumption 
decisions.  
Risks to financial stability 
Unsustainable housing market developments also play a key role for the build-up of risks 
to financial stability. About two-thirds of banking crises were preceded by housing market 
booms, and housing market boom-bust cycles are often followed by a crisis (Crowe, 
Dell’Ariccia, Deniz and Rabanal 2011). Additionally, economic downturns that are accom-
Seite 8 von 27 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
panied by a bust in the housing market are estimated to last around 40% longer, and they 
are almost three times as severe as those without housing busts (Claessens, Kose, and 
Terrones 2009). In general, financial crises which are connected with a housing market 
bubble tend to be more severe if the bubble was financed by excessive credit resulting in 
high leverage of private households and other housing market participants (IMF 2012; 
Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor 2015a).  
Looking deeper into country examples allows identifying some regularities. First, at the 
aggregate level, a build-up of risks from the housing market often stems from a combina-
tion of rising house prices, strong mortgage growth, and a deterioration of credit stand-
ards (Jordà, Schularick, and, Taylor 2015b; Mian and Sufi 2010). Such developments are 
especially problematic if too many market participants form overly optimistic expectations 
as regards their ability to service debt over the whole cycle of a mortgage loan or with re-
spect to future house price growth. Also, macroeconomic risks and system-wide reper-
cussions are often difficult to assess for individuals. Additionally, overly optimistic expec-
tations during a boom can favour a bias towards low levels of awareness of risks. This is 
even more problematic if a boom is accompanied by large current account deficits or a 
domestic building boom (Bunda and Ca’Zorzi 2009; Kannan, Rabanal, and Scott 2011). 
The role of financial literacy 
Financial literacy and, in particular, financial education can affect the probability of mort-
gage defaults. Surveys of subprime mortgage borrowers in the US who took out loans 
pre-crisis show a large and statistically significant negative association between numerical 
ability and mortgage default (Gerardi, Goette, and Meier 2013). This relationship is robust 
to controlling for a large set of sociodemographic variables and other aspects of cognitive 
ability, and it does not depend on the type of mortgage contract. Similarly, participation in 
a long-term financial education and counselling programme can be related to the default 
rates of mortgages (Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David, Chomsisengphet, and Evanoff  2010). 
Ex-post delinquency rates among programme graduates are significantly lower due to dif-
ferent types of mortgage contracts, the post-purchase counselling, and the budgeting and 
credit management skills taught. Moreover, increases in education (years of schooling) 
 Seite 9 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
lead to substantial reductions in the probability of bankruptcy and foreclosure, slightly 
higher credit scores, and fewer delinquent credit card payments (Cole, Paulson, and 
Shastry 2014). The effect of education on foreclosure was particularly pronounced during 
the recent financial crisis. Work of Brown, Collins, Schmeiser, and Urban (2014) also 
shows that financial education in high schools has an effect on debt behaviour and re-
duces the probability of defaulting on debt. 
The Role of Macroprudential Policies  
While improved financial education can help improve the quality of financial decisions at 
the individual level, additional measures may be needed in order to mitigate negative ex-
ternalities for the financial system. Macroprudential policy has thus been established in 
order to contain financial stability risks arising from unsustainable financial market devel-
opments, including the housing market. Essentially, macroprudential policy fills the gap 
between microprudential supervision, which focuses on the stability of individual financial 
institutions, and monetary policy, which focuses on price stability.  
Risks for financial stability can arise if strong increases in prices for real estate, a strong 
expansion of mortgage lending, and declining credit standards coincide. Such trends are 
particularly risky if a large number of market participants form overly optimistic expecta-
tions with regard to the future evolution of prices and debt sustainability, and if they do not 
take sufficient account of the fact that house prices can fall and interest rates can rise. 
Macroprudential measures addressing risks to financial stability aim at reducing the prob-
ability that mortgage-related risks materialise and that these risks have system-wide im-
plications because of insufficient buffers in the system. These policy measures can target 
the demand or the supply-side of the market for mortgage lending. Measures targeting the 
supply side are, for example, capital-based measures that aim at increasing the resilience 
of lenders and their capacity to absorb losses during a market downturn.  
In many instances, though, issues of debt sustainability arising from the housing market 
are not a key risk for banks but for households. Macroprudential instruments targeting the 
 Seite 10 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
demand side thus address the probability of borrower default and the losses arising from 
default. The probability of borrower default can be limited through restrictions on loan-to-
value-ratios (LTVs), that is, caps on the ratio of borrowed money relative to the value of a 
residential property. Another set of instruments is related to the ability of households to 
service debt, thus limiting losses. These instruments include the debt-service-to-income 
ratio and the debt-to-income ratio. Amortisation requirements can provide additional safe-
guards against future deteriorations in debt sustainability.  
Essentially, these macroprudential instruments related to the housing market are similar 
to indicators that individual borrowers and lenders use as a basis for loan decisions. Bind-
ing targets, however, limit the contractual freedom of private market participants. Before 
invoking binding macroprudential measures, softer policy interventions, including commu-
nication strategies, can thus be useful. In this context, financial education can play an im-
portant role in terms of a longer-term strategy towards financial stability.  
Recent policy discussions in Germany can serve as an illustration. In the year 2015, the 
German Financial Stability Committee issued a recommendation addressing potential 
risks arising from the mortgage market (Financial Stability Committee 2015). The Commit-
tee argued that, while not seeing imminent risks to financial stability, a legal basis for 
macroprudential instruments related to the housing market would be needed as a precau-
tionary measure. In addition, the Committee recommended the creation of a legal basis 
for the collection of granular data of the housing market. Better data serve two purposes – 
improved risk assessments and impact assessments of policy measures.  
Subsequent policy discussions centred around the need for policy instruments, in particu-
lar in view of the parallel introduction of new guidelines related to consumer protection,5  
and the costs and benefits of additional data collections. In 2017, the German parliament 
passed legislation providing the legal basis for two out of four requested macroprudential 
instruments, modifying consumer protection legislation related to real estate, but without 
providing the legal basis for additional granular data (Bundesgesetzblatt 2017; Deutsche 
Bundesbank 2017; Federal Government of Germany 2016).  
 Seite 11 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
To sum up, buying and financing a house is one of the most important financial decisions 
taken by many households. Promoting financial literacy with respect to housing finance 
can thus contribute to improved decision making. This contributes to financial stability by 
reducing the probability of financial crisis linked to high indebtedness of households. Yet, 
improved financial knowledge alone does not address the issue of negative externalities. 
Macroprudential policies targeted at the housing market – or, more generally, other mar-
ket segments where excessive credit is an issue – are thus needed. Their effectiveness, 
in turn, will depend on the degree of financial literacy at the individual level. 
 4 
Lessons for Academia 
In recent years, empirical research has focused on the identification of causal effects: 
How do particular policy measures affect policy outcomes? How can environmental fac-
tors be isolated? These strands of research have brought many important new insights in-
to individual decision making and, in particular, the implications of financial literacy.  
Recent empirical work has made significant contributions to tackle the issue that financial 
literacy can be endogenous, using methods allowing causal impact analysis (Lusardi and 
Mitchell 2014). For example, economists are more likely to hold shares in companies than 
non-economists – which can be the result of economists being more financially literate, or 
it can be due to some other (unobserved) factors driving financial literacy. This issue has 
been addressed using the fact that universities have been established in a particular re-
gion as an (exogenous) instrument (Christiansen, Joensen, and Rangwid 2008). Other 
studies use an experimental setting in which a randomly selected group is assigned to a 
“treatment” such as an education programme, while another randomly selected group 
acts as the control group. A study for India uses a randomised field experiment on low-
income urban households to study the effect of a financial education programme on fi-
nancial behaviour (Carpena, Cole, Shapiro, and Zia  2011). Participation in the pro-
gramme influenced awareness of and attitudes towards financial products and financial 
planning tools. 
 Seite 12 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
In a recent study, Kaiser and Menkoff (2016) perform a meta-analysis of studies on the ef-
fects of financial education programmes. Their main finding is that financial education and 
financial literacy impact financial behaviour. At the same time, the way in which financial 
education is implemented matters. For example, teaching low-income participants has a 
weaker impact, behaviour is difficult to influence, providing financial education at a 
“teachable moment” provides the best results, and interventions in low-income countries 
appear to be less successful than those in high-income countries. 
Develop Evaluation Methods  
Using causal identification methods to analyse the drivers of financial stability and the ef-
fects of macroprudential policies is, obviously, more difficult for a number of reasons.  
First, macroprudential policy is a relatively new policy area. Hence, there is not much ex-
perience with the use of these policies across countries. Also, systematic documentation 
of macroprudential policy measures started only recently. The International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) has been publishing, since 2017, a regular survey on macroprudential policy 
measures (IMF 2018), which can be a good starting point for empirical work. 
Second, in order to assess the effects of financial education, it is sufficient to link educa-
tion received by an individual to outcomes at the individual level. Assessing the effects of 
financial stability policies, in contrast, requires linking interventions that affect decisions at 
the micro-level to aggregate outcomes. Focusing on the big picture and on the question of 
how micro-incentives and decisions add up to aggregate behaviour is thus needed.  
A related question is how frictions and biases that affect micro-level decision making ag-
gregate up and affect financial stability, and how these frictions can be identified early on. 
Uninformed investors will always be present in markets. The question is how important 
they are, quantitatively, for market outcomes. Vissing-Jorgensen (2004) argues that direct 
evidence on investors’ beliefs is needed in order to determine which aspects of behav-
ioural finance models are relevant and thus which models provide reliable input into policy 
debates. In typical environments, however, information about investors’ beliefs is not 
 Seite 13 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
available, and the question arises how to develop robust policy implications in such envi-
ronments of limited information. 
Essentially, this boils down to the question of how the need for policy interventions and 
the effects of policies that have been implemented can be assessed. Designing appropri-
ate strategies for impact assessments, both ex ante and ex post, can be an important 
contribution of research.  
Teaching Economic and Financial Knowledge 
 Well-designed financial education programmes can improve financial knowledge that is 
relevant for day-to-day decision making. In parallel, efforts should be made to improve 
teaching financial stability and to integrate this into curricula of universities. This provides 
the necessary academic background for macroprudential policies and analytical work re-
lated to financial stability to both, policymakers and academics. The challenge is that 
teaching financial stability requires input from many fields including micro- and macroeco-
nomics, public finance, theory of regulation, or even competition theory. Teaching needs 
to cover empirical methods – as well as knowledge about institutions. In most universities, 
such knowledge is spread across different departments. Possible steps forward involve 
developing a macroprudential module for CORE, an open-access online teaching tool, 6 
and introducing basic concepts related to financial knowledge and financial stability al-
ready in curricula of schools. 
Not least, closing gaps in financial literacy as well as teaching financial stability can great-
ly enhance the success of communication strategies of central banks. Many central banks 
engage in training courses related to general economic knowledge and issues related to 
price stability. Broadening the focus of these activities to include aspects of financial liter-
acy and financial stability is a natural next step. 
  Seite 14 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
5 
Lessons for Central Banks 
What are the Policy Objectives? 
Policy interventions in financial markets can have many different motivations. Justification 
for the microprudential regulation of banks, for instance, derives from information asym-
metries and moral hazard in banking models (Dewatripont and Tirole 1994): banks fi-
nance themselves with short-term deposits and invest in longer-term assets. This expos-
es banks to a run-risk, and deposit insurance reduces the liquidity risk for depositors. In 
order to prevent moral hazard on the part of banks and to delegate monitoring away from 
uninformed depositors, bank capital regulation and monitoring through the deposit insurer 
helps aligning incentives. 
Macroprudential supervision and regulation have a different motivation (Borio 2003). They 
aim at internalizing systemic risk externalities. Individual market participants do not take 
sufficiently into account that their own actions might affect the stability of the entire finan-
cial system, be it through “too big to fail” issues, common exposures, or interconnections 
within the financial system. Macroprudential policy measures can take many different 
forms, they can apply to different types of market participants, and they can range from 
relatively soft tools such as communication to more interventionist measures. 
Consumer protection, in turn, aims at protecting the individual from unsound financial de-
cision making. Financial markets are subject not only to “traditional” market failures such 
as externalities, information asymmetries, market power, and coordination failures, but al-
so to inefficiencies related to biases and cognitive limitations (Campbell, Jackson, Madri-
an, and Tufano 2011). The latter include the lack of basic financial literacy. When house-
holds lack the training necessary to assess their financial decisions, they may make 
mistakes that lower their own welfare, and this can have broader consequences for the 
economy (Campbell 2016).  
Consumer protection regulation focuses on provisions for fair treatment and on disclosure 
requirements.7  The “European Mortgage Directive”8 can serve as an example. It includes 
guidelines for the advertising of products, the provision of information, affordability provi-
Seite 15 von 27 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
sions, minimum standards for advice, and requirements for the qualification of staff.9  
Regulations may also extend to the content and terms of financial products in order to 
align products with the demand of consumers and to protect consumers from acting 
against their own interests. Such consumer protection policies involve trade-offs between, 
on the one hand, the benefits of intervention in terms of correcting market failure and, on 
the other hand, the costs of policy mistakes and constraints imposed on individual deci-
sion-making. These trade-offs should be confronted explicitly, based on high-quality evi-
dence.10  
The need for micro- and macroprudential regulation is linked to the ability of market partic-
ipants to process financial information and to take financial decisions. The reasons that 
give rise to microprudential regulation are weakened, the more informed depositors are. 
The better market participants react to relatively soft interventions such as communication 
as macroprudential instruments, the weaker is the case for stronger interventions such as 
the imposition of binding constraints on borrowing and investing. 
Yet, consumer protection and financial stability are typically treated as separate policy ar-
eas, often with different institutions being in charge of the implementation of these poli-
cies. Central banks are typically involved in macroprudential policies, recognising the ana-
lytical similarities between financial stability and monetary policy. Consumer protection is 
often the responsibility of microprudential supervisors, given that these policies focus on 
individual behaviour, and given that these policies can have distributional consequences 
thus requiring broad political support. These decisions are outside the realm of (inde-
pendent) central banks. The Bundesbank, for example, is a member of the German Fi-
nancial Stability Committee but has no responsibilities with regard to consumer protection.  
At the same time, the typical division of labor often prevents an efficient coordination be-
tween the different policy areas. I thus see two main areas for cooperation between au-
thorities in charge of macroprudential policies, financial education, and consumer protec-
tion.  
  Seite 16 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Develop Common Data and Evaluation Strategies 
Developing common data and evaluation strategies can be an important area of coopera-
tion between policies that aim at enhanced financial literacy and financial stability. The in-
dicators that are relevant to monitor the sustainability of individual-level finances are very 
similar to those needed to assess the stability of the financial system. As regards the 
housing market, for example, loan-to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios are relevant, 
at the level of households and of the financial system. Also, information about financial 
knowledge might be relevant for financial stability analysis. Hence, defining data require-
ments needed for the monitoring of risks jointly across the policy areas can be an im-
portant contribution to reducing reporting costs and ensuring consistency of indicators. 
Similarly, assessing the effects and the effectiveness of policy interventions related to 
household finance (consumer protection) and financial stability will rely on similar micro-
level mechanism. Developing common protocols and strategies for policy evaluation can 
be useful. 
Develop Common Narratives 
A second area where different policies can benefit from closer cooperation is communica-
tion. Often, the narratives that can be used to explain why policy measures are needed 
are very similar. For example, the resilience of individual households with regard to 
shocks to the mortgage market is related to loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios. Simi-
lar indicators matter when assessing the probability of a systemic crisis to the mortgage 
market and its severity. Explaining financial stability issues can thus build on narratives 
that are related to individual experiences with the assessment of credit risks.  
At the same time, communicating financial stability needs to go beyond examples related 
to decision-making at the individual level. Take the common explanation of why macro-
prudential policies are needed. We typically argue that systemic risks in financial systems 
arise if distress in one institution or a group of financial institutions threatens the function-
ing of the entire financial system. This includes domino effects due to direct contractual 
 Seite 17 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
linkages and informational contagion leading to runs on assets of other financial institu-
tions, even without any direct contractual linkages. While these mechanisms may be rela-
tively intuitive, the standard definition of macroprudential policy is not. The sentence 
“Macroprudential policy aims at internalising systemic risk externalities.” is informative for 
economists but it is likely complex and too technical for most non-economists. 
It is thus not surprising that many intuitive but potentially misleading narratives dominate 
public policy discussions on financial stability issues. These include statements such as 
“Equity capital is a burden for banks.”, “Low bank profitability poses risks to financial sta-
bility.”, “Tighter regulations put domestic banks at a competitive disadvantage.”, “Small 
banks have not contributed to the financial crisis and thus do not pose risks to financial 
stability.”, “Banks that have to hold more capital cannot lend as much.” Why are these 
statements potentially misleading? Because equity capital is not a “burden” but enables 
banks to lend, because low profitability can be a symptom of overcapacities and fierce 
competition in banking markets,11  because stronger and better regulated banks contrib-
ute to the resilience of the financial system and may find it easier to acquire market 
shares, particularly in times of crisis, and because distress of small banks can become 
systemic if these banks have common exposures to macroeconomic risks. 
So how can one deal with the dichotomy of difficult-to-explain policy objectives and the 
need to develop intuitive narratives? Developing good narratives which are not yet tauto-
logical is important. Financial stability analysis requires a strong analytical framework that 
addresses the complexities of the financial system. But “explaining” the complexity of the 
financial system to the general public – and even to informed observers – is challenging. 
Given that other policy areas such as consumer protection or fiscal policy face similar 
challenges, developing narratives in cooperation and learning from experience can be 
fruitful. Developing narratives acknowledges the importance of communication strategies. 
A recent report by the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) stresses the 
importance of communication strategies and gives examples (CGFS 2016). 
Narratives are not only important in terms of explaining what financial stability policies are 
about. They can also influence the stability of financial system in their own right. The 
Seite 18 von 27 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
propagation of narratives within a financial system can have implications for the propaga-
tion of shocks within the system and the re-enforcement of biases at the individual level, 
as has been stressed recently by Shiller (2017).  
 6 
Summing Up 
Financial (il)literacy is an important channel through which financial instabilities can arise. 
Yet financial literacy is not a sufficient condition for financial stability. Even if all actors in 
financial markets are fully financially literate, they may ignore the impact of their own de-
cisions on the functioning and stability of the financial system.  
Financial literacy and financial stability are thus close cousins. Yet, policy often treats 
them as distinct areas. This is important in order to ensure accountability and transparen-
cy. Yet, closer cooperation in terms of analytical work, communication, policy evaluation, 
and – not least – data strategies can improve coordination between policy areas. This 
would, ultimately, contribute to enhanced resilience at the level of the individual and of the 
financial system. 
This has implications for academia and central banks. For academia, further analytical 
work is needed to understand the link between micro-decision making and macro-
economic outcomes. Academia can also contribute to designing good policy evaluation 
studies and improving teaching of financial stability. For central banks, acknowledging the 
role of communication for financial stability is important. Exploiting synergies between pol-
icy areas dealing with financial stability and financial literacy can be fruitful. This includes 
developing common narratives, common data strategies, and frameworks for policy eval-
uation. So far, knowledge about the role of narratives, communication, and financial sta-
bility is very limited, thus requiring more research and analytical work. 
    Seite 19 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
References 
Adam, Klaus, Johannes Beutel, Albert Marcet and Sebastian Merkel (2015). Can a finan-
cial transaction tax prevent stock price booms? Journal of Monetary Economics 76(S): 90-
109. 
Adam, Klaus, Albert Marcet, and Johannes Beutel (2017). Stock price booms and ex-
pected capital gains. American Economic Review 107(8): 2352-2408. 
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, and 
Douglas D. Evanoff (2010). Learning to Cope: Voluntary Financial Education and Loan 
Performance during a Housing Crisis. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceed-
ings 100 (5): 495-500.  
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel 
(2015). Regulating Consumer Financial Products: Evidence from Credit Cards. The Quar-
terly Journal of Economics 130(1): 111-164. 
Barberis, Nicholas and Richard Thaler (2003). A survey of behavioral finance. In G.M. 
Constantinides G.M, M. Harris and R. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Fi-
nance . Edition 1, volume1, chapter 18, p. 1053-1128. Elsevier. Amsterdam. 
Barberis, Nicholas, Robin Greenwood, Lawrence Jin, and Andrei Shleifer (2018). Extrapo-
lation and bubbles. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming. 
Beutel, Johannes (2017). Smart Money? Investment Professionals’ Expectations About 
the Stock Market. University of Mannheim. Doctoral Dissertation. Mannheim. 
Beutel, Johannes, Sophia List, and Gregor von Schweinitz (2018). An Evaluation of Early 
Warning Models for Systemic Banking Crises: Does Machine Learning Improve Predic-
tions? Deutsche Bundesbank. Mimeo. Frankfurt. 
Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer (2016). Diagnostic Expectations 
and Credit Cycles. The Journal of Finance 73(1): 199-227. 
 Seite 20 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Borio, Claudio (2003). Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision 
and Regulation? Bank for International Settlements (BIS). Working Paper 128. Basel. 
Brown A., M.J. Collins, M.Schmeiser, and C.Urban (2014). State Mandated Financial Ed-
ucation and the Credit Behavior of Young Adults, Federal Reserve Working Paper. 
Brunnermeier, Markus K. (2009). Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 23(1): 77–100. 
Bunda, Irina and Michele Ca’Zorzi (2009). Signals From Housing and Lending Booms. 
European Central Bank (ECB). Working Paper No. 1094. Frankfurt. 
Bundesgesetzblatt (2017). Gesetz zur Ergänzung des Finanzdienstleistungsaufsichts-
rechts im Bereich der Maßnahmen bei Gefahren für die Stabilität des Finanzsystems und 
zur Änderung der Umsetzung der Wohnimmobilienkreditrichtlinie (Finanzaufsichts-
rechtergänzungsgesetz), No. 34, 9 June 2017, pp. 1495 ff. Bonn. 
Campbell, John Y. (2016). Restoring Rational Choice: The Challenge of Consumer Fi-
nancial Regulation. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 106(5):1-30. 
Campbell, John. Y., Howell E. Jackson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Peter Tufano (2011). 
Consumer Financial Protection.  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 91-114.  
Carpena Fenella, Shawn Cole, Jeremy Shapiro, and Bilal Zia (2011).Unpacking the 
Causal Chain of Financial Literacy. The World Bank. Policy Research Working Paper 
5798. Washington D.C. 
Case, Karl E., Robert J. Shiller, and Anne Thompson (2012). What Have They Been 
Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets. Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity 45: 265–315.CGFS (2016). Objective-setting and Communication of Macropru-
dential Policies. Committee on the Global Financial System, Bank for International Set-
tlements (BIS). CGFS Paper 57. Basel. 
Christiansen, Charlotte, Juanna Schrøter Joensen, and Jesper Rangvid (2008). Are 
Economists More Likely to Hold Stocks? Review of Finance 12(3): 465-496. 
 Seite 21 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones (2009). What happens during 
recessions, crunches and busts? Economic Policy 24(60): 653-700. 
Cole, Shawn, Anna Paulson, and Gauri Kartini Shastry (2014). Smart Money? The Effect 
of Education on Financial Outcomes. The Review of Financial Studies 27(7): 2022-2051. 
Crowe, Christopher, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Igan Deniz, and Pau Rabanal (2011). How to 
deal with real estate booms: Lessons from country experiences. International Monetary 
Fund (IMF).Working Paper, WP/11/91. Washington DC. 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017). Financial Stability Review. November 2017. Frankfurt. 
Directive 2014/17/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 February 2014 
on credit agreements for consumers relating to residential immovable property. Official 
Journal of the European Union L 60/34. 
Dewatripont, Mathias and Jean Tirole (1994). The Prudential Regulation of Banks. MIT 
Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Federal Government of Germany (2016). Draft Act on the Amendment of Financial Su-
pervisory Law in the Area of Measures in the Event of a Threat to the Stability of the Fi-
nancial System and on the Amendment of the Implementation of the Mortgage Credit Di-
rective (Finanzaufsichtsrechtergänzungsgesetz) of 21 December 2016, available as 
Bundestagsdrucksache 18/10935. 
Financial Stability Committee (2015). Recommendation on New Instruments for Regulat-
ing Loans for the Construction or Purchase of Residential Real Estate (AFS/2015/01). 
June 2015. 
Gelain, Paolo, Kevin J. Lansing, and Caterina Mendicino (2013). House prices, credit 
growth, and excess volatility: Implications for monetary and macroprudential policy. Inter-
national Journal of Central Banking 9(2): 219-276. 
 Seite 22 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Gerardi, Kristopher, Lorenz Goette, and Stephan Meier (2013). Numerical ability and 
mortgage default. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (28): 11267-
11271. 
Greenwood, Robin and Andrei Shleifer (2014). Expectations of Returns and Expected Re-
turns. Review of Financial Studies 27: 714-746. 
He, Zhiguo and Arvind Krishnamurty (2018). Intermediary Asset Pricing and the Financial 
Crisis. National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Working Paper 24415. Cam-
bridge MA.HFCN (2016). The Household Finance and Consumption Survey – results from 
the second wave. European Central Bank. Statistics Paper Series No 18/December. 
Frankfurt. 
Hoffmann, Wieland (2016). What Drives the Volatility and Persistence of house price 
growth? In: Essays on House Price Formation and Household Leverage (Chapter 2). Uni-
versity of Mannheim. Doctoral Dissertation. Mannheim.  
Hogarth, Jeanne M. and Marianne A. Hilgert (2002). Financial Knowledge, Experience, 
and Learning Preferences: Preliminary Results from a New Survey on Financial Literacy. 
Consumer Interest Annual, Proceedings of the American Council on Consumer Interests 
2002 Annual Conference. March 2002.  
IMF (2012). World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3: Dealing with Household Debt, April 
2012. 
IMF (2018). The IMF’s Annual Macroprudential Policy Survey – Objectives, Design, and 
Country Responses. International Monetary Fund (IMF). Policy Paper. Washington DC. 
Jiang, Liangliang, Ross Levine, and Chen Lin (2017). Does Competition Affect Bank 
Risk? National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Working Paper 23080. Cambridge 
MA.  
Jordà, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2015a). Leveraged bubbles. Journal 
of Monetary Economics 76(S): 1-20. 
 Seite 23 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Jordà, Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2015b). Betting the House. Journal 
of International Economics 96(1): 2-18 
Kaiser, Tim and Lukas Menkhoff (2016). Does Financial Education Impact Financial Be-
havior, and If So, When?  World Bank Economic Review 31(3): 611-630. 
Kannan, Prakash, Paul Rabanal, and Alasdair Scott (2011). Recurring patterns in the run-
up to house price busts. Applied Economic Letters 18(2): 107-113  
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia Mitchell (2011a). Financial Literacy Around the World: An 
Overview. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 497-508. 
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011b). Financial Literacy and Retirement 
Planning in the United States. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10(4): 509-525. 
Lusardi Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell (2014). The Economic Importance of Financial 
Literacy: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5-44. 
Lusardi, Annamaria, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2017). Optimal Financial 
Knowledge and Wealth Inequality. Journal of Political Economy 125(2): 431-477. 
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel (2011). Depression babies: do macroeconomic ex-
periences affect risk taking. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1):  373-416. 
Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi (2010). The Great Recession: Lessons from Microeconomic 
Data. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 100(2): 51-56. 
Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi (2018). Finance and Business Cycles: The Credit-Driven 
Household Demand Channel. National Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working 
Paper 24322. Cambridge MA. 
 OECD (2011). G20 High-level Principles on Financial Consumer Protections. Organisa-
tion for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Paris. 
OECD (2017). G20/OECD INFE Report on Adult Financial Literacy in G20 countries. Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Paris. 
 Seite 24 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
OECD (2018). OECD/INFE Toolkit for Measuring Financial Literacy and Financial Inclu-
sion.  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Paris. 
Peng, Tzu-Chin M., Suzanne Bartholomae, Jonathan J. Fox, and Garrett Cravener 
(2007). The impact of personal finance education delivered in high school and college 
courses. Journal of Family and Economic Issues 28(2): 265-284. 
Piazzesi, Monika and Martin Schneider (2009). Momentum traders in the housing market: 
survey evidence and a search model. American Economic Review 99(2): 406-11. 
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2008). Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial 
Crisis so Different? An International Historical Comparison. The American Economic Re-
view 98 (2): 339-344. 
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). This Time is Different: Eight Centu-
ries of Financial Folly. Princeton University Press. Princeton.  
Schmidt, Tobias and Panagiota Tzamourani (2017). Zur finanziellen Bildung der privaten 
Haushalte in Deutschland: Ausgewählte Ergebnisse aus der Studie „Private Haushalte 
und ihre Finanzen (PHF)“. Vierteljahreshefte zur Wirtschaftsforschung / Quarterly Journal 
of Economic Research 4,  forthcoming. 
Shiller, Robert J. (2017). Narrative Economics. American Economic Review 107(4): 967-
1004. 
Tirole, Jean (2017). Economics for the Common Good. Princeton University Press. 
Princeton. 
Towbin, Pascal and Sebastian Weber (2016). Price expectations and the US housing 
boom. Swiss National Bank. SNB Working Paper, 6/2016. Zurich. 
Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette (2004). Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does “Irration-
ality” Disappear with Wealth? Evidence from Expectations and Actions. In Gertler, Mark 
and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 18: 139-208. MIT Press. 
Cambridge MA. 
 Seite 25 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Winkler, Fabian (2016). The Role of Learning for Asset Prices and Business Cycles. 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Finance and Economics Discussion 
Series 2016-019. Washington D.C. 
                                            
i  
I would like to thank Johannes Beutel, Magda Bianco, Manuel Buchholz, Katharina Knoll, Anna-Maria 
Lusardi, Jens Reich, Michael Richter, Panagiota Tzamourani, and Benjamin Weigert for very helpful dis-
cussions and inputs into earlier versions of this paper. All remaining errors and inconsistencies are my 
own. 
 
2   The OECD International Network on Financial Education (OECD/INFE) defines financial literacy as a 
combination of awareness, knowledge, skill, attitude, and behaviour necessary to make sound financial 
decisions and ultimately achieve individual financial wellbeing (OECD 2018). This definition is reflected 
in the OECD/INFE questionnaire to measure literacy and financial inclusion, which is used in the 
OECD/INFE Survey of Adult Financial Literacy Competencies. Results from the data collection across 
G20 countries (and two guest countries) are reported in OECD (2017). 
 
3    Information on household debt is based on information on the German residential real estate market  
available at www.bundesbank.de/residential_property. Information on loan volumes is based on data for 
the German banking system available at 
https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/Banks_and_other_financia
l_institutions/banks_and_other_financial_institutions_details_value_node.html?tsId=BBK01.PQ3013&listI
d=www_s10v_vjkre_05 (mortgage loans). 
https://www.bundesbank.de/Navigation/EN/Statistics/Time_series_databases/Banks_and_other_financia
l_institutions/banks_and_other_financial_institutions_details_value_node.html?tsId=BBK01.PQA350&list
Id=www_s10v_vjkre_01 (total lending). 
 
4   The discrepancy between the HFCS and the aggregate figures is due to different definitions of, for ex-
ample, the household sector, and possibly measurement errors typically accompanying survey esti-
mates. 
 
5   On 21 March 2016, the “Mortgage Credit Directive” (Directive 2014/17/EU of the European Parliament 
and of the Council) was transposed into German law. The main objectives of the directive are to improve 
consumer protection, to create a transparent and efficient single European market for loans for house 
purchase, and to contribute to sustainable lending and borrowing. The transposition into German law 
was modified in 2017 in combination with the introduction of a legal basis for borrower-based measures 
for mortgage financing in Germany.  
 
6   Further information on CORE is available at: http://www.core-econ.org. 
 
7   The G20 High-level Principles on Financial Consumer Protection (OECD 2011) also encourage provi-
sions to promote consumers’ financial literacy. It advocates that financial services providers should have 
as an objective to work in the best interest of their customers and that they should assess the financial 
capabilities, situation, and needs of their customers before agreeing to provide them with a product, ad-
vice or service. 
 
8    See Directive 2014/17/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council. 
 
9   The directive prescribes that relevant provisions should be laid down by Member States. 
 
10   For example, the 2009 Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (CARD) Act in the Unit-
ed States imposes limits on credit card fees. Agarwal, Chomsisengphet, Mahoney, and Stroebel (2015) 
analyse the effectiveness of this aspect of the CARD Act as well as the requirement for clear information 
on credit card statements on the costs of making only the minimum payment. They find that regulatory 
limits on credit card fees reduce overall borrowing costs. They find no evidence of an offsetting increase 
in interest charges or a reduction in the volume of credit. 
  Seite 26 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
                                                                                                                                                
11 Evidence on the risk-return trade-off for banks is inconclusive. Recent evidence for US states suggests 
that intensified competition can promote risk taking and have negative implications for financial stability 
(Jiang, Levine, Lin 2018). 
  Seite 27 von 27 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511 or 3512, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
