Jerome  H  Powell:  Semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Report  to  the
Congress
Testimony by Mr Jerome H Powell, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,
Washington DC, 27 February 2018.
 Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the Committee, I am pleased
to present the Federal Reserve’s semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
On  the  occasion  of  my  first  appearance  before  this  Committee  as  Chairman  of  the  Federal
Reserve,  I  want  to  express  my  appreciation  for  my  predecessor,  Chair  Janet  Yellen,  and  her
important  contributions.  During  her  term  as  Chair,  the  economy  continued  to  strengthen  and
Federal Reserve policymakers began to normalize both the level of interest rates and the size of
the  balance  sheet.  Together,  Chair  Yellen  and  I  have  worked  to  ensure  a  smooth  leadership
transition and provide for continuity in monetary policy. I also want to express my appreciation for
my  colleagues  on  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC).  Finally,  I  want  to  affirm  my
continued support for the objectives assigned to us by the Congress—maximum employment
and  price  stability—and  for  transparency  about  the  Federal  Reserve’s  policies  and  programs.
Transparency is the foundation for our accountability, and I am committed to clearly explaining
what we are doing and why we are doing it. Today I will briefly discuss the current economic
situation and outlook before turning to monetary policy.
Current Economic Situation and Outlook
The U.S. economy grew at a solid pace over the second half of 2017 and into this year. Monthly
job  gains  averaged  179,000  from  July  through  December,  and  payrolls  rose  an  additional
200,000 in January. This pace of job growth was sufficient to push the unemployment rate down
to 4.1 percent, about 3/4 percentage point lower than a year earlier and the lowest level since
December 2000. In addition, the labor force participation rate remained roughly unchanged, on
net, as it has for the past several years—that is a sign of job market strength, given that retiring
baby boomers are putting downward pressure on the participation rate. Strong job gains in recent
years have led to widespread reductions in unemployment across the income spectrum and for
all  major  demographic  groups.  For  example,  the  unemployment  rate  for  adults  without  a  high
school education has fallen from about 15 percent in 2009 to 5-1/2 percent in January of this
year, while the jobless rate for those with a college degree has moved down from 5 percent to 2
percent  over  the  same  period.  In  addition,  unemployment  rates  for  African  Americans  and
Hispanics  are  now  at  or  below  rates  seen  before  the  recession,  although  they  are  still
significantly above the rate for whites. Wages have continued to grow moderately, with a modest
acceleration in some measures, although the extent of the pickup likely has been damped in part
by the weak pace of productivity growth in recent years.
Turning from the labor market to production, inflation-adjusted gross domestic product rose at an
annual rate of about 3 percent in the second half of 2017, 1 percentage point faster than its pace
in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  Economic  growth  in  the  second  half  was  led  by  solid  gains  in
consumer spending, supported by rising household incomes and wealth, and upbeat sentiment.
In addition, growth in business investment stepped up sharply last year, which should support
higher  productivity  growth  in  time.  The  housing  market  has  continued  to  improve  slowly.
Economic  activity  abroad  also  has  been  solid  in  recent  quarters,  and  the  associated
strengthening  in  the  demand  for  U.S.  exports  has  provided  considerable  support  to  our
manufacturing industry.
Against  this  backdrop  of  solid  growth  and  a  strong  labor  market,  inflation  has  been  low  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
stable. In fact, inflation has continued to run below the 2 percent rate that the FOMC judges to be
most consistent over the longer run with our congressional mandate. Overall consumer prices,
as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), increased 1.7
percent in the 12 months ending in December, about the same as in 2016. The core PCE price
index,  which  excludes  the  prices  of  energy  and  food  items  and  is  a  better  indicator  of  future
inflation, rose 1.5 percent over the same period, somewhat less than in the previous year. We
continue to view some of the shortfall in inflation last year as likely reflecting transitory influences
that we do not expect will repeat; consistent with this view, the monthly readings were a little
higher toward the end of the year than in earlier months.
After  easing  substantially  during  2017,  financial  conditions  in  the  United  States  have  reversed
some of that easing. At this point, we do not see these developments as weighing heavily on the
outlook  for  economic  activity,  the  labor  market,  and  inflation.  Indeed,  the  economic  outlook
remains strong. The robust job market should continue to support growth in household incomes
and  consumer  spending,  solid  economic  growth  among  our  trading  partners  should  lead  to
further gains in U.S. exports, and upbeat business sentiment and strong sales growth will likely
continue to boost business investment. Moreover, fiscal policy is becoming more stimulative. In
this  environment,  we  anticipate  that  inflation  on  a  12-month  basis  will  move  up  this  year  and
stabilize around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Wages should increase
at a faster pace as well. The Committee views the near-term risks to the economic outlook as
roughly balanced but will continue to monitor inflation developments closely.
Monetary Policy
I  will  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  The  Congress  has  assigned  us  the  goals  of  promoting
maximum employment and stable prices. Over the second half of 2017, the FOMC continued to
gradually reduce monetary policy accommodation. Specifically, we raised the target range for the
federal  funds  rate  by  1/4  percentage  point  at  our  December  meeting,  bringing  the  target  to  a
range of 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent. In addition, in October we initiated a balance sheet normalization
program to gradually reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings. That program has been
proceeding  smoothly.  These  interest  rate  and  balance  sheet  actions  reflect  the  Committee’s
view that gradually reducing monetary policy accommodation will sustain a strong labor market
while fostering a return of inflation to 2 percent.
In  gauging  the  appropriate  path  for  monetary  policy  over  the  next  few  years,  the  FOMC  will
continue to strike a balance between avoiding an overheated economy and bringing PCE price
inflation  to  2  percent  on  a  sustained  basis.  While  many  factors  shape  the  economic  outlook,
some of the headwinds the U.S. economy faced in previous years have turned into tailwinds: In
particular, fiscal policy has become more stimulative and foreign demand for U.S. exports is on a
firmer trajectory. Despite the recent volatility, financial conditions remain accommodative. At the
same  time,  inflation  remains  below  our  2  percent  longer-run  objective.  In  the  FOMC’s  view,
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate will best promote attainment of both of our
objectives.  As  always,  the  path  of  monetary  policy  will  depend  on  the  economic  outlook  as
informed by incoming data.
In evaluating the stance of monetary policy, the FOMC routinely consults monetary policy rules
that  connect  prescriptions  for  the  policy  rate  with  variables  associated  with  our  mandated
objectives.  Personally,  I  find  these  rule  prescriptions  helpful.  Careful  judgments  are  required
about  the  measurement  of  the  variables  used,  as  well  as  about  the  implications  of  the  many
issues these rules do not take into account. I would like to note that this Monetary Policy Report
provides further discussion of monetary policy rules and their role in the Federal Reserve’s policy
process, extending the analysis we introduced in July.
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
