Anita Angelovska Bezoska: Let's get digital
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska  Bezhoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia, at the NBRM’s 11th Conference on Payments and Market Infrastructures “Let's Get
Digital”, Ohrid, 6-8 June 2018.
Distinguished guests,
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my great pleasure to welcome you to the 11th edition of the Conference on Payments and
Market Infrastructures hosted by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia.
The organization of this Conference has been traditionally supported by De Nederlandsche
Bank  for  which  we  are  very  thankful  and  over  time,  this  initial  bilateral  cooperation  attracted
involvement of other central banks and IFIs. In this context, I would like to extend our appreciation
to Banco de Portugal for its contribution in the past editions, as well as to the Bank of Italy, the
National  Bank  of  Belgium  and  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia  for  their  contribution  to  this
Conference. Also,  particularly  valuable  is  the  continued  participation  of  the  European  Central
Bank, the Bank for International Settlement and the European Commission given the prominent
role these institutions play in the payments area.
This year’s conference focuses on digital transformation, a process that is heavily penetrating
across all segments of our business and private lives and will take even greater significance in
the  years  to  come.  The  digital  transformation  in  finance  has  been  rapidly  evolving  with  the
emergence of Fintech sector. According to the Ernst&Young’s Fintech Adoption Index, one-third
of consumers utilize at least two or more fintech services and they are becoming increasingly
aware of FinTech as a part of their daily lives. The FinTech Adoption Index for services offered by
FinTech  organizations  under  five  broad  categories  –  money  transfers  and  payment  services,
financial planning tools, savings and investments, borrowing and insurance, indicates that money
transfers  and  payment  services  are  continuing  to  lead  the  FinTech  change,  with  adoption
standing at 50% in 2017 and 88% of consumers anticipating of doing so in the future. Thus, the
global payments industry is currently undergoing a paradigm shift driven by rapid advances, the
influx of new technologies and evolving consumer behavior as digital generations come of age.
The emerging FinTech enhances the transformative power of digital payments via innovation.
The irruption of digital payments relates to its many opportunities. Embracing payments
digitalization has the potential to substantially reduce the costs, increase the efficiency and
enable  broader  access  to  payment  services.  With  the  rise  of  new  payment  digital
technologies  developed  by  the  FinTech,  and  increasingly  adopted  by  banks,  consumers  and
merchants nowadays have a wide range of payment products to choose from. Innovation
developments, such as instant payments, payment initiation services, person-to-person mobile
payments  and  contactless  proximity  payments  have  the  digitization  process  accompanied  by
innovative solutions in their essence. The payment innovations and digitization process also have
an  impact  on  the transformation of payment market infrastructures.  These  developments,
however, have raised various issues related to the requirements for bank openness, customer
security,  transparency  and  trust  in  the  payment  services  market  as  well  as  consumer  rights
protection.
Consequently,  the  regulators  have  to  adopt  appropriate legislative  framework  that  supports
digitalization,  innovation  and  competition,  but  also  take  care  of  security  and  protection.  In  this
context, it can be noticed that the European Union is a global leader in this domain. By revising
the Payment Services Directive (PSD2), the European Union enables stronger competition and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
innovation by allowing entrance of FinTech payment service providers that will eventually lead to
greater choice and better prices for consumers, it will fosters cyber resilience of the payment
service  providers  as  well  as  enhance  protection  of  payment  services  users.  In  this  way,  the
European  Union  created  a  sound  legal  framework  for  digitalized  payments  landscape  that
enhances the integration of the single payment. At the same time, it sets an example for other
countries around the world how to support digitalization trends by balancing between innovation
and  competition,  on  the  one  hand,  and  security  and  protection,  on  the  other  hand.  The  new
regulatory  framework  implies  that  banks  will  no  longer  only  be  competing  against  banks,  but
everyone offering financial services, i.e. the customers will be able to create a set of providers of
different financial services instead of relining on one bank for all services. The belief that non-
bank  FinTech  companies  will  play  a  significant  role  in  the  future  financial  landscape  is  well
established  if  we  look  at  investments  in  fintech  industry.  The  cumulative  investments  globally
have more than ten-doubled the last five years and are estimated to exceed $150bn the next 3-5
years. This, in addition to changed customer expectation and increased digitalisation, may be the
reason  why  today  we  are  witnessing  a  trend  of  stronger  cooperation  between  banks  and
fintechs, including in the area of innovation labs.
The new technologies, such as blockchain and distributed ledger technology, though young
and  still-evolving,  show  the  potential  of  restructuring  financial  industry,  even  encouraging
discussions for cashless society with central bank digital currencies replacing the fiat money and
underpinning  the  proliferation  of  cryptocurrencies.  The  cryptocurrencies  have  registered  a
spectacular  rise  –  in  2017  their  market  valuation  increased  from  USD  30  billion  to  USD  400
billion, and widened, with the rapid increase of “initial coin offerings” – fundraising facility for start-
up investors. So, are the cryptocurrencies, although unregulated becoming a substitute for fiat
money?  Are they incorporating the basic features of the fiat money such as being a medium of
exchange, store of value and unit of account? Despite the rising trend, they play a marginal role
globally as a medium of exchange in comparison with standard payment options; as they are not
backed by legal authority and are marked by high value volatility and rather illiquid non-regulated
markets, they obviously cannot be treated as unit of account and store of value. On the other
hand,  they  may  lead  to  creation  of  bubbles  that  down  the  road  may  burst.  Against  this
background,  at  the  last  meeting  of  G20  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  it  was
acknowledged  that  technological  innovation  may  be  conducive  to  higher  efficiency  and
inclusiveness  of  the  financial  system.  Many  risks,  however,  were  also  pinpointed  with  their
proliferation – consumer and investor protection, market integrity, tax evasion, money laundering
and terrorist financing.
In  this  changing  and  challenging  environment,  staying  aside  is  not  an  option  for  the
Republic of Macedonia. To tackle the rising challenges, we have already drafted a new Law
on payment services and payment systems (in cooperation with the Ministry of Finance)
which  transposes  the  PSD2  as  well  as  other  European  Union  relevant  directives  and
regulations in the payments area. The new payment regulation aims to boost the competition in
the  traditionally  bank  dominated  payments  market  by  opening  the  entrance  for  FinTech
companies which can provide innovative payment services as well as establish and operate new
payment systems. At the same time, we assert our focus on maintaining financial stability by
enhancing the resilience of payment market infrastructures which are being assessed against
the  Principles  for  Financial  Market  Infrastructures.  In  this  context, the largest retail payment
system in the Republic of Macedonia established a Guarantee Scheme in 2017 which is in
accordance with the regulation of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia that aims to
effect  the  same-day  settlement  and  thus,  minimize  the  liquidity  risk  in  the  important  payment
system  in  case  of  a  participant  default.  Furthermore,  we  also  engaged  in facilitating  cross-
border  payments  in  euro  in  2017  by  establishing  a  link  between  our  RTGS  payment
system MIPS and TARGET2, which relies on the highly appreciated cooperation with Bank of
Italy. And we do not stop here. Our recent efforts have been focused on building a Strategy for
reducing the cash usage and thus, increasing the digitalization and cashless payments, which
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
is a joint project of the central bank, the Ministry of Finance and the banking community.  
During the following three days, the lecturers will address all the above relevant developments in
the payment market. The conference agenda includes a variety of interesting topics, including
the  European  payment  landscape  and  legislation  with  a  special  focus  on  PSD2,  instant
payments, T2 & T2S consolidation project, collateral management system, recent work of CPMI
and latest trends in central bank oversight. This year’s agenda also covers themes related to
cryptocurrencies,  central  bank  digital  currencies  and  distributed  ledger  technology  and  cyber
resilience. The active participation of the conference is provided and encouraged through panel
session  on  “Payments  challenges  in  an  integrating  world”,  in  which  panelists  from  payment
institutions and payment systems will be exchanging thoughts and ideas. Last but not least is the
expected interactive participation in the working groups scheduled for the last day of the event.
I  look  forward  to  the  discussions  and  wish  all  the  delegates  an  enjoyable  and  rewarding
conference, as inspiring as its location – the beautiful city of Ohrid and the Ohrid Lake which I
hope you will be able to enjoy too in the following Conference days.
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
