Yandraduth  Googoolye:  Legal  aspects  on  the  National  Payments
System
Address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the
Workshop on the Legal Aspects on the National Payments System, in achieving compliance with
Principle 1 of the CPSS-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI) organized
by the IMF's Regional Technical Assistance Center for Southern Africa (AFRITAC South), Ebene,
27 November 2017.
Ms L. Effie Psalida, AFRITAC South Coordinator,
AFRITAC South Delegates from member Central Banks
 Learned Resource Persons
Ladies and Gentlemen
Good  morning.  I  extend  to  you  a  warm  welcome  to  Mauritius.  Thank  you  for  the  privilege  to
providing  the  opening  for  the  Workshop,  indeed  very  timely  for  Mauritius,  as  we  are  currently
finalizing our National Payment Systems Legislation and working towards a National Payment
Switch.
I am also delighted to see Ms Onnene Partsch in our midst today.  Ms Onnene Partsch has, as
part of the IMF Technical Assistance Mission, provided assistance to the Bank of Mauritius in
reviewing our draft National Payment Systems Bill.  I am confident that she, as well as all the
resource  persons,  will  partake  their  invaluable  experience  and  knowledge  with  you  during  this
week.
Amidst its basic traditional functions, a central bank is called to ensure that liquid resources in
the  economy  are  efficiently  managed.  This  function  allows  for  the  use  of  cashless  payment
systems by economic agents. Cash payments make economic agents incur costs in terms of
interest foregone and higher security risks. A primary function of a central bank is to conduct
monetary policy, the impulses of which are typically transmitted from banks to the rest of the
economy.  The  operational  features  of  the  transmission,  however,  rests  upon  the  smooth
functioning  of  payment  infrastructure.  If  the  operation  of  payment  systems  is  underdeveloped,
these institutions will opt to retain a higher buffer of central-bank money for liquidity management
purposes, with a view to better manage their liquidity. This, in turn, leads to weaker than intended
monetary-policy impulses from the central bank.
Another primary function of the central bank is to ensure stability of the financial system. This
implies that the financial system is robust to systemic risk. Financial stability allows the financial
system to withstand shocks without impairing the processing of payments in the economy, and
ultimately,  the  allocation  of  savings  to  investment  opportunities.  Accordingly,  a  robust  and
resilient market infrastructure is key to financial stability. The interest of central banks in financial
stability can be traced as far back as late June 1974, when the closure of the Herstatt bank left
transactions half-done due to the time-zone difference between Frankfurt and New York. This
incident  led  central  banks  to  develop  a  continuous  linked  settlement  platform,  whereby
commercial banks manage settlement of foreign exchange amongst themselves on a payment
versus payment basis.
More  often  than  not,  we  have  tended  to  underestimate  the  role  of  payment  systems  in  an
economy. At one point in time, we even took the payments system for granted, assuming that
transfers will be settled as expected, and that the system will perform as solidly under market
stress as it does under normal conditions. Let me reassure you… central banking is a serious
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
job and we do acknowledge that payment systems play a critical role in the design of the broad
spectrum of a central bank’s policies. Thus, it is in the interest of the central bank to ensure that
the payment system is efficient, as it enables the orderly functioning of the interbank, money and
capital  markets.  This  also  reduces  the  cost  of  exchanging  goods  and  services,  expands
opportunities  for  commercial  and  financial  transactions,  and  supports  higher  investment  and
economic activity. Settling payments in accounts at the central bank still provides the link with the
latter’s  two  main  tasks,  namely  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.    In  sum,  a  national
payment  system  is  a  vital  mechanism  for  ensuring  a  country’s  economic  development,  since
almost all transactions involve some kind of payment and maintain confidence in the domestic
currency both in normal times and during crisis times.
Central banks are also required to nurture the various characteristics that underpin the design
and development of the payment system. Specifically, a central bank has to put forward the legal
framework through the establishment of rules and regulations, standards, and policies that will
govern the nation’s payment and settlement services; while facilitating payment finality. It is also
called  upon  to  regulate  private  agents  in  the  payment  system;  and  to  administer  payment
services, especially the large-value payment systems that underpin financial activity. Last but not
least, the central bank musty also provide credit for participants in the payment system.
As the lender of last resort, the central bank ought to have the required information and means to
oversee  and,  if  necessary,  assist  the  institutions  participating  in  the  payment  system.    The
central  bank  has  to  exercise  oversight  on  the  design  and  the  operations  of  payment
arrangements to improve the speed and reliability as well as reduce financial risk, transactions
costs  and  the  risks  of  fraud,  errors  and  other  major  types  of  risks  inherent  in  the  payment
system. A  well-developed  statutory  and  regulatory  framework  for  the  payment  system,  thus,
reduces uncertainty and risk, and provides the needed clarity.
Let  us  recall  that  payments  systems  are  but  one  of  the  five  key  types  of  Financial  Market
Infrastructures  (FMIs).  The  four  others  being  the  Central  Securities  Depositories,  Securities
Settlement  Systems,  Central  Counter  Parties  and  Trade  Repositories.    FMIs  are  key
components of the financial system.  They play a critical role in the smooth functioning of the
financial market and can be a source of both financial stability and operational efficiency by, inter
alia,  establishing  and  ensuring  secure  arrangements  for  the  timely  clearing  and  settlement  of
obligations  between  counterparties.  To  manage 
the  various
counterparties  and  stakeholders  and  also  to  mitigate  risks,  it  is  imperative  for  the  National
Payment System (NPS) to operate on sound legal premises.
the  relationships  among 
Legal certainty brings confidence, and Principle 1 of the CPSS-IOSCO Principles for Financial
Markets  Infrastructures  underscores  the  importance  for  FMIs  to  have  a  well-founded,  clear,
transparent, and enforceable legal basis for each material aspect of their activities. 
The CPSS-IOSCO Principles further set out the five key considerations in order to fully comply
with the first Principle, which are as follows:
1.  the legal basis should provide a high degree of certainty for each material aspect of an FMI’s
activities in all relevant jurisdictions;
2.  an  FMI  should  have  rules,  procedures,  and  contracts  that  are  clear,  understandable,  and
consistent with relevant laws and regulations;
3.  an  FMI  should  be  able  to  articulate  the  legal  basis  for  its  activities  to  relevant  authorities,
participants,  and,  where  relevant,  participants’  customers,  in  a  clear  and  understandable
way;
4.  an  FMI  should  have  rules,  procedures,  and  contracts  that  are  enforceable  in  all  relevant
jurisdictions. There should be a high degree of certainty that actions taken by the FMI under
such rules and procedures will not be voided, reversed, or subject to stays; and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
5.  an  FMI  conducting  business  in  multiple  jurisdictions  should  identify  and  mitigate  the  risks
arising from any potential conflict of laws across jurisdictions. 
A  proper  understanding  of  these  key  considerations  is,  thus,  mandatory  for  central  bankers.  I
need not dwell further on these as they would surely be covered by the resource persons in the
Workshop.
The  legal  framework  must  accordingly  provide  explicit  and  defined  authority  of  Central  Banks
over payment systems, including amongst others the powers to license, authorise or designate
payment systems and clearly define their oversight functions.  The basis for cooperation with the
regulators of other domestic FMIs as well as foreign FMIs must also be clearly spelt out in the
law. 
We must not ignore the regional dimension to this lively subject. Cross-border trade in the region
is rapidly expanding and various initiatives are evolving for the continent. To facilitate payment
transactions, Africa is host to a number of cross-border payment systems: the SADC Integrated
Regional  Electronic  Settlement  System  (SIRESS)  and  the  COMESA  Regional  Electronic
Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (REPSS),  West African  Monetary  Zone  (WAMZ),  the  East
Africa Payment Systems (EAPS) of the East African Community (EAC).  I am sure that AFRITAC
member states must be participants to at least one of them.  The Bank of Mauritius is itself a
participant in the REPSS and SIRESS.
However, there is currently no harmonised legal and regulatory framework for payments in the
Continent and member states are at varying stages of development of their legal and regulatory
frameworks for their respective NPS.
In  the  SADC  Region,  for  example,  in  the  absence  of  an  appropriate  SADC  wide  legal  and
regulatory  framework,  Member  States  participating  in  the  SIRESS  have  structured  the  legal
arrangements  between  themselves  through  a  number  of  multilateral  agreements,  in  view  of
providing for legal certainty. SADC countries have, however, already committed themselves to
harmonise their legal and regulatory frameworks and to establish institutional and organisational
structures conducive to the establishment of an integrated payments market.
Ladies and gentlemen, payment services are considered to be the stepping stone for financial
inclusion.  People’s demand for ever faster, more convenient and flexible means of payments
has  led  to  a  dramatic  evolution  in  the  payment  ecosystem,  especially  in  the  retail  payment
services. 
Today,  the  contours  of  the  global  financial  system  are  different  from  what  they  were,  say,  a
decade before. Major developments have underscored the implications for payment systems and
financial stability as they have exposed central banks to additional sources of risks. For instance,
the  issuance  of  new  financial  instruments,  the  increasing  size  and  complexity  of  financial
systems, and globalization of financial markets have contributed to generate new areas of risks.
Financial innovations, due to technological advances in information and communications, have
impacted strongly on the  speed,  variety  and  costs  of  transactions.  These  have  increased  the
size of the financial sector vis-à-vis the real economy and the number and volume of transfers
that  take  place  through  the  payment  system  have  magnified  significantly.  Consequently,  the
smooth running of the financial system and the economy is turning out to be very reliant on the
non-stop provision of market liquidity and, obviously, on the orderly functioning of the payment
system.
Fintechs are nowadays the new kid on the block. They are rapidly positioning themselves as the
key players in the financial industry, partly due to some sort of regulatory void in which they have
been operating so far, and partly as some regulators around the world have adopted a somewhat
adaptive approach to regulation in order not to stifle innovation. Since financial companies are
creating faster, cheaper, and more convenient payment systems out of technology, a customer
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
centric approach for service is emerging with the notion of anytime, anywhere payments. At the
same time, the payment service provider is moving out of the banking domain to the non-banking
one.
The regulatory challenges thrown up by Fintechs can be summarised thus:
i.  the need to focus on activity rather than technology and literally educating the consumer
of risks involved;
ii.  when an activity is innovative, or embedded within the underlying technology, regulators
need to understand how they work, while allowing such activities to mature at the same
time, the so-called, “Regulatory Sandbox” which enable regulators to address the potential
risks of new technologies without stifling innovation; and
iii.    with  applications  built  on  the  Blockchain  technology,  regulators  are  faced  with  the
challenge of ensuring the right balance between transaction transparency and privacy.
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has lately issued a Consultative Document, which
assesses how technology-driven innovation in financial services may affect the banking industry
and the attendant activities of supervisors in the near to medium term. At the Bank, we have
established  an  internal  committee  as  well  as  an  inter-bank  committee  on  Fintechs  and
Distributed  Ledger  Technologies  to  study  Fintech  models  and  propose  the  regulatory
frameworks and technological infrastructures conducive to promote an enabling environment for
emerging technologies.
Broadly, central banks have to ensure that they remain in sync with the markets. As they become
more global and interconnected, authorities have to cooperate more closely in their oversight and
operational  activities,  and  towards  mitigating  risks  associated  with  Fintech.  In  this  rapidly
changing  environment,  regulators  need  to  show  flexibility  but,  at  the  same  time,  they  have  to
ensure that there is no regulatory arbitrage. As the boundaries between banks and non-banks
involved in financial activities get thinner, regulators need to closely collaborate in order to come
up with smart regulation for the jurisdiction as a whole.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  am  confident  that  this  Workshop  on  the  Legal Aspects  of  NPS  will
provide the basis to better understand key requisites for devising or revising legislation regarding
the  payments  system.  On  this  note,  I  wish  you  all  a  fruitful  workshop  and  a  pleasant  stay  in
Mauritius.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
