Gent Sejko: Economic research - discussions and developments
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, to the 11th South-Eastern European
Economic Research Workshop, organised by the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 4 December 2017.
 Distinguished guests,
Dear participants,
It is a great pleasure to be here with you today. On behalf of the Bank of Albania, I would like to
welcome you to the 11  South-East European Economic Research Workshop and thank you for
your continuous devotion and precious contribution.
th
The  workshop  has  been  evolving  throughout  the  years,  providing  a  useful  platform  for
researchers, academics and central bankers from the Region and beyond, to:
present innovative research findings, foster exchange of views,
discuss  about  key  developments  in  money  markets,  monetary  policy  implementation  and
central bank operational frameworks, and
develop long-term collaborative relationships.
From a strategically point of view, the main goal of economic research is to provide a strong
conceptual and empirical basis for policy-making. High-quality research leads to higher credibility
of the central bank and improves the quality of its policies. We strongly believe that a qualitative
research  increases  the  potential  contribution  of  the  central  bank  on  the  financial  markets,  the
economy and the society.
Like in other European central banks, economic research at the Bank of Albania is an important
function  in  its  overall  activity,  which  has  proved  to  be  successful  in  supporting  the  policy
formulation and implementation processes. New methodologies provided by Research, based on
empirical models, have been adopted as standard tools of policy analysis and forecasts by other
Departments (e.g. monetary policy, financial stability, banking supervision, etc.).
This means that the mission, scope and contribution of research, assume a very important place
in Bank of Albania’s development strategy. Its goals consist in:
increasing our knowledge and understanding about domestic, regional and global economy,
including the functioning of the financial system;
developing high-quality models, tools and analysis to support better the monetary policy and
financial stability;
participating in research international networks (Region and Euro system), to facilitate the
exchange of opinions and views with other central banks; and
delivering reliable advice to policymakers and sharing findings and conclusions with market
participants, foreign investors and to the public.
Furthermore,  during  this  year,  research  at  the  Bank  of Albania  extended  its  activity  to  include
historical research. The outcome was the Conference on “Money and banking in Albania, from
antiquity  to  nowadays”,  which  brought  together  many  scholars,  numismatists,  archaeologists,
and researchers of monetary and economic history.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Turning to the very reason why we are all here today...
Recently, research has focused on various topics related to:
financial  market  infrastructure  and  potential  implications  for  financial  stability  and  banking
supervision;
implementation of the new IFRS standards;
rapid development of the financial market and its instruments, and
institutional developments in domestic and international markets.
All  of  them  are  currently  hot  topics  of  economic  research  and  I  am  happy  to  note  that  they
occupy  a  significant  part  of  this  workshop’s  agenda. Additionally,  I  am  very  happy  to  see  that
traditional issues of monetary policy and developments in the external sector of the economy will
also be discussed during the two days of the workshop.
In my opinion, such a broad coverage makes the agenda quite interesting. We are confident that
research papers that will be presented during the workshop days will provide some guidance on
how to approach several issues arising from the recent economic developments, regionally and
beyond. Many of them are similar across countries; therefore, collective cooperation would be
quite useful.
Without further ado, I would like to invite you to actively participate in and conduct a very lively and
fruitful debate. I truly believe that constructive discussions and comments, which will certainly
take  place  during  the  workshop,  will  contribute  to  enhancing  further  cooperation  among
researchers, and between the institutions.
For  all  these  reasons,  I  thank  you  once  again  for  your  invaluable  contribution  to  this  annual
meeting of researchers and wish you a successful and fruitful workshop!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
