Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Committed
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Signing of the Memorandum of Agreement between the Bangko
Sentral ng Pilipinas and the Philippine Payments Management, Inc. (PPMI), Manila, 12 January
2018.
 Fellow members of the Monetary Board, Antonio S. Abacan and Felipe M. Medalla, Chairman of
Philippine Payments Management, Inc. (PMMI), Mr. Justo Ortiz, PPMI Board members; guests
and leaders of the payments industry; E-Peso team (led by Mr. Mert Tangonan); fellow BSPers,
ladies and gentlemen, a very good morning to all of you.
In today’s programme, this part – this message – is identified as “the keynote address”... there
are various definitions of “keynote”... with its main purpose being, “to arouse interest, unity, and
enthusiasm in a group.”
But there is no lack of interest, unity and enthusiasm here. There is, and has been ...since the
launch of the NRPS initiative in December 2015... great commitment to the vision of creating an
inter-operable  ecosystem  supporting  fluid  electronic  fund  transfers  and  payments  from  one
account to another.
It  was  only  on August  30  last  year  that  Philippine  Payments  Management  was  incorporated...
from then until this day, there was, no doubt detailed preparation, collaboration and discussions
between us... 
We know that all great and worthy goals are reached in sure, purposeful and determined steps.
We at the Monetary Board and the Bangko Sentral thank PPMI for taking yet another step with us,
manifested by the earlier signing of our Memorandum of Agreement. 
Thank you for being here today, not only in your individual capacities as distinguished executive
officers of the dynamic financial institutions you represent...not in only in your impressive roles as
members  of  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Bankers Association  of  the  Philippines...  But  as
members  of  the  Board  of  the  Philippine  Management,  Inc....  as  a  collegial  body...  as  chief
stewards of a modern, responsive and globally-competitive Philippine retail payment system.
The signing of our memorandum of agreement marks certain mutual recognitions and binds us
each, to worthy undertakings. 
On our part, the signing of the MOA cements and formalizes our recognition of PPMI as THE
industry-led self-governing payment system management body for retail payment systems in the
country.  The MOA also expresses our commitment to provide continuing guidance so that the
industry’s activities remain aligned and harmonized with the NRPS Framework.
We at the BSP thank the Chairman Tito and PPMI for this declaration of support and dedication. 
We note with gratitude, your acknowledgment of the BSP’s crucial role as primary overseer of
the nation’s payment systems.
As  our  reliable  and  invaluable  ally,  we  have  no  doubt  that  PPMI  will  support  the  proper
implementation  of  the  NRPS  framework;  ...  monitor  compliance  with  its  principles;  ...
conformance to agreements of our automated clearing houses (ACHs) ... and will be powerfully
instrumental in strategically driving electronic payments through these ACHs (ACHs that have
been, and are yet to be launched).
We look forward to how PPMI will seize opportunities presented by technological innovations to
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
improve operational efficiency...  We anticipate that it will engage service providers with robust
systems  and  infrastructures...  We  are  confident  it  will  lead  and  assist  as  novel  products  and
services  that  cater  to  the  evolving  needs  of  clients  here  and  abroad  are  developed...  We
anticipate  that  PPMI  will  formulate  strategies  infused  with  system-wide,  and  industry-wide
perspectives rather than limited and restricting institution-centric approaches. 
What  exciting  prospects  for  us  all!    More  so,  what  empowering  possibilities  for  so  many
Filipinos!  I believe we are mutually committed to this endeavor because we realize it shall have a
great  effect  on  many  of  our  countrymen.    We  know  that  widespread  implementation  of
interoperable  payments  will  boost  the  ordinary  Filipino’s  confidence  to  make  economic
decisions.  We hope that capabilities – even of the now unserved and underserved – to execute
financial transactions will be increased!  
Today, this day of Commitment, is indeed another NRPS milestone worth celebrating.
I close with the exuberant declaration that we in the BSP, affirm and celebrate our partnership
with PPMI.  Together, we are allies and catalysts for revolutionary reforms in the payment space
and in pursuing NRPS goals.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
