Andreas  Dombret:  The  future  relationship  between  Germany  and
the UK in finance after Brexit
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at UK Finance, London, 8 February 2018.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank  you  for  your  kind  introduction,  and  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  talk  about  financial
services after Brexit.
Although I am in London to talk about finance issues, I have to confess that the United Kingdom,
and  especially  London,  has  always  been  much  more  to  me  than  just  business.  This  is  the
birthplace of the industrial revolution and the modern market economy – and the centre of the
first wave of globalisation in the 19th century. And this great country and this wonderful city are
where the future is made: a place of rare art and cultural diversity and of economic dynamism
and innovation. So I am more than happy to be here with you today.
When I read the news of the Brexit vote, I was shocked. As I looked at the news, I simply couldn’t
believe it. I imagine I was not the only one among us.
It’s needless to say that I respect the decision. Yet I am convinced that the UK and the EU going
1
separate ways will be a tremendous loss for both sides.
And that’s why the state of shock had to be just a very brief moment. We all have to do our best
during  the  coming  months  to  find  pragmatic  ways  to  establish  a  new,  respectful,  and  friendly
partnership.
Today,  I  will  talk  about  the  formal  aspects  of  this  future  partnership  in  the  realm  of  finance.
However, formalities alone will not make for a partnership founded on mutual trust and amity.
What is equally important is the direct involvement of citizens and businesses – because, in the
end, this is what underscores friendship and economic partnership. That is why this visit here
today is so important to me.
I will start by outlining where we are in the talks about a future agreement and will then discuss
the odds of something more than no deal happening. Given that a “no deal” on financial services
is – like it or not – a realistic outcome, I will then discuss what pragmatic approaches to this new
reality are feasible from my point of view.
2. Where we are: The debate on financial services
Since the leave vote in June 2016, we have seen a steady decline in expectations of how close
economic integration between the UK and the EU27 will be after Brexit.
Against  this  background,  it  was  positive  that  in  December  of  last  year  the  EU27  and
the UK reached broad agreement on the three fundamental divorce issues.  After this preliminary
settlement,  we  can  now  talk  about  the  future  model  of  cooperation  and  integration.  This  has
improved the chances of reaching a reasonable settlement before the March 2019 deadline. The
plan is to have a political declaration on what the future partnership will look like by October this
year; at the same time negotiation parties should have a draft withdrawal treaty ready.
2
But we should make no mistake: in light of the fact that the goals of the UK government are yet
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
unclear to me and in light of the not fully unified positions within Whitehall, such an agreement is
anything but a sure thing. First of all, we have to keep in mind that substantial progress has yet to
be made on the details of the three separation issues I have just mentioned. Second, a sufficient
transition  period  is  not  assured  at  the  moment,  either. And  finally,  even  the  no  deal  scenario
remains possible in light of the fundamental differences between the negotiation blocs.
So what are the implications? What they have been since the beginning: the private sector and
authorities have to prepare for a no deal scenario starting March 2019. I will come back to what
this means for the financial sector.
But, let’s remain at once realistic and optimistic. There is still at least a 50 percent chance of
avoiding a “no deal” scenario. So let’s think about what this would mean for financial services.
Would they be part of an overall deal? And if yes, what would that deal look like?
Like  with  the  overall  negotiation,  for  financial  services  we  have  also  seen  a  steady  decline  in
expectations of how deep the integration will be after Brexit. It quickly fell from remaining part of
the single market and passporting to the approach of equivalence in supervisory regimes, on the
basis  of  which  access  could  have  been  granted.  The  next  step  down  the  stairway  of
expectations  was  mutual  recognition,  at  least  in  selected  areas  –  or  alignment  and  mutual
3
recognition, as UK Finance has proposed.
Yet  I  am  sceptical  as  to  whether  such  a  mutual  recognition  framework  is  actually  possible.
Moreover, a future agreement may very well be quite limited – for example, to the exchange of
goods. Labour migration is likely to be excluded; at least, this has been mentioned as a red line
for the UK government. And free trade in services also seems less and less likely. To quote the
negotiator for the EU, Michel Barnier: “There is no place [for financial services]. There is not a
4
single trade agreement that is open to financial services. It doesn’t exist […].”
3. Facing difficult realities: The “no deal” scenario
Thus, it is not that unlikely that there will be no free trade agreement for financial services – or
other services sectors, for that matter.
What would that mean for financial transactions between the UKand the EU? It would mean that
the  EU  and  the  UK  would  trade  under  rules  set  by  the  World  Trade  Organization  –  where
services sectors are only thinly covered.
Service providers would then have to apply for comprehensive licenses in both jurisdictions and
have all the necessary elements of a fully functioning bank ready in both places.
I  am  very  much  aware  that  this  sounds  like  a  worst  case  scenario.  And  I  very  much  do
understand that. We are coming from a highly comfortable position: the single market and the
passporting rights allow free trade in services without much legal and regulatory friction. After
more than two decades of this freedom we have gotten used to it; it has become our point of
reference in debates and for policy proposals.
But it is time to face the facts. The point of reference has changed since the Brexit vote. Where it
was the single market and passporting, it is now trade agreements with third countries that do
not  accept  the  EU’s  legal  jurisdiction  –  we  all  know  Mr  Barnier’s  stairway  to  Brexit.   In  these
arrangements, the free exchange of workers and services tends to be very limited.
5
It is imperative to accept this new political point of reference, because the old one has somewhat
lost democratic legitimacy.
Yes,  this  is  inconvenient  and  it  creates  frictions.  However,  if  we  take  a  broader  historical
perspective, we can see that – in the past – full integration has not been a necessary condition
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  vibrant  international  economic  exchange.  Innovation,  growth,  and  close  economic  ties  are
possible  even  in  a  world  where  firms  have  to  adhere  to  different  sets  of  rules  in  different
countries. This competition of rulesets may even foster institutional innovation and diversity and
may contribute to stability.
Rather than clinging to an almost somewhat anachronistic point of reference, we must explore
new approaches. And that is why we need constructive proposals from all sides, including the
industry.
UK Finance has tabled a proposal as well, and I welcome the effort. Yet I am sceptical as to
whether the mutual recognition framework proposed is actually 100 percent feasible. By giving
substantial  powers  to  technical  cooperative  committees  of  supervisors,  it  would  most  likely
undermine national sovereignty and democratic legitimacy – thereby crossing the UK’s red lines
and also infuriating those critical of the EU for undermining national parliaments. A particularly
problematic example is the idea that any agreement would need to ensure that this agreement is
a baseline for the future, meaning that a country could not “impose more restrictive terms than
those applicable at the time the framework is agreed.”  It is not obvious to me that this would be
efficient.
6
The  substantial  effort  necessary  to  make  this  technical,  cooperative  arrangement  work  may
outweigh the benefits to society. In the end, the effort put into keeping such an arrangement alive
might be better invested in making sure that we make the licensing procedures as smooth as
possible.
At the end of the day, the decision about the future for financial services will be a political one.
But, in any case, it is important that we all work together to find pragmatic solutions under any
kind of framework. And a lot of difficult tasks lie ahead of us – for financial firms as well as for
central banks and supervisors.
4. Transition phase to the rescue?
In light of these tremendous tasks, many firms and officials seem to be counting on a transition
phase that could provide some breathing space for businesses and give them more time for their
preparations. Talks about such a phase have just started: last week the EU’s chief negotiator
Michel Barnier has received directives reflecting the stance of the EU27 on a potential transition
phase until the end of 2020. Roughly eight weeks are scheduled for the talks about transition in
total,  so  that  an  agreement  on  transition  could  be  reached  by  March  and  talks  about  future
relations can take centre stage thereafter.
Many businesses are holding out high hopes that a transition phase will give them certainty on
the shape of relations between the UK and the EU, at least until year-end 2020. Some observers
seem quite confident that there will be a transition phase. But a number of potential stumbling
blocks  remain.  For  one  thing,  while  there  would  certainly  be  economic  merits  to  such  an
arrangement, it’s politically tricky to design.
Furthermore, a vague, in-principle political agreement on transition wouldn’t tell you too much and
would be very fragile. But even if both sides managed to reach a consensus on a detailed legal
text by March, this would still only be a preliminary part of the greater deal. Both sides would still
have to reach an overall divorce deal, roughly by October of this year. If this endeavour fails or if
parliaments don’t subsequently ratify the deal, the transition period would be off the table, too. Put
bluntly: a deal on the transition phase hinges on an agreement on the overall future relationship –
if the UK and the EU can reach a deal on the end state of the future partnership, I am confident it
will be easier to find a suitable solution for the transition phase.
The point is: Even if one is cautiously optimistic that a transition phase can be agreed upon –
which  I  continue  to  be  –  it  still  wouldn’t  give  businesses  the  certainty  they  crave.  Just  this
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Monday,  Mario  Draghi  has  underlined  in  the  European  Parliament  that  political  uncertainty  will
remain for quite some time to come. The transition phase is not a safety net.
5. Acknowledging realities: timely preparation is key
This is why I see no alternative to timely preparation. This holds for all businesses affected, and it
holds  for  the  financial  sector  in  particular.  Financial  institutions  should  not  fall  prey  to  a  false
sense  of  certainty  that,  come  what  may,  there  will  be  an  agreement  and  that  they  will  have
sufficient time left to adapt to the new framework. The economic consequences of insufficient
preparation in the event of a hard Brexit would far exceed the costs of proper preparation.
Looking  at  banks,  proper  preparation  includes  establishing  at  least  basic  entities  in  the  other
economic area – that is, the EU27 or the UK – in order to continue doing business there. The
concept of a “basic entity” is not easy to define. From our side, I can repeat that we will certainly
not accept empty shells or “letterbox companies” where the business effectively continues to be
run  from  London.  For  critical  functions  such  as  management,  controlling  and  compliance,
qualified personnel need to be present at the EU entity at all times. We expect any branch or
subsidiary to retain chief responsibility for its business.
That is our general approach. When it comes to the details, things get much more complicated
very quickly – as has been demonstrated by our experience with the applications of banks for
licenses  in  the  context  of  Brexit.  It  is  not  enough  to  make  a  decision  about  what  business  to
move and to submit a ten-page application for a banking license to the supervisor. In reality, it is
quite  common  that  applications  are  changed  and  amended  during  the  process  as  a  result  of
ongoing discussions between the supervisor and the applying bank or due to the applying bank
having a change of heart due to the emergence of new information.
This should by no means come as a surprise. In many ways, both banks and supervisors are in
new territory here. And not only businesses have got their hands full managing the fallout from
Brexit, supervisors do, too. In normal times, the European Single Supervisory Mechanism issues
about 10 licenses for credit institutions under the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR) per
year, plus a couple of licenses issued nationally for entities such as securities trading banks. But
in the context of Brexit, we are looking at more than 100 financial institutions – many of which are
highly significant and complex institutions – currently operating out of the UK that potentially need
a new or modified license in the EU.
Therefore, we have increased our resources both in the European banking supervision and in the
national supervisory authorities. However, our capacities are obviously finite. Should there be a
flood of applications at the very last minute, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to prevent
capacity constraints that could prolong the application process.
Therefore,  I  strongly  advise  banks  not  to  slow  down  in  their  preparatory  efforts  because  of  a
vague possibility of a transitional period. The first quarter of this year has been named by many in
the financial industry as a point of no return for pushing the button on their Brexit contingency
plans. In my view, this is still a fair estimate. Those who do not complete their plans and start
implementing them by March this year risk being left high and dry by Brexit one year later.
To be clear, this also applies to German and other European institutions that operate in the UK.
We have learned that there are institutions that have not yet approached the PRA even though
they want to maintain their UK business after Brexit.
6. What can bank supervisors do?
Some  have  voiced  the  concern  that  warnings  from  European  officials  towards  businesses,
including financial institutions, currently operating out of the UK to prepare for a hard Brexit could
be an attempt to lure business and jobs to the EU27. I want to make crystal clear that this is not
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
our intention. From the day after the referendum I have repeatedly emphasized that we are not
the marketing agency for the city of Frankfurt – or any other European financial centre, for that
matter.  We  are  supervisors  interested  in  the  stability  and  smooth  functioning  of  the  financial
sector. And as long as there is no deal on future relations, no divorce deal and not even a reliable
and consistent declaration of intent, we have no other choice than to warn financial institutions of
the risk of being caught unprepared. This would not be in the interest of either the EU or the UK.
Whatever political decision is taken, bank supervisors will not only do all they can to make the
transition to a new regime as smooth as possible; they will also, in the long run, try to reduce
unnecessary inefficiencies where possible.
In  December  last  year,  the  PRA  published  a  draft  proposal  for  a  post-Brexit  supervisory
approach. I very much appreciate the spirit behind this approach. It reflects a solution-oriented,
pragmatic,  yet  stability-oriented  approach.  In  the  same  vain,  the  SSM  has  developed  quite
pragmatic, cooperative “policy stances” on many of the relevant issues. I am confident that this
cooperative style can be an important contribution towards a smooth transition.
7. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, the point of reference for future regulatory alignment has changed since
the Brexit vote. It used to be the single market and passporting; now it is trade agreements with
third countries that do not accept the EU’s legal jurisdiction. The free exchange of workers and
services will tend to be very limited under these scenarios.
It is imperative to accept this new political point of reference, because the old one has somewhat
lost its democratic legitimacy.
The tasks that come with this new reality are unchartered territory for all of us. But, irrespective
of the framework, it is important that we work together to find pragmatic solutions that sustain the
strong links between our economies and financial sectors.
I am confident that, even without a financial services agreement, our economies and financial
sectors  will  remain  closely  integrated.  Furthermore,  I  am  confident  –  and  glad,  even  –  that
Germany and the UK will maintain their long tradition of partnership based on close cooperation
and mutual trust.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
A Dombret (2016) Opt-in or opt-out? The future of the European Union in light of the UK referendum. Speech
delivered at the Atlantik-Brücke, Hamburg, 23 June 2016.
The rights of EU citizens in the UK after Brexit (and vice versa), the border between the Republic of Ireland and
Northern Ireland, and the UK’s financial contributions to the EU budget over the coming years.
UK Finance (2017) Supporting Europe’s economies and citizens. A modern approach to financial services in
an EU-UK trade agreement. September 2017.
Interview with the Guardian on 18 December 2017; www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/dec/18/uk-cannot-have-
a-special-deal-for-the-city-says-eu-brexit-negotiator-barnier; accessed on 23 January 2018.
Reuters (2017) Stairway to Brexit: Barnier maps out UK’s Canadian path. 19. December 2017. Available at
uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-options/stairway-to-brexit-barnier-maps-out-uks-canadian-path-
idUKKBN1ED23R, last accessed 31 January 2018.
UK Finance (2017) Supporting Europe’s Economies and Citizens. A modern approach to financial services in
an EU-UKtrade agreement. September 2017, p. 12.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
