   Vítor Constâncio: Past and future of the European Central Bank 
monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conference on “Central Banks in Historical Perspective: What Changed After the Financial 
Crisis?”, organised by the Central Bank of Malta, Valletta, 4 May 2018. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 It is a pleasure to be here today and participate in this celebratory event for the 50th anniversary 
of the Central Bank of Malta. In accordance with the conference theme, I would like to take this 
opportunity to adopt a historical perspective and offer some reflections on monetary policy in 
the euro area over the past two decades. I will start with a review of the ECB journey from 
1999 to date, to highlight the evolution of the practice of monetary policy in the euro area over 
this period. I will then draw some lessons from this experience, both for economic thinking and 
monetary policy making. 
The ECB journey 
As you all know, the Treaty on the European Union defines the contours of monetary policy in 
the euro area. According to Article 127 of the Treaty, price stability is the primary objective of 
monetary policy in the euro area. It is only without prejudice to the objective of price stability 
that monetary policy can support the general economic policies in the Union. This high-level 
mandate enshrined in the Treaty is the cornerstone of all ECB decisions and has remained 
unchanged over its two decades of existence. 
Within the boundaries of the Treaty, however, the practice of monetary policy in the euro area 
has undergone a process of transformation over time. While the transformation has often been 
gradual, four key phases can be clearly identified. 
First Phase: Monetary policy beginning and adjustment (1999-2003) 
The first phase starts with the launch of the single currency and lasts until the revision of the 
monetary  policy  strategy  in  May  2003,  when  the  weight  of  the  monetary  pillar  and  the 
“dominant role of money” were demoted and the framework got closer to the flexible inflation 
targeting regime adopted by many other central banks around the world.  
In the preparation for monetary union, a document published in 1997 by the ECB predecessor, 
the European Monetary Institute, explained why both a monetary aggregates targeting strategy 
and an inflation targeting regime were not considered fully appropriate for the euro area.[1] 
The first regime, which was followed by the Bundesbank, in a tradition that understandably 
exerted a crucial influence on the initial ECB decisions, was refused for the practical reason 
that money demand functions at the European level would not be stable enough to allow for a 
reliable calibration of a M3 target. The refusal of pure inflation targeting was justified by the 
theoretical reason that it did not allow a role for money.  
One of the first decisions of the Governing Council, already in 1998, was to announce the 
adoption  of  a  “stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy”  to  attain  the  goals  set  out  in  the 
Treaty. The strategy was a sort of hybrid based on the two main strategies previously examined 
and characterised by the following key elements, as described in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin 
of January 1999: “The strategy consists of three main elements: (i) a quantitative definition of 
the primary objective of the single monetary policy, namely price stability; and the “two pillars” 
of the strategy used to achieve this objective: (ii) a prominent role for money, as signaled by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   the announcement of a reference value for the growth of a broad monetary aggregate; and (iii) 
a broadly based assessment of the outlook for future price developments and the risks to price 
stability in the euro area as a whole.” 
There was clearly a dominant first pillar with a reference value initially set at 4.5% growth rate 
for M3. The text further explained: “To signal the prominent role it has assigned to money, the 
Governing Council has announced a quantitative reference value for monetary growth as one 
pillar of the overall stability oriented strategy”. So, some trace of technical monetarism[2] was 
implicitly present. In 2006, explaining the origin of the “two pillars”, Otmar Issing quoted former 
President Wim Duisenberg’s reply to a question by a journalist in 1999: “it is not a coincidence 
that I have used the words that money will play a prominent role. So, if you call it the two pillars, 
one pillar is thicker than the other is or stronger than the other, but how much I couldn’t tell 
you”.[3] 
The reference value for the monetary aggregate M3 was considered a relevant variable for 
inflation assessment and was related to the theoretical approach of technical monetarism in 
that money predicts inflation and differs from credit or other aggregates. The reference value 
for  M3  annual  growth  was  calculated  to  be  4.5%  and  was  used  to  produce  a  monetary 
overhang:  the  difference  between  actual  M3  growth  and  the  reference  value,  with  higher 
numbers representing higher risks for medium term inflation.  
The  monetary  policy  framework  announcement  sparked  a  lively  debate  in  the  academic 
community, regarding the differences between the ECB approach and the inflation targeting 
regime.[4]  There  were  criticisms  about  the  ambiguity  of  having  two  seemingly  different 
approaches, one close to monetary targeting (the reference value) and another related to a 
public  commitment  of  a  quantified  inflation  target  (less  than  2%),  an  element  of  utmost 
importance in an inflation targeting regime.  
The sobering experience of the following few years with the framework, determined the need 
for  clarifications  and  ultimately for  a revision  of the  strategy.  Since  2001  the growth  of  M3 
started to accelerate to values well above the 4.5%, registering 10.9% in December 2001 and 
in December 6.6% in 2002[5] . It thus suggested significant risks for inflation that the behavior 
of prices did not show, even when considering meaningful lags. In fact, the money demand 
function became clearly unstable since 2001 and did not justify the use of a concept like the 
reference  value  referring  to  the  medium-term  of  up  to  two  years  which  is  the  operational 
horizon for monetary policy decisions.[6] The continuous need to try to explain away the growing 
monetary  overhang  without  corresponding  inflation  in  the  horizon,  was  turning  into  an 
embarrassing exercise.  
Consequently, in May 2003, the ECB published a review of the monetary policy framework 
including the following elements. First, the medium-term target for inflation was redefined to a 
value “below but close to 2%”; second, the presentation of the monetary policy decisions would 
start with the “economic analysis to identify short- to medium-term risks to price stability”; third, 
the monetary analysis would “mainly serve as a means of cross-checking, from a medium- to 
long-term perspective, the indications coming from the economic analysis; fourth, the review 
of the reference value on an annual basis was dropped. While still at 4.5%, the reference value 
has, in fact, not been mentioned or used since then. The monetary pillar became thinner.  
Finally, in June 2004 the ECB started publishing its staff macroeconomic projections for the 
euro area. In my assessment, the decisions taken in 2003 and 2004 were important steps 
towards a higher degree of transparency and accountability and made the ECB strategy even 
more aligned with inflation targeting. I therefore believe that the ECB’s monetary policy strategy 
can be seen as consistent with the broad features of flexible inflation targeting as described in 
Svensson (2008). It includes: first, an announced numerical inflation target; second, monetary 
policy decisions that make the inflation forecast published by the central bank, converge to this 
numerical target, and third, a high degree of transparency and accountability.[7] Naturally, this 
does  not  mean  that  all  central  banks  do  not  look  at  what  is  happening  with  monetary 
aggregates, especially credit, as they have information content. In the same way, central banks 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   also follow general financial conditions. In both cases, however, central banks cannot extract 
quantitatively  precise  calibration  on  what  will  happen  to  inflation  from  those  monetary  and 
financial variables.  
Second Phase: Monetary policy until the financial crisis (2003-2007) 
The period spanning from the revision of the monetary strategy to the beginning of the crisis 
in  2007  coincided  with  the  build-up  of  macroeconomic  imbalances  in  several  member 
countries.  With  hindsight,  the  ECB  has  been  criticised  for  not  helping  prevent  that 
development. I do not agree with such criticism as it ignores that a single monetary policy 
cannot cater for heterogeneity across member states.  
Rates  were  increased  in  December  2005  as  there  was  evidence  that  strong  growth  was 
contributing to a rise in inflation above 2%, with a rate of 2.5% in the third quarter of that year. 
Curiously, the interest rate decision was criticised at the time by a number of commentators[8] 
and  even  by  some  policy  institutions.  However,  the  IMF’s  economic  outlook  of  April  2005 
considered that monetary policy in the euro area “should remain firmly on hold”.[9] A similar 
recommendation was issued by the OECD in November 2005.[10] With the benefit of hindsight, 
most observers now agree that the tightening decision in December 2005 was appropriate.  
Let me emphasise however, that this conclusion does not imply that monetary policy interest 
rates are the best tool to respond to financial imbalances with what is called “leaning against 
the wind” policy. I do not believe that monetary policy should be normally used to prevent the 
build-up of financial imbalances. The main reason is that, due to the imperfect synchronisation 
of financial and business cycles, leaning against the wind would pose an intertemporal trade-
off  in  achieving  price  stability.[11]  More  precisely,  “leaning  against  the  wind”  requires 
intentionally  producing  deviations  from  price  stability  over  the  short-  to  medium-term,  as  a 
precautionary move against the risk of a future financial crisis. Its benefit would be to help 
prevent potentially larger deviations from price stability over the medium- to long-term, once 
the financial crisis occurs. The risks of this approach are to increase the amplitude of business 
cycle fluctuations and hinder the credibility of the central bank regarding its inflation objective, 
while only marginally reducing the probability of financial crises.  
My conclusion is that the costs of “leaning against the wind” are likely to exceed benefits as I 
illustrated in a recent intervention applying the methodology developed by Lars Svensson to 
the euro area.[12] Macroprudential policy should be the main policy tool to respond to the build-
up of financial imbalances. In this respect, the fact that monetary policy “gets in all the cracks” 
of the financial system was seen as an advantage by Jeremy Stein. However, it can easily 
become a significant inconvenience if it creates an unnecessary recessionary episode or when 
in a monetary union, a financial instability episode is not generalised across all countries.[13] 
Indeed, some influential authors have pointed out that a tightening of monetary policy could, 
in some cases, even boost the bubbly component of stock prices, or increase house price 
imbalances through debt deflation effects.[14] This requires strong macroprudential policies to 
complement monetary policy in order to achieve both price and financial stability. 
The third phase: global financial crisis and Great Recession (2008-2013) 
The third phase marks an abrupt change in euro area monetary policy. It can be identified as 
a result of the financial crisis of 2007, and especially its intensification after the bankruptcy of 
Lehman Brothers in September 2008. However, in July 2008, overreacting to a reading of 4% 
in headline inflation related to oil price developments we took the controversial decision to 
increase the policy rate to 4.25%. Following the dramatic effects of the Lehman bankruptcy, 
rates were subsequently cut three times to a level of 2.5% in December 2008. A broad policy 
of liquidity provision to the banking sector replacing auctions by the fixed rate full allotment 
regime was introduced in October and kept until this day.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   The  operational  approach  was  to  calibrate  each  measure  to  address  the  specific  market 
impairment  prevailing  at  that  point.  For  example,  liquidity  was  provided  at  much  longer 
maturities  than  usual  to  help  alleviate  tensions  exacerbating  the  maturity  mismatch  on  the 
banking sector’s balance sheet. The list of eligible collateral was also expanded to ease the 
shortages that emerged during the crisis. 
A direct implication of the activity of eased liquidity provision to the market was the increase in 
the  size  of  the  ECB  balance  sheet.  The  increase  in  financial  institutions’  demand  for  ECB 
liquidity led to a progressive, and sizable, increase in bank reserves. This was accentuated by 
the effects of the SMP programme under which the ECB boldly intervened since 2010 with 
purchases of government bonds of countries where monetary policy transmission had been 
severely impaired as a result of excessive market pressures. Between 2007 and mid-2012, the 
size of the ECB’s balance sheet more than doubled. Clearly, the larger balance sheet was then 
not the objective of our non-standard measures, but rather the result of the lender of last resort 
function to the market. Indeed, as the funding situation in the banking sector started improving 
in mid-2012, the ECB balance sheet slowly began to contract without any adverse effects. 
Some commentators were nevertheless concerned by the increasing size of the ECB balance 
sheet.  Based  on  the  high  long-run  correlation  between  inflation  and  money  growth,  they 
interpreted the huge growth in the ECB monetary base as a signal of future high inflation risks. 
These fears obviously disregarded three things: first, no theory of inflation is directly related 
with the central bank’s balance sheet; second, the relationship between the monetary base 
and  the  broad  monetary  aggregates  is  unstable  and,  in  fact,  during  that  period  monetary 
aggregates did not increase in response to the expansion of central bank liquidity; third, that 
the crisis implied a shock to money demand that totally disrupted any potential relationship 
between  monetary  aggregates  and  inflation.  This  assessment  has  been  vindicated  by 
subsequent  developments.  Almost  ten  years  after  the  initial  increase  in  size  of  the  ECB 
balance  sheet,  the  problem  in  the  euro  area  remains  one  of too  low,  rather  than too  high, 
inflation.  
In the opposite direction, concerns were also voiced about the reduction in the ECB’s balance 
sheet size beginning in 2012 and a possible link to the recession and low inflation period that 
followed. This view is compounded by the criticism of the two policy rate increases in April and 
July of 2011, taking it from 1% to 1.5%. This episode and the double dip in growth deserve 
therefore further comment. Those rate increases came on the wake of developments in the 
first half 2011, showing economic growth slightly above 2% and with inflation attaining 2.75 % 
in the second quarter. We were also overly influenced by growth forecasts which turned out to 
be excessively optimistic. Blanchard and Leigh, who also point out that many other forecasting 
institutions made recurring errors on euro area growth during this period, make an independent 
validation of this hypothesis in their 2013 paper.[15] The authors argue that this is due to an 
underestimation  of  fiscal  multipliers,  which  in  turn  led  to  an  underestimation  of  the 
contractionary effects of the fiscal consolidation plans announced in early 2010.  
With hindsight, it is now clear that increasing interest rates during this phase was premature. 
The  economy  weakened  markedly  after  the  summer,  on  the  wake  of  the  acute  market 
pressures on the sovereign debt of Spain and Italy that led to a second round of interventions 
in  the  sovereign  bond  markets  under  the  Securities  Market  Programme  (SMP).  The  two 
consecutive rate hikes were quickly reversed in November and December of that same year. 
In view of the long lags of monetary policy effects, it is obvious that the quick succession of 
increases and reductions of policy rates cannot be responsible for the recessionary episode of 
that period. What really was responsible for the recession of 2012/2013 was the coordinated 
fiscal consolidation in which all member states engaged. A working paper published by the 
European  Commission  estimated  that  collective  fiscal  consolidation  led  to  cumulative 
deviations from the baseline growth in 2011-2013 from 8% in Germany to 18% in Greece.[16] 
Another paper finds a loss deviation from baseline between 14% to 20%, for the euro area 
GDP during the same period.[17] 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Monetary policy continued to help the situation when, at the end of 2011, the ECB introduced 
two  three-year  longer-term  refinancing  operations  implemented  in  December  2011  and 
February 2012 amounting to EUR 1 trillion. This measure and the correction of the two rate 
hikes contributed to attenuate the severity of the 2012 recession.[18] The announcement of the 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme in 2012 further contributed to preventing 
an even worse deterioration of economic conditions by removing redenomination risk, which 
had become an important source of macroeconomic uncertainty. The programme facilitated 
an ease of tension in all financial markets, which was accompanied by a slow, but progressive 
return of spreads towards normal levels. Altogether, with the second round of sovereign bond 
purchases in 2011, the liquidity supplied at end-2011 and the OMT announcement, the ECB 
put an end to the euro area acute existential crisis.  
The fourth phase: ultra-low inflation and QE (2014-today) 
This brings me to the fourth and current phase of monetary policy in the euro area. In 2013, 
the euro area recovery had not yet gained traction. In spite of the ultra-low level of interest 
rates, renewed deflationary risks emerged with a progressive fall of inflation towards levels 
significantly below 2 percent. In contrast with the previous five years, financial disruptions could 
no longer be responsible for the economic slowdown. The coincident reduction of output and 
inflation suggested that the renewed economic weakness was driven by a negative aggregate 
demand shock. In turn, the negative demand shock could be the delayed result of the fiscal 
policy tightening since 2010, or possibly the consequence of weakened economic sentiment 
after two recessions.[19] 
Maintaining  price  stability  in  the  face  of  insufficient  aggregate  demand  and  downward 
inflationary pressures required a more expansionary monetary policy stance. In response to 
these  developments,  a  new  phase  in  non-standard  measures  was  launched,  including 
increasing the balance sheet with asset purchases. The new non-standard policies were not 
merely expected to undo any remaining financial market impairments, but to further ease the 
monetary policy stance at a point where policy rates had reached their lower bound. In July 
2013, in response to the contagion of increased bond yields resulting from the “taper tantrum” 
in  the  U.S.,  the  ECB  had  already  introduced  the  non-standard  policy  of  forward  guidance, 
indicating its intention to keep interest rates at prevailing or lower levels “for an extended period 
of  time”.  As  inflation  continued  to  decelerate  from  October  2013,  falling  under  1%,  a 
comprehensive package of expansionary measures[20] was announced in June 2014 including: 
a cut in policy rates and a negative deposit facility rate; two asset purchase programmes for 
asset backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds (CBPP), and a facility to provide longer-
term funding to banks for new loans, contingent on bank credit supply behaviour, which we 
refer to as targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO). In January 2015, the large-
scale  asset  purchase  programme  (APP)  was  extended  to  include  purchases  of  sovereign 
bonds.  
A  growing  number  of  studies  about  the  impact  of  APP  suggest  that  the  programme  was 
effective  in  lowering  spreads  on  long-maturity  assets  and  thereby  boosting  inflation  and 
growth.[21]  These  studies  also  highlight  that  the  APP  announcement  contributed  to  a  re-
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  by  reversing  their  previously  observed  decline.  From  a 
simpler perspective, we can state today that three years of large-scale asset purchases have 
eliminated the risk of prolonged deflation. This fact is incontrovertible and should be admitted 
by both the early APP critics and those who claimed it was unnecessary.[22] Nevertheless, we 
should remain aware that the precise channels of transmission of Quantitative Easing (QE) 
are still imperfectly understood and they do not relate to technical monetarism. I think that 
making progress in our theoretical understanding of QE remains an important research priority 
for central banks, especially in view of the possibility that nominal interest rate will be more 
persistently low in the future, and thus that the effective lower bound constraint will be hit more 
frequently. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   A  particular  aspect  of  QE  programmes  that  needs  to  be  investigated  further  regards  its 
distributional effects. As an instrument of monetary policy accommodation, the APP led to an 
increase in economic activity, which was especially beneficial for those individuals who, as a 
result, found a job after being unemployed. At the same time, the APP increased the value of 
financial assets and thus led to capital gains for the holders of those assets. Improving our 
understanding of the relative strength of these distributional effects is also an important priority 
for central banks. Ongoing work at the ECB suggests that the decline in unemployment that 
followed the introduction of the APP had a disproportionately positive impact on low-income 
households.[23]  The  net  overall  impact  of  APP  has  therefore  reduced  income  inequality. 
Furthermore, as a result of housing price increases associated with the economic recovery, 
the same positive outcome took place with respect to wealth distribution.  
Implications for the future 
The ECB journey that I have recalled here can give rise to two obvious questions. The first one 
relates to economic analysis: were the mainstream macroeconomic models used before the 
crisis appropriate to help guide policy decisions, or should these be changed? The second 
question  relates  to  the  monetary  policy  strategy:  should  lessons’  learnt  in  the  journey  be 
reflected in a change of central banks’ monetary policy strategies? 
Implications for macroeconomics and monetary theory 
Let me start with the first question. The shortcoming of mainstream macroeconomics and of 
the type of Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models that prevailed before the 
crisis, are by now quite well known.[24]  
Besides  extending  DSGE  models  to  include  macro-financial  linkages,  the  ECB  decided  to 
develop  a  new  Multi-Country  model  starting  from  the  premise  that,  in  the  words  of  Olivier 
Blanchard, “policy models” cannot be expected to have the same tight structure as “theory 
models”.[25]  A semi-structural approach along the lines of the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US model 
has been adopted.[26] We can therefore put more emphasis on the model’s ability to provide 
sound  quantitative  predictions.  When  introducing  financial  frictions,  we  have  relied  on  a 
reduced form representation that is consistent with different theoretical micro-foundations. This 
more  flexible,  semi-structural  approach  allows  us  to  model  a  wide  range  of  banking  and 
financial variables, going from bank lending spreads to term premia, without taking a stance 
on the theoretical fundamental debate about how they are linked to the macroeconomy.[27] 
A crucial theoretical aspect which requires improvement is related to the Phillips curve, the 
most commonly used empirical model of inflation that faces several estimation problems as it 
uses several unobservable variables.[28] It started as a relationship between wage growth and 
unemployment and later, prices or inflation substituted wages. In 1967-8, Phelps and Friedman 
introduced expectations as a variable that shifted the previously considered stable relationship. 
Jointly with this change, Friedman added the concept of a fixed Natural Rate of Unemployment 
(NARU), determined only by supply factors, to which the economy would tend in the long-term. 
The difference between actual unemployment and this long-term unemployment rate became 
the variable used as proxy for demand pressure in the market of goods and services, seen as 
the  main  theoretical  cause  of  inflation.  Inflation  was  an  excess  demand  phenomenon  and 
demand could be controlled by monetary policy — via monetary aggregates for Friedman or 
with interest rates, as believed today. In practice, estimates of a Non-Accelerating Inflation 
Rate (NAIRU) are what is obtained instead of the unobservable long-term NARU, which are 
doubtfully deemed to be the same. 
In the late 1970s, two different research approaches emerged, thus characterised by Robert 
Gordon[29] : “The left fork in the road,… is the resurrection of Keynesian economics in the form 
of a …. Phillips Curve (PC) model that incorporates long-run neutrality and an explicit role of 
supply shocks in shifting the Phillips Curve up or down, together with an interpretation of the 
influence of past inflation as reflecting generalized inertia rather than expected inflation. The 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   right fork in the road of the post-1975 evolution, features an approach developed by Kydland, 
Prescott and Sargent, and more recently by Galì and Gertler and others. Inflation depends on 
forward-looking  expectations,  and  expectations  respond  rationally  to  actual  and  expected 
changes in monetary and fiscal policy. This two-way game has no room for supply shocks or 
inertia”.  This  second  approach  produces  what  is  called  the  New  Keynesian  Phillips  Curve 
(NKPC) that basically focuses on the output gap and expectations and is a crucial part of the 
DSGE models, where the interest rate is all-powerful to control demand and therefore inflation.  
Gordon and others forged ahead with the first approach, adding variables representing supply 
shocks (as prices depend on demand and supply factors), inertia represented by long lags of 
inflation and a time-varying NAIRU determined by a simple stochastic process. To this day, 
using  this  so-called  “triangle  approach”,  Gordon  continues  to  obtain  very  good  results  in 
predicting  inflation  out-of-sample[30].  In  2013,  Gordon  shows  that  his  model  “can  estimate 
coefficients up to 1996 and then in a 16-year-long dynamic simulation, with no information on 
the actual values of lagged inflation, predict the 2013 value of inflation to within 0.5 percentage 
point. The slope of the PC relationship between inflation and the unemployment gap does not 
decline by half or more as in the recent literature, but instead is stable.”  
This last aspect is particularly important as it highlights one of the puzzles found in the second 
approach  of  the  NKPC,  since  Roberts[31] obtained  the  result  of  a  50%  decline  in  the  slope 
coefficient for the U.S. in 2006. As is to be expected, the value of that coefficient depends on 
the entire specification of the regression. When it does not use supply-side variables, assumes 
inflation lags with coefficients that add to 1, and a constant NAIRU, as in the NKPC specified 
by Roberts, it is natural that the low inflation environment of the period shows up in a declining 
slope coefficient.  
The problem is that the NKPC did not perform empirically well from the start. Many ad-hoc 
remedies have been tried in order to make it work, even when they did not conform to the pure 
theoretical paradigm of the model. First, lags of inflation were introduced by Galì and Gertler 
(1999) to create the so-called hybrid NKPC.[32] This hybrid model has faced many difficulties in 
predicting inflation with acceptable accuracy, even when embedded in DSGE models. As I 
mentioned in another intervention[33]: “As King and Watson (2012)[34] highlight when using the 
labour income share or unit labour costs the models do not capture that the last 15 years do 
not show a co-movement of inflation with the significant decline of those ULCs”. Gürkaynak, 
Kisacikoglu  and  Rossi  (2013)[35] also  illustrate  the  subpar  performance  of  DSGE  models  to 
forecast  inflation.  In  their  encompassing  survey,  Mavroeidis,  Plagborg-Møller  and  J.  Stock 
(2014)[36], also conclude that, “we are unable to pin down the role of expectations in the inflation 
process sufficiently accurately for the results to be useful for policy analysis”. 
Many other transformations have been attempted to make variants of the hybrid model perform 
better. One way is to focus on core inflation on which the missing supply factors may be less 
important. Another approach is to take expectations from consumer surveys or professional 
forecasters, which of course are not microfounded.[37] In some estimates, the price of oil or the 
full  price  of  imports  is  introduced  as  an  ad-hoc element  within  the  paradigm. Time-varying 
coefficients  and  NAIRUs  are  also  used.  So,  pragmatically  adjusted,  hybrid  NKPCs  can  be 
made to work, especially for core inflation. This specification is quite distant from the initial 
pretensions  of  the  NKPC  and  from  rationale  of  DSGE  models  where  everything  is 
microfounded and subject to rational expectations. The two strands of the literature identified 
by Robert Gordon seem to have undertaken some convergence. 
An important source of the Phillips curve’s poor performance can be the mis-measurement of 
the output gap and the NAIRU. An important part of the under-prediction of inflation in recent 
years may be the result of an underestimation of the slack in the economy. This is illustrated 
by the fact that we better predictions of inflation can be obtained when the broad concept of 
unemployment is used (e.g. U6, which is at 16% for euro area) instead of the usual measure 
of unemployment (standing at 8%). Usual measures of slack can vary substantially across 
methods and chosen variables, although they tend to agree on the timing of peaks and troughs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   The fact that economic activity is multidimensional suggests that there might be advantages in 
using large dynamic models to estimate it. For instance, ECB staff used a dynamic factor model 
that performs a trend/cycle decomposition of real activity variables and core inflation.[38] Using 
different sets of variables and trend assumptions, they get different measures of the output 
gap. One way to discriminate among different estimates of the output gap is to check their 
ability to forecast inflation. It turns out that the variants associated with a continuation of a 
positive growth trend, implying a wider output gap, are the ones that produce better inflation 
forecasts. The best variant from this perspective implies that the output gap was as large as -
6% in 2014 and 2015, on average, an estimate which is considerably more negative than most 
official  estimates,  hovering  between  -2  and  -3%  for  those  years.[39]  Results  for  2017  still 
continue to show a quite meaningful negative output gap, instead of one already close to zero 
as reported by several international institutions. This points to the great uncertainty behind the 
estimation of the output gap, the same being true about the concept of an unemployment gap 
more directly involving the NAIRU.  
In any case, what matters is that it is possible to find specifications that can be used as fairly 
good inflation forecasting tools. Either NKPC or Traditional Keynesian Phillips Curves (TKPC) 
can  achieve  that.  For  instance,  in  their  estimations  of  the  Non-Accelerating Wage  Rate  of 
Unemployment (NAWRU), the European Commission has used the NKPC for 21 countries 
and  the TKPC for  7  countries.[40] In recent  ECB  work  about  understanding the  low  inflation 
environment, a variant of the hybrid NKPC for core inflation was used but with the inclusion of 
import prices, lagged inflation and expectations taken from surveys.[41] Using that pragmatic 
specification, acceptable forecasting results are obtained and we find that the slope has been 
increasing in recent years. This is a source of confidence that our policy, having contributed to 
the recovery, will in the end contribute to achieve our inflation goal. 
Another question related to the PC, beyond the forecast of inflation, refers to the interpretation 
and use of the NAIRU that can be extracted from it. It is common to see it as equivalent to the 
Friedman’s NARU, a long-term structural rate of unemployment totally dependent on supply-
side factors like demography, technology, institutions that shape market rules, etc. This view 
then endorses the use of estimated NAIRUs for several policy decisions: for instance, using 
that particular value as a measure of structural unemployment that enters into the calculation 
of  potential  output  and  the  structural  budget  deficit  with  all  its  implication  for  fiscal  policy. 
Trusting just one number to conduct policy can be dangerous. In their seminal paper, Staiger, 
Stock and Watson (1997) estimated standard deviations for the NAIRU and concluded that 
these were very large.[42] The standard deviations are not usually calculated and/or disclosed 
in estimates of NAIRU but we can rely that they are normally quite large. This recommends 
caution in using NAIRU estimates for strict policy decisions.  
A second aspect to underline is that it is difficult to accept that estimated NAIRUs are long-
term constants determined exclusively by supply-side factors. This would correspond to the 
natural rate hypothesis (NRH) put forward by Friedman. This view of separating trend from 
cycle  or  supply  from  demand  shocks  has  repeatedly  been  challenged,  for  example  in  the 
hysteresis  hypothesis  proposed  by  Blanchard  and  Summers.[43]  Recently,  Blanchard  even 
questioned whether the NRH should be rejected which in the end he refrains from doing while 
instilling a high degree of doubt and caution in its use. The main argument behind hysteresis 
is  that  there  are  various  transmission  channels  that  may  induce  a  long-lasting  impact  of 
economic fluctuations due to aggregate demand. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to detect this 
hypothesis  on  empirical  grounds  from  an  aggregate  economic  viewpoint.  However,  some 
micro-evidence  appears  to  support  it,  such  as  the  decreased  employability  of  long-term 
unemployed, as they lose skill and morale, or the decline in R&D activities and investment of 
firms during recessions.  
One change in the NARU long-term assumption is to accept that it changes over time, albeit 
slowly and indeed much more sluggish than what is normally used in estimates of NAIRU that 
even show yearly changes. About these time-varying NARUs and NAIRUs, Farmer refuses 
the whole concept[44] : “Defenders of the Natural Rate Hypothesis might choose to respond to 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   these empirical findings by arguing that the natural rate of unemployment is time varying. But 
I am unaware of any theory which provides us, in advance, with an explanation of how the 
natural rate of unemployment varies over time. In the absence of such a theory the NRH has 
no predictive content. A theory like this, which cannot be falsified by any set of observations, 
is closer to religion than science.” In the same vein, Solow once quipped “a natural rate that 
wanders permanently is not natural, is epiphenomenal”.  
The major point behind the previous discussion is that estimated NAIRUs are not good proxies 
of structural unemployment. Already in 1998, Estrella and Mishkin[45] showed that the NAIRU 
use in monetary policy “… depends critically on redefining NAIRU as a short-term concept and 
distinguishing it from a long-term concept like the natural rate of unemployment…something 
that is not typically done in the literature. Furthermore, …the view that the NAIRU concept 
implies that the monetary authorities should try to move the economy towards the NAIRU, thus 
to some treating it as a target, is both incorrect and misguided”. Indeed, the casual identification 
of  the  NAIRU  with  the  level  of  long-term  structural  unemployment  has  pernicious 
consequences,  either  in  using  to  calculate  potential  output  or  the  structural  budget  deficit. 
Being a short term concept, the NAIRU estimates since 2007, for instance, seem, to a large 
extent, to be driven by macro-economic developments rather than by shifts in structural labour 
market characteristics. ECB staff have recently replicated and updated an earlier study of the 
European  Commission  (EC)  to  illustrate  this  point.  The  study  relates  the  European 
Commission’ s NAIRU estimates to four structural labour market indicators (unemployment 
benefits,  replacement  rates,  labour  tax  wedges,  union  density,  and  active  labour  market 
policies) and three macro-economic indicators (total factor productivity growth, the share of 
construction in GDP and the real interest rate).[46] As shown in the chart, the structural indicators 
explain only a small fraction of the changes in NAIRU, whereas the macro-economic indicators 
appear to explain the bulk of its variation. Another paper, reaching the same conclusion and 
using a broader set of variables is Heimberger et al. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9 
   Overall, this evidence suggests that the shifts in unemployment rates observed since 2007 
were  mostly  triggered  by  the  macro-economic  cycle  and  not  by  an  increase  of  structural 
unemployment  as  allegedly  indicated  by  very  high  NAIRU  levels.  This  means  that  the 
estimated NAIRU from Phillips curves is not a good representation of structural unemployment. 
Confirming this, an Economic Paper published by the European Commission uses a concept 
of Structural Unemployment Rate (SUR) to substitute the NAWRU[47] in the calculation of the 
structural budget deficit. A subsequent Discussion Paper integrated the concept of SUR as a 
sort  of  anchor  in  the  estimation  of  NAWRUs,  that  are  therefore  less  pro-  cyclical  and  less 
sensitive to data corrections.[48] These analyses produce meaningful changes on fiscal policy 
stance indicators when compared with the previous straight estimates of NAWRUs.  
In view of all the uncertainty, policy-makers should seriously consider the possibility of dropping 
the NRH as a long-term stable concept that can be estimated from Phillips curves and used in 
policy decisions. This does not imply abandoning the idea behind the Phillips curve as a pure 
forecasting device with a positive slope coefficient indicating that strong growth of aggregate 
demand, given time, will increase inflation. What should be refused is the idea that there is a 
unique  identifiable  level  of  unemployment,  corresponding  to  a  level  of  stable  structural 
unemployment, above which expansionary macro policy exclusively accelerates inflation.  
Monetary policy strategy in the future 
While  our quest for  better  analytical  tools  continues,  a  broader question  concerns  whether 
there is a need to also change central banks’ monetary policy strategies. Many commentators 
have started discussing whether these should undergo a more complete overhaul, rather than 
eventually returning to the pre‐crisis status quo.[49] 
I think that the position to take in this debate hinges on the assessment of the recent experience 
with non-standard monetary policy measures. If non-standard measures were considered to 
be  ineffective,  then  interest  rates  would  really  be  the  only  available  tool  to  achieve  price 
stability. In other words, we would conclude that, once interest rates reach their effective lower 
bound, central banks are, de facto, powerless. The inconvenient truth behind that view is that 
it would crucially require reducing to literally zero the likelihood of hitting the effective lower 
bound ever again in the future.  
A substantial overhaul of current strategies would in the end be necessary. Options that have 
been  proposed  in  this  context  include  the  abolition  of  cash,  to  eliminate  the  arbitrage 
opportunity which prevents policy rates from going negative, and a higher inflation target to 
reduce the likelihood of hitting the lower bound even after large, adverse shocks.[50] In my view, 
on  the  issue  of  the  abolishment  of  cash,  “a  prudent  policy-maker  would  advise  to  be  very 
cautious before proceeding with this radical proposal, even if digitalisation may gain ground 
and finally prevail – as we start to observe in some countries”.[51] 
Regarding proposals to increase inflation targets, I think they are in general problematic, in 
view of the difficulties of managing the transition without losing credibility. Notwithstanding this, 
I would have no theoretical objections to a mild correction as proposed by many economists. 
My reaction is similar to what Janet Yellen replied in June 2017 to a question about the letter 
to the Federal Reserve signed by 22 prominent American economists[52] in favour of increasing 
the inflation target: “…this is one of our most critical decisions and one we are attentive to 
evidence and outside thinking. It's one that we will be reconsidering at some future time. … It 
needs to be a balanced assessment. But I would say that this is one of the most important 
questions  facing  monetary  policy  around  the  world  in  the  future.  And  we  very  much  look 
forward to seeing research by economists that will help inform our future decisions on this."  
An interesting alternative proposal has recently been made by Bernanke, the former chairman 
of the Federal Reserve.[53] In a nutshell, the idea is to switch to a temporary price level target 
during episodes in which the interest rates effective lower bound is binding. Under a price level 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   target, the central bank aims to stabilise the price level, rather than inflation, and it therefore 
ensures that any low-inflation episode is compensated by a period of relatively high inflation.[54] 
Outside the zero lower bound, the central bank would continue to target a standard inflation 
objective. The main advantage of this proposal is that it clearly communicates the horizon over 
which  a  period  of  inflation  below  trend  would  have  to  be  compensated.  Relative  to  other 
proposals,  the fact that for  most  of the  time,  the  central  bank  would  continue to target  the 
inflation  rate  also  facilitates  communication  with  the  public.  Nevertheless,  I  am  not  sure 
whether  the  practical  difficulties  of  implementing  the  policy  would  prevent markets  and  the 
public from fully understanding it, which may make the proposal an unrealistic option to be 
adopted by a central bank in the future. 
I have a positive assessment of the experience with non-standard measures, from large scale 
open market operations of asset purchases to negative rates, and I am glad that they now 
permanently  belong  to  the  ECB’s  toolkit  of  instruments  to  address  particular  stressful 
situations. Even outside those special conditions, it is somewhat doubtful that monetary policy 
can remain effective just by going back to the traditional approach of very small central bank 
balance sheets and the targeting of overnight money market rates, for a number of reasons.  
First, the importance of banks in funding non-financial firms has declined everywhere, including 
in the euro area. There has been a dramatic change, as non-bank financing sources have 
become much more important since the onset of the financial crisis. Total assets of investment 
funds in percentage of total bank assets increased from 16% in 2007 to 44% last year. The 
percentage of bank loans in the total stock of firms’ external financing in 2017 was just above 
12%  (or  15%,  if  intra-company  loans  and  trade  credit  are  excluded  from  total  external 
financing). For the same year, if only the stock of debt instruments is considered (excluding 
equity sources), bank loans represented only 28% of total debt financing (or 45%, if net of 
intra-sectoral financing). Before the crisis, back in 2007, bank loans represented 37% of total 
debt financing (or 60%, if net of intra-sectoral financing).[55] 
Second, other structural changes in the financial system are also important in this context: the 
increased role of secured money market transactions; the importance of a broad set of market 
rates beyond the overnight rate, in view of imperfections in arbitrage; the growing relevance of 
market-based finance; and finally, the scarcity of safe assets that affects the functioning of 
markets and the management of collateral. 
These  developments  are  behind  proposals  to  keep  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  with 
significant size to allow the use of a programme like the Fed’s reverse repo programme (RRP) 
where its stock of government securities is available for repo operations against cash.[56] The 
programme would be used to involve more counterparties and affect several interest rates, 
thereby contributing to a better transmission of monetary policy, in view of the limits to arbitrage 
hampering the pass-through from short- to long-term interest rates. Recent internal work at the 
ECB also detects similar pass-through imperfections in European markets. Furthermore, by 
keeping a significant balance sheet, albeit much smaller than the present levels creates short-
term safe assets. This would foster financial stability: the unsuccessful attempts by the financial 
system to engineer “safer” private assets, as we saw before the crisis would be unnecessary. 
Both arguments deserve careful consideration for the design of future monetary policy after 
the present normalisation phase. Maintaining a much smaller but still significant balance sheet 
may be necessary to allow targeting a broader set of interest rates. Another related dimension 
refers  to  central  bank  counterparties.  Central  banks  have  traditionally  granted  access  to 
monetary  policy  operations  exclusively  to  credit  institutions.  Nevertheless,  non-banks  are 
beginning to play a greater role in the European financial landscape, and are likely to take an 
even greater role as the capital markets union deepens and broadens financial markets in 
Europe. Such a consideration is not neutral for market rates in the euro area. Secured money 
market rates, when backed by high quality collateral, have traded several times below the ECB 
deposit facility rate, which normally sets a floor for short-term money market rates. In part, this 
discount is explained by non-banks’ activities that – not having access to central bank facilities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   – are accepting interest rates below the deposit facility rate in their repo activity. The discount 
is,  of  course,  also  attributed  to  the  APP  which  has  reduced  the  availability  of  high  quality 
collateral at the same time as market demand for that collateral has increased. Nonetheless, 
understanding these drivers is crucial for the central bank when making decisions about future 
counterparty eligibility and the choice of money market rates to target to ensure an effective 
monetary policy transmission.  
These are, however, questions for the long-term future of monetary policy. At present, we have 
started a very cautious withdrawal of monetary accommodation. The caution is justified by the 
subdued inflation dynamics since the second half of 2017 and the recent levels of headline 
inflation: 1.4 % in March, following 1.1% in February, with underlying inflation at just 1%. The 
ongoing robust recovery that the euro zone is experiencing is a source of optimism for the 
immediate future. The euro area is much more resilient to possible external financial shocks.[57] 
Yet, a great deal still remains to be achieved. The euro area is a highly integrated economic 
and financial area which needs to be managed through common decisions. However, it lacks 
powerful instruments in domains other than monetary policy, ranging from private risk sharing 
in  a  true  capital  markets  union  with  a  European  safe  asset,  to  a  strong  centralised  fiscal 
stabilisation function to deal with asymmetric and symmetric shocks.  
The creation of such instruments would also ensure that the fiscal policy mistakes made in 
2011-12 would not be repeated so that we do not suffer from avoidable double dip recessions. 
Over the business cycle, we also need co-ordinated fiscal policies to ensure that the overall 
fiscal policy stance is sufficiently countercyclical, thereby contributing to economic stabilisation. 
Until now, the burden of countercyclical stabilisation has been mainly left to monetary policy. 
This  situation  is  not  sustainable,  particularly  in  the  context  of  a  recessionary  episode  that 
should come at some point. Monetary policy will certainly require the help of strong fiscal policy 
that will then need to be in place. Governments need to act now and take advantage of the 
ongoing recovery to make the necessary institutional adjustments.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  have  reviewed  the  different  phases  of  monetary  policy  since  the 
introduction of the euro and have described how the financial crisis has affected the conduct 
of monetary policy. Like in other jurisdictions, the deployment of large scale asset purchase 
programmes  is  the  most  relevant  change  observed  since  the  financial  crisis.  These  new 
unconventional instruments, along with forward guidance, negative rates and reverse repos 
belong now to the monetary policy toolkit to be used whenever necessary. From now on, the 
ECB  will  have  no  excuse  not  to  fulfil  its  mandate,  either  in  fighting  against  deflation  or  in 
addressing the impairment of the single monetary policy transmission by intervening in the 
sovereign bond market. The ECB made the journey from a central bank still under the partial 
influence of the simple monetary aggregates approach, to join the community of central banks 
of other major jurisdictions using flexible inflation targeting regimes and asset purchases as 
non-standard measures. It is therefore prepared to continue to deliver on the priority of price 
stability for euro area citizens, while contributing to favourable growth conditions and financial 
stability in a world in which market-based finance is ever more complex and dominant. In sum, 
the ECB is now a modern, effective and prepared central bank to serve the goals of monetary 
union.  
References 
Altavilla,  C.,  G.  Carboni  and  R.  Motto  (2015),  “Asset  purchase  programmes  and  financial 
markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper 1864. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Alves,  N.  and  C.R.  Marques  (2004),  “Money  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy:  a 
reassessment”,  Banco  de  Portugal,  mimeo,  December  2004,  later  published  as  Banco  de 
Portugal Working Paper No. 20/2007 “Is the euro area M3 abandoning us?“.  
Bernanke,  B.  (2017),  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  New  Era”,  conference  on  Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 12-13 October 2017. 
Beyer, A. and R. Farmer (2002), “Natural rate doubts”, ECB Working Paper 121.  
Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  Unemployment 
Problem”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Vol. 1.  
Blanchard,  O.,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking  Macroeconomic  Policy”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42:199–215 and  
Blanchard, O. and D. Leigh (2013), "Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers", American 
Economic Review, 103(3): 117-20. 
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers (2015), “Inflation and activity − two explorations and 
their  monetary  policy  implications”,  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking  on  Inflation  and 
Unemployment in Europe, Sintra 2015. 
Blanchard, O. (2017), “The Need for Different Classes of Macroeconomic Models”, Peterson 
Institute for International Economics Real Time Economic Issues Watch, 12 January 2017.  
Blanchard, O. (2017), “Should we reject the natural rate hypothesis?”, Peterson Institute for 
International Economics Working Paper 17/14.  
Brayton, F. and P. A. Tinsley (1996), "A guide to FRB/US: a macroeconomic model of the 
United States", Finance and Economics Discussion Series 96-42, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Breckenfelder J., F. De Fiore, P. Andrade, P. Karadi and O. Tristani (2016), "The ECB's asset 
purchase programme: an early assessment", ECB Working Paper Series 1956. 
Ciccarelli,  M  and  C.  Osbat  (ed)  (2017),  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and 
consequences“, ECB Occasional Paper 181. 
Coibion,  O.  and  Y.  Gorodnichenko,  (2015),  “Is  the  Phillips  Curve  Alive  and Well  after  All? 
Inflation  Expectations  and 
the  Missing  Disinflation”,  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics, 7(1):197-232. 
Constâncio,  V.  (2014),  “A  new  phase  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy”,  speech  at  the  ECB 
workshop on non-standard monetary policy measures, Frankfurt 6 October 2014. 
Constâncio,  V.  (2015),  “Understanding  Inflation  Dynamics  and  Monetary  Policy,”  panel 
remarks at the Annual Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Constâncio,  V.  (2016),  “Challenges  for  future  monetary  policy  frameworks:  A  European 
perspective”,  speech  at  the  19th  Annual  International  Banking  Conference  “Achieving 
Financial Stability: Challenges to Prudential Regulation”, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 4 
November 2016. 
Constâncio, V (2017), “The future of monetary policy frameworks”, lecture at the Instituto 
Superior de Economia e Gestão, Lisbon.  
Constâncio,  V.  (2017),  “Inequality  and  macroeconomic  policies”,  speech  at  the  Annual 
Congress of the European Economic Association, Lisbon 22 August 2017.  
Constâncio, V. (2017), “Growth, adjustment and resilience in the euro area”, at the Forum Villa 
d’Este, Cernobbio, 2 September 2017. 
Constâncio, V. (2017), “Developing models for policy analysis in central banks”, speech at the 
Annual Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main 25-26 September 2017. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   Constâncio, V. (2018), “Financial stability risks and macroprudential policy in the euro area”, 
speech at the ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2018. 
Constâncio, V. (2018) Presentation of ECB Annual Report 2017 to the Committee on Economic 
and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament, Brussels, 9 April 2018. 
De  Grauwe,  P.  (2005),  “Monetarists  cry  wolf  on  eurozone  inflation”,  Opinion,  Financial 
Times. 
Duffie D. and A. Krishnamurthy (2016), “Pass-through efficiency in the FED’s new monetary 
policy setting”, presented at the Annual Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City;  
ECB (2011), “The monetary policy of the ECB”, third edition, May.  
EMI (1997) “The single monetary policy in stage three: elements of the monetary policy strategy”. 
Estrella,  A.  and  F.  Mishkin  (1998),  “Rethinking  the  role  of  NAIRU  in  Monetary  policy:  the 
implications of model formulation and uncertainty”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
European Commission (2014), “The production function methodology for calculating potential 
growth rates & output gaps”, Economic Papers 535, page 7. 
European  Commission  (2015),  “Structural  unemployment  vs.  NAWRU:  implications  for  the 
assessment of the cyclical position and the fiscal stance”, Economic Papers 552. 
European Commission (2017), “NAWRU estimation using structural labour Market indicators” 
Discussion Paper 069.  
Farmer, R. (2013), “The Natural Rate Hypothesis: An idea past its sell-by date”, NBER Working 
Paper No. 19267 and Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, September Q3, pp 244-256, 2013;  
Galì, J. and M. Gertler (1999), “Inflation dynamics: a structural econometric analysis”, Journal 
of Monetary Economics. 44:195-222; 
Galì, J., M. Gertler and D. López-Salido (2005), “Robustness of the estimates of the hybrid 
new Keynesian Phillips Curve", Journal of Monetary Economics, 52:1107-18. 
Gaspar, V., F. Smets and D. Vestin (2007), “Is the time ripe for price level path stability?”, ECB 
Working Paper 818;  
Galì, J. and L. Gambetti (2015), “The Effects of Monetary Policy on Stock Market Bubbles: 
Some Evidence”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2015, 7(1): 233–257.  
Gerlach, S. and L. E.O. Svensson (2000), “Money and Inflation in the Euro Area: A Case for 
Monetary  Indicators?”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  8025,  published  later  in  the  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics 50 (2003) 1649-1672.  
Gordon, R. (2009), “The history of the Phillips Curve: consensus and bifurcation”, Economica 
78(309):10-50. 
Gordon, R. (2013), “The Phillips curve is alive and well: inflation and the NAIRU during the 
slow recovery”, NBER Working Paper 19390. 
Greenwood R., S. Hanson, and J. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet as a 
Financial-Stability  Tool”,  2016  Economic  Policy  Symposium  Proceedings,  Jackson  Hole: 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 
Gürkaynak,  R.S.,  B.  Kisacikoglu,  and  B.  Rossi  (2013),  “Do  DSGE  Models  Forecast  More 
Accurately Out-of-Sample than VAR Models?”, CEPR Discussion Paper, July 2013. 
Heimberger, P., J. Kapeller, and B. Schütz (2016), ““What’s ‘structural’ about unemployment 
in  Europe:  on  the  determinants  of  the  European  Commission’s  NAIRU  estimates”,  ICAE, 
University of Linz, Working Paper No 47. 
IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2005. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Issing,  O.  (2006),  “The  ECB’s  Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Why  did  we  choose  a  two  Pillar 
Approach?”, contribution to the 4th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, November.  
Jarociński M. and M. Lenza (2016), “An inflation-predicting measure of the output gap in the 
euro area”, ECB Working Paper 1966, forthcoming article in the Journal of Money, Credit and 
Banking. 
Jasova M., C. Mendicino and D. Supera (2018), "Rollover Risk and Bank Lending Behavior: 
Evidence from Unconventional Central Bank Liquidity", mimeo. 
King, R. and M.W. Watson (2012), “Inflation and unit labour costs”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 44(s2):11-149. 
Krugman,  P.  (2014), “Inflation  targets  reconsidered”,  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking,  May 
2014. 
Lenza, M. and J. Slacalek (2017), "The effects of unconventional monetary policy on inequality 
in the euro area", mimeo, European Central Bank.  
Lorenzoni, G. (2009), “A Theory of Demand Shocks”, American Economic Review, 99: 2050–
84  as  an  example  of  models  in  which  a  drop  in  consumer  sentiment  can  lead  to  demand 
shocks. 
Mavroeidis,  S.,  M.  Plagborg-Møller  and  J.  Stock  (2014),  “Empirical  Evidence  on  Inflation 
Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve”, Journal of Economic Literature 52(1):124-
188, March 2014. 
OECD Economic Outlook, Vol 2005, issue 2. 
Orlandi, F. (2012), “Structural Employment and its Determinants in EU Countries”, European 
Commission Economic Papers 455.  
Quint, D. and O. Tristani (2017), “Liquidity provision as a monetary policy tool: The ECB’s non-
standard  measures  after  the  financial  crisis”,  Journal  of  International  Money  and  Finance, 
80:15-34. 
Rannenberg,  A.,  C.  Schoder  and  J.  Strasky,  (2015),  “The  macroeconomic  effects  of  the 
European  Monetary  Union’s  fiscal  consolidation  from  2011  to  2013:  a  quantitative 
assessment”, IMK Working Paper 156. 
Roberts, J.M. (2006), “Monetary Policy and inflation dynamics”, International Journal of Central 
Banking 2:193-230. 
Rünstler, G. and M. Vlekke (2018), “Business, Housing and Credit Cycles”, Journal of Applied 
Econometrics, 33(2):212-226.  
Schmidt,  S.  (2011),  “The  cost  channel,  indeterminacy,  and  price-level  versus  inflation 
stabilization”, The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 11(1). 
Schüler,  Y.,  P.  Hiebert  and  I.  Jaccard  (2017),  “Contrasting  financial  and  business  cycles: 
Stylized facts and candidate explanations”, mimeo Bundesbank and ECB. 
Staiger, D., J.H. Stock, and M.W. Watson (1997), “The NAIRU, unemployment and monetary 
policy” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11:33-49. 
Stark, J., “The Irresponsible ECB”. 
Stein,  J.  (2013),  “Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy 
Responses”, speech at the "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter"  research  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (1999), “Price-Level Targeting versus Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31(3):277-295.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
   Svensson, L.E.O. (2008), “Inflation targeting”, in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 
Second Edition, 2008. 
Svensson,  L.E.O.,  (2010),  "Inflation  Targeting,"  in:  Benjamin  M.  Friedman  and  Michael 
Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, Chapter 22, pp 1237-
1302. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (2017c), “Leaning Against the Wind: Costs and Benefits, Effects on Debt, 
Leaning in DSGE Models, and a Framework for Comparison of Results,” International Journal 
of Central Banking 13:385-408.  
Svensson,  L.E.O.  (2017),  “Cost-Benefit  Analysis  of  Leaning  against  the  Wind”,  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, 90:193–213.  
Tarullo, D (2017), “Monetary policy without a theory of inflation”, Hutchins Center at Brookings 
Institution Working Paper No.33. 
The Oxford Review of Economic Policy Volume 34, Issue 1-2, Spring-Summer 2018. 
Veld, J. (2013), “Fiscal consolidations and spillovers in the Euro area periphery and core”, EU 
Commission European Economy Paper, Economic Papers 506, October 2013, Table 5, pages 
10 and 11.  
 [1] See EMI (1997) “The single monetary policy in stage three: elements of the monetary policy 
strategy”.  
[2] I use the expression “technical monetarism” to designate the operational approach relying 
on  a  target  for  a  monetary  aggregate  precisely  calibrated  to  achieve  the  desired  level  of 
inflation. The word Monetarism has been used in a more general doctrinal way, referring to a 
set of beliefs about a particular vision of the way market economies work.  
[3] See Issing, O. (2006), “The ECB’s Monetary Policy Strategy: Why did we choose a two Pillar 
Approach?”, contribution to the 4th ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, November.  
[4] See ECB (2011), “The monetary policy of the ECB”, third edition, May. For a detailed review 
of  the  theoretical  features  of  inflation  targeting,  see  Svensson,  L.E.O.,  (2010),  "Inflation 
Targeting,"  in:  Benjamin  M.  Friedman  and  Michael Woodford  (ed.),  Handbook  of  Monetary 
Economics, Edition 1, Volume 3, Chapter 22, pp 1237-1302.  
[5] December year-on-year percentages.  
[6] Already in 2000, Gerlach and Svensson had concluded that “the prominent “first pillar” in its 
(ECB) monetary strategy, contains little information about future inflation”. See, Gerlach, S. 
and  L.E.O.  Svensson (2000),  “Money  and Inflation  in  the  Euro  Area:  A Case for  Monetary 
Indicators?”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  8025,  published  later  in  the  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 50 (2003) 1649-1672. See also, Alves, N. and C.R. Marques (2004), “Money in the 
ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy:  a  reassessment”,  Banco  de  Portugal,  mimeo,  December 
2004, later developed into a Working Paper No. 20, 2007 “Is the euro area M3 abandoning 
us?“.  
[7] Svensson, L.E.O. (2008), “Inflation targeting”, in The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 
Second Edition, 2008.  
[8]  See  for  instance  De  Grauwe,  P.  (2005),  “Monetarists  cry  wolf  on  eurozone  inflation”, 
Opinion, Financial Times.  
[9] IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2005.  
[10] OECD Economic Outlook, Vol. 2005, Issue 2.  
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   [11] See Rünstler, G. and M. Vlekke (2018), “Business, Housing and Credit Cycles”, Journal of 
Applied  Econometrics,  33(2):  212-226;  Schüler,  Y.,  P.  Hiebert  and  I.  Jaccard  (2017), 
“Contrasting financial and business cycles: Stylized facts and candidate explanations”, mimeo 
Bundesbank and ECB.  
[12] Svensson, L.E.O. (2017c), “Leaning Against the Wind: Costs and Benefits, Effects on Debt, 
Leaning in DSGE Models, and a Framework for Comparison of Results,” International Journal 
of Central Banking 13:385-408. Svensson, L.E.O. (2017), “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning 
against the Wind”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 90:193–213. For a calculation of costs and 
benefits  applied  to  the  euro  area  see  Constâncio,  V.  (2018),  “Financial  stability  risks  and 
macroprudential policy in the euro area”, speech at the ECB and Its Watchers XIX Conference, 
Frankfurt am Main, 14 March 2018.  
[13]  Stein,  J.  (2013),  “Overheating  in  Credit  Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy 
Responses”, speech at the "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: 
Why  Household  Balance  Sheets  Matter"  research  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis.  
[14]  See  Galì,  J.  and  L.  Gambetti  (2015),  “The  Effects  of  Monetary  Policy  on  Stock  Market 
Bubbles: Some Evidence”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2015, 7(1): 233–
257; Svensson, L.E.O. (2017), “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind”, Journal of 
Monetary Economics, 90: 193–213.  
[15]  Blanchard,  O.  and  D.  Leigh  (2013),  "Growth  Forecast  Errors  and  Fiscal  Multipliers", 
American Economic Review, 103(3): 117-20.  
[16] See Veld, J. (2013), “Fiscal consolidations and spillovers in the Euro area periphery and 
core”,  EU  Commission  European  Economy  Paper,  Economic  Papers  506,  October  2013, 
Table 5, pages 10 and 11.  
[17] Rannenberg, A., C. Schoder and J. Strasky, (2015), “The macroeconomic effects of the 
European  Monetary  Union’s  fiscal  consolidation  from  2011  to  2013:  a  quantitative 
assessment”, IMK Working Paper 156.  
[18] See for instance Jasova M., C. Mendicino and D. Supera (2018), "Rollover Risk and Bank 
Lending Behavior: Evidence from Unconventional Central Bank Liquidity", mimeo; Quint, D. 
and O. Tristani (2017), “Liquidity provision as a monetary policy tool: The ECB’s non-standard 
measures after the financial crisis”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 80:15-34.  
[19] See Lorenzoni, G. (2009), “A Theory of Demand Shocks”, American Economic Review, 99: 
2050–84 as an example of models in which a drop in consumer sentiment can lead to demand 
shocks.  
[20] See Constâncio, V. (2014), “A new phase of the ECB’s monetary policy”, intervention at 
the ECB workshop on non-standard monetary policy measures, Frankfurt 6 October 2014.  
[21] See e.g. Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and 
financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No 1864; Breckenfelder 
J.,  F.  De  Fiore,  P.  Andrade,  P.  Karadi  and O. Tristani (2016), "The  ECB's  asset  purchase 
programme: an early assessment”, ECB Working Paper Series 1956.  
[22] See for instance the article by Jürgen Stark, former member of the ECB board.  
[23] See Constâncio, V. (2017), “Inequality and macroeconomic policies”, speech at the Annual 
Congress of the European Economic Association, Lisbon 22 August 2017. Based on work by 
Lenza, M. and J. Slacalek (2017), "The effects of unconventional monetary policy on inequality 
in the euro area", mimeo, European Central Bank.  
[24] See the whole issue of the The Oxford Review of Economic Policy Volume 34, Issue 1-2, 
Spring-Summer 2018.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
   [25]  See  Blanchard,  O.  (2017),  “The  Need  for  Different  Classes  of  Macroeconomic 
Models”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Real Time Economic Issues Watch, 
12 January 2017.  
[26] Brayton, F. and P. A. Tinsley (1996), "A guide to FRB/US: a macroeconomic model of the 
United States", Finance and Economics Discussion Series 96-42, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System.  
[27] See Constâncio, V. (2017), “Developing models for policy analysis in central banks”, speech 
at the Annual Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main 25-26 September 2017.  
[28] For an insightful reflection from a policy-maker, see Tarullo, D. (2017), “Monetary policy 
without a theory of inflation” Hutchins Center at Brookings Institution Working Paper No.33.  
[29]  See  the  insightful  description  by  Gordon,  R.  (2009),  “The  history  of  the  Phillips  Curve: 
consensus and bifurcation”, Economica 78(309):10-50.  
[30] See Gordon, R. (2013), “The Phillips curve is alive and well: inflation and the NAIRU during 
the slow recovery”, NBER Working Paper 19390.  
[31] See Roberts, J.M. (2006), “Monetary Policy and inflation dynamics”, International Journal of 
Central Banking 2:193-230.  
[32]  Galì,  J.  and  M.  Gertler  (1999),  “Inflation  dynamics:  a  structural  econometric  analysis”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics. 44:195-222; see also Galì, J., M. Gertler and D. López-Salido 
(2005), “Robustness of the estimates of the hybrid new Keynesian Phillips Curve", Journal of 
Monetary Economics, 52:1107-18.  
[33] See Constâncio, V. (2015), “Understanding Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” panel 
remarks at the Annual Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.  
[34] King, R. and M.W. Watson (2012), “Inflation and unit labour costs”, Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 44(s2):11-149.  
[35] Gürkaynak, R.S., B. Kisacikoglu, and B. Rossi (2013), “Do DSGE Models Forecast More 
Accurately Out-of-Sample than VAR Models?”, CEPR Discussion Paper, July 2013.  
[36] Mavroeidis, S., M. Plagborg-Møller and J. Stock (2014), “Empirical Evidence on Inflation 
Expectations in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve”, Journal of Economic Literature 52(1):124-
188, March 2014.  
[37] Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko, (2015), “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? 
Inflation  Expectations  and 
the  Missing  Disinflation”,  American  Economic  Journal: 
Macroeconomics, 7(1):197-232.  
[38] See Jarociński, M. and M. Lenza (2016), “An inflation-predicting measure of the output gap 
in the euro area,” ECB Working Paper 1966, forthcoming article in the Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking.  
[39] See Jarociński, M. and M. Lenza (2016), “An inflation-predicting measure of the output gap 
in the euro area,” ECB Working Paper 1966, forthcoming article in the Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking.  
[40] See European Commission (2014), “The production function methodology for calculating 
potential growth rates & output gaps”, Economic Papers 535, page 7.  
[41] See Ciccarelli, M. and C. Osbat (ed) (2017), “Low inflation in the euro area: Causes and 
consequences“, ECB Occasional Paper No. 181.  
[42]  Staiger,  D.,  J.H.  Stock,  and  M.W.  Watson  (1997),  “The  NAIRU,  unemployment  and 
monetary policy” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11:33-49.  
[43]  Blanchard,  O.  and  L.  Summers  (1986),  “Hysteresis  and  the  European  Unemployment 
Problem”,  NBER  Macroeconomics  Annual,  Vol.  1.  and  Blanchard,  O.,  E.  Cerutti  and  L. 
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Summers  (2015),  “Inflation  and  activity  −  two  explorations  and  their  monetary  policy 
implications”, ECB Forum on Central Banking on Inflation and Unemployment in Europe, Sintra 
2015.  
[44] Blanchard, O. (2017), “Should we reject the natural rate hypothesis?”, Peterson Institute for 
International  Economics  Working  Paper  17/14;  Farmer,  R.  (2013),  “The  Natural  Rate 
Hypothesis:  An  idea  past  its  sell-by  date”,  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  19267  and  Bank  of 
England Quarterly Bulletin, September Q3, pp 244-256, 2013; see also an earlier paper Beyer, 
A. and R. Farmer (2002), “Natural rate doubts” ECB Working Paper 121.  
[45] Estrella, A. and F. Mishkin (1998), “Rethinking the role of NAIRU in Monetary policy: the 
implications of model formulation and uncertainty”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.  
[46] This regression approach follows the analysis in Orlandi, F. (2012), “Structural Employment 
and its Determinants in EU Countries”, European Commission Economic Papers 455. Using a 
broader set of variables, another paper that illustrates that European Commission estimates 
of the NAIRU are not a good proxy of structural unemployment is Heimberger, P., J. Kapeller, 
and B. Schütz (2016), “What’s ‘structural’ about unemployment in Europe: on the determinants 
of the European Commission’s NAIRU estimates”, ICAE, University of Linz, Working Paper No 
47.  
[47] See European Commission (2015), “Structural unemployment vs. NAWRU: implications for 
the assessment of the cyclical position and the fiscal stance”, Economic Papers 552.  
[48]  See  European  Commission  (2017),  “NAWRU  estimation  using  structural  labour  Market 
indicators”, Discussion Paper 069.  
[49] For a more in-depth discussion see Constâncio, V (2017), “The future of monetary policy 
frameworks”, lecture at the Instituto Superior de Economia e Gestão, Lisbon. See also Duffie, 
D. and A. Krishnamurthy (2016), “Pass-through efficiency in the FED’s new monetary policy 
setting”,  presented  at  the  Annual  Economic  Policy  Symposium,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Kansas City; Greenwood R., S. Hanson and J. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve's Balance 
Sheet as a Financial-Stability Tool”, 2016 Economic Policy Symposium Proceedings. Jackson 
Hole: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.  
[50]  See  for  instance  Blanchard,  O.,  G.  Dell’Ariccia  and  P.  Mauro  (2010),  “Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42: 199–215 and Krugman, P. 
(2014), “Inflation targets reconsidered”, ECB Forum on Central Banking, May 2014.  
[51]  Constâncio,  V.  (2016),  “Challenges  for  future  monetary  policy  frameworks:  A  European 
perspective”,  speech  at  the  19th  Annual  International  Banking  Conference  “Achieving 
Financial Stability: Challenges to Prudential Regulation”, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 4 
November 2016.  
[52]  Availabe  at  http://populardemocracy.org/news-and-publications/prominent-economists-
question-fed-inflation-target.  
[53]  Bernanke,  B.  (2017),  “Monetary  Policy  in  a  New  Era”,  conference  on  Rethinking 
Macroeconomic Policy, Peterson Institute for International Economics, 12-13 October 2017.  
[54] Svensson, L.E.O. (1999), “Price-Level Targeting versus Inflation Targeting: A Free Lunch?”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 31(3):277-295. Gaspar, V., F. Smets and D. Vestin 
(2007), “Is the time ripe for price level path stability?”, ECB Working Paper 818; Schmidt, S. 
(2011), “The cost channel, indeterminacy, and price-level versus inflation stabilization”, The 
B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 11(1).  
[55]  See  presentation  of  the  ECB  Annual  Report  2017  to  the  Committee  on  Economic  and 
Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European  Parliament,  Introductory  Remarks  by  Vítor  Constâncio, 
Vice-President of the ECB, Brussels, 9 April 2018.  
[56] Duffie, D. and A. Krishnamurthy (2016), “Pass-through efficiency in the FED’s new monetary 
policy setting” and Greenwood, R., S. Hanson and J. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
   balance  sheet  as  a  financial  stability  tool”,  both  presented  at  the Annual  Economic  Policy 
Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.  
[57] See Constâncio, V. (2017), “Growth, adjustment and resilience in the euro area”, at the 
Forum Villa d’Este, Cernobbio, 2 September 2017.  
 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
