Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks for a lecture given by Agustín
Carstens
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  for  the
SAFE/CFS/Deutsche Bundesbank Lecture, given by Mr Agustín Carstens, General Manager of
the Bank for International Settlements, Frankfurt am Main, 6 February 2018.
 1 Introduction
Dear Agustín Carstens,
Dear Vice-President Haar,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It’s a pleasure and a privilege to welcome you to the joint lecture of the SAFE Policy Center, the
Center of Financial Studies and the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Today  we  welcome  a  former  minister  of  finance,  a  former  central  bank  governor,  a  former
Deputy  Managing  Director  at  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  a  graduate  from  the
University of Chicago and an erstwhile General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS).
Normally,  this  constitutes  a  highly  exiting  composition  for  a  panel  discussing  monetary  and
financial issues. But today we are doing even better. Our speaker has held all these positions –
not at the same time, but at some point in his career.
I am talking about Agustín Carstens. After graduating with a PhD from the University of Chicago,
Agustín began his career at the Central Bank of Mexico. He then became Executive Director at
the  IMF,  before  being  appointed  Mexico’s  Deputy  Finance  Minister  and  thereafter  Deputy
Managing Director at the IMF. In 2006 he returned from Washington to Mexico-City to serve as
minister of finance.
In  this  position  –  rather  unusual  for  a  finance  minister  –  he  earned  some  reputation  in  the  oil
market. In 2008 he insured Mexico’s oil revenues against lower oil prices. A move that earned
Mexico 8.5 bn $ in 2009. Some traders joked, he was that year’s most successful, but worst paid
oil manager.
The  finance  ministry  was  by  no  means  the  end  of  your  career.  Between  2010  and  2017  you
served as Governor of the Bank of Mexico. 
And in December last year, you added the most recent entry to your CV, when you became the
General Manager of the BIS. You are an excellent choice for the position and I am already looking
forward  to  working  with  you  in  Basel.  I  am  certain  the  BIS  will  benefit  from  your  enormous
experience. This experience manifests itself not only in the long list of positions you held in your
impressive career, but also in the economic events you witnessed during that time.
It is safe to say that your career was very eventful in this respect. In the 1990’s, when you were
head of the research department at the Banco de Mexico, Mexico went through the so called
Tequila-crisis, when it encountered difficulties in financing its large current account deficits. And
in 2008, as Mexico’s Minister of Finance, you helped to coordinate an international response to
global financial crisis in the G20.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
It was during this time that we first met and I was impressed by your strong push towards an
international  response  to  the  crisis.  It  helped  prevent  the  world  from  falling  back  into  trade
protectionism  and  an  even  deeper  recession. And  it  established  to  G20  as  the  key  body  for
international economic cooperation – not only on the field of financial market regulation.
The common efforts of the G20 have demonstrated that multilateral cooperation does work – a
message  which  is  worth  to  be  repeated  these  days  when  some  countries  do  not  get  tired  to
doubt the meaning of multilateral agreements.
Dear Agustín, at the high-point of the sovereign debt crisis in euro area, you offered the euro area
to benefit from your huge experience. In a 2013 speech you draw lessons from Mexico’s Tequila
crisis  for  the  euro  area .  Two  of  your  conclusions  were  that  “an  exchange-rate  system  [or  a
common currency] cannot be a substitute for policy discipline". And you also pointed out that
fiscal discipline needs to be maintained after the crisis. This is very close to our thinking here at
the Bundesbank.
1
It also appeared to me that at that time you were tactfully trying to remind us in the euro area to
make progress in crisis resolution. I am aware that many considered the sovereign debt crisis as
a risk for the global economy.
This is why I am happy to be able to state that matters have improved substantially since then.
The euro area has turned from a drag to a driver of growth. In 2017, the euro area grew slightly
faster than the average of the advanced economies.
The greatest risk is now to assume that all problems are solved. Shocks in specific region or
specific sectors of the economy can still put the euro area to an endurance test – despite the
progress that has been made in the past years.
But at least the times where the sovereign debt crisis required the full attention of policy makers,
regulators and bank-supervisors is behind us. We are now able to turn some of our attention to
other important issues. One such issue is certainly the digitalization of finance. The Bundesbank
has put this topic on the agenda of the G20 during Germany’s presidency last year.
One important aspect of this issue we weren’t able to look at in the framework of the G20 is the
possibilities and risks that come with the issuance of digital tokens or even digital central bank
money. The question whether new technology changes fundamentally the foundations of central
banking is increasingly discussed amongst central bankers.
Agustín, your talk today is highly welcomed because it will contribute to an objectification of the
debate and will constitute an important input for our policy deliberations. I am very happy that we
were able to attract such a distinguished speaker for this task.
Fire away. The floor is yours.
1
Agustin  Carstens  (2013).  The  quest  for  successful  policy  responses  to  sovereign  crises.  Speech  at  the
Monetary Authority of Singapore Lecture 2013, 5 February 2013.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
