Ong Chong Tee: The future of banking - evolution, revolution or a
big bang
Introductory remarks by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of
the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the German-Singaporean Financial Forum, Singapore, 16
April 2018.
 Dr Johannes Beermann, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank
His Excellency Dr Ulrich Sante, Ambassador of the Federal Republic of Germany
Dr Claus Trenner, President of the Singaporean-German Chamber of Industry and Commerce
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen
It is my pleasure to join you this morning at the inaugural German-Singaporean Financial Forum.
Bilateral relations
Singapore and Germany have strong bilateral relations at many levels.
(a) Last year, Chancellor Angela Merkel and Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong met in Berlin in July,
and later, President Halimah Yacob hosted President Frank-Walter Steinmeier during his state
visit in November.
(b) Singapore was also invited to the G20 meetings in 2017 during Germany’s Presidency.
The close partnerships at both government and business levels underscore the many common
values and strategic interests that we share. For example, in the area of financial services, there
is strong emphasis on financial institutions having high standards of conduct and prudence given
the importance of savings and investment in our societies. 
MAS  and  our  German  counterparts,  the  Bundesbank  and  BaFin ,  participate  in  many
international forums and standard-setting bodies including the Financial Stability Board, the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and
the International Organisation of Securities Commission.
1
On  many  issues,  we  share  common  interests  and  positions.  In  2010,  MAS  and  Bundesbank
established a cross-border collateral arrangement to enhance liquidity provision by widening the
pool  of  eligible  collateral  for  banks.  MAS  has  a  Supervisory  Memorandum  of  Understanding
(MOU) with BaFin that provides for mutual assistance and sharing of supervisory information in
banking and insurance. MAS also participates in the annual Deutsche Bank Supervisory College
for non-EU regulators and we are pleased to have hosted the most recent one last November.
Given that financial activities are often cross-border in nature, such international co-operation will
be of increasing importance, including to facilitate innovative services as well as to mitigate the
risks that some these may present.
It  is  also  in  this  spirit  that  I  congratulate  the  establishment  of  this  partnership  forum.  It  is  an
excellent  example  of  a  co-operation  platform  that  allows  our  industry  players  to  engage  one
another  in  open  discussions,  to  identify  common  challenges  and  working  opportunities.  This
forum also provides for perspectives from government, central bank, regulator and academia.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Future of banking
Allow me now to share some thoughts on the conference theme around the future of banking.
This is clearly a topical subject in the face of the ongoing Technology Revolution around us.
Many of us will probably have heard of the famous quote by Bill Gates, that “people do not need
banks, they need banking”. In other words, with the rise of new FinTech players, activities that
are considered banking services need not be provided by traditional banks alone.
Technology  or  e-commerce  giants  like  Alibaba  and  Tencent  have  moved  into  the  financial
services space, as they seek to strengthen their customer-centric propositions and services. 
Business disruptions need not be led only by the large firms. Smaller nimble start-ups have also
sought  to  un-bundle  the  banking  value  chain  by  focusing  on  niche  areas  such  as  financial
advisory services and consumer finance.
There are two underlying factors:
(a) One, is the arrival of the smartphones that launched a new era of mobile apps. Banking has
moved from physical branches, to the desks, and now to the palm. Recently, I read a report that
British  psychologists  found  that  young  adults  use  their  smartphones  roughly  one-third  of  their
total  waking  hours.  Simply  put,  all  of  us  can  now  do  banking  anytime,  anywhere. And  many
segments of our populations are increasingly comfortable going digital, be it for banking, or to
purchase goods and services.
(b)  Second,  the  accessibility  afforded  by  technology  has  led  banks  to  shift  away  from  a
production-consumption model. Traditional banking models are based on making available the
range  of  the  services  that  a  customer  need.  Today,  competition  centres  on  the  customer
experience. One of our local Singapore banks has a tag line on making banking joyful. The notion
of delighting a customer opens up a whole field of competitive ideas as to how to generate that
positive experience. This is what the FinTech players have sought to do, and this is what banks
are fighting back on. Banks will have the advantage of being highly regulated and trusted, that
smaller and newer players may find it hard to challenge.
The  general  consensus  is  that  many  FinTechs  and  the  established  financial  institutions  will
collaborate.
There is a natural synergy here:
(a)  Collaboration  with  financial  institutions  enables  FinTech  players  and  technology  firms  to
broaden their reach.
(b) On the flip side, FinTech solutions present established financial institutions with opportunities
to enhance their product offerings or to improve operational productivity. McKinsey estimated that
enhancing  digital  capacity  and  adopting  technologies  could  result  in  productivity  gains  worth
2
roughly US$350 billion for the global banking industry by 2025 .
But the competition will remain intense. Large internet-based firms with their massive customer
base can be serious contenders for customer mind-share and wallets including in the area of
financial services.
There is another development that has gained traction. We see the emergence of fully digital
banks  that  operate  entirely  online  with  no  physical  branches,  but  are  able  to  provide  similar
services as the traditional brick-and-mortar banks. Fidor Bank, founded in Germany, is one such
example.  WeBank  in  China  is  another.  DBS’  Digibank,  a  mobile-only  bank  in  India,  is  also
completely  branchless  and  in  less  than  two  years,  have  signed  up  more  than  1.5  million
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
customers.  All three have different origins and operate very different business models. I am sure
the panellists later will discuss these further when they talk about the future of banking.
Let me turn to this forum’s theme question on whether we will witness an evolution or revolution
in  banking.  I  believe  it  will  be  both.   A  lot  of  attention  and  excitement  have  been  created  by
services  going  digital.  This  digitisation  of  services  have  transformed  the  customer  experience
say  for  on-boarding  or  transactional  purposes;  but  frankly,  are  not  ground-breaking  in
themselves. As one commentary noted, this is no different from reading an actual newspaper or
reading  the  news  online.  But  a  revolution  is  also  happening  when  new  digital  services  or
business models emerge that employ say, artificial intelligence (AI) or blockchain technologies.
These can fundamentally change how we borrow, save, pay, invest or insure. As an example,
there is a UK bank BABB that leverages totally on blockchain and biometrics to provide peer-to-
peer financial services with the slogan of “everyone is a bank”. Time will determine the winners
and losers as this cycle of technology disruption takes it course.
Open banking
Open Banking broadly captures the concept that a consumer owns information about himself,
and  should  be  able  to  share  that  information  with  any  third  party  if  he  chooses,  for  example
through APIs, and to transfer his money to any third party seamlessly.
The effect is to give consumers ownership over their financial data, to make that data portable,
and  therefore  enables  switching  and  choice  among  financial  service  providers.  This  should
promote competition to improve pricing and service quality.
The EU has started on this journey by making payment and data interconnectivity between banks
and  non-banks  mandatory,  through  the  Payment  Services  Directive  2.  Australia  has  also
announced  that  it  will  legislate  a  national  Consumer  Data  Right  in  2018,  allowing  consumers
open access to all their data including banking-related ones.
While these hold a lot of promise by promoting consumer interests and welfare, there are other
details to consider. For example, what primary data rightfully belongs to the customer, and what
about  secondary  data  about  the  customer  that  a  bank  had  made  sense  of?  How  should  a
customer’s data be packaged for onward sharing? How do we develop technical standards to
share this information efficiently and securely?  Who should pay for these?
In Singapore, we subscribe to the notion of banks sharing their data openly as a larger good.
Some of the operational details have to be worked out. In MAS’ engagement with the banking
industry,  there  is  broad  consensus  as  to  the  benefits  of  open  banking.    What  we  see  is  an
opening up of customer data as a ground-up process led by the banks themselves. We believe
this is a constructive development, that industry players themselves see the value in doing so.
Role of financial regulators
In my remarks so far, it should be obvious that financial regulators will have active roles in the
business and technology transformation in the banking industry.
Regulators  need  to  have  a  sharp  understanding  of  emerging  technologies  and  new  business
models, and to be alert to potential risks. Only then are we able to exercise thoughtful judgment. 
There will be a balance between supporting innovation and technology use, while pre-empting
new or heightened risks that these may present.
MAS takes an even-handed approach by providing a regulatory regime that is risk-proportionate
across the range of institutions involved in regulated financial activities. We seek to provide the
environment, and even to encourage new FinTech and other players to establish themselves to
compete,  collaborate  and  innovate.  We  allow  for  adoption  of  technology  and  innovation  in
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial  services,  especially  those  that  hold  promise  in  raising  efficiency,  in  creating  new
opportunities, in enabling new or value-adding services or simply to manage risks better. 
MAS adopts a “materiality and proportionality” test, and seeks to right-size regulations to be fit-
for-purpose;  for  both  traditional  as  well  as  new  business  models,  according  to  the  risks  the
activity poses.
For  example,  in  the  new  Payment  Services  Bill  that  MAS  has  consulted  on,  regulatory
requirements  for  payment  activities  will  be  differentiated  according  to  the  risks  that  specific
activities pose rather than apply a uniform set of regulations on all payment service providers.
Regulation comes in when the risk posed becomes material or crosses a threshold.  The weight
of regulation must be proportionate to that risk. Singapore is one of the first jurisdictions to have
established  regulatory  sandboxes  where  firms  can  experiment  their  innovative  solutions  in  a
contained environment, with access to a limited pool of actual customers.
What we will diligently protect is the trust and credibility in our financial system. We will also be
paying closer attention to financial institutions’ management of cyber-threats and to new forms of
financial  stability  vulnerabilities  as  digitisation  blurs  the  boundaries  across  geography  and
industries. Recently, we have created an enhanced role of a Chief Cybersecurity Officer as well
as appointed a new Chief Data Officer. I believe there is much we can share and learn from
other  central  banks,  financial  regulators  and  even  law  enforcement  agencies,  such  as  our
European counterparts.
Looking ahead
Finally, there are other areas that should matter to all of us amidst the ongoing transformations in
the banking industry.
One is the important issue of financial inclusion. In the quest to innovate and as banks develop
the sophistication to sharpen the profile of each customer, we should not overlook the need for
financial inclusion – especially access to basic banking and financial services for under-served
communities.
Another area is in the responsible use of technology tools. Earlier this month, MAS announced
the setting up of a regulator-industry grouping to co-create a guide to promote the responsible
and ethical use of AI and data analytics by financial institutions.  This Committee is known by its
acronym FEAT – which stands for Fairness, Ethics, Accountability and Transparency. This gives
you a good idea of its mandate. The key is as technology and data analytics usage become more
prevalent, the responsible use of these is equally paramount.
Conclusion
To conclude my remarks, allow me to resurrect a quote from a speech by President Kennedy in
1966, which I thought is apt even in current times.
[quote]
There is a Chinese curse which says ‘May he live in interesting times’. Like it or not we live in
interesting times. They are times of danger and uncertainty; but they are also more open to the
creative energy of men than any other time in history.
[unquote]
Many  will  agree  that  we  are  living  in  interesting  times;  and  a  forum  like  this  will  be  useful  in
bringing  together  the  constructive  and  creative  energy  of  experts  like  yourselves  to  share,  to
understand and to co-operate. Ultimately, it falls on all of us to do our part to make the future
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
more promising and enriching for this and the generation that follows.
Thank you
1
2
Federal Financial Supervisory Authority in Germany
McKinsey & Company, “The Phoenix Rises: Remaking the Bank for an Ecosystem World”, McKinsey Global
Banking Annual Review 2017, October 2017.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
