Anita Angelovska-Bezoska:  Ministerial  Dialogue  on  the  Economic
Reform Programmes of the Candidate Countries
Speech  by  Ms Anita Angelovska-Bezoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the  Republic  of
Macedonia, at the Ministerial Dialogue on the Economic Reform Programmes of the Candidate
Countries, Brussels, 25 May 2018.
Dear Ministers,
 Dear representatives of the European Commission, European Central Bank and Eurostat,
It is my great pleasure to join you on the regular Ministerial Dialogue. At the beginning, let me
express our gratitude to the ECB, European Commission and Eurostat for their assessment of
our Economic Reform Programme that outlines the ongoing, as well as forthcoming medium-
term reform priorities aimed at more competitive, flexible and resilient economy. Herewith, we
appreciate the positive assessment of the monetary policy as well as the recommendation to
continue  “to  conduct  monetary  policy  consistent  with  the  exchange  rate  peg,  using  available
scope within this framework in line with safeguarding price stability” which is completely in line
with central bank views on monetary policy strategic framework.   
In light of today’s thematic discussion on fiscal sectors reforms, we would like to express
our support for the Ministry of Finance’s reforms oriented towards strengthening Public
Finance  Management  system  that  besides  improving  the  effectiveness  of  the  use  of
public resources, will also foster the ongoing fiscal consolidation process.  We  believe
that  the  numerous  reforms  enshrined  in  the  medium-term  PFM  Reform  Program,  such  as
strengthening  macro-economic  forecasting  infrastructure,  strengthening  commitment  control,
enhancing  fiscal  transparency  and  introducing  fiscal  rules  will  help  prevent  potential  fiscal
slippages and be conducive to further strengthening of fiscal discipline.
Continuation  of  prudent  fiscal  policy  leading  to  stabilization  of  the  public  debt  will
provide room for prolonged accommodative monetary policy, i.e. keeping the main policy
rate  at  its  historically  lowest  level  for  an  extended  period,  thus  providing  further
stimulus  for  economic  recovery.    This  is  even  of  crucial  importance  considering  the
implemented exchange rate targeting strategy in our case. Reestablishment of fiscal buffers may
be needed in the context of the new forthcoming global cycle of lower liquidity and higher interest
rates.  In  addition,  budget  forecasts  underpinned  by  sound  macro  assumptions  will  be  an
important input in the medium-term macro-forecasting process of the central bank with positive
effects over forecast quality thus further enhancing the quality of the monetary policy decision
making.
Allow  me  to  take  this  opportunity  to  also  point  out  that  last  year’s  monetary  policy
objectives have been achieved, despite the political uncertainty present at that time.
Monetary  policy  remained  accommodative,  amid  moderate  inflation  of  1.5%  in  the  first  four
months of 2018, strong external position and gradual stabilization of market expectation. In March
2018, the main policy rate was reduced to 3%, which is historically lowest level. Deposit and
credit growth of the banking sector continued, with revival in the lending to the corporate sector,
accompanied with a decline of the NPL ratio in the first quarter of 2018 to 5.1%, due to claims
collection.  Current  account  deficit  in  2017  additionally  reduced  to  1.3%  of  GDP,  reflecting  the
positive contribution of the foreign capital companies on the export side, which indicates further
strengthening of the economic fundamentals.
Regarding the recommendation from the last year’s dialogue,  the  central  bank  prepared
draft strategies for NPLs management and strengthening the use of local currency, both agreed
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
with the Ministry of Finance and currently subject to consultation with other relevant stakeholders.
In both areas, as already being confirmed in the assessments and final conclusions, we have
already achieved tangible results; however the adoption of these comprehensive strategies will
put in place additional mechanisms to deal with these issues.
In  light  of  the  challenging  time  that  we  have  faced  in  recent  years,  we  need  to  point  to  the
maintenance of price and financial stability as important pillars of the macroeconomic stability, as
well  as  the  need  to  continue  strengthening  the  fundamentals  and  resilience  of  the  economy.
Implementation of structural reforms and strengthening institutional capacities, including sound
public finances, should remain main priorities for faster income convergence and EU integration. 
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
