  Speech by Daniel Mminele, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the University of Zululand, MBALI International conference  
 Richard’s Bay 
1 August 2018  
 The Fourth Industrial Revolution and the future of work:  
some implications for central banking 
 Introduction 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.  
 I would like to start by thanking the University of Zululand for the opportunity to share 
some thoughts with you on an issue which will invariably have an impact on all of our 
lives, namely ‘The Fourth Industrial Revolution and the future of work’.  
 Policymakers  (including  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities),  business  entities  and 
academic  institutions  all  around the  world  are  grappling  with  the  implications of  the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution and what this means for the future of work. This issue also 
formed  part  of  the  theme  of  the  10th  BRICS1  Summit  that  was  concluded  in 
Johannesburg last week.  
 Indeed, this topic is also relevant for an institution such as yours, as education is the 
key to unlocking benefits and avoiding the potential negative repercussions. Machines 
are  developing  at  a  rapid  speed  and  their  application  is  becoming  increasingly 
sophisticated, which undoubtedly has massive implications for education and the skills 
set  required  for  moving  successfully  into  the  future.  The  future  requires  not  only  a 
                                                      
1 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 
 Page 1 of 12 
different  skills  set,  but  also  a  different  way  of  learning,  a  commitment  to  lifelong 
development, with young people at the coalface of this change. 
 Against this brief background, I would like to share with you a few thoughts about how 
the future of work is changing the world of work, and some initiatives of international 
organisations such as the G202 in this regard. I would also like to explore some of the 
implications for central banking. 
 What is ‘the future of work’, and how is it changing the world of work? 
 One  could  argue  that  a  country’s  experience  of  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution 
depends on certain socio- and macroeconomic fundamentals, such as the level of its 
development and the skills set of its labour force, among other things. But this does 
not change the fact that preparedness is essential.  
 For many emerging markets, structural impediments have hindered development  to 
such  an  extent  that  artificial  intelligence  is  not  an  immediate  possibility,  and  the 
adaptation of new technology to local conditions in these economies is therefore likely 
to be slower. Nonetheless, adaptation is inevitable. 
 There  appears  to  be  a  great  deal  of  emphasis  on  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution 
currently  taking  place,  perhaps  more  so  than  was  the  case  with  the  previous  three 
industrial revolutions. Many are asking: why is there so much hype, and what makes 
this revolution different?  
 Like  the  first  three  industrial  revolutions,  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution  will  have 
significant transformative impacts on society. However, this time, the systemic impact 
is  expected  to  be  much  more  intense,  as  new  technologies  are  developing  at 
exponential  speed,  with  much  wider  coverage  given  a  far  more  integrated  and 
globalised world.  
                                                       
2 Group of Twenty 
 Page 2 of 12 
Furthermore, it is not just a matter of manual tasks being overtaken by automation. 
Rather, technology is developing tacit knowledge and completing cognitive tasks. It is 
not only the low-skilled jobs or tasks that are at risk of being eliminated, but also the 
more highly qualified professional jobs like  those of financial analysts. There was a 
time  when  ideas  like  driver-less  cars  and  talking  robots  were  only  found  in  sci-fi 
movies, and seemed so imaginative and unrealistic. These are no longer things of the 
distant  future;  they  are  becoming  part  of  our  lives  and  will  become  increasingly 
common in the coming years.  
 Indeed, there are conflicting views about the impact that such automation will have on 
jobs, skills and wages. A McKinsey report3 estimates that, by the year 2030, at least 
one-third  of  the  activities  of  60%  of  all  the  occupations  could  be  automated.  This 
implies that, globally, up to 375 million people may need to change jobs or learn new 
skills within the next 12 years. As Professor Klaus Schwab, the founder and Executive 
Chair of the World Economic Forum, notes: these shifts mean that we live in a time of 
great promise and of great peril.   
 The positive aspects include the ability to connect billions more people through digital 
networks,  improving  the  efficiency  of  organisations  dramatically.  There  is  also  the 
capacity to reduce costs significantly, to reduce the necessity for businesses to have 
a  physical  presence,  and  to  create  opportunities  for  new,  small-scale  producers  to 
enter the increasingly globalised markets. If harnessed correctly, technological change 
can  bring  about  immense  economic  opportunities,  new  and  better  ways  of  doing 
business,  the  creation  of  new  industries,  new  and  better-quality  jobs,  higher  GDP4 
growth, and improved living standards. The current technological developments have 
the potential to lift growth and productivity, thereby raising living standards over the 
longer term.  
 However,  if  organisations  and  governments  fail  to  embrace  new  technologies  to 
capture the benefits they bring, changes in labour markets may instead contribute to 
rising inequality, as the middle-skilled jobs relative to both high- and low-skilled jobs 
                                                      
3 Mc Kinsey Global Institute. Jobs lost, jobs gained: what the future of work will mean for jobs, skills 
and wages. December 2017 
4 Gross domestic product 
 Page 3 of 12 
are lost and the real wages decline among the lower-skilled workers in some countries. 
These  developments  could  aggravate  income  inequality  both  within  and  between 
countries.5  If  left  unchecked,  security  concerns  and  threats  may  also  increase, 
compromising governments, businesses and individuals.  
 For the ladies in the audience, I should note that the World Economic Forum believes 
that women tend to possess more of the human characteristics that should give them 
an advantage in the new jobs of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. These characteristics 
include,  among  others,  the  capacity  for  empathy,  creativity,  listening  skills,  learning 
ability and collaboration (instead of competition). 
 The Fourth Industrial Revolution, and our ability and willingness to respond to the ever-
evolving  needs  of  the  workplace,  is  particularly  important  for  a  continent  such  as 
Africa, because of its rapidly growing and dynamic population. How we deal with the 
changing  African  demographics  will  make  the  difference  between  having  either  a 
‘dividend’ of young producers and consumers, or a growing unemployment problem.6 
Why is this so important for Africa in particular?  
 Africa emerged from each of the previous three industrial revolutions lagging behind 
much  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  We  have  not  kept  pace  with  the  move  from  the 
mechanisation of production to mass production, and finally to the computer age. Now 
that we are entering the Fourth Industrial Revolution, Africa will unfortunately do so on 
the back foot once again.  
 Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has the second-largest working-age population, accounting 
for 13% of the world’s total. Furthermore, more than 60% of its population is under the 
age of 25, and it is estimated that, by 2030, SSA will be home to more than one-quarter 
of the world’s total under-25 population.7  
                                                       
5 Taken from “The Future of Work: Trends, Impacts and the Case for G20 Action”, March 2018 
6 The ‘fourth industrial revolution’: potential and risks for Africa, The Conversation 
7 World Economic Forum. The Future of Jobs and Skills in Africa, Preparing the Region for the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution. May 2017 
 Page 4 of 12 
However, SSA does not make optimal use of its human capital potential. The World 
Economic Forum’s Human Capital Index8 indicates that SSA captures, on average, 
only 55% of its full human capital potential, compared to a global average of 65%. The 
World Economic Forum asserts that the region’s capacity to adapt to the requirements 
of  future  jobs,  relative  to  the  region’s  exposure  to  these  future  trends,  leaves  little 
space  for  complacency.  On  a  bigger  scale,  urgent  efforts  are  needed  to  close  the 
continent’s skills gap.  
 SSA  is  therefore  relatively  underprepared  for  the  impending  disruption  to  jobs  and 
skills  brought  about  by  the  Fourth  Industrial  Revolution,  and  needs  to  take  action 
quickly.  
 The G20 approach to the future of work 
 As I have already alluded, the future of work has become a topic of international focus. 
Under  Argentina’s  presidency  –  as  part  of  achieving  its  objective  of  strong, 
sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth – the G20 has recognised the importance 
of focusing on the Fourth Industrial Revolution, understanding that it has an important 
role to play in devising policy responses to deal with the ramifications of the future of 
work.  
 The G20 has also recognised that policy consistency across its members, especially 
where  there  are  spillovers,  can  strengthen the effectiveness of  individual  members’ 
policy  efforts  and  increase  the  benefits  of  international  collaboration.  In  addition, 
through international cooperation, the opportunities presented by the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution can be better exploited to ensure that none are left behind in the process.  
 With  this  in  mind,  the  G20  has  considered  the  economic  and  social  impacts  of 
technological changes on the future of work.  Under the Framework Working Group, 
the G20 Finance Track has devised a menu of policy options that member countries 
can draw on when responding to the impacts of technological change – specifically in 
                                                      
8 Measures the extent to which countries and economies optimize their human capital through 
education and skills development and its deployment throughout the life-course 
 Page 5 of 12 
the  areas  of  tax,  public  expenditure  and  transfers,  competitive  conditions,  and 
measurement and data. The menu is structured around four overarching objectives:  
(i) 
(ii) 
harnessing the benefits of technology for growth and productivity;  
supporting  people  during  transitions  and  addressing  distributional 
challenges;  
(iii) 
securing sustainable tax systems; and  
(iv) 
ensuring the best possible evidence to inform decision making.  
 Countries are encouraged,  when  devising  their  growth  strategies9,  to  identify  policy 
actions as well as areas of potential international cooperation.  
 South Africa is an active member of the G20 and has been contributing to the debate 
on this topic, and will include, in its growth strategy, an outline of South Africa’s policy 
approaches to this priority area.  
 The future of work and central banking 
 Much of the research being conducted on the future of work in relation to the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution revolves around issues directly related to fiscal policy. Beyond 
this,  many  of  the  policy  areas  being  affected,  such  as  skills  and  competition,  are 
outside  of  the  direct  ambit of  central banks. However,  insofar  as the future of  work 
could have an impact on the macroeconomy – through its effect on labour, aggregate 
demand  and  supply,  prices  and  therefore  the  equilibrium  interest  rate  –  it  certainly 
could influence the conduct of monetary policy.  
 Monetary policy could be affected through various channels. Prices could be lowered, 
for  example,  as  retail  sales  become  digitalised,  as  many  already  are.  As  a  result, 
inflation could decelerate because online retailers face much lower operational costs 
than traditional businesses. Anders Borg, Sweden’s former Minister of Finance, also 
notes that feed-through from exchange rate depreciations might be less than it has 
                                                      
9  Under  Australia’s  G20  Presidency  in  2014,  all  G20  countries  were  asked  to  prepare  medium-term 
growth strategies to provide a systematic framework for addressing policies and priorities in the growth 
agenda. The strategies prepared are comprehensive in scope, spanning macroeconomic policies and 
structural reforms to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. 
 Page 6 of 12 
been historically. The theoretical starting point is that a permanent depreciation should 
be fully absorbed by consumer prices. In a digital world, currency depreciation could 
imply that the profit-margin squeeze is accelerating. The recent limited impact of dollar 
appreciation on inflation in some of the emerging markets shows that this could be at 
least one underlying factor.10 
 Monetary policy will also be affected by labour demand and supply. One can assume 
that, during a transition, jobs will be lost. However, should the displaced workers be 
unable to find other jobs, the equilibrium rate of unemployment could increase, shifting 
the  Phillips  curve11  outwards.  Inflation  could  decelerate  if  we  assume  that  the 
productivity  of  robots  will  be  greater  than  that  of  humans,  causing  a  decline  in  the 
wages of the remaining workforce. However, the shape of the Philips curve can also 
be affected if, for example, trade union power is reduced or the expected disinflation 
is not realised because firms decide to increase mark-ups, cancelling out the impact 
of  lower  wage  growth.  The  macroeconomic  impact  of  these  developments  remains 
uncertain. What is clear, however, is that monetary policy will have to keep pace with, 
and be cognisant of, any potential changes in this regard, and adjust accordingly.  
 An  area  where  technological  advancement  is  indeed  having  a  profound  impact  on 
central banking is in the financial technology (fintech) space. Fintech architecture, with 
which some central banks are currently experimenting (e.g. blockchain and distributed 
ledger technology (DLT) solutions), is making it possible to manage massive numbers 
of  transactions  as  well  as  the  transfers  and  settlements  of  large  sums  of  money. 
However, in many ways this is a technology that is still in its infancy, and the extent of 
efficiency  benefits  still  have  to  be  demonstrated.  But  further  developments  could 
certainly see much greater efficiencies and a reduction in costs.  
 The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  recently  launched  Project  Khokha,  which 
had as its scope the trial of interbank wholesale settlement using DLT. This was South 
                                                      
10 World Economic Forum. How will the Fourth Industrial Revolution affect economic policy? 28 
January 2016.  
11 The Phillips curve, named after William Phillips, describes the historical inverse relationship between 
rates  of  unemployment  and  corresponding  rates  of  wage  increases  that  are  evidenced  within  an 
economy. According to the theory, faster economic growth leads to higher inflation, which in turn leads 
to more jobs and less unemployment.  
 Page 7 of 12 
Africa’s first DLT initiative, whose aim was to contribute to the global initiatives that 
assess the application and use case for DLT. Project Khokha was successful in that it 
proved  that  the typical  daily  volume  of  the  South  African  payment system  could be 
processed in less than two hours with full confidentiality of transactions and settlement 
finality. This demonstrated to us that DLT has potential, but it has also become evident 
that there is a long road ahead before large-scale adoption can be considered.12  
 New technology is increasing the efficiency of key banking functions through enabling 
the creation of new financial services. In terms of lending and borrowing, for example, 
‘crowd-funding’13 and online ‘peer-to-peer lending platforms’14 are buzzwords. These 
applications  are  closely  related  to  financial  intermediation,  a  core  and  heavily 
regulated element of financial institutions. The fintech applications in this field are still 
a  small  fraction  of  overall  credit,  but  are  growing  very  rapidly  in  some  jurisdictions. 
This requires ongoing monitoring by central banks.  
 Fintech  also  provides  opportunities  to  increase  financial  inclusion,  and  provides 
unbanked  households  and  firms  with  access  to  loans  and  savings.  Low‐income 
countries still have a large part of the population lacking access to services that are 
widespread in high‐income countries, such as formal savings in financial institutions. 
Greater competition in the banking sector, concentration risks, and greater security of 
remittances are added benefits which ultimately mean reduced costs for participation 
in  the  formal  economy  and  easier  access  to  public  services  based  on  improved 
government databases.  
 However,  while  new  technology  provides  opportunities,  it  also  poses  a  number  of 
challenges,  including  financial  stability  risks  and  cyber  security  risks.  The  more 
financial  systems  depend  on  electronic  platforms  and  digital  records,  the  more 
exposed  they  are  to  cyberattacks,  which  can  disrupt  the  flow  of  funds  across  the 
                                                      
12  Some  of  the  considerations  relate  to  the  interlinkages  and  cost-speed-and-scale  comparative 
analysis with current systems, and the fit with current legal and regulatory requirements.  
13 Crowdfunding is the practice of funding a project or venture by raising small amounts of money from 
a large number of people, typically via the Internet. 
14 Peer-to-peer lending, also abbreviated as P2P lending, is the practice of lending money to individuals 
or businesses through online services that match lenders with borrowers. 
 Page 8 of 12 
economy  and  create  financial  instability.  Therefore,  a  robust  cyber-resilience  and 
cyber-risk  framework  is  crucial  to  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  financial 
services innovation.15  
 One  area  which  has  been  receiving  increasing  attention  in  central  banking  circles 
relates to so-called crypto-currencies. The rapid pace of usage, and the complexities 
of  such  crypto-assets,  have  forced  central  banks  to  reassert  some  fundamentals 
relating to the definition of money, its characteristics, and the role of the central bank 
in  this  regard.  There  is  a  broad  consensus  that  crypto-assets  do  not  meet  the 
traditional definition of money, as they are not a means of exchange, a store of value, 
nor a unit of account. At the very least, as explained by Augustin Carstens, the General 
Manager of the Bank for International Settlements16, they lack the characteristics of 
‘good money’ as what constitutes ‘good money’ is the level of trust and credibility that 
the public has in the currency, and that trust has to be earned and supported. Central 
banks, however, are exploring the use of central bank digital currencies, which could 
be of more benefit and would likely be safer.  
 As part of its fintech Programme, the SARB has taken cognisance of the investigatory 
studies  done  on  crypto  assets,  and  has  placed  high  emphasis  on  monitoring  the 
developments in this area. It has adopted a ‘back to basics’ approach by focusing on 
the  underlying  economic  function  or  activity  being  performed  (deposit  taking, 
payments, lending and investments) rather than the specific technology. The SARB’s 
position on crypto-assets is that these are not recognised as currency or legal tender 
in South Africa, and that only the SARB is allowed to issue legal tender. Any merchant 
or beneficiary has a right to refuse crypto-assets as a means of payment.  
 Although  the  Financial  Stability  Board  has  concluded  that  there  are  currently  no 
immediate financial stability risks arising from crypto-assets, there are other potential 
risks  arising  with  respect  to  consumer  and  investor  protection,  market  integrity,  tax 
                                                      
15  The  SARB  undertook  a  cyber-crisis  simulation  exercise  last  year,  with  assistance  from  the World 
Bank. The simulation included three different but related cyberspace incidents, namely failure to settle 
Treasury bills, a failure of the stock exchange, and an attack on a small bank paying out social grants. 
Much  was  learnt  from  this  exercise.  It  also  allowed  authorities  to  test  the  strength  of  their  crisis 
communication  arrangements,  coordination  and  decision  making  under  critical  situations,  including 
recovery and resolution strategies. 
16 Augustin Carstens, Money in the digital age: what role for central banks?”BIS, February 2018 
 Page 9 of 12 
evasion, money laundering and terrorism financing, which require ongoing monitoring. 
We therefore need to ensure that as these technologies evolve, we robustly assess in 
parallel dimensions such as legal, governance, risk and operational frameworks.  
 I have said much about how the Fourth Industrial Revolution could be changing the 
world of work and the implications that it might have for central banking, from monetary 
policy to financial stability, currency operations and payment systems.  
 Recent monetary policy developments  
 At  the  conclusion  of  its  most  recent  meeting  about  two  weeks  ago,  the  SARB’s 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to leave the repurchase rate unchanged 
at  6.5%  per  annum.  This  was  judged  to  be  consistent  with  a  still  accommodative 
stance of monetary policy given the current weak state of the economy.  
 The MPC did, however, note with concern that the risk profile to both the growth and 
inflation outlooks had deteriorated when compared to the observations at its previous 
sitting in May 2018, and this was reflected in the Bank’s forecasts. A number of risks 
that  had  been  highlighted  in  previous  meetings  had  either  materialised  or  still 
persisted,  in  an  environment  that  continued  to  be  characterised  by  heightened 
uncertainty. While  the external  environment has had  a more  dominant  influence on 
the outlook, domestic factors also played a role.  
 Headline inflation is now expected to average 4.8% in 2018 (down from 4.9%) before 
increasing to 5.6% in 2019 and decreasing again to 5.4% in 2020 (up from 5.2% in 
both years). The forecast for core inflation is expected to average 4.6% in 2018 (up 
from 4.5%), 5.5% in 2019, and 5.3% in 2020 (up from 5.1% in both years). Although 
the  forecasts  suggest  that  inflation  outcomes  will  remain  within  the  inflation  target 
range, the MPC is concerned that they are drifting further away from the midpoint of 
the target band.  
 The MPC deemed the key risks to the inflation outlook to be higher oil prices, a more 
depreciated  exchange  rate,  and  higher  electricity  prices.  Although  oil  prices  have 
retreated from the recent high levels of around USD80 per barrel, they are expected 
 Page 10 of 12 
to still remain at relatively elevated levels over the forecast period. Together with the 
depreciation  of  the  domestic  currency,  upside  risks  to  domestic  fuel  prices  and 
ultimately  to  inflation  remain.  The  nominal  effective  exchange  rate  of  the  rand  has 
depreciated by almost 9%  and exhibited increased  volatility from the first quarter of 
2018 to the  second quarter. The increased volatility resulted from a deterioration in 
sentiment towards emerging markets, owing to the combined headwinds of tightening 
financial  conditions,  weakening  economic  growth,  and  rising  trade  tensions,  which 
resulted  in  capital  outflows.  The  rand  is  likely  to  continue  to  be  vulnerable  to these 
developments. In addition, electricity prices continue to pose a further upside risk given 
the uncertainty around the speed at which Eskom will adjust electricity tariffs.  
 Should  these  risks materialise,  it  may  become  necessary  to  adjust  monetary  policy 
settings in the future to ensure that inflation remains more comfortably inside the target 
range  and  closer  to  the  midpoint,  and  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations  are 
anchored towards the midpoint of the target range. The MPC will not hesitate to act 
when deemed appropriate. However, in line with flexible inflation targeting, the MPC 
will also continue to be careful not to overreact to initial price pressures and be guided 
by  its  assessment  of  second  round  effects  of  any  price  pressures,  which  could 
contribute to inflation moving too far away from the mid-point of the range, or  even 
exceeding the target range, on a sustained basis.   
 The SARB’s forecast for GDP growth for 2018 was revised down from 1.7% to 1.2%, 
while  the  forecasts  for  both  2019  and  2020  were  slightly  higher  at  1.9%  and  2.0% 
respectively. Following the broad-based contraction of 2.2% in the first quarter of 2018, 
indications based on high frequency data suggest continued sluggish performance of 
the economy in the second quarter, but with a likelihood that a technical recession will 
be avoided.  
 As indicated previously, with South Africa having no fiscal space and monetary policy 
similarly  currently  not  being  able  to  provide  further  stimulus,  the  attention  needs  to 
firmly shift towards fully restoring confidence and urgent implementation of structural 
reforms to help lift the potential rate of growth of the South African economy.    
   Page 11 of 12 
Conclusion 
 Let me conclude by reiterating the remarks made by Robert Shiller of Yale University 
on the subject of the Fourth Industrial Revolution: “You cannot wait until a house burns 
down to buy fire insurance on it. We cannot wait until there are massive dislocations 
in our society to prepare for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.”  
 Indeed, it is up to us whether we succeed in the Fourth Industrial Revolution – whether 
it will be a time of great promise or a time of great peril, both for the continent and for 
our  country.  New  technologies  will  transform  the  world  we  live  in.  The  exponential 
speed  and  scope  of  this  transformation  brings  with  it  the  potential  for  unlimited 
possibilities and endless opportunities, but also massive challenges.  
 Educational  institutions  need  to  understand  the  implications  of  the  Fourth  Industrial 
Revolution in order to better prepare their students for this new future. Our fate is in 
our hands. We cannot afford to be left behind, and institutions such as the University 
of Zululand have an important role to play in ensuring that we are not left behind. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 Page 12 of 12 
