Ong  Chong  Tee:  Fostering  a  strong  corporate  governance
ecosystem
Keynote speech by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of the
Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Singapore  Governance  and  Transparency  Forum,
Singapore, 6 August 2018.
 Mr Yeoh Oon Jin, Divisional President – Singapore, CPA Australia
Associate  Professor  Lawrence  Loh,  Director,  Centre  for  Governance,  Institutions  and
Organisations, NUS Business School
Mr Willie Cheng, Chairman, Singapore Institute of Directors
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Thank  you  for  the  kind  invitation  to  my  colleagues  and  I  to  join  all  of  you  here  today.  It  is  my
pleasure to offer some remarks.
The timing of this forum is also apt as the MAS has just released the revised Code of Corporate
Governance (“Code”) this morning.
Allow me to first take the opportunity to thank members of the Corporate Governance Council
(“Council”), chaired by Mr Chew Choon Seng, for their valuable contributions over the last one
and a half years. I am told that deliberations had been lively and rigorous throughout. These have
culminated in a balanced and thoughtful package of recommendations that took into account the
views of various stakeholders.
The MAS has considered the proposals and accepted all the Council’s recommendations. These
are now incorporated into the revised Code.
The recognition of high corporate governance (CG) standards is one of the important elements to
fostering good practices. A forum, such as this, is one good example of how as a community, we
recognise companies that have done well in their CG disclosures and practices.
Companies with good CG are characterised by a sense of mission to hold themselves to high
standards of accountability, transparency and sustainability, which are in turn critical to a thriving
capital market. Good CG in companies stands for doing right and doing good so as to do well
over the long run. Conversely, companies that fall short in their CG practices will hurt investor
confidence. Failings in larger institutions can also undermine system-wide financial stability.
There  have  been  recent  public  commentaries  on  companies 
for  corporate
transgressions. Some reports are accompanied by calls for more forceful regulatory actions, or
further tightening of CG standards.
flagged 
So allow me to briefly describe the regulatory framework for CG in Singapore.
The MAS, as the statutory regulator, is responsible for a sound framework within which market
discipline and enterprise can thrive. In regulating and developing the capital markets, we seek to
be balanced. On the one hand, to allow for growth and appropriate risk-taking and on the other
hand, to curb potential abuses and wrongful acts.
The Singapore Exchange (SGX), as the frontline market regulator, administers the SGX Listing
Rules.  The  SGX  is  responsible  for  ensuring  that  the  market  operates  in  a  fair,  orderly  and
transparent  manner.  This  includes  requiring  listed  companies  to  make  timely  disclosures  on
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
material transactions and have in place adequate internal controls and governance structures.
The MAS supervises the SGX in the discharge of its regulatory function. SGX’s RegCo Board
also has oversight of the exchange’s regulatory responsibilities.
This  MAS-SGX  regulatory  model,  where  the  statutory  and  market  regulator  each  have  their
distinct role but also share the responsibility to ensure sound functioning of the capital markets,
is not unique to Singapore. Similar approaches are adopted in many financial centres, including
in the United States, Australia and Hong Kong.
So each time a corporate failing of one form or another happens, both the MAS and the SGX
would  review  and  investigate  the  matter.  The  specific  regulatory  response  would  obviously
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case. Often, a kneejerk tightening of rules may
not be in the best interest of the market.
Tighter across-the-board regulations can impose additional costs on all listed companies, and
these costs must be weighed against the benefits. It may not be appropriate to prescribe the
same standard on all companies, as they can differ in size or business complexity.
The  MAS  has  therefore  been  deliberate  in  calibrating  our  rules.  For  example,  there  are  more
stringent CG standards for banks, compared to for other listed companies; and rightly so due to
banks’ potential systemic impact.
This  is  also  why  in  the  latest  review  of  the  Code,  the  Council  took  a  pragmatic  approach.
Important  baseline  market  practices  that  should  apply  to  every  firm  –  or  CG  “hygiene”
requirements – are hardened by their inclusion in the SGX Listing Rules. Indeed, twelve basic
requirements previously couched as guidelines have been shifted from the Code to the Listing
Rules.  In  other  aspects,  the  Code  has  been  streamlined  and  elaborated  in  the  Practice
Guidance.
In  considering  what  should  be  mandatory  in  the  SGX  Listing  Rules,  Council  members  had
carefully  considered  their  effectiveness  in  supporting  long-term  business  goals,  and  how  the
revised Code compares against international practices.
There  may  be  some  concerns  that  some  of  the  principles  in  the  Code  are  subject  to
interpretation  and  gaming.  I  can  understand  such  sentiments.  This  is  why  the  MAS  has  also
accepted the Council’s recommendation to set up a standing Corporate Governance Advisory
Committee to monitor CG developments on a regular basis, and you can expect more details on
this Committee once it is set up.
There are other views calling on regulators to adopt quicker or harsher actions in response to CG
violations. Some felt that directors should be held more accountable for their fiduciary duties, or
breaches in their fiduciary duties.
Investigations  are  usually  complex  and  time-consuming  affairs  especially  if  there  are  cross-
border elements involved. At the same time, it is important that our financial sector operates with
a clear rule of law, as well as fair and transparent legal processes. This is to assure a trusted
regime  for  everyone.  We  must  allow  for  thorough  investigations  as  a  matter  of  legal  and
investigation integrity. There is often a web of details to be ascertained in each case of possible
misconduct. Any premature updates to the public can also compromise investigations. In such
situations, regulators would avoid alerting suspects who are under investigation at the outset, so
as not to prejudice the investigations, in the process of evidence gathering.
As a matter of due process, the MAS does not reveal information during ongoing investigations
until the investigations have been concluded. Some of these considerations equally apply to the
SGX as the frontline market regulator.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Notwithstanding  this,  the  MAS  supports  putting  out  more  information  on  our  investigation
outcomes and of our enforcement approach. Some of our recent measures include:
(a) Press updates on our enforcement actions as well as publishing these on our website. 
(b) Enhanced disclosure of the MAS’ enforcement statistics through the use of infographics and
dashboards  in  our  Annual  Report.  This  is  to  provide  the  public  with  a  better  overview  of
enforcement  actions  that  the  MAS  has  taken  over  the  past  year.  Where  appropriate,  we  will
provide more information on our investigations that could be of public interest, as long as these
do not compromise the reviews.
(c)  In  2016,  we  also  published  a  monograph  that  explains  the  role  of  enforcement  in  the
supervision of Singapore’s capital markets. We are in the process of updating the monograph by
later this year. This will provide more clarity on the respective roles of the various agencies – as
well as MAS’ own approach to investigating misconduct.
Where laws are broken, the MAS will rigorously investigate a case including with the Commercial
Affairs Department (“CAD”), and will not hesitate to charge the perpetrators involved. We also
supervise  regulated  financial  institutions  on  a  regular  basis  and  will  take  enforcement  actions
against  an  institution  that  has  fallen  short  of  our  regulatory  requirements.  But  enforcement
actions  cannot  operate  in  isolation.  No  amount  of  rules  can  stop  someone  who  is  intent  on
gaming the system or breaking the law.
Our capital market works best in a regime where all stakeholders share some responsibility in
holding the line against any mismanagement or misconduct, analogous to community policing.
The  statutory  and  market  regulators  can  work  closely  with  the  industry,  investors,  industry
associations and other groups to co-create a fair and orderly capital market. This will engender
confidence and trust, and allow market discipline to thrive.
This brings me to the important role of market discipline. As our capital markets develop, we can
and should expect market discipline to increasingly feature. It is the process by which market
participants themselves exercise oversight over companies and call out what may be possible
transgressions  or  dubious  practices.  The  fact  that  we  have  indeed  seen  more  of  such
commentaries and reports in recent years need not be interpreted as a sign of weakness but of
strength arising from a more mature capital marketplace.
For  market  discipline  to  work,  it  is  essential  that  companies  provide  relevant  and  meaningful
disclosures.
Investors, in turn, can play an important role by scrutinising disclosures and providing relevant
feedback to companies where boilerplate disclosures are ambiguous or unhelpful. Companies
must similarly play their part to engage their stakeholders proactively.
The  engagement  between  companies  and  shareholders  should  be  conducted  responsibly  by
both parties. Companies should avoid taking an overly-legalistic approach in their dealings with
shareholder  queries  as  that  can  only  engender  distrust.  Rather,  they  can  have  more  regular
dialogues with their investors to facilitate understanding with their investors, and to build a strong
relationship that is based on openness and mutual respect. The rights of all shareholders should
be respected. Investors in turn should engage companies in a constructive manner, and avoid
unfounded allegations or speculative attacks.
Industry  associations  are  another  key  enabler  group  to  foster  strong  market  discipline.  The
Singapore  Institute  of  Directors,  as  the  national  association  of  directors,  advocates  good
governance practices through its conferences, training sessions and publications. The Securities
Investors Association (Singapore) also serves to connect and empower minority shareholders,
through efforts such as its initiative to raise the standards of queries at AGMs.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Other players in the CG ecosystem matter too. Journalists, analysts, academics, lawyers, other
advocacy  groups  and  the  general  public  –  all  can  contribute  to  raising  of  industry-wide  CG
standards  through  their  reports  and  research.  Done  well,  these  can  also  augment  market
discipline  by  promoting  debates  on  important  CG  issues  and  in  educating  investors  to  be
discerning.
In sum, building a strong CG ecosystem is most effective when there is collective effort involving
multiple gatekeepers – beyond the regulators and the boards of companies.
To  end  my  remarks,  let  me  also  acknowledge,  as  this  forum  demonstrates,  that  many
companies have and do take good CG seriously. The care and vigilance put into this effort must
continue. I am sure the boards and management of all the firms present here will not rest on your
laurels  either.  And  I  trust  that  from  your  examples  as  good  CG  stewards,  others  will  follow
likewise.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
