Peter Praet: Interview in Expresso
Interview with Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, in
Expresso, conducted by Mr João Silvestre on 18 June 2018 and published on 23 June 2018.
 Is the asset purchase programme (APP) really going to conclude at the end of this year?
What we did last week was to express an anticipation that net asset purchases would end at the
end of the year. We didn’t say we were now deciding to stop the programme in December. We
still  have  six  months  to  go.  We  translated  the  increased  confidence  we  expressed  about
developments in the economy and inflation into an anticipation about the APP. And, at the same
time, we also enhanced the forward guidance on interest rates. But, in any event, to anticipate the
end of the programme is to give a strong signal.
What exactly do you mean by giving a strong signal?
We undertook a careful review of the progress made towards a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2%. It was a strong signal because, in spite of a recent
moderation  in  euro  area  economic  growth,  we  concluded  that  progress  towards  our  aim  has
been substantial so far, and actually sufficiently substantial for us to be in a position to express
this  anticipation  of  an  end  to  net  asset  purchases  at  the  end  of  the  year.  We  think  that  the
underlying strength of the economy gives grounds that inflation convergence will continue in the
period ahead, even after a gradual winding down of net asset purchases.
What is that confidence based on?
There is a path of gradual improvement towards our inflation aim, as the euro area economy will
continue to grow above potential. Increasing pressure on the utilisation of resources, notably in
the labour market, will continue to support inflation over the medium term.
Is the ECB comfortable with the recent projection pointing to annual inflation of 1.7%
over the period to 2020, clearly below the 2% aim for these three years?
The Eurosystem staff projections are only one element of our assessment. What is crucial is
that we see a sustained path of adjustment of inflation towards levels that are below, but close to,
2%.  Over  the  projection  period,  the  contribution  of  energy  to  inflation  declines,  and  inflation
excluding energy and food gradually rises, as capacity constraints become increasingly binding.
What  the  ECB  anticipated  last  week  was  the  halving  of  asset  purchases  between
October  and  December.  But  there  was  a  proviso:  the  measure  was  subject  to  data
confirming the medium-term inflation outlook. What does this mean in practice?
Our baseline scenario is that the euro area expansion will continue in the period ahead. But new
uncertainties have arisen in 2018. Last year was exceptional, with euro area GDP growing by
about 3% in real terms between the first quarter of 2017 and the first quarter of 2018, with the
combination  of  strong  growth  in  domestic  demand  and  a  rebound  in  international  trade.  This
year, international trade dynamics seem weaker. It may be attributable to a delayed impact of the
appreciation of the euro since the beginning of 2017. Temporary factors and supply-side tensions
related to very high levels of capacity utilisation in some euro area countries also contributed to a
moderation in economic growth in early 2018. In a nutshell, both demand and supply-side factors
are  at  work,  and  our  baseline  scenario  is  surrounded  by  more  uncertainty.  So  we  must  be
prudent and carefully monitor economic developments.
Why?
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  level  of  uncertainty  has  increased.  Protectionism,  for  example,  is  having  an  effect  on
business sentiment, which might already be holding back investment. It is still too early to tell. In
addition, Brexit will have financial implications for firms not only in the United Kingdom, but at this
stage no one knows what the final Brexit conditions will be.
Are  these  uncertainties  the  reason  for  your  prudence  in  the  way  the  asset  purchase
programme is being concluded?
Our  baseline  scenario  still  holds,  but  we  must  monitor  the  risks.  This  is  why  we  decided  to
express  an  anticipation  about  the  evolution  of  our  net  asset  purchases.  By  doing  so  we  are
keeping what we call optionality.
Ultimately, if risks materialise, could one of the options be a further extension of the
programme into 2019?
As  our  President,  Mario  Draghi,  said  last  week,  the  asset  purchase  programme  is  now  an
integral  part  of  our  “toolbox".  It  is  definitely  an  option,  but,  last  week,  we  announced  our
anticipation of the end of net asset purchases, which reflects our confidence that inflation is on
course to reach levels below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Well, are you being vigilant?
We  are  alert  to  the tail risks that may, for example, stem from protectionism  and,  potentially,
from an associated sharp fall in confidence.
Might another option be to increase the monthly pace of purchases for the last three
months of the year, to purchase more than €15 billion, if the situation deteriorates?
The asset purchase programme remains an integral part of our “toolbox". This being said, our
monetary  policy  decisions  altogether  maintain  the  current  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation that is still needed for inflation to converge towards our aim. This includes, first,
our enhanced forward guidance on interest rates, which we expect will remain at their present
levels  at  least  through  the  summer  of  2019  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary,  and,
second,  our  very  large stock of assets for which we intend to reinvest the principal payments
from maturing securities. The reinvestment policy plays a very important role, as the amounts
are sizeable.
How long will the reinvestments last?
We intend to maintain our policy of reinvesting the principal payments from maturing securities
for an extended period of time after the end of our net asset purchases, and in any case for as
long as necessary to maintain favourable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary
accommodation. Our policy of reinvesting is another instrument at our disposal.
Regarding a change in interest rates, the ECB guaranteed that it will not take place until
“through the summer of 2019". Does it mean until the end of next summer?
At  our  last  Governing  Council  meeting  we  said  that  we  expect  our  key  ECB  interest  rates  to
remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019. In any case, they will stay at
their  present  levels  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  evolution  of  inflation  remains
aligned with our current expectations of a sustained adjustment path.
Our enhanced forward guidance signals that we will remain patient in determining the timing of
the first rate rise. The path of very short-term interest rates that is implicit in the term structure of
money market interest rates is compatible with our intention of being patient.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Negative  interest  rates  are  one  of  the  most  controversial  points  within  the  ECB’s
current monetary policy framework. Particularly for the banks. What do you have to say to
them?
You have to look at the whole package of measures that we have implemented. Consider, for
example, the lines of funding aimed at bank lending to the real economy, known by the acronym
TLTROs. They supported bank lending to the real economy. Banks that borrowed from the ECB
and  lent  to  the  economy  more  than  a  pre-specified  lending  benchmark  also  benefited  from  a
negative interest rate on their funding.
What role did the negative interest rates play?
They were important for enhancing the asset purchase programme and for forward guidance.
They are an essential instrument in our toolbox that supports very favourable financial conditions,
and  therefore  the  economy.  This  led  to  improvements  in  the  credit  portfolio  of  banks.  It  also
stimulated the demand for loans of households and firms.
Was the impact on savers one of the reasons for the negative reaction?
For  those  savers  that  do  not  want  to  take  risks  and  therefore  keep  their  assets  in  savings
accounts, it is an issue. But it is important to look at the overall situation, and to take into account
the  impact  of  our  measures  on  growth  and  jobs.  Young  people  who  need  to  borrow  have
benefited  and,  in  general,  the  important  thing  for  them  is  to  find  jobs.  Our  measures  have
supported economic activity and job creation.
Has the policy of monetary tightening of the Federal Reserve System (Fed) put pressure
on the decisions of the ECB?
There is no pressure. We are in a different situation. The Fed and the ECB are at two different
stages of their monetary policy cycles.
PORTUGAL
Could the ending of this zero interest rate environment be a problem for more indebted
countries, like Portugal?
Obviously, countries with higher debt levels have benefited more from lower refinancing costs,
but this is not the objective of our monetary policy, which to ensure price stability.
More fundamentally, we should always keep in mind that investor confidence in the sustainability
of public finances is the key determinant of interest rates on sovereign debt. If there are doubts
about the sustainability of public finances, spreads can increase to very high levels, despite the
ECB’s asset purchase programme.
I have noted that, following heightened market volatility due to developments in Italy, spillovers to
interest rates on Portuguese public debt were contained, thanks to significant progress in public
finances. This again stresses the importance of sound public finances.
What is your assessment of Portugal’s progress?
Commission  and  ECB  staff  concluded  their  eighth  post-programme  surveillance  mission  last
week. They stress that the current favourable macroeconomic and financial conditions provide
an opportunity to accelerate structural reforms, further reduce macroeconomic imbalances and
increase  Portugal’s  resilience  to  shocks.  Fiscal  consolidation  remains  necessary  to  ensure  a
steady decline in the debt ratio.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
They also note that, while Portuguese banks have made considerable progress in strengthening
their  balance  sheets,  remaining  vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  sector  need  to  be  addressed,  in
particular the high level of non-performing loans (13.7% in 2017 compared with an EU average of
about  5%).  Finally,  addressing  impediments  to  investment,  increasing  productivity  and  further
improving the business environment remain key for strengthening potential growth.
To  conclude,  my  assessment  is  that  significant  progress  has  been  made,  but  that  ensuring
prosperity  on  a  lasting  basis  requires  continuing  the  implementation  of  an  ambitious  reform
agenda going forward.
BANKING
It is essential to complete the banking union. In this respect, the European summit on 28 and
29  June  is  very  important.  The  European  banking  landscape  is  still  characterised  by  one
important  feature:  a  strong  exposure  of  banks  to  their  national  economy,  including  a  high
exposure to domestic public debt. The completion of the banking union will, over time, lead to a
lower exposure to national economies.
Regarding the situation of the banking sector, there is still a sizeable legacy of non-performing
loans in some banks. An impressive effort has been made to reduce the level, but the situation
has not yet been fully rectified.
The banks are now much more capitalised. Their liquidity is much stronger. But, on the other
hand, we have to be clear: for the large banks, the new regime under the Bank Recovery and
Resolution Directive – BRRD, to use its English acronym – has still not been tested in the event
of a crisis – luckily.
The banks still have a strong national orientation: they have exposures to the public debt of their
country  and  a  strong  focus  on  the  domestic  economy.  If  the  national  economy  goes  into
recession, if budget deficits soar and public debt rises, this has immediate repercussions for the
banks.  European  banking  is  not  yet  sufficiently  diversified  geographically.  More  consolidation,
more cross-border holdings between banks from different countries, is needed. There is a need
for more geographical diversification within the European Union. Smaller, local banks are also
necessary  to  provide  financial  services  to  households  and  firms  in  a  diversified  banking
landscape.
ITALY
We  have  seen  very  large  market  movements,  following  political  declarations  that  unsettled
market  confidence.  After  political  campaigns,  it  is  normal  that  more  precise  government
programmes are set out, and we now have to wait for more information about the fiscal plans of
the new government.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
