Christopher Kent: The limits of interest-only lending
Address by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, to the Housing Industry Association Breakfast, Sydney, 24 April 2018.
 I would like to thank Michael Tran and Ben Jackman for help in preparing this material, and my
colleagues Bernadette Donovan and Ben Shanahan from the Financial Stability Department for
their helpful comments and suggestions.
Introduction
I’d like to thank the Housing Industry Association for the opportunity to speak to you about the role
of interest-only loans.
Mortgages  on  interest-only  terms  have  become  an  increasingly  prominent  part  of  Australian
housing  finance  over  the  past  decade.  At  their  recent  peak,  they  accounted  for  almost
40 per cent of all mortgages. While interest-only loans have a role to play in Australian mortgage
finance, their value has limits.
Other  things  equal,  interest-only  loans  can  carry  greater  risks  compared  with  principal-and-
interest  (P&I)  loans.  Because  there’s  no  need  to  pay  down  principal  initially,  the  required
payments  are  lower  during  the  interest-only  period.  But  when  that  ends,  there  is  a  significant
step-up in required payments (unless the interest-only loans are rolled over). This owes to the
need to repay the principal over a shorter period; that is, over the remaining term of the loan.
Also, because the debt level is higher over the term of the loan, the interest costs are also larger.
For  housing  investors,  the  key  motivation  for  using  an  interest-only  loan  is  clear.  By  enabling
borrowers to sustain debt at a higher level over the term of the loan, interest-only loans maximise
interest  expenses,  which  are  tax  deductible  for  investors.  They  also  free  up  funds  for  other
investments.
For those purchasing a home to live in, there are other motivations for an interest-only loan. They
provide  a  degree  of  flexibility  when  it  comes  to  repayment.  They  can  assist  households  to
manage a temporary period of reduced income or heightened expenditure. That might occur, for
example,  when  a  household  wants  to  work  less  in  order  to  raise  children,  cover  the  cost  of
significant renovations or obtain bridging finance to buy and sell properties. They can also appeal
to households without a steady flow of regular income, such as the self-employed. So there are
understandable reasons why borrowers have taken out interest-only loans.
During interest-only periods, disciplined borrowers will be able to provision for future repayment
of principal. They can accumulate funds in an offset or redraw account, or build up other assets.
With sufficient saving over the interest-only period, the health of their balance sheet need be no
1
different than it would have been with a P&I loan.
If,  however,  a  borrower  spends  the  extra  cash  flow  available  to  them  during  the  interest-only
period (compared with the alternative of a P&I loan), they will need to make sizeable adjustments
when that ends. They will have to either secure additional income by that time or reduce their
consumption (or some combination of both). That will be more difficult and possibly come as a
shock to the borrower if they haven’t planned for it in advance.
If the borrower has made no provisions and is unable to make the necessary adjustment, they
may need to sell the property to repay the loan. Therein lies an additional risk inherent in interest-
only lending. Moreover, the borrower’s ability to service the loan is not fully tested until the end of
the interest-only period. If the borrower defaults, the potential loss for the lender will be larger than
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the case of a P&I loan given that interest-only loans by design allow borrowers to maintain the
debt at a higher level over the term of the loan.
That’s  why,  when  providing  interest-only  loans,  prudent  lenders  will  carefully  assess  the
borrower’s ability to make both interest and principal payments. Among other things, banks have
to make their loan ‘serviceability assessments’ based on the status of the borrower’s income and
expenditure  at  the  time  of  origination.   To  help  manage  risks,  lenders  also  typically  limit  the
3
maximum interest-only period to five years.
2
The role of interest-only lending and its potential implications for financial stability have been of
interest to the Reserve Bank for some time. The possible effects of the transition at the end of
interest-only periods were discussed in the recent Financial Stability Review.  I will come to that
issue shortly, but first I want to review the regulatory responses to the strong growth of interest-
only lending in recent years.
Tightening of lending standards
4
Interest-only  loans  had  grown  very  strongly  for  a  number  of  years  in  an  environment  of  low
mortgage  rates  and  heightened  competitive  pressures  among  lenders.  The  share  of  housing
credit on interest-only terms had increased steadily to almost 40 per cent by 2015 (Graph 1). The
share of credit on interest-only terms has always been much higher for investors than owner-
occupiers (consistent with the associated tax benefits for investors). But interest-only loans for
owner-occupiers had also grown strongly.
In  2014,  the Australian  Prudential  Regulation Authority  (APRA)  acted  to  tighten  standards  for
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
interest-only loans, and mortgages more generally. APRA required serviceability assessments
for  new  loans  to  be  more  conservative  by  basing  them  on  the  required  principal  and  interest
payments over the term of the loan remaining after the interest-only period. (Previously, some
banks were assuming that the principal was being repaid over the entire life of the loan, which
was clearly a lower bar for the borrower to meet.) At about the same time, APRA acted to ensure
that the interest rate ‘buffer’ used in the serviceability assessments for all loans was at least 2
percentage  points  above  the  relevant  benchmark  rate  (with  an  interest  rate  floor  of  at  least
7 per cent). Also, that test was required to include other, existing debt (which is often substantial
for  investors).  The  application  of  such  a  buffer  in  serviceability  assessments  implies  that
borrowers should be able to accommodate a notable rise in required repayments.
When APRA  tightened  loan  serviceability  requirements,  it  also  limited  the  growth  of  investor
lending (to 10 per cent annually).  The share of interest-only loans in total housing credit then
stabilised for a time at around 40 per cent, having increased steadily up to that point.
5
In early 2017, in recognition that continued strong growth of interest-only loans was contributing
to rising risks, APRA further tightened standards on interest-only lending. Among other things,
banks were required to limit new interest-only lending to be no more than 30 per cent of new
mortgage lending.  Banks were also required to tightly manage new interest-only loans extended
at high loan-to valuation ratios (LVRs).
The past year or so
6
In response to those recent regulatory measures, the banks raised interest rates on investor and
interest-only loans. From around the middle of 2017, the average interest rates on the stock of
outstanding  variable  interest-only  loans  increased  to  be  about  40  basis  points  above  interest
rates on equivalent P&I loans (Graph 2). Prior to that, there was little difference in interest rates
7
on these loans.
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The higher interest rates contributed to a reduction in the demand for new interest-only loans. In
addition, because banks had raised interest rates on all of their (variable rate) interest-only loans,
existing customers had an incentive to switch their loans from interest-only to P&I terms before
8
their scheduled interest-only periods ended. Many took up that option.
The combination of higher interest rates and tighter lending standards contributed to the share of
new  loans  that  are  interest-only  falling  comfortably  below  the  30  per  cent  limit.  The  stock  of
interest-only loans in total housing credit has also declined noticeably, from close to 40 per cent
to almost 30 per cent.
This  reduction  in  the  stock  of  interest-only  loans  over  the  past  year  was  substantial.  It
represented about $75 billion of loans (out of a total stock of interest-only loans of almost $600
billion in late 2016).
While  many  of  the  customers  switching  chose  to  do  so  in  response  to  the  higher  rates  on
interest-only loans, there are likely to have been some borrowers who had less choice in the
matter. Some borrowers may have preferred to extend their interest-only periods but may not
have qualified in light of the tighter lending standards. We don’t have a good sense of the split
between those borrowers that switched voluntarily and those that switched reluctantly. However,
our liaison with the banks suggests that most borrowers have managed the transition reasonably
well. Also, the share of non-performing housing loans over the past year remains little changed at
relatively low levels. Moreover, the growth of household consumption has been sustained; indeed
it picked up a touch in year ended-terms over 2017.
Given the large number of borrowers switching to P&I loans, it’s not surprising that scheduled
housing loan repayments have increased over the past year (Graph 3). Meanwhile, unscheduled
payments have declined. With total payments little changed, the rise in scheduled payments has
had no obvious implications for household consumption.
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The next few years
So, many interest-only borrowers appear to have responded voluntarily to the pricing incentives
and switched to P&I loans. This means that it is possible that the current pool of interest-only
borrowers is a little more likely than usual to want to continue with their interest-only loans. For
some of these borrowers, the decision not to switch to a lower interest rate P&I loan may reflect
the higher required payments for such a loan.
Some commentators have gone so far as to suggest that when scheduled interest-only periods
end, many borrowers will be forced onto P&I loans and will find it challenging to make the higher
required payments.  Commentators go on to suggest that such borrowers will either have to sell
their property or reduce other expenditure significantly in order to service their loans.
9
In  what  follows,  I’ll  explore  these  concerns  by  providing  some  estimates  of  the  effect  of
borrowers switching to P&I loans in the years ahead. I’ll focus my attention on the potential size
of  the  change  in  households’  cash  flows  as  well  as  the  effect  on  the  household  sector’s
consumption.
Around two-thirds of interest-only loans in the Reserve Bank’s Securitisation Dataset are due to
have their interest-only periods expire by 2020 (Graph 4).
 That is consistent with interest-only
periods typically being around five years. Only a small share of loans have interest-only periods
of 10 years (or longer), with very few loans on these terms having been written (and securitised)
since 2015. This is in line with the earlier measures to tighten lending standards.
10
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Applying  this  profile  of  expiries  to  the  total  value  of  all  interest-only  loans  suggests  that  about
$120 billion of interest-only loans is scheduled to roll over to P&I loans each year over the next
three  years  (Graph  5).  This  annual  figure  is  equivalent  to  around  7  per  cent  of  the  stock  of
housing credit outstanding.
While the value of loans scheduled to reach the end of the interest-only periods appears large, it
is worth emphasising that expirations of this size are not unprecedented. At the end of 2016, a
similar value of loans was due to have their interest-only periods expire in 2017. What is different
now, however, is that many households have already switched willingly in 2017 in response to
pricing  differentials,  and  lending  standards  were  tightened  further  in  recent  years.  This  could
affect the ability of some borrowers to extend their interest-only periods or to refinance to a P&I
loan with a longer amortising period so as to reduce required payments on the loan.
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
To estimate the effect of the expiry of interest-only periods, I’ll consider the case where all of the
interest-only  periods  expire  as  scheduled.  While  extreme,  this  provides  a  useful  upper-bound
estimate of the effect of the transition ahead.
11
Consider a ‘representative’ interest-only borrower with a $400,000 30-year mortgage with a 5-
year interest-only period.
  The  left-hand  side  bar  in  Graph  6  shows  the  approximate  interest
payments  (of  5  per  cent)  that  such  a  borrower  makes  during  the  interest-only  period. At  the
expiry of the interest-only period, required payments will increase by around 30–40 per cent (with
an example shown in the bar on the right). (As shown in the graph, the interest rate applied to the
loan is expected to be lower when it switches to P&I (by around 40 basis points) but this effect is
more than offset by the principal repayments.)
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  rise  in  scheduled  payments  amounts  to  about  $7,000  per  year  for  the  representative
interest-only borrower. This is a non-trivial sum for the household concerned.
But how big is this cash flow effect when summed up across all households currently holding
interest-only loans? Again, I adopt the extreme assumption that all interest-only periods expire as
scheduled over the coming few years. As a share of total household sector disposable income,
the cash flow effect in this scenario is estimated be less than 0.2 per cent on average per annum
over each of the next three years (Graph 7).
For the household sector as a whole, this upper-bound estimate of the effect is relatively modest.
Even so, there are a number of reasons why the actual cash flow effect is likely to be even less
than this. More importantly, the actual effect on household consumption is likely to be lower still.
So let me step through the various reasons.
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Savings
Many borrowers make provisions ahead of time for the rise in required repayments. It is common
for borrowers to build up savings in the form of offset accounts, redraw balances or other assets.
They can draw upon these to cover the increase in scheduled payments or reduce their debt.
Others may not even need to draw down on existing savings. Instead, they can simply redirect
their current flow of savings to cover the additional payments. In either case, such households
are  well  placed  to  accommodate  the  extra  required  payments  without  needing  to  adjust  their
consumption very much, if at all.
As shown in the chart above, about half of owner-occupier loans have prepayment balances of
more than 6 months of scheduled payments. While that leaves half with only modest balances,
some of those borrowers have relatively new loans. They wouldn’t have had time to accumulate
large prepayment balances nor are they likely to be close to the scheduled end of their interest-
only period.
12
There are borrowers who have had an interest-only loan for some time but haven’t accumulated
offset or redraw balances of substance.
  Offset  and  redraw  balances  are  typically  lower  for
investor loans compared with owner-occupier loans. That is consistent with investors’ incentives
to maximise tax deductible interest. However, in comparison to households that only hold owner-
occupier debt, there is evidence that investors tend to accumulate higher savings in the form of
other  assets  (such  as  paying  ahead  of  schedule  on  a  loan  for  their  own  home,  as  well  as
accumulating equities, bank accounts and other financial instruments).
Refinancing
13
Another option for borrowers is to negotiate an extension to their interest-only period with their
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
current lender or refinance their interest-only loan with a different lender. Similarly, they may be
able  to  refinance  into  a  new  P&I  loan  with  a  longer  loan  term,  thereby  reducing  required
payments. Based on loans in the Securitisation Dataset, a large majority of borrowers would be
eligible to alter their loans in at least one of these ways.
14
Any such refinancing will reduce the demands on a borrower’s cash flows for a time. However, it
is worth noting that by further delaying regular principal repayments, eventually those repayments
will be larger than otherwise.
Extra income or lower expenditures
What about borrowers who have not built up savings ahead of time or are unable to refinance
their loans? The Securitisation Dataset suggests that such borrowers are in the minority. More
importantly, most of them appear to be in a position to service the additional required payments.
Indeed, the tightening of loan serviceability standards a few years ago was no doubt helpful in
that regard.
Some fraction of interest-only  borrowers  may  have  used  the  reduced  demands  on  their  cash
flows during the interest-only period to spend more than otherwise. However, the available data,
and our liaison with the banks, suggest that there are only a small minority of borrowers who will
need to reduce their expenditure to service their loans when their interest-only periods expire.
Sale of the property
15
Finally, some interest-only borrowers may have to consider selling their properties to repay their
loans. Difficult as that may be – most notably for owner-occupiers – doing so could free up cash
flow for other purposes. It would also allow them to extract any equity they have in the property.
The extent of that  can  be  gauged  by  estimating  LVRs  from  the  Securitisation  Dataset.
  The
LVRs  of  almost  all  of  those  interest-only  loans  (both  owner-occupier  and  investor)  are  below
80 per cent (based on current valuations and including offset balances) (Graph 8). This reflects
the combined effects of loan serviceability tests and the increase in housing prices over recent
years.
16
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some risks remain
While  the  various  estimates  I’ve  provided  suggest  that  the  aggregate  effect  of  the  transition
ahead  on  household  cash  flows  and  consumption  is  likely  to  be  small,  some  borrowers  may
experience genuine difficulties when their interest-only periods expire. The most vulnerable are
likely  to  be  owner-occupiers,  with  high  LVRs,  who  might  find  it  more  difficult  to  refinance  or
resolve their situation by selling the property.
Currently,  it  appears  that  the  share  of  borrowers  who  cannot  afford  the  step-up  in  scheduled
payments and are not eligible to alleviate their situation by refinancing is small. Our liaison with
the banks suggests that there are a few borrowers needing assistance to manage the transition.
Over the past year, some banks have reported that there has been a small deterioration in asset
quality. For some borrowers this has tended to be only temporary as they take time to adjust their
financial affairs to cope with the rise in scheduled payments.
 For a small share of borrowers,
though, it reflects difficulty making these higher payments. That share could increase in the event
that an adverse shock led to a deterioration in overall economic conditions.
Conclusion
17
Today, I have discussed some of the risks associated with interest-only loans, which imply that
their value as a form of mortgage finance has limits. I have also presented rough estimates of the
likely  effect  of  the  upcoming  expiry  of  interest-only  loan  periods.  The  step-up  in  required
payments at that time for some individual borrowers is non-trivial. For the household sector as a
whole,  however,  the  cash  flow  effect  of  the  transition  is  likely  to  be  moderate.  The  effect  on
household consumption is likely to be even less. This is because some interest-only borrowers
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
will be willing and able to refinance their loans. Also, many others have built up a sufficient pool of
savings, or will be able to redirect their current flow of savings to meet the payments, or have
planned for, and will manage, this change in other ways.
Indeed,  the  substantial  transition  away  from  interest-only  loans  over  the  past  year  has  been
relatively  smooth  overall,  and  is  likely  to  remain  so.  Nevertheless,  it  is  something  that  we  will
continue to monitor closely.
Finally,  the  observation  that  the  transition  is  proceeding  smoothly  is  not  an  argument  that  the
tightening in lending standards on interest-only loans was unwarranted; far from it. The tightening
in standards starting in 2014 has helped to ensure that borrowers are generally well placed to
service  their  loans. And  the  limit  on  new  interest-only  lending  more  recently  has  prompted  a
reduction in the use of those loans during a time of relatively robust growth of employment and
still very low interest rates. In this way, it has helped to lessen the risk of a larger adjustment later
on in what could be less favourable circumstances.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
This can be true even for investors today since (over a relatively long horizon) the benefit of the tax deduction can
offset the cost of paying the higher interest rate on interest-only loans that now apply. Also, if the investor has
attractive alternative investments, they may be willing to pay more for an interest-only loan.
The term ‘bank’ here refers to all authorised deposit-taking institutions, namely banks, building societies and
credit unions, which are regulated by APRA.
Investors  are  sometimes  given  a  clear  option  to  extend  into  a  second  interest-only  period,  but  that  would
normally proceed only after ascertaining that the borrower’s financial position remains sound.
For more discussion of the risks associated with interest-only loans, see RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia)
(2017), Financial Stability Review, April.
Strictly speaking, APRA imposed a 10 per cent benchmark on investor lending growth. If a lender breached that
growth it would face higher capital charges and more scrutiny from APRA.
For details, see APRA (2017), ‘APRA Announces Further Measures to Reinforce Sound Residential Mortgage
Lending Practices’, Media Release No 17.11, 31 March.
The gap between actual rates paid on interest-only loans and on P&I loans prior to 2016 largely disappears
when we control for the differences between loan characteristics (such as loan size or LVR). For more details,
see Kent C (2017), ‘Some Innovative Mortgage Data’, Address to Moody’s Analytics Australia Conference 2017,
Sydney, 14 August.
Indeed, lenders actively encouraged their existing interest-only borrowers to switch and allowed them to do so
without penalty. Banks had an incentive to do so as their existing interest-only customers may otherwise have
chosen to switch to a (lower rate) P&I loan with another lender.
For example, Shapiro J and Greber J (2017), The Australian Financial Review, ‘Interest-only loans could be
‘Australia’s sub-prime’, available at , 21 May; Hughes D (2018), The Australian Financial Review, ‘Interest-only
borrowers brace for mortgage crunch’, available at , 17 January; and Kirby J (2018), The Australian, ‘Interest-only
crisis time bomb ticking as repayments rise’, available at , 3 March.
The  Reserve  Bank  collects  detailed  information  on  asset-backed  securities  it  accepts  as  collateral  in  its
domestic market operations. Most of the asset-backed securities in the dataset are underpinned by residential
mortgages, covering around $400 billion of mortgages or about one-quarter of the total value of housing loans
in Australia. Although the dataset is not representative of the entire mortgage market across all its dimensions,
the aggregate share of interest-only loans in the Securitisation Dataset is similar to other measures that cover
the broader housing market. For more details, Kohler M (2017), ‘Mortgage Insights From Securitisation Data’,
Address to Australian Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 20 November.
This is based on the median loan size of interest-only loans from the Securitisation Dataset originated since
2013.
Fixed-rate  loans  do  not  allow  substantial  prepayments.  Nevertheless,  even  those  borrowers  could  be
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
accumulating savings in other assets.
13
14
15
16
17
This is based on internal analysis using data from the survey of Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in
Australia (HILDA).
To  obtain  these  estimates,  each  borrower’s  maximum  borrowing  capacity  is  estimated  using  a  measure
aligned  with APRA’s  prudential  standards  and  conservative  assumptions  where  possible  (such  as  around
minimum  expenses).  Also,  borrowers  who  took  out  interest-only  loans  prior  to  2015  are  likely  to  have
accumulated positive equity because of substantial price growth in recent years. This would help them to qualify
for refinancing into a longer P&I term if they desired it.
The Australian Securities and Investment Commission has required eight lenders to provide remediation to
borrowers that face financial stress as a direct result of poor lending practices related to interest-only lending.
As yet, however, only a small number of borrowers have been identified as being eligible for such remediation
action.
This is done by indexing property valuations (typically provided at the time a loan is originated) by a measure of
housing prices and accounting for offset balances.
Banks can assist their borrowers experiencing temporary difficulties under their ‘hardship programs’, including
by extending the interest-only period for brief period, for example.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
