Peter Praet: Ensuring a sustained adjustment in inflation
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central
Bank, at the National Bank of Romania, Bucharest, 3 July 2018.
Accompanying slides of this speech.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Bucharest today. Since Romania joined the European
Union on 1 January 2007, the world has changed considerably. The global financial crisis has
challenged  the  European  Union  and  its  Member  States.  Several  of  them,  including  Romania,
have  implemented  significant  macroeconomic  and  financial  adjustments.  The  euro  area
sovereign debt crisis exposed the institutional weaknesses of our Economic and Monetary Union
and  notably  led  to  the  push  for  the  banking  union  and  the  creation  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism.
Romania has achieved a lot since it joined the European Union. Starting from very low GDP per
capita, the country has made significant progress in terms of real convergence, with real GDP
per capita moving from about 40% to roughly 60% of the EU average. Further structural reforms
are  necessary  to  unlock  the  full  potential  of  the  economy  and  pave  the  way  for  continued
sustainable convergence.
Further reforms are also indispensable to ensure the smooth functioning of our Economic and
Monetary  Union.  Our  monetary  union  is  gradually  becoming  stronger.  Last  week  the  Euro
Summit agreed to take further steps towards completing the banking union and to strengthen the
European  Stability  Mechanism,  including  by  providing  the  backstop  to  the  Single  Resolution
Fund. This is not yet the end of the journey towards a genuine economic and monetary union, but
the Meseberg Declaration maps out a path towards further institutional developments that will,
over time, make our monetary union stronger, to the benefit of all Europeans.
As a European institution, the ECB responded forcefully to the challenges posed by the crisis. In
doing so, it acted in complete independence and fully in line with its mandate to maintain price
stability in the euro area as a whole. This independence, granted to central banks by the Treaties,
is an invaluable asset, helping them to act as guardians of price stability in good as well as in
challenging times.
I  will  first  consider  our  monetary  policy  response  to  the  crisis,  before  turning  my  attention  to
recent economic developments. I will then elaborate on the measures that we took last month.
Overview of the monetary policy response to the crisis
A drawn-out phase of overborrowing and leverage came to an abrupt end in 2008. This set in
train  a  turbulent  decade  of  challenges  to  both  financial  stability  and  to  the  macroeconomic
performance of the euro area economy. Not least, significant deleveraging and de-risking were
triggered over several phases, each requiring a distinct response from the ECB.
The first phase exposed banks and sovereigns. It started with the liquidity crisis triggered by the
collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. Funding markets for banks came to a sudden
stop. In response, the ECB – in concert with its counterparts around the world – reacted swiftly. It
lowered its main refinancing rate to 1% in May 2009 and, in order to facilitate banks’ borrowing of
central bank funds, it expanded the range of eligible collateral for its refinancing operations. It also
provided liquidity to the banking sector elastically – with no ex ante limit. This caused overnight
interest rates to drift down to well below the rate on main refinancing operations.
But the severity of the crisis was such that the banking sector remained under pressure. The
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
resources of the public sector were mobilised, putting strains on the public finances of those
countries  whose  banking  sectors  were  large  relative  to  their  economies.  As  a  result  of  this
assistance to the financial sector, government debt in the euro area as a whole increased by
more than five percentage points of GDP. At the level of individual countries, government debt
increased in some cases by more than 10 or even 30 percentage points of GDP, not including
further – very sizeable – contingent liabilities resulting from state guarantees to banks.
The second phase intensified the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns. This
loop was a source of vulnerability for the euro area for two reasons: first, any impairment of the
banking  sector’s  liabilities  –  including  capital  −  challenged  fiscal  sustainability  in  the  eyes  of
investors; and, second, the value of bonds held as bank assets shrank as their market value
eroded.
The main consequence of this negative feedback loop was a fragmentation of financial markets
along  national  lines. A  lack  of  liquidity,  coupled  with  the  erosion  of  capital  due  to  losses  on
sovereign exposures, eventually led to entire national banking systems being unable to access
market funding. Cross-border bank funding contracted, and has never really recovered since.
Financial  fragmentation  impaired  monetary  policy  transmission.  Markets  started  to  price  in
redenomination  risk  for  some  sovereign  bonds,  which  in  turn  prevented  our  accommodative
policy  stance  from  reaching  businesses  and  households  evenly  throughout  the  euro  area.
Contagion eventually became an acute threat to price stability and to the economy as a whole.
The ECB’s monetary policy response to these developments was twofold. First, to ensure that
banks had access to longer-term funding, two three-year refinancing operations were undertaken
at the end of 2011 and beginning of 2012. Second, in the summer of 2012, the announcement of
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  served  as  a  powerful  circuit  breaker.  However,  by  then,  the
sovereign debt crisis had already left a trail of destruction in its wake, paving the way for the third
phase of the crisis.
In  the  third  phase,  banks  in  many  parts  of  the  euro  area  started  to  deleverage,  substantially
reducing their lending to the private sector. Towards the end of 2013 lending was falling by more
than 2% per year and another credit crunch was looming. By mid-2014, the economic recovery
was losing momentum and the weakness in aggregate demand was starting to depress inflation
expectations. Additional  policy  accommodation  was  needed  to  maintain  price  stability,  but  the
rate on the ECB deposit facility had already been reduced to zero in July 2012. To address this
challenge, the ECB sought to affect the whole range of interest rates that are relevant for private
sector financing conditions through a strategy consisting of three elements.
The first was the launch of a negative interest rate policy, which began with a cut in the deposit
interest rate to –0.1% in June 2014. This provided additional stimulus, as it extended the scope of
conventional monetary policy.
The second element was the introduction of a credit easing package, which included targeted
longer-term refinancing operations designed to support bank lending to the private sector, a third
covered  bond  purchase  programme  and  an  asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme.
These  measures  improved  the  pass-through  of  liquidity  injected  into  the  financial  system  to
private sector borrowing costs.
The third was the addition of a public sector purchase programme to the ECB’s asset purchase
programme (APP) to reinforce the accommodative monetary policy stance, further compressing
term premia all along the yield curve.
These  instruments  were  complemented  by  the  use  of  forward  guidance,  through  which  we
started to communicate our expectations of future policy, along with the conditions that would
warrant a change in the policy stance. Forward guidance was intended to make our measures
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
as effective as possible, in particular by ensuring that the impact of asset purchases on term
premia was not counteracted by false expectations of interest rate increases.
Over  time,  our  measures  have  boosted  the  growth  momentum  of  the  euro  area  economy,
thereby supporting a return of inflation towards our inflation aim. The euro area has now enjoyed
five consecutive years of growth. This prolonged economic expansion is reflected in the labour
market: around 8.4 million more people are employed now than at the bottom of the trough in
mid-2013. The jobs lost during the crisis have been entirely recovered, and the unemployment
rate stands at its lowest level in nearly nine years, despite an increase in the labour force of more
than 2%. Recent business  surveys  point  to  a  continued  positive  outlook  for  employment.  Our
monetary policy measures have thus been successful.
Progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
In spite of the recent moderation in economic activity, economic conditions remain favourable.
The moderation in the first half of 2018 is attributable to a pull-back from the high levels of growth
in  the  previous  year,  compounded  by  some  temporary  and  supply-side  factors,  as  well  as  a
weaker impetus from external trade. The pace of economic growth is expected to stay above
potential in the coming years. Favourable financing conditions, a robust labour market and steady
income  and  profit  growth  are  expected  to  continue  to  support  private  consumption  and
investment. This outlook is contingent on a continued supportive business environment at the
global level and on the pursuit of institutional and structural reforms in the euro area.
Headline inflation increased significantly in May, primarily due to higher oil prices, and stood at
2.0% in June according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. Eurosystem staff expect headline inflation to
stand  at  1.7%  in  each  year  over  the  period  from  2018  to  2020,  supported  by  the  continuing
economic expansion, high levels of capacity utilisation, labour market tightness and rising wage
growth. This stable path of headline inflation conceals a decline in the annual rate for the energy
component,  offset  by  gradually  rising  HICP  inflation  excluding  energy  and  food,  as  capacity
constraints  are  expected  to  become  increasingly  tight.  This  expectation  is  consistent  with  the
incipient increase in measures of underlying inflation from earlier lows.
The  risks  surrounding  the  euro  area  growth  outlook  remain  broadly  balanced.  However,  risks
related  to  global  factors,  including  the  threat  of  increased  protectionism,  have  become  more
prominent.  Moreover,  the  risk  of  persistent  heightened  financial  market  volatility  adds  to  the
downside factors.
Against this backdrop, the ECB’s Governing Council carried out a thorough assessment of price
and wage pressures and the inflation outlook at its June meeting. Its assessment of progress
towards  a  sustained  adjustment  of  inflation  was  guided  by  three  criteria:  convergence,
confidence and resilience.
As  for  convergence,  the  June  2018  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  foresee
headline  and  core  inflation  reaching  1.7%  and  1.9%,  respectively,  in  2020.  This  confirms  a
pattern  of  convergence  to  levels  closer  to  2%  that  has  become  increasingly  evident  over
successive projection rounds.
Concerning  the  second  criterion,  confidence,  uncertainty  about  the  inflation  outlook  has  been
declining significantly and the risk of deflation has vanished. Inflation expectations − both survey
and  market-based  −  have  been  gradually  improving  and  are  increasingly  consistent  with  the
Governing  Council’s  inflation  aim.  Moreover,  domestic  cost  pressures  are  strengthening  amid
high levels of capacity utilisation, tightening labour markets and rising wages.
Finally,  with  regard  to  the  resilience  criterion,  the  projected  inflation  convergence  towards  our
inflation aim has become progressively less reliant on further extensions of net asset purchases.
This is also reflected in current market expectations.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Progress towards a sustained adjustment in inflation has been substantial so far. The underlying
strength  of  the  euro  area  economy,  together  with  well-anchored,  longer-term  inflation
expectations, provides grounds to be confident that the sustained convergence of inflation will
continue in the period ahead, even after a gradual winding-down of net asset purchases.
At the same time, significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to support the further build-
up of domestic price pressures and to ensure the durable stabilisation of inflation around levels
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Patience, prudence and persistence continue to
be essential in determining the future course of monetary policy. The significant stimulus that is
still needed for the continued sustained convergence of inflation will be provided by the additional
net  asset  purchases  until  the  end  of  the  year,  by  the  sizeable  stock  of  acquired  assets  and
associated reinvestments, and by the enhanced forward guidance on key ECB interest rates.
Patience, prudence and persistence are fully reflected in our latest monetary policy decisions.
First,  the  anticipated  end  of  net  asset  purchases  remains  conditional  on  incoming  data
confirming  the  medium-term  inflation  outlook.  Second,  we  have  reiterated  our  intention  to
maintain  our  policy  of  reinvesting  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased
under the APP for an extended period of time after the end of our net asset purchases, and in
any case for as long as necessary. Third, we have clarified the expected future course of policy
interest  rates  by  enhancing  our  forward  guidance  through  explicit  date-based  and  state-
contingent  elements.  The  expectation  is  that  policy  rates  will  remain  at  their  present  levels  at
least through the summer of 2019 and, in any case, for as long as necessary to ensure that the
evolution  of  inflation  remains  aligned  with  the  Governing  Council’s  current  expectations  of  a
sustained adjustment path.
Beyond the end of net asset purchases, reinvestments will mean that the Eurosystem maintains
a sizeable presence in euro area securities markets. Enhanced forward guidance on rates, in
turn,  supports  financial  conditions  by  anchoring  policy  rate  expectations  more  firmly  at  their
present  low  levels.  Moreover,  the  conditionality  embedded  in  forward  guidance  on  all  policy
instruments ensures that the monetary stance will continue to evolve gradually and in a data-
dependent manner.
The  impact  of  our  most  recent  decisions  on  financial  prices  was  largely  frictionless.  Our
enhanced forward guidance on the ECB’s policy rates underlines their pivotal role as the main
tool for adjusting the monetary policy stance in the future.
Overall, the present configuration of policy instruments will preserve the monetary stimulus that
underpins the economic growth momentum in the euro area and the evolution of inflation along a
sustained adjustment path.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
