Andreas Dombret: A stairway to heaven? The promises and limits
of global integration
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the London School of Economics and Political Science, London, 8 February 2018.
 1. Introduction
Professor Goodhart,
dear Charles
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you very much indeed for your kind invitation. It’s a great pleasure for me to be back at
the LSE. For me this university represents how we can achieve a better society if we deepen our
understanding of the world. London, on the other hand – with its fascinating and diverse culture –
is the more joyful part of learning about the world.
I  have  to  admit  I  was  somewhat  shocked  when  the  majority  of  UKvoters  chose  to  leave  the
European  Union.  I  respect  that  decision,  and  I  understand  that  many  voters  voiced  their
frustrations through their “leave” vote. Yet I am convinced that the UK and the EU going separate
ways will be a tremendous loss for both sides. And I very much hope that during the coming
months we will find pragmatic ways to establish a new, respectful, and amicable partnership.
But the formal contracts alone will not make for such a strong partnership. What it will take is civil
engagement – universities are among the most important breeding grounds for this; and that is
especially true of the beacons of international academic cooperation like the LSE. The teachers,
professors and students of the LSE and all other universities can be – I would go as far as to
say: they have to be – the basis for continued exchange to foster mutual understanding.
That is what makes my visit here today so important to me. And that is why I want to talk about
the future of international cooperation, the limits of which have become so painfully obvious – not
only due to the Brexit vote, but more generally in the partial rejection of global solutions and the
rising support for sovereign national economic policies.
In  my  lecture  today  I  will  ask  whether  over  the  last  40  years  global  economic  integration,
globalisation  for  short,  has  been  the  stairway  to  heaven  that  it  promised  to  be,  raising  overall
economic welfare. I will argue that globalisation‘s performance has actually been rather mixed.
From there, I will ask what we might learn for future partnerships like the post-Brexit deal. I intend
to discuss a middle way between the perceptions of globalisation advocates and opponents: an
approach of less comprehensive globalisation and greater national diversity. To make the case, I
will  apply  this  approach  to  three  current  policy  challenges:  the  regulation  of  global  trade,  the
regulation of global finance, and the future relationship between the UK and the EU.
2. Has globalisation gone too far?
Globalisation is good – for almost everyone. This was the mainstream judgement for a long time.
But the wind has changed. More than a year after the “leave” vote and a new USadministration
taking office, the discontent with globalisation seems to be almost everywhere. Do Brexit and the
new US trade policy threaten to reduce overall economic welfare as they turn back globalisation?
Or has globalisation gone too far? Has it created wealth for a few, while creating many losers
among the broader population?
Well,  globalisation  is  both  good  and  bad.  On  the  one  hand,  global  economic  integration  has
contributed  to  greater  prosperity  in  many  countries.  The  reduction  of  tariffs  on  trade  –  one
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
particular example being the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade or GATT for short – has
increased overall economic welfare. The division of labour on a global scale has opened many
channels of rising prosperity – from economies of scale and comparative advantages to global
technological transfer.  And for the last 40 years the public debate has focused on these gains.
1
Then  came  Brexit  and  growing  populist  support  around  the  world.  This  development  is  a
reminder that globalisation has a darker side; that global economic integration of the last 40 years
has contributed to two significant problems.
First, importing and exporting lead to sectoral change and redistribution, which produces both
winners and losers in a society. Even though globalisation is less important than technological
change for redistribution, we knew for quite some time that international trade creates winners
and  losers  within  a  society.   There  is  considerable  evidence  that  international  trade  pushes
some people in import-competing industries out of jobs or reduces their wages.  Examples of
what this does to societies are to be seen in the American rust-belt and northern England. There
4
is also evidence that it heightens political polarisation.
2
3
Now, a society may want to protect globalisation’s losers against the negative repercussions of
this  redistribution,  or  at  least  compensate  them.   But,  this  may  be  difficult  –  because  of  the
second problem of globalisation: global regulatory harmonisation weakens the ability of states to
sustain welfare standards and regulations that are above global minimum standards – the result
can be what is referred to as the race to the bottom.
5
Success in slashing tariffs gave rise to the belief that ever more integration of global markets
would  foster  prosperity  growth  for  all  participating  societies.  Globalisation  advocates  identified
divergent national regulations as being the great remaining non-tariff barrier to trade. To increase
the reach of the global market and to further raise prosperity, they recommended harmonising
national  regulations  in  order  to  reduce  transaction  costs.  This  led  to  trade  agreements  that
harmonised rules far beyond reducing simple trade hurdles.
This harmonisation pressure did not come in the shape of formal international agreements alone;
it also came in the shape of informal pressure to adjust to global market pressure, potentially
leading a country to consider itself limited in its policy choices because it perceived the threat of
6
firms moving to locations with more favourable conditions.
At the time, wide-ranging global liberalisation and harmonisation were widely seen as a panacea.
But  the  downside  is  that  it  limits  countries  in  their  individual  policy  choices.  Just  think  about
criticism  levelled  against  CETA,  the  comprehensive  Canada-EUtrade  deal,  and  TTIP,  the
corresponding US-EU project. And also Britain’s desire to set its own rules can be viewed in this
light. Comprehensive, rule-harmonising agreements have the drawback of giving more influence
to  global  institutions  and  international  firms  than  is  legitimate  with  respect  to  democratic
principles. Moreover, they leave insufficient room for institutional, legal and regulatory diversity
between countries with different histories and preferences.
And these examples show one thing very clearly: when governments and parliaments seek to
regulate markets and firms freedoms – for example by taxing corporations or setting labour and
environmental  standards  –  but  resist  because  they  feel  constrained  by  harmonised  rules  and
global market pressures, this can undermine social contracts and lead to political polarisation.
In sum, globalisation is both good and bad. On the one hand, liberalising trade and connecting
the world economy has created substantial wealth. We need to be careful not to throw this away.
Retreating to purely nationalist solutions would almost certainly make things worse – for almost
everyone in our societies. Yet on the other hand, globalisation might have gone too far – the dose
chosen over the past 40 years probably has been too much of a good thing.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
3. Accepting the limits of globalisation
What  can  we  do  about  it?  We  need  a  middle  way  between  the  positions  of  globalisation
advocates  and  opponents  –  a  solution  that  harnesses  globalisation’s  benefits  and  limits  its
negative repercussions. But what road can lead us to such a promising goal?
There  is  the  populist  “solution”:  nationalist  protectionism,  which  might  even  go  as  far  as
promoting autarky. I do not wish to spend much time on this, as I deem this a short-sighted,
incomplete proposal that claims to shield people from economic and societal change – without
admitting that this is impossible even within a walled nation.
7
A more realistic, and quite prominent idea is to compensate those who lose out from international
trade.   The  welfare  state  does  in  considerable  part  already  achieve  just  that.  Yet  the  welfare
state has been somewhat in retreat, as countries have attempted to strengthen their international
competitiveness by lowering social costs. So there is probably some room for improvement. But
this will not be enough, as it does not provide a solution to the “race to the bottom” problem; nor
does it even the tilted influence of global institutions and international firms.
To understand what options we do have, I find a simple, yet powerful analysis very helpful: the
impossibility theorem for the global economy. Dani Rodrik, the Harvard professor, whose work in
International Political Economy has gained a great deal of attention, argues that when we set the
framework for global economic integration, it is impossible to have all three tenets of the current
globalisation order at the same time: we cannot have
(a) full, global market liberalisation,
(b) national sovereignty and
8
(c) democracy.
In other words, this globalisation trilemma forces us to choose two of these three tenets and give
one up. It can be any two, but it is impossible to have them all. So, if we look for a solution in our
current globalisation debate, we have to decide which two central tenets we value more than the
third.
While  this  sounds  overly  simplistic,  I  think  Dani  Rodrik  has  a  valid  point.  Think  about  it.  If  we
continue to deepen global market liberalisation and harmonisation, then the ability of countries
and their sovereign people to choose their own policies becomes less and less. We could give
up  democracy,  so  that  an  autocratic  ruler  or  a  technocratic  government  could  decree  that
everyone  has  to  accept  full  market  liberalisation  or  the  globally  harmonised  rules  that  the
government has negotiated. Or – if we cherish democracy and want to keep the global market –
we could surrender national sovereignty to a global democracy, so that a global government and
parliament would correct globalisation’s failures.
Thus, if we continue to pursue a fully integrated global market with widely harmonised rules, we
would have to give up either our national sovereignty or our democratic ability to oppose global
rules. However, democracy is not on the table; and I think it is fair to say that Brexit and the rise
of populism have taught us that our societies are not ready to renounce national sovereignty.
What remains, then, is to limit global market liberalisation. But how?
Normally, it is bad marketing to start with what your product cannot do – nevertheless, I want to
clarify what limiting globalisation does not mean. It does not mean that we should end foreign
diplomacy  and  multilateral 
fostering  mutual
understanding  and  the  friendship  of  nations.  It  likewise  does  not  exclude  economic  policy
coordination in times of crisis – which was quite successful during the last financial crisis. And
finally, it does not mean that we should resort to mercantilist policies of rebuilding tariffs around
special interest groups.
international  politics;  nor  should  we  stop 
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
So what then? The answer is that we must devise a stronger set of rules that limit the negative
repercussions  of  free  markets.  This  solution  has  a  national  and  a  global  component,  where
greater attention has to be placed on the national approach than was the case in the past four
decades. I want to emphasise three policy elements.
First, countries themselves have to decide what level of compensation they want to provide to
those who lose out from globalisation.
Second, each society has to reconsider the cases in which certain limits to global markets would
make sense. This would most likely result in more limits to international economic activity, and it
could  lead  to  more  institutional,  legal  and  regulatory  diversity  between  countries  with  different
histories and different preferences.
But there will still be substantial room for the global dimension. So the third policy element of the
future  globalisation  framework  is  continued  –  but  less,  and  focused  –  harmonisation.  It  is  my
opinion  that  we  should  focus  our  harmonisation  efforts  on  certain  meaningful  and  legitimate
minimum standards.
You could call this “globalisation on a leash”. I prefer the expression “focused harmonisation”:
sovereign countries carefully select the suitable areas and respect where other nations see their
own vital interests at risk. This means that we have to ask in what areas global liberalisation and
harmonisation is meaningful and how far they should go – and in many areas the answer might
be that less is more; that less liberalisation and less harmonisation is better globalisation.
But when does a national policy legitimately protect its national social contract, and when does it
constitute  the  illegitimate  protection  of  special  interest  groups?  Whether  we  can  find  practical
answers to this question is the acid test of focused globalisation. Politicians and their advisors
need  to  carefully  decide  in  which  areas  harmonisation  is  meaningful  and  how  far  and  deep  it
should go.
There is no simple answer here, but we need a more balanced benchmark than the idea of a fully
liberalised global market without any legal transaction costs. Leaving room for diverse national
approaches  in  areas  involving  vital  elements  of  a  country’s  social  contract  would  be  a  more
realistic course.
Now I realise that proceeding in this way takes us out of the comfort zone of our established
policy principles. But innovation is always outside the comfort zone, especially since – as with all
important and challenging questions – we have no readily available plan.
So  the  crucial  question  is:  How  can  we  make  focused  harmonisation  work?  Let’s  take  the
principles that I just talked about and apply them to reality in three crucial policy areas: trade,
finance and Brexit.
4. What should trade agreements harmonise?
When it comes to trade, it is crucial for our societies to find innovative policies that compensate
9
for or even prevent some of the redistributive effects of trade.
There is a lot of debate going on about how this could best be done.
 And it seems clear to me
that  we  have  to  continue  looking  for  a  good  policy  mix  that  combines  established  ideas,  like
combating tax fraud and tax evasion, with new ideas. Only in this way can we hope to strengthen
the social contracts which underpin our market-based policies.
10
But my focus today is less on the redistributive effect and more on how much global liberalisation
and  harmonisation  is  meaningful  in  light  of  these  challenges.  In  the  realm  of  trade  deals,  this
brings us to the question of how many trade-related regulations and laws we should harmonise.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
As the failure of the TTIP agreement shows, our approach cannot rest on the simple tenet of “the
more, the better”.
Instead, future trade agreements need to be focused and should respect national prerogatives.
Trade agreements should be trade agreements and nothing more than is necessary to enable
the  global  division  of  labour  and  exchange  of  goods.  For  that,  we  do  not  need  transnational
arbitration courts, as were discussed in the context of TTIP. What we need is a reliable legal
framework, something that all developed economies can already guarantee.
If we want to do business in a society or deliver goods or services to its markets, we have to
accept the rules this society deems essential, in which case a company’s cost-benefit analysis
will show either that compliance with said rules will still deliver an acceptable return, or that it
should not engage in the business in question.
5. How much harmonisation in global finance?
Let’s  turn  to  my  second  example:  global  finance  and  regulatory  harmonisation.  Here,  focused
harmonisation and more diversity could also be applied.
This statement may surprise some of you, as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has
just finalised the Basel III agreement after eight years of global cooperation to devise the complex
set of rules.
And of course I would not wish to see this wheel turned back. Basel III is an important milestone;
it is a global minimum standard that imposes limits on the risks that internationally active banks
can  take.  By  defining  minimum  amounts  of  equity  for  banks  in  relation  to  their  risk-weighted
assets, it seeks to reduce the international risks to financial stability.
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a transnational body of supervisory authorities
from  28  jurisdictions,  has  worked  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  to  provide  a  global
solution  to  problems  that  brought  about  the  financial  crisis.  And  I  am  a  strong  supporter  of
implementing this standard in the European Union to make it a binding reality. I am convinced
that the UKauthorities will take a very similar view.
However, please note two qualifications: these are minimum standards for internationally active
banks.
11
Since  Basel  standards  are  minimum  standards,  a  country  may  decide  to  set  stricter
requirements. For example, Switzerland has a higher leverage ratio. And as many of you know,
the UK has ring-fencing rules in place that separate vital basic functions of a bank from the riskier
ones. This policy is not of the Basel Committee’s making, and the UK is free to apply it in its
jurisdiction.
The second qualification of the Basel III standard is that it is for internationally active banks. As
such, jurisdictions are free to apply a different set of rules to smaller, only nationally active banks
that pose no threat to international financial stability. Most nations already have less restrictive
rules  on  smaller  banks  in  order  to  reduce  the  operational  burden  for  them.  I  am  a  strong
proponent of extending this proportionality further, because the highly complex regulatory reforms
after  the  financial  crisis  were  sought  for  global  banks,  and  they  overburden  smaller,  regional
banks.
In sum, then, we ought to focus on truly global aspects, like regulating globally active banks, while
leaving it to nation states to carry out those tasks that they are better placed to take care of, such
as the regulation of locally active banks.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
6. Brexit and the limits of the future partnership
This brings us to Brexit. Many of us are wondering what sort of cooperation model there will be. If
no  solution  is  found,  the  EUand  the  UK  will  trade  under  rules  set  by  the  World  Trade
Organization  –  which  is  in  nobody’s  interests,  but  is  likely  to  be  especially  harmful  to
the UK economy.
Politicians and negotiators are currently seeking a deal that will minimise frictions in trade and
supply  chains  on  the  one  hand.  On  the  other,  such  a  settlement  must  also  give  the  UK  and
the EUfreedom to develop  their  own  rules  according  to  their  own  specific,  historically  evolved
circumstances and current preferences.
And it may very well be that this new agreement is quite limited – for example, to the exchange of
goods.  Labour  migration  is  likely  to  be  excluded;  at  least,  that  seems  like  a  red  line  for
the  UKgovernment. And  free  trade  in  services  also  seems  less  and  less  likely.  To  quote  the
negotiator for the EU, Michel Barnier: “There is no place [for financial services]. There is not a
single trade agreement that is open to financial services. It doesn’t exist […].”
12
Thus, it is not that unlikely that there will be no free trade agreement for financial services – or
other services sectors for that matter. Service providers would then have to apply for full licenses
in both jurisdictions and have all the necessary elements of a fully functioning bank ready in both
places.
And  while  this  might  increase  transaction  costs  in  some  cases,  it  may  bring  the  benefit  of
enabling the EU and the UK to set their own rules in an important area of economic policy. And
as important as efficiency is, the ability to find national solutions, national rules to stabilise the
social contract, is more important for social cohesion than economic efficiency.
And as unspeakable as this may have seemed just a year ago, it would not stop the world from
turning;  which  is  why  we  have  been  urging  banks  and  other  financial  services  firms  for  quite
some time to prepare for this scenario.
Whatever  political  decision  is  taken,  supervisors  will  not  only  do  all  they  can  to  make  the
transition to a new regime as smooth as possible; they will also, in the long run, try to reduce
unnecessary  inefficiencies  where  possible.  That  way,  we  can  hopefully  keep  the  efficiency
losses  to  the  economy  at  a  rather  negligible  level.  Yet,  one  thing  must  be  absolutely  clear:
relaxing regulatory standards as an instrument of economic policy is not an option. Competitive
deregulation  through  tax  or  supervisory  policy  would  erode  the  foundation  of  our  future
cooperation.
7. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
I was born in the United States, grew up in Germany, and spent much of my life working around
the  world,  including  London.  Personally,  the  backlash  against  the  integration  of  our  global
community has shattered my core beliefs and worries me deeply.
But I accept that global economic integration has gone too far. Theoretically, it may be appealing
to  have  one  global  market,  but  the  reality  is  that  it  does  not  work.  It  has  substantial  negative
repercussions – repercussions that our current approach to globalisation cannot handle well.
We need to find a new, third way; a middle way that harnesses globalisation’s benefits and limits
its negative repercussions. To stop a race to the bottom, national governments and parliaments
will have to be more willing to go their own way rather than believing in entirely free, frictionless
global markets and fully harmonised rules.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
They will have to decide what level of compensation they want to provide to those who lose out
from globalisation; and each society will have to reconsider where it makes sense to impose
limits on global markets and internationally active firms.
However, there would still be substantial room for the harmonisation of rules, but it should be
less, and focused, harmonisation with minimum standards only in carefully selected, meaningful
areas. I personally will do everything I can to contribute to finding the right approach.
Ten years from now, I hope we will have adapted the multilateral system to form one that does
not condemn distinct national rules as something illegitimate or inefficient, but one that combines
sensible global integration with institutional diversity. Only if we become that open-minded and
accept the rich diversity of human culture will we be able to sustain a close multilateral system
that is geopolitically stable and enjoys the support of the clear majority of people.
We need to debate this earnestly and intensely so that we may arrive at new thoughts and ideas.
On that note, I now look forward to debating with you. Thank you very much for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The danger posed to the global economy by protectionist tendencies. Monthly
Report, July 2017, pp 77–91.
W F Stolper & P A Samuelson (1941) Protection and Real Wages in The Review of Economic Studies 9(1): 58–
73.
See, for example, for the US, D H Autor, D Dorn & G H Hanson (2013) The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market
Effects of Import Competition in the United States in The American Economic Review, 103(6): 2121–2168; J R
Pierce  &  P  K  Schott  (2016)  The  Surprisingly  Swift  Decline  of  US  Manufacturing  Employment  in American
Economic Review, 106(7): 1632–62; D Goldschmidt & J F Schmieder (2017) The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing
and the Evolution of the German Wage Structure in The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3): 1165–1217.
See, for example, D Autor et al (2016) Importing Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising
Trade  Exposure.  NBER  Working  Paper  No.  22637;  for  Germany:  Dippel,  C,  R  Gold  and  S  Heblich  (2015)
“Globalisation and its (dis-)content: Trade shocks and voting behaviour”, NBERWorking Paper No. 21812.
A Dombret (2017) Current challenges for the European economy and international trade. Speech given at the
German Chamber of Commerce in Beijing, 25 May 2017
D Drezner (2007) All Politics is Global. Explaining International Regulatory Regimes. Princeton University Press.
A Dombret (2017) Election time(s) in Europe – Challenges on the way to economic recovery. Speech at the
University of Tokyo, 23 May 2017.
D Rodrik (2000), How far will international economic integration go? in Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1):
177–186.
However, we should not forget that these social interventions in market economies are even more important
with a view to the much bigger redistributive effects of digitisation and technological change more generally.
For example, D Rodrik (2017) Straight Talk on Trade: Ideas for a Sane World Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press; A Dombret (2017) Election time(s) in Europe – Challenges on the way to economic recovery.
Speech at the University of Tokyo, 23 May 2017.
A Dombret (2017) Basel III – Are we done now? Statement at the ILF Conference in Frankfurt am Main, 29
January 2018.
Interview with the Guardian on 18 December 2017; www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/dec/18/uk-cannot-have-
a-special-deal-for-the-city-says-eu-brexit-negotiator-barnier; accessed on 23 January 2018.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
