Ahmed  Naseer:  The  role  of  institutional  investors  in  long-term
financing for growth and development
Keynote  speech  by  Mr Ahmed  Naseer,  Governor  of  the  Maldives  Monetary Authority,  at  The
Maldives Finance Forum 2018 “The role of institutional investors in long-term financing for growth
and development”, Malé, 22 May 2018.
 Chairman of the Maldives Pension Administration Office Board (MPAO), Mr. Ibrahim Nasir, CEO
of MPAO, Mr. Mohamed Hussain Maniku, CEO of STELCO, Mr. Ahmed Zuhoor, Auditor General,
Mr. Hassan Ziyath, senior officials of the MMA and financial institutions, distinguished delegates.
Assalaamu Alaikum, and good morning.
It is a great honour and privilege to be here at the 7th Maldives Finance Forum as the keynote
speaker.  I  sincerely  thank  the  Maldives  Pension  Administration  Office  for  giving  me  this
opportunity.
The Maldives Finance Forum initiative of MPAO has become one of the keystone financial sector
related events to be held in the Maldives a regular frequency. The Forum provides a platform for
key  players  in  the  financial  sector  to  come  together  and  discuss  about  pressing  topics  and
issues in our economy, which is something that we need more of. This year’s Forum is on the
theme:  “The  role  of  institutional  investors  in  long-term  financing  for  growth  and  development”,
which I believe is of central importance to us at this point in time.
We have excellent speakers and presentations lined up throughout the day focused specifically
on the theme of the forum. So, my plan is to tackle a more diverse set of areas, all of which are,
in my opinion, important issues that we need to think about and address.
I  will  start  off  with  a  macroeconomic  overview  of  the  Maldivian  economy,  followed  by  some
highlights of the recent economic developments in the global arena.
The tourism sector of the Maldives has performed remarkably well during the past few months. In
fact, we just had the best peak season of the past 5 years. Tourist arrivals grew 18% year-on-
year from December 2017 to March 2018, while tourist bednights grew 19% during the same
period. Inflation has generally been low during the past few years, but picked up in 2017 due to
the impact of policy measures such as increases in the tariffs of selected goods. However, other
changes such as the reduction in electricity tariffs and surcharges put down ward pressure on
inflation, and CPI inflation is now edging downwards in 2018.
Looking at the external sector, the current account deficit widened significantly from 2016 due to
the hike in imports related to the infrastructure projects that are currently ongoing. The deficit
stood at 21% of GDP in 2017, and is expected to remain almost at the same level at 20% in
2018. However, due to the strong increase in receipts from the tourism sector and due to the
large infrastructure projects gradually wind up, the current account deficit is expected to narrow
in  the  medium  term.  Net  outflows  from  foreign  exchange  reserves  persist,  but  reserve  levels
remain  stable  due  to  short  term  reserve  management  activities  and  large  inflows  from  public
debt issuances. As such, gross international reserves are expected to be at US$728 million at
the end of 2018. On account of the strong performance by the tourism and construction sectors,
GDP is expected to grow at around 6% during the year.
Looking  at  developments  in  the  global  economy,  economic  activity  is  picking  up  in  both  the
advanced and emerging economies. Emerging Asia is expected to maintain its high growth rate
at  current  levels  in  2018.  This  is  mainly  because  the  impact  of  an  acceleration  in  the  Indian
economy is expected to be offset by a slight slowdown in the growth in the Chinese economy in
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
2018. The slowdown in the Chinese economy, which is the largest tourism source market for us,
could pose risks for us in the form of lower tourist arrivals and spending. Global consumer prices
are expected to pick up further in 2018, which is somewhat in contrast to the conditions here in
the  Maldivian  economy.  This  is  because  current  developments  in  inflation  in  our  domestic
economy is being driven primarily by policy related factors.
This is a time where global attention on international trade has increased, with talks of a trade
war between the US and China at the forefront. Being a highly import dependent country, we
need  to  be  aware  and  keep  on  top  of  these  developments. Any  such  event  can  have  major
implications  for  our  competitiveness  and  terms  of  trade  positions,  especially  with  the  sizable
share China accounts as an inbound tourism market and import source market.
From here on, I intend to talk about 3 issues that I believe are of key importance to us at this point
in time. The first of these issues is fund management practices and the need to streamline the
practices currently being followed.
Despite the small size of the Maldivian economy, we currently have 3 professionally managed
funds being administered. Two are being managed by the Maldives Monetary Authority, one being
the official foreign exchange reserves which in a loose sense is also a type of managed pool of
assets,  and  the  other  being  the  Sovereign  Development  Fund  (SDF)  of  the  government.  The
other  fund  in  the  Maldives  is  the  pension  fund  administered  by  the  Maldives  Pension
Administration Office.
Diversification and investment abroad is important, which can help to overcome business cycle
downturns.  These  pools  of  funds  can  also  ensure  our  capacity  to  meet  our  foreign  currency
obligation  even  in  times  of  economic  distress.  Monitoring  and  analyzing  economic  market
conditions, both foreign and domestic, therefore becomes essential, and is something that needs
to be integrated into our work to a greater extent.
Considering the infancy of our established funds and our existing institutional framework, the fund
management  practices  currently  being  followed  work  relatively  well.  However,  there  is  always
room for further development. Identifying globally accepted frameworks and customizing them to
our context is often the most straightforward way to achieve this. In this regard, the existing gold
standard for fund management is the Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Sovereign
Wealth  Funds,  which  is  more  commonly  known  as  the  Santiago  Principles.  The  Principles
consist of 24 practices that have also been endorsed by the International Monetary Fund, and the
major themes addressed are transparency and the clear identification of the fund’s objectives.
All  these  practices  are  subject  to  domestic  laws  and  regulations  in  that  specific  jurisdiction,
which makes the Santiago Principles more of a best practice guide rather than a hard and fast
rulebook. The flexibility this allows can guide the development of tailor made fund management
principles that are specific to an individual country’s or fund’s context. Therefore, I urge current
fund  managers  and  relevant  stakeholders  to  work  together  to  bring  some  degree  of
harmonization,  both  between  the  fund  management  practices  and  policies  of  our  respective
institutions and between ours and the globally accepted standards. Well managed funds have
the  potential  of  minimizing  the  impact  of  business  cycle  downturns  and  can  increase  the
resilience of our economy to shocks, both external and domestic. For this reason, wealth funds
have to become key players in our economy, and it is my hope that a well-functioning Sovereign
Wealth Fund will be established in the Maldives in the near future.
I now turn to a pressing issue that we need to address today to prevent future distress on public
finances  and  the  macroeconomy,  which  is  the  retirement  pension  scheme  framework.  The
Maldives Retirement Pension Scheme is an essential mechanism intended to provide a basic
income for all retirees without the state bearing the entire burden. According to the statistics of
MPAO,  the  current  stock  value  of  the  pension  fund  is  MVR10.6  billion.  The  monthly  active
contribution  per  active  contributor  is  MVR  654,  while  the  average  value  of  retirement  savings
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
accumulated per member is MVR77,058.
Looking at the population dynamics of the Maldives, we have a disproportionately large share of
the  population  in  the  youth  age  bracket.  While  we  can  enjoy  the  benefits  of  a  large  youth
population today, this also implies that within 35 to 40 years, this group of people will become
retirees and the payouts from the pension fund will increase dramatically. Also, we have made
remarkable progress over the years with regard to life expectancy. The life expectancy at birth in
2016  was  77  years,  which  is  contrast  to  just  49  years  in  1976.  This  means  that  the  average
Maldivian  lives  12  years  beyond  retirement.  Aligning  this  figure  with  the  retirement  pension
savings  of  approximately  MVR77,000  translates  to  just  over  MVR500  per  month  during  post-
retirement years. Once inflation is accounted for, the future value of the payouts will be lower still.
Therefore,  if  the  status  quo  is  maintained,  we  will  have  an  ageing  population  expected  to  live
increasingly  longer,  and  the  bulk  of  the  social  welfare  burden  will  still  be  on  the  government.
There are issues that this poses that we need to start addressing now in order to prevent future
economic  and  social  issues.  We  need  to  reap  demographic  dividends  of  the  large  youth
population now in order to mitigate this.
After touching on the potential for rising government expenditure, I would like to briefly talk about
how  we  are  financing  that  expenditure,  especially  in  times  when  large  scale  infrastructure
development  projects  are  ongoing.  The  right  mix  between  alternative  sources  of  financing  is
important.  Exclusive  reliance  on  debt  could  be  problematic  for  a  country  like  the  Maldives,
especially in the medium to long term when the repayments fall due. Also, debt denominated in
foreign currency brings along the additional issue of foreign currency convertibility for repayment.
There is also a revaluation risk should there be any changes to the value of Maldivian rufiyaa. The
Sovereign Development Fund, which is intended to be a sinking fund to ensure our capacity to
meet future foreign currency obligations incurred to execute public sector development projects,
is a good initiative to mitigate the risk. However, the underlying issue of rising debt levels remain
unresolved.  Therefore,  striking  the  right  balance  between  alternative  means  of  financing  is
essential. Attracting foreign direct investment is one avenue through which we can continuously
achieve development without incurring additional debt. FDI under public-private initiatives should
be explored more, as it could present a number of advantages for countries like the Maldives.
Our level of indebtedness, and in particular, the level of public sector debt is something to always
be mindful of. We have to evaluate our capacity to repay our obligations before incurring new
debt in order to avoid walking into a debt trap. Currently, the economy is performing exceptionally
well, and it is during these times that we must take measures to get our financial affairs in order.
We have to learn from the experience of other countries and think about what led them to fall into
debt traps, and also identify what they did to escape those traps. We are in a position to tackle
the issues the economy has been facing for years, and this opportunity should not be missed.
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank the MPAO for giving me the opportunity to speak
here today, and applaud their efforts to make such excellent arrangements for the Forum.
Assalaamu Alaikum.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
