Gent Sejko: Increasing the formalization of the Albanian economy
Address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint press conference with the
Minister of Finance and Economy, Tirana, 7 December 2017.
Dear Minister Ahmetaj,
Dear media representatives,
 It is with great pleasure that I present this concrete initiative of the Bank of Albania (BoA) in the
framework of our efforts to promote the formalization of the economy. It is encouraging to see
that  a  series  of  initiatives  by  other  Albanian  authorities  are  taken  for  the  same  purpose,  to
enhance  the  law  enforcement  and  the  use  of  financial  channels.  Experience  has  shown  that
complementary  efforts  of  regulatory  institutions  lower  the  policies’  implementation  costs  and
increase their likelihood for success.
Informal activity imposes open and hidden costs for the Albanian economy and the society. It
damages the country’s public finances, increases the tax burden and distorts its effect on the
economic  agents,  hampers  competition  and  increases  the  costs  of  fair  business  activity,
reduces business financing resources and curbs their normal development, and creates social
problems that arise from lack or insufficient coverage of social and health insurance.
From the BoA’s point of view, as the monetary authority and as the supervisor and regulator of
the banking sector, informal activity reduces the effectiveness of our stabilization policies and
creates the premises for instability of one or more segments of the financial system.
Focusing  on  the  latter  issue,  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  safeguarding  and  strengthening
financial stability has been and remains a major objective of BoA’s work. As we have stated in
our previous communications, the deterioration of the loan portfolios’ quality has been one of the
biggest challenges we have been facing in recent years. This deterioration reflected the effect of
many  factors,  but  the  high  level  of  informality  in  the  economy,  undoubtedly,  provided  its
contribution  to  this  performance.  More  concretely,  the  lack  of  financial  transparency,  lack  or
problems with property titles and those encountered during the execution of collateral contributed
to the increase of non-performing loans and were a barrier to our legal and regulatory measures,
for their reduction.
In addition to the negative impact of informality on the loan performance and quality, it has also
negatively affected the borrowers. Taking risks beyond the repayment capacities, not identified
as a result of the lack of clarity regarding the financial statements, has also caused credit default,
thus making/driving borrowers face with unpredictable situations.
For these reasons, the Bank of Albania has commended and has continuously supported the
initiatives for increasing the formalization of the economy.
We have taken several measures to address informality, which have given their effects over the
years. Enhancing transparency and lowering the costs of bank transactions, without affecting the
operational  independence  of  banks  and  their  decision-making,  has  brought  households  and
enterprises closer to the financial institutions.
The national plan for the reduction of non-performing loans established a regulatory criterion, as
an important task for/to the Bank of Albania. Starting from 2018, lending activity should take into
account only tax declarations. This is one of the key elements for addressing informality, also for
the significant share of the banking activity in the domestic economy. The Bank of Albania has
previously  dealt  with  this  phenomenon  from  a  regulatory  point  of  view,  but  only  with  large
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
borrowers. The coordination of efforts with government bodies and appropriate actions taken in
this  regard  have  created  the  necessary  space  for  taking  this  regulatory  measure  further  to
include a broader base of borrowers.
The  Bank  of Albania  is  confident  that  this  measure  will  bring  long-term  benefits  for  all  parties
involved in the process.
- For the banking industry: crediting based on tax declarations facilitates significantly the lending
process by putting banks on a common denominator in reading financial data. This eases the
lending  activity,  providing  banks  with  more  clarity  in  the  process  of  financial  analysis  and
selection of borrowers, as well as exchanging information for common borrowers.
- For Albanian enterprises and households: this process promotes transparency, which will be
translated into reduction of credit risk and, most importantly, lowering of financing cost. Also, by
providing a level playing field, this process fosters competition and efficiency, which, ultimately,
contributes to the overall economic development of the country.
- For the economy:  this  process  increases  the  country’s  economic  and  financial  stability  and
creates premises for a simpler tax system and a fairer distribution of the tax burden.
Thank You!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
