SPEAKING POINTS 
2017-12-07 
Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley 
International Economic Forum of the Americas, 
 
OECD Conference Center, Paris 
       DATE:   
SPEAKER:  
VENUE:   
   SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
What role for monetary policy in achieving 
inclusive and sustainable growth? 
•  I intend to say a few words about the role of monetary policy 
in achieving inclusive and sustainable growth.  
•  I would like to start by saying that in general, a well-balanced 
monetary policy, including a price stability target, contributes 
to sustainable growth, and that sustainable growth is 
normally positive for equality.  
•  Achieving the monetary policy goal of keeping inflation low 
and stable leads indirectly to positive effects on equality, as 
households with low incomes don’t have the possibility to 
shield themselves from the costs connected with high and 
volatile inflation.  
•  The press release from 15 January 1993, when the inflation 
target in Sweden was announced, stated: “Price stability is a 
prerequisite for sustained economic growth as well as full 
employment and it prevents an arbitrary redistribution of 
income and wealth”.  
•  If inflation is higher than expected, borrowers benefit 
because the value of their debts declines, while lenders and 
those with large savings lose out. This type of large, arbitrary 
redistribution between lenders and borrowers was common 
in Sweden during the 1970s and 1980s, but is now history.   
•  On the other hand, households with low incomes also suffer 
if inflation is too low due to low aggregate demand. These 
households are usually very exposed to the business cycle 
and, more often than not, face unemployment and lower 
living standards when there is a trough. So, again, low and 
 1 [5] 
   stable inflation is an important contribution from monetary 
policy.    
•  When looking at effects on equality, there are different 
channels from monetary policy at play. 
•  These include the exchange rate, effects on stock prices, 
house prices and the labour market. 
•  Low interest rates increase demand and are often associated 
with higher share prices and house prices. As shares are 
typically owned by high income earners, this increases the 
capital income for those at the upper part of the income 
distribution1. House ownership is normally more evenly 
distributed than shares2, so higher house prices would have 
smaller effects on equality.  
•  The labour market channel is sometimes ignored when 
analysing the monetary policy effects on equality. This effect 
is not easy to calculate, but it is an important channel. 
•  When attaining an inflation target, this normally goes hand in 
hand with an economy avoiding too much of booms and 
busts in the business cycle and less swings in unemployment. 
Less uncertainty over economic developments and economic 
policy is good for investment, and hence for growth and 
labour market outcomes. So, labour market developments 
are important for income equality. 
•  In recent years, in order to meet their price stability targets, 
many central banks have pursued a very expansionary policy, 
including low or even negative policy rates, as well as 
purchase programmes of securities. These policies have 
attracted criticism, saying they increase inequality, but I 
disagree.  
•  Given the weak trend in growth in many countries, a less 
expansionary monetary policy than pursued during recent 
years would have led to higher unemployment than was the 
case. In that sense, monetary policy could be argued to have 
contributed to lower income inequalities, as unemployment 
could lead to large negative effects on household income. 
Many of those households, who would have experienced 
unemployment, would then have fallen to lower income 
deciles, contributing to higher income dispersion. Most 
studies that include the labour market effect come to the 
conclusion that the overall effect of expansionary monetary 
                                                           
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 
  2 [5] 
   policy on inequality is that it slightly decreases it. Or in short, 
the dampening effect of lower unemployment offsets the 
effects from higher share prices. But the overall effect seems, 
if any, to be small. 
•  To sum up, the very expansionary monetary policy conducted 
during recent years in some countries could be argued to 
have had a positive net effect, albeit small, on equality. The 
positive employment effect normally seems to dominate 
over the negative effects3. 
•  We at the Riksbank don’t per se take equality into 
consideration when taking monetary policy decisions. It is 
not part of our mandate. This is more effectively done by 
fiscal policy. I don’t believe any other central bank specifically 
takes this into account either. 
•  But going forward, the Swedish parliamentary committee on 
finance has asked the Riksbank to evaluate the distributional 
effects of the expansionary monetary policy in recent years. 
So this is an area we are working on now and will continue to 
do so.     
•  As the theme of this conference is “reshaping globalisation” I 
would like to end by adding some words about my views on 
the global perspective on equality and the possible 
explanations for increased inequality in many developed 
economies during recent decades. As I have said, the 
contribution from monetary policy to equality should in my 
view in general be minor.  
•  I do not think you can talk about globalisation without also 
talking about technology. Some argue that increased 
inequality in many countries is due to the latest technological 
progress having been skills biased, resulting in a rise in the 
skill premium and the decline of some labour market 
institutions in advanced economies, emerging markets and 
developing countries4. The decline of labour market 
institutions includes lower trade union membership, which 
reduces the relative bargaining power of labour, and more 
flexible labour market institutions that can pose challenges 
                                                           
3 See, for example, the effects of the monetary policy pursued by the Federal Reserve in connection with the 
financial crises in Bivens (2015), the effects of monetary policy in the USA since 1980 in Coiboin (2016), the 
effects in advanced economies since 1990 in panel data-analyses in Furceri et al. (2016) and effects of the 
monetary policy conducted by the ECB in connection with and after the financial crises, with a focus on Germany 
in Bundesbank (2016). 
4 One example is that a decline in trade union membership (union rate) reduces the relative bargaining power of 
labour, exacerbating wage inequality (Frederiksen and Poulsen 2010). Another is that more flexible labour 
market institutions (although positive for reallocating resources to more productive firms and enabling firm 
restructuring) can pose challenges for workers, especially those with low skills, and hence play an important role 
in explaining inequality developments (Alvadero et al 2013). 
  3 [5] 
   for workers with low skills. Technological progress combined 
with globalization seems to have played at least some role in 
increasing inequality within countries. 
•  The discussion of the effects of globalization is interesting. 
Globalization has for long been a natural part of the Nordic 
economies. Our dependency on foreign trade is much higher 
than the global average. There is among the Nordic countries 
an acceptance on the positive long term net effects on 
productivity, growth and employment. Globalization creates 
opportunities for new jobs.    
•  The reason for the positive view on globalisation in the 
Nordic countries might be a broader social security net and 
public policy that help people who lose their jobs due to 
trade as well as technology. Training and education improve 
employability and reasonable replacement ratios in 
unemployment benefit and other social benefits can mitigate 
the negative short-term effects of globalization. These are all 
fiscal or structural policy issues, outside the scope of 
monetary policy, but still important in a global perspective.  
•  To summarize: Globalisation and technology are strong 
forces that rapidly shape the world. Policymaking is needed 
to facilitate the changes that ensue for individuals, 
companies, the public sector and countries as a whole. In 
that policymaking, I want to stress that each and every policy 
area should do what it does best to make good contributions 
when the changes are being managed.  
•  Thank you! 
-------------------------------- 
References 
 
•  Alvaredo, F., A. B. Atkinson, T. Piketty, and E. Saez (2013), 
“The Top 1 Percent in International and Historical 
Perspective”, Journal of Economic Perspectives Volume 
27, Number 3, 2013. 
•  Bivens, J., (2015), “Gauging the Impact of the FED on 
Inequality During the Great Recession”, Hutchins Center 
on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, Working 
Paper 12, June 2015. 
•  Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, L. Kueng, J. Silvia, (2017), 
“Innocent Bystanders? Monetary Policy and Inequality”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 88, June 2017. 
  4 [5] 
       •  Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), “Distributional Effects of 
Monetary Policy”, Monthly Report, September 2016. 
•  Frederiksen, A., O. Paulsen, (2010) “Increasing Income 
Inequality: Productivity, Bargaining and Skill-Upgrading”, 
IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 4791, February 2010. 
•  Furceri D., P. Loungani, and A. Zdzienicka (2016), “The 
Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks on Equality”, IMF 
Working Paper, WP/16/245, December 2016. 
 5 [5] 
