Andreas Dombret: What's going on in Europe?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Hong Kong, 16 January 2018.
 1. Introduction
Dear Norman Chan
dear Eddie Yue
dear colleagues
It’s a pleasure for me to be invited back to the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. I value very highly
the  excellent  cooperation,  not  only  between 
the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and
the Bundesbank,  but  also  more  generally  between  our  two  countries.  This  contributes  to  the
strong friendship of Hong Kong and Germany.
In my remarks today, I will give you an overview on what’s going on in Europe.
Some of you may have become used to quite negative news from the European continent, as we
not  only  endured  the  global  financial  crisis  but  also  witnessed  how  it  triggered  the  euro  area
crisis. As a result, the last ten years were something of a dry spell for the EU’s economy.
But  things  have  actually  changed  for  the  better  of  late:  the  economic  recovery  is  gaining
momentum and has spread to all EUcountries. Today, I will paint a positive picture of the current
development and will also talk about the positive outlook.
Yet in my remarks I will also focus on the two big challenges the EU faces, namely Brexit and
euro area reform. My main point is that we now have a vibrant economic situation that gives us
an  opportunity  not  only  to  manage  but  to  master  these  challenges  such  that  the  recovery
becomes a sustainable story.
2. Finally, a broad-based recovery of the EU economy
Until last year, the economic recovery following the financial crisis was rather disappointing – and
that despite extensive monetary easing by the European Central Bank. Entering the second half
of 2017, however, growth momentum began.
Recent figures for the third quarter of 2017 show a sound GDPgrowth of 0.6%, quarter on quarter
– after 0.7% in the preceding quarter. Euro area unemployment stood at 8.8% in October – well
down from its peak of 12.1% in 2013 and the lowest level since January 2009. And a recent study
by Ernst & Young expects 1.8 million new jobs to be created over the course of 2018.
What is important is that the upswing has become more broadly based – across countries as
well as sectors. And this is also reflected in the positive economic sentiment. In December last
year, the European Commission index reached a 17-year peak to record the highest value since
October 2000.
And at the same time, inflation is slowly rising. The Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections
forecast annual HICP inflation of 1.5% in 2017, 1.4% in 2018, 1.5% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020.
There  is  some  indication,  then,  that  the  volume  of  expansionary  monetary  stimulus  could  be
lowered.
The  euro  area  recovery  is  in  considerable  part  driven  by  the  healthy  upswing  of  the  German
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy,  which  is  ongoing:  2017  was  the  fourth  consecutive  year  in  which  GDP  growth
outpaced  potential  output. And  the Bundesbank expects a further rise of 2.5% for  2018,  while
growth in 2019 is seen at 1.7%.
3. A solid outlook for the EU economy
Coming back to the euro area and looking ahead, the very high level of confidence among firms
and households suggests, moreover, that the upswing will continue well into 2018. The outlook
for  the  euro  area’s  economy  is  quite  solid.  This  is  in  considerable  part  due  to  the  robust
projection for the world economy. The World Bank recently estimated that growth will be 3.1%;
this means that the world economy’s growth potential will be fully or almost fully reached for the
first time since 2008.
The strongest driver of global growth will be the East Asian economies, China in particular. The
World Bank sees emerging markets growing by 4.5% in 2018 and by 4.7% in 2019.
The global and emerging market growth has positive effects on the euro area economy as well.
And  I  am  convinced  that  the  strong  ties  between  the  euro  area  and  Asia,  notably  between
Germany and Asia, will contribute to the success stories of both Asian and European countries.
With this in mind, we should further deepen our political and economic relationships. And this
should be based on the principles of free trade and market economies, while leaving some room
for legitimate differences in rule-setting.
1
Both  the  IMF  and  the  ECB  staff  recently  upped  their  growth  expectations  for  the  euro
area.   According  to  the  December  2017  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the
annual real GDP is set to rise by 2.3% in 2018, 1.9% in 2019, and 1.7% in 2020. Compared with
the September projections, the outlook for GDP growth has been revised upwards substantially.
The  Eurosystem  expects  the  economic  expansion  to  continue,  as  private  spending  and
consumption  growth  are  reinforced  by  lower  deleveraging  needs  and  better  labour  market
conditions.
Furthermore, the recovery in business investment is supported by improvements in corporate
profitability and the very favourable financing conditions. At the same time, euro area exporters
are benefiting from the ongoing global economic expansion.
These figures give some comfort as to the EU’s economic future. And I personally am confident
that this trend can and will continue. However, challenges are looming: two particularly serious
ones are Brexit and euro area reform. The current, upbeat trajectory has to be harnessed as we
set about mastering these historical challenges.
4. Brexit looming
The first challenge, Brexit, began in June 2016, when the majority of UK voters decided to leave
the EU. Where are we now? Brexit is definitely happening, and it is more and more likely to be a
hard  Brexit  –  by  which  I  mean  that  there  will  be  a  complete  exit  rather  than  a  partial  one.
The UK and the EU will go their separate ways.
Since December of last year, there is a better chance of reaching a sensible agreement before
the deadline of March 2019. The EUCouncil agreed in December on the Brexit divorce issues:
basic  compromises  were  reached  on  three  fundamental  questions,  namely  the  rights
of EU citizens in the UK after Brexit (and vice versa), the border between Ireland and Northern
Ireland, and the UK’s financial contributions to the EU budget over the coming years.
This compromise allows us to move forward to negotiate the terms of our future partnership. But
let’s  keep  in  mind  that  substantial  progress  has  yet  to  be  made  on  the  details  of  the  three
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
separation issues I just mentioned.
Now, since negotiations have been going rather slowly, there may be a transition period of two
years from 2019 to 2021 – during which the old rules would still apply and the terms of the new
partnership could be implemented. What kind of economic partnership this will be has yet to be
determined. If no solution is found, the EU and the UK will trade under rules set by the World
Trade  Organization  –  which  is  in  nobody’s  interest,  but  is  likely  to  be  particularly  harmful  to
the  UK  economy,  while  the  economic  impact  on  Europe  will  be  limited  by  comparison.  Take
Germany for instance. The UK is an important export market, accounting for ca. 7% of German
exports. But this implies only 2% of value added to the German economy.
My  hope  is  that  all  the  parties  involved  will  be  able  to  negotiate  an  economic  partnership  that
underscores the close political amity between the UK and the EU.
With a view to future economic relations, we must work hard to reach a deal that, on the one
hand, minimises frictions in trade and supply chains. In that context, I also think that a substantial
transition period is in the interest of both economies. On the other hand, however, this deal must
also give the UK and the EUthe freedom to develop their own agendas in economic policy and
rule-setting – this would ensure the possibility of institutional diversity, where each society can
develop  rules  according  to  its  own  specific,  historically  grown  circumstances  and  current
preferences.
5. Euro area crisis and reform
Mastering Brexit is probably the biggest mid-term challenge facing the European economy, and
we all need to take a pragmatic approach. Much is at stake. Yet as is always the case in life,
problems and challenges never come alone, but in groups, or at least in pairs. The second big
economic challenge we need to focus our attention on in 2018 is the reform of the euro area.
This is also emphasised by the weight that this topic has in the current negotiations to build a
new government coalition in Germany. I will come back to this in a moment.
The  euro  area  will  remain  vulnerable  as  long  as  one  fundamental  stumbling  block  remains  in
place: its asymmetric institutional design. Member states surrendered sovereignty in monetary
policy matters to the ECB on the one hand, but retained ownership of their fiscal and economic
policies on the other.
This creates two major problems: first, a common monetary policy for economies that are at
different developmental stages – compare France and Greece, for instance – and at different
stages of the business cycle. Second, the moral hazard that arises when governments, firms
and  households  borrow  too  much  to  take  advantage  of  lowered  interest  rates  as  a  result  of
averaging in the currency union.
We need answers to both these problems. For the economic convergence of the euro area will
take  time.  Currently,  the  potential  German  coalition  partners  are  debating  quite  sensible
approaches on how to foster social inclusion, limit a race to the bottom in tax policies, and foster
the convergence of the euro area economies. It’s too early to judge these positions.
The second problem – excessive debt, and high borrowing by governments in particular – could,
in theory, be solved much more easily. However, the necessary political reforms have seen little
progress so far. But here, again, the recent proposals of the potential German coalition partners
are promising. The creation of a European Monetary Fund seems to go in the direction that we,
the Bundesbank, have been advising for quite some time.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Formally, the EU has a set of fiscal rules that restrict public borrowing – the Stability and Growth
Pact.  Yet  these  were  regularly  violated  before  the  financial  crisis,  without  any  meaningful
consequences.  In  response,  the  EU  reformed  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  in  2005,  but  the
outcome was to expand the discretionary scope even further.
The European Commission, despite its role as guardian of the Stability and Growth Pact, has
already exploited its scope on several occasions and interpreted the rules rather generously in
doing so. Indeed, some euro area countries have been breaching the rules for nine years now.
What  is  needed  to  strengthen  the  fiscal  rules  is  a  simple  and  transparent  design  and
implementation  of  the  rules.   The  transfer  of  responsibility  for  fiscal  surveillance  from  the
European Commission to an independent institution would be a big step towards a less political
approach.  One  promising  measure  would  be  to  strengthen  the  role  of  the  European  Stability
Mechanism,  ESM  for  short.  Thus  far,  the  ESM  has  been  tasked  with  providing  financial
assistance to euro area countries experiencing or threatened by severe financing problems.
2
However, if member states retain their fiscal autonomy, the sustainability of public finances will
need further safeguards beyond rules alone.
It  is  therefore  essential  that  the  binding  force  of  the  rules  be  additionally  shored  up  by  the
disciplining effect of the market. In other words, interest rate levels and, therefore, financing costs
have to be realigned more closely with the risks in government budgets.
The only way to achieve that, however, is to restore the credibility of the no bail-out clause in the
Maastricht Treaty. Investors have to perceive a more credible threat of losing money if they buy
bonds  from  governments  that  have  unsound  public  finances.  One  proposal  put  forward  by
the Bundesbank envisages changing the contractual terms for sovereign bonds in the euro area
by  introducing  an  automatic  maturity  extension  for  them  as  soon  as  the  issuing  government
applies for an ESM programme.
Up to now, a large part of the assistance loans have ended up being used to pay off the original
creditors. This means that the original creditors, such as banks, are then let off the hook – at the
taxpayers’ expense.
In contrast, extending maturities would leave the original creditors on the hook, and they could
still be held liable if debt restructuring became necessary at a later point in time.
6. Conclusion
To sum up, the European Union has entered a period of broad-based, stable economic growth
and, having done so, has overcome the economic repercussions of the financial crisis and the
euro area crisis.
Yet it would be a huge mistake to consider our mission successfully accomplished. It is a solid
basis on which the EUneeds to build its efforts in 2018 to tackle not only the political challenges it
faces but also the two biggest economic challenges in the shape of Brexit and the reform of the
euro area.
We  must  do  all  we  can  to  achieve  a  close  and  friendly  political  and  economic  partnership
between the UK and the EU after Brexit – anything else is in no-one’s interest.
With regard to the euro area, it is crucial that we improve the asymmetric institutional design to
prevent another euro crisis.
If we take these challenges seriously, the euro area will become an economic success story.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
GDP projection by IMF: 2017: 2.1% (+0.2 pp); 2018: 1.9% (+0.2 pp).
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly Report, June
2017.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
