Yannis Stournaras: The future of the Greek economy
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an event organized by the
Hellenic Spanish Chamber of Commerce, Athens, 12 February 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It is a great pleasure for me to be with you today. I will share with you some thoughts on the
developments, the risks, the challenges and the future prospects of the Greek economy.
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  that  Greece  and  Spain  are  connected  by  close  ties  of
friendship and constructive cooperation within the European Union and the Eurozone. Existing
strong economic ties are reflected in our bilateral trade in goods and services.
1. There is scope for further increasing the Greek-Spanish bilateral trade in goods and
services
In more detail, Greece’s trade balance with Spain is negative (at about 1 billion euro in January-
November 2017) and has been gradually worsening over the last five years. Exports of goods to
Spain  account  for  about  2.5%  of  Greek  exports  of  goods  and  have  increased  by  29.4%  in
nominal terms in 2012–2016. Imports of goods from Spain account for 3.5% of Greece’s total
imports  of  goods  and  have  increased  by  about  20.9%  in  nominal  terms  in  2012–2016.  The
services balance with Spain is positive, albeit too small to cover the trade deficit . The total net
inflows for foreign direct investment coming from Spain reached 3.5% of the total in 2016. The
figures I have just mentioned are a testimony of our good economic relations, but provide room
for  further  increasing  bilateral  trade  and  investment  flows,  which,  in  turn,  will  raise  economic
growth  and  prosperity  in  both  countries.  On  the  last  point,  let  me  highlight  that  the policy
changes that have taken place over the past eight years in Greece, coupled with the decisive
implementation  of  the remaining  reforms  and  privatizations,  have  rendered  Greece  an
attractive  place  to  invest  and  provide  opportunities  for  expanding  the  activities  of  Spanish
businesses in Greece in both goods and services sectors.
2. Progress over the past eight years
1
The Greek crisis was the result of major macroeconomic imbalances which have accumulated
over a long period of time, leading to the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in 2010. To a large
extent, these imbalances have now been addressed, although major challenges remain, as I will
explain later. Over the past eight years, Greece has implemented a bold economic reform and
adjustment programme that has fully eliminated fiscal and external deficits and improved
competitiveness. In more detail:
• The general government balance turned into a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP in 2016 from a
deficit of 15.1 percent of GDP in 2009. The primary surplus (i.e., the general government balance
net  of  interest  payments)  showed  a  surplus  of  3.8  percent  of  GDP  in  2016  (programme
definition), from a deficit of 10.0 percent of GDP in 2009.
• The current account deficit has fallen by 15 percentage points of GDP since the beginning of
the crisis, with the current account effectively being in balance over the last three years.
•  Labour  cost  competitiveness has  been  fully  restored  and  price  competitiveness  has
recorded substantial gains since 2009.
•  The reforms implemented  cover  the  pension  system,  the  health  system,  labour  market,
product  market,  the  business  environment,  public  administration,  the  tax  system,  and  the
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
budgetary framework.
As  a  consequence,  openness  has  improved  substantially  and  the  economy  has  started  to
rebalance towards tradable, export-oriented sectors.
•  The  share  of  total  exports  in  GDP  increased  from  19.0%  in  2009  to  33.1%  in  January-
September 2017. Exports of goods and services, excluding the shipping sector, have increased
by 47% in real terms since their trough in 2009, similar to euro area exports.
• The share of tradables goods and services in the economy has increased by 10% relative to
non-tradables in terms of real gross value added since 2010. Also, relative prices and net profit
margins of tradables’ sectors have increased, facilitating the rebalancing process of the Greek
economy towards tradable goods and services.
The banking  system  has  been  restructured,  consolidated  and  recapitalized,  following
stringent stress tests along with in-depth asset quality reviews. Greek banks are now among the
best capitalized in Europe. In September 2017 the CET1 ratio came to 17.1% (December 2016:
16.9%) and the CAR to 17.2% (December 2016: 17%). Moreover, the accumulated provisions
cover half of banks’ total NPEs, while the other half is covered by the value of the underlying
collateral, resulting in an overall coverage ratio of almost 100%.
Significant institutional  reforms have  been  implemented,  aiming  at  providing  banks  with  a
variety of means of reducing non-performing loans. These reforms, among other things, include
the  authorization  of  credit  servicing  firms,  operation  of  an  electronic  platform  for  out-of-court
settlement, and electronic auctions of real estate.
In addition, banks have set operational targets to reduce the stock of non-performing exposures
(NPEs) by 37% by end-2019. According to the relevant reports published by the Bank of Greece,
progress  towards  the  achievement  of  targets  is  satisfactory.  In  September  2017  non-
performing  exposures  stood  at  €100.4  billion  or  44.6%  of  total  exposures,  having  declined  by
7.6% (or €8.2 billion) from the March 2016 peak. The improvement during the period January-
September 2017 resulted mainly from sales and loan write-offs.
3. Short and medium-term outlook
Progress in the implementation of the adjustment programme and in particular the completion of
the 3rd review is having a beneficial impact on confidence, liquidity and economic activity. The
economy is recovering. This is reflected not only in GDP figures, but also in several key
indicators  of  economic  activity,  such  as  industrial  production,  private  sector  employment
flows, exports of goods and services, and foreign direct investment, as well as soft data such as
the manufacturing PMI and economic sentiment indicators.
Improvements  are  also  visible  in  the  financial  sector:  bank  deposits  of  the  non-financial
private  sector  have  increased  and  bank  credit  to  non-financial  corporations  has  stabilized.
Nevertheless, financial conditions remain tight and bank lending rates are high compared to other
euro area countries. Since October 2017, all four systemic banks returned to the international
capital markets with covered bond issues for the first time since 2014. Banks’ dependence on
central  bank  financing  has  declined  significantly.  The  ELA  ceiling  stands  now  at  €19.8  billion
euro,  down  from  90  billion  euro  in  July  2015.  The  reduction  reflects  an  improvement  of  the
liquidity  situation  of  Greek  banks,  taking  into  account  flows  stemming  from  private  sector
deposits,  banks’  liquidations  of  non-core  assets  and  banks’  access  to  wholesale  financial
markets.
Yields of Greek government bonds have declined to pre-crisis levels and the yield curve
has largely normalised. The Greek government returned to international bond markets, for the
first time since 2014, with a new five-year issue in July and, towards the end of 2017, conducted
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
an exchange operation of PSI bonds in order to enhance the liquidity of the market for Greek
debt. Investors’ participation in this operation came to 86%. Following the swap of old bonds for
new  ones,  yields  have  fallen  substantially  (especially  on  shorter-term  notes).  Last  week  and
despite market turbulence Greece issued a seven-year bond through which it borrowed €3 billion
at a yield of 3.5%. Moreover, yields on corporate bonds fell, while share prices rose, reflecting a
gradual recovery of investor confidence in connection with steady progress in the implementation
of the economic adjustment programme.
On  the fiscal front, in January-November 2017, the general government cash primary surplus
improved, reaching 4.0% of GDP, compared to 3.7% of GDP in the same period last year. Based
on the above, the incoming ESA-2010 data and the execution of the 2017 state budget, the 2017
primary balance target of 1.75% of GDP is expected to be reached with a significant margin. For
2018 the primary balance target of 3.5% of GDP is considered achievable.
According to Bank of Greece estimates, economic activity is expected to pick up in the
medium term, with GDP growing by 1.6%, 2.4% and 2.5% in 2017, 2018 and 2019, respectively.
Growth is projected to accelerate in 2018 and 2019, supported by exports, private consumption
and investment. Consumption is expected to recover, primarily on the back of higher household
real disposable income as a result of increased employment. The contribution of investment is
expected  to  be  positive,  mainly  due  to  stronger  business  investment,  reflecting  the  gradual
restoration  of  confidence  and  liquidity  in  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  the  acceleration  of
privatisations. Exports are expected to remain robust, reflecting higher foreign demand and the
restoration of international competiveness.
4. Risks and challenges
The above forecasts are based on the assumption that the reform and privatization programme
will be implemented smoothly and according to the agreed time schedule. The recovery of the
economy  remains  fragile  and  subject  to  risks  and  vulnerabilities,  both  internal  and  external.
Delays or backtracking on reforms would weaken the positive outlook and impact negatively on
investors’  confidence  in  the  future  course  of  the  Greek  economy.  Therefore,  economic  policy
should remain focused on the implementation of the remaining programme measures and the
preparation for the timely conclusion of the fourth and final review, which will mark the end of the
ESM programme.
There are also external risks to the forecast, which are linked, among other things, to the sudden
increase in investors’ risk aversion due to disturbances in international financial markets (such
as  the  recent  mini-crash  in  Wall  Street),  tensions  in  foreign  exchange  markets  and  broader
geopolitical factors.
5. Major challenges looking forward: Putting the economy on a sustainable growth path
As a result of the painful economic adjustment over the past eight years, macroeconomic flow
disequilibria  have  now  been  eliminated  and  reforms  have  contributed  to  a  substantial
improvement of competitiveness. Hence, this is a good starting point for the Greek economy to
embark  on  a  sustainable  growth  trajectory.  However,  stock  disequilibria  —  such  as  the  high
public debt, the high burden of NPLs and high unemployment — persist or have even increased
during the years of the crisis, acting as a drag on long-term growth. Furthermore, a large number
of legislated reforms need to be fully implemented and the fiscal policy mix is not supportive of
growth.
The high level of public debt reduces long-term growth prospects because it increases the cost
of capital and generates expectations that future taxes will remain high in order for the sovereign
to service the debt, lowering investment. High NPLs in banks’ balance sheets reduce the ability of
the banking system to provide credit to healthy firms because capital is trapped in non-viable
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
firms. High long-term unemployment leads to depletion of human capital whereas the collapse in
investment  has  contributed  to  a  decline  in  the  stock  of  productive  capital  with  negative
consequences for long-term productivity growth.
2
In order to address the abovementioned challenges the focus of economic policy should be on
the following:
1. Addressing the public debt overhang. Decisive and concrete actions are needed to ensure
the sustainability of Greek public debt, on the basis of the Eurogroup’s decision of June 2017.
The  Bank  of  Greece  has  put  forward  a  mild  debt  re-profiling  proposal,  which  entails  only  a
negligible  cost  for  our  partners  and  provides  for,  among  other  things,  extending  the  weighted
average maturity of interest payments on EFSF loans by at least 8.5 years. This, along with a
long-term commitment to structural reforms, could bring Greek debt back to a sustainable level
in gross financing needs terms, allowing for a smooth return of the country to the international
capital markets.
2.  Implementing  the  remaining  reforms  and  improving  the  quality  of  institutions.
Academic  research  on  the  drivers  of  long-run  growth  shows  that  well-functioning  institutions,
high regulatory quality and good governance matter for economic growth and enable countries to
over-perform in the long run . This is because institutions and regulatory quality affect incentives
for  people  and  businesses  to  invest  in  physical  and  human  capital,  technology  and  the
organization of production. Therefore, particular emphasis should now be placed on improving
the public administration, implementing the land registry, strengthening institutions, cutting red
tape,  lowering  the  regulatory  burden  and  ensuring  the  predictability  and  stability  of  legislation,
reducing entry barriers into network industries, retail trade and professional services as well as
on enhancing judicial efficiency. Moreover, with regard to independent authorities, it is important
to  strengthen  their  administrative  and  financial  autonomy  and  ensure  respect  for  their
independence, as well as accountability towards Parliament.
3. Adopting a growth-friendly fiscal policy mix.  The  over-performance  relative  to  the  fiscal
policy  targets  over  the  past  three  years  strengthened  fiscal  policy  credibility,  but  it  came  at  a
cost, i.e., lower economic growth. This is due to the high reliance of the fiscal policy mix on tax
policy measures and tax rate hikes. According to the Global Competitiveness Index 2017–2018,
Greece  ranks  last  and  second  to  last  as  regards  the  adequacy  of  the  tax  system  to  provide
incentives to invest (137th out 137 countries) and to work (136th out of 137 countries). High tax
rates  actions  encourage  the  shift  of  activities  towards  the  shadow  economy  and  provide
incentives  for  tax  evasion.  Hence,  the  fiscal  mix  is  not  sustainable  and  must  change.  More
emphasis has to be placed on cutting non-productive expenditures, increasing the public sector
efficiency,  including  the  management  of  state  property  and  improving  the  tax  administration.
These actions will lead to a fairer distribution of the fiscal burden and will facilitate the reduction of
the excessively high tax rates.
4. Tackling the problem of non-performing exposures/loans (NPEs/NPLs) and strategic
defaulters which constrains the banking system’s ability to finance economic growth. The NPE
reduction targets for the next two years are ambitious compared to last year, implying that banks
will  need  to  step  up  their  efforts  and  make  full  use  of  the  available  toolkit  for  private  debt
resolution.  Moreover,  banks  will  be  facing  new  challenges  in  2018,  most  notably  the
implementation  of  IFRS  9,  stricter  treatment  of  loan-loss  provisions,  as  well  as the  EU-wide
stress test to be conducted by the ECB. Thus, banks need to step up their efforts to attain their
operational targets for reducing their NPLs and, ideally, over-achieve them now that the economy
has returned to positive growth. In this context, they need to broaden the scope of the workouts
they  offer  to  borrowers  and  make  more  drastic  decisions,  in  particular  with  respect  to  the
restructuring of viable businesses, identification of strategic defaulters and the liquidation of non-
viable businesses.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. Improving further the business environment and the insolvency framework to enable
faster  reallocation  of  productive  factors  to  more  productive  opportunities.  Rebalancing  of  the
economy towards tradables heavily relies on the ability to freely and quickly move capital from
less  profitable  to  more  profitable  sectors.  An  efficient  insolvency  framework  is  crucial  in
restructuring  companies  that  are  viable  and  liquidating  companies  that  are  not.  Despite
streamlining the insolvency framework over the past four years, insolvency proceedings remain
slow and asset recovery rates are low. Indicatively, according to the OECD, a typical insolvency
process in Greece lasts on average 3.5 years, double the time of the OECD average and the
recovery rate is 35%, half the level of the OECD average. According to OECD research, Greece
has  the  highest  share  of  capital  (and  labour)  trapped  in  non-viable  companies  among  OECD
countries  (27%).  This  suggests  that  there  is  a  high  degree  of  capital  misallocation  in  the
economy, which contributes to lower productivity.
6. Promoting innovation, education and knowledge-based capital. A  necessary  condition
for sustainable growth is the achievement of higher TFP growth. In order to foster TFP growth,
policy  must  focus  on  improving  the  quality  of  labour  (i.e.  skills),  attracting  investment  in  new
technologies and improving the quality of capital through the creation of an institutional framework
that supports innovation. Given the decline in the cost of labour relative to the cost of capital and
the tight financing conditions of companies, the major risk looking forward is that investment will
be  concentrated  in  labour-intensive,  low-productivity  sectors.  This,  however,  would  trap  the
economy in a state of low productivity and low growth. Hence, innovation, ICT investment and
technological progress are important in order to boost productivity in the long run.
7. Speeding up privatizations to attract FDI. Given the decline in disposable income due to
the recession and the increased tax burden due to fiscal consolidation, domestic savings are
insufficient to meet investment needs which, after a long period of very low investment rates, are
significant even though capacity utilization remains low in some sectors. Thus, conditions should
be established to attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). One way to do that is by completing
quickly privatization projects which are at a mature stage, as well as stepping up the pace of the
overall  privatization  and  real  estate  development  programme.  FDI,  besides  closing  the
investment  gap,  promotes  greater  trade  ties  with  countries  and  companies  with  cutting  edge-
technologies. This will allow integration of Greek companies into global value chains, increasing
openness of the economy and improving both the quantity and quality of Greek exports.
8.  Supporting  the  unemployed  and  enhancing  employment  and  training  programmes.
With  unemployment  at  very  high  levels,  it  is  essential  to  provide  immediate  support  to  the
unemployed and those marginally attached to the labour market by using active labour market
policies  and  targeted  social  transfers  to  counter  temporary  income  losses  and  shorten  job
transitions.  In  the  medium  term,  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  skill  upgrading  and  retraining
policies to get people back into work.
6. Final remarks
A major issue in the coming months is the consolidation of confidence and the improvement of
the country’s creditworthiness, which will allow the return of the Greek sovereign to financial
markets on sustainable terms after the end of the programme in August 2018. The steps that will
make an effective contribution in this direction are:
• First, the implementation of the reform and privatization programme and the preparation
for  the timely  conclusion  of  the  fourth  and  final  review,  which  will  mark  the  end  of  the
programme;
•  Second,  the specification of medium-term debt re-profiling measures, which will enable
Greece’s access to bond markets on sustainable terms and will facilitate the inclusion of Greek
government bonds in the ECB’s quantitative easing programme.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
•  Third,  the complete lifting of capital controls,  in  connection  with  the  improvement  of  the
economic outlook and depositors’ confidence in the Greek banking system.
New  bond  issuances,  while  still  in  the  ESM  programme,  coupled  with  the  forthcoming  ESM
disbursements (in line with the June 2017 Eurogroup commitment) could be used to build up a
cash buffer to support investors’ confidence and facilitate Greece’s market access. Such a cash
buffer would be particularly useful in the event that Greece’s credit rating has not improved to
investment grade by the end of the programme in August 2018 (currently, five notches lower).
However,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of  a  cash  buffer  to  consolidate  confidence  over  the
medium  term,  it  is  important  to clarify the environment in which the Greek economy will
move after the end of the ESM programme. Under the EU legal framework, Greece will be
under  surveillance  at  least  until  it  repays  75%  of  the  official  loans  received  from  euro  area
countries, the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Stability Mechanism
(ESM). Therefore, it remains to be clarified first, the form of supervision in the conduct of
economic  policy and,  second, whether  and  on  what  conditions  precautionary  financial
support  from  the  partners  will  be  available  after  the  completion  of  this  program.
According  to  the  Bank  of  Greece,  such  a  precautionary  support  framework  could  assist  the
Greek economy by further driving down borrowing costs, as it will provide assurance of Greece’s
access to financing after the end of the programme in August 2018, especially if international
financial market conditions deteriorate. It will also allow the ECB to maintain the waiver on Greek
government  bonds  after  the  end  of  the  programme  and  eventually  include  Greek  government
bonds  in  its  asset  purchase  programme  in  the  normal  or/and  in  the  reinvestment  period.
Maintaining the waiver is, in the Bank of Greece’s view, important for the smooth financing of
Greek banks as long as Greece’s credit rating remains lower than investment grade, as even
repo operations are facilitated by the waiver.
 The  ongoing  reform  and  fiscal  adjustment  effort  is  bearing  fruits.  The  macroeconomic
imbalances  have  now  been  corrected,  important  and  long-needed  reforms  have  been
implemented, competitiveness has improved and the banking sector is adequately capitalized.
The economy is recovering. However, we still have some way to go in order for Greece to tap the
financial markets on sustainable terms after the end of the programme in August 2018.
I  am  confident  that  the  actions  I  have  just  described  will  improve  Greece’s  creditworthiness,
boost  the  investment  and  business  climate,  facilitate  the  return  to  financial  normality,  and  will
contribute  to  the  sustainable  recovery  of  the  economy  after  many  years  of  recession  and
stagnation.
Sources:
Bank of Greece (2017), The Bank of Greece Interim Report on Monetary Policy 2017, December.
www.bankofgreece.gr/BoGAttachments/Inter_NomPol2017.pdf  
Masuch, K., Moshammer, E. and Pierluigi, B. (2016): Institutions and Growth in Europe”, CEPS
Working Document No 421.
OECD, 2016, Greece, OECD Economic Surveys, Paris.
Stournaras, Y. (2017b), “The Greek economy: Prospects and main challenges”, Speech at the
2nd 
November.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=482&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
EU-Arab 
Summit, 
Athens, 
World 
10 
Stournaras,  Y.  (2017a),  “Greece  and  the  global  economy:  Prospects  and  main  challenges
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
ahead”, Speech at an event organised by Credit Suisse, Athens, 11 October.
www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx?
Item_ID=476&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166–9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b  
1
2
It is about 30 million euro in January-November 2017. Services receipts from Spain account for approximately
1.0% of total Greek exports of services (and have declined by 11% in nominal terms in 2012–2016), while
payments to Spain account for about 2.2% of total Greek imports of services (and have increased by about 9% in
nominal terms in 2012–2016).
(2) For an overview of the literature and an empirical analysis of the role of institutional factors in long-term
growth in the EU, see Masuch, K., Moshammer, E. and Pierluigi, B. (2016): Institutions and Growth in Europe”,
CEPS Working Document No 421.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
