January  31,  2018 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Oita 
Kikuo Iwata 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial, and business leaders in Oita Prefecture. I would also like to take this opportunity 
to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with  the  activities  of  the  Bank  of 
Japan's Oita Branch. 
 At  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  last  week,  the  Bank  updated  its  projections 
for  Japan's  economic  activity  and  prices  through  fiscal  2019  and  released  them  in  the 
January 2018 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report). Today, I would 
like to talk about the Bank's outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices as well  as its 
thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy, while outlining the Outlook Report. 
 I. The Current Situation of Economic Activity and Its Outlook 
Let  me  start  by  talking  about  economic  developments.  Japan's  economy  is  expanding 
moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating. The real GDP growth 
rate  for  the  July-September  quarter  of  2017  was  2.5  percent  on  an  annualized  basis, 
representing  positive  growth  for  seven  consecutive  quarters  (Chart  1).  The  benefits  of  the 
economic  improvement  have  been  spreading  to  a  wide  range  of  economic  entities,  and 
according  to  the  Bank's  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan) 
released  in  December  2017,  the  diffusion  indexes  (DIs)  for  business  conditions  have 
continued to be positive, not only for large enterprises and manufacturers but also for small 
enterprises  and  nonmanufacturers.  By  region,  in  the  Bank's  January  2018  Regional 
Economic Report, all nine regions across the country, including the Kyushu region, showed 
positive economic assessments, using phrases such as moderate recovery and expansion. In 
what  follows,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  the  current  situation  of  Japan's  economic  activity 
and its outlook in more detail. 
 Overseas Economies 
I  would  first  like  to  touch  upon  developments  in  overseas  economies.  Looking  back, 
overseas  economies  remained  subdued  following  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008. 
However, since around the second half of 2016, the positive effects of economic recovery in 
advanced  economies  have  started  to  spread  to  emerging  economies,  and  so-called 
 1 
synchronous  growth  has  been  achieved  recently,  with  advanced  and  emerging  economies 
growing  in  tandem.  In  this  situation,  production  and  trade  activity  of  the  manufacturing 
sector have become active due to the completion of inventory adjustments and an increase 
in business fixed investment on a global basis. World trade volume last year registered high 
growth that reflected such developments, growing at a faster pace than the global economy 
for the first time in six years. The global economy is expected to continue growing firmly 
for the time being. According to the January 2018 World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update 
released by the  International Monetary  Fund (IMF), the global GDP  growth  rates for both 
2018 and 2019 are expected to register relatively high growth of 3.9 percent, exceeding the 
long-term average since the 1990s (Chart 2). 
 Current Situation of Japan's Economic Activity 
As I noted at the beginning, Japan's economy is expanding moderately, supported in part by 
such growth in overseas economies. With regard to the corporate sector, exports have shown 
high growth mainly for capital goods and IT-related goods. In particular, exports to China as 
well as the NIEs and the ASEAN economies have been rapidly increasing recently, and real 
exports  for  November  2017  reached  record  high  levels,  exceeding  those  seen  before  the 
global  financial  crisis.  Production  has  also  been  on  an  uptrend  on  the  back  of  a  rise  in 
demand  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  ratio  of  firms'  current 
profits  to  sales  has  been at a  record  high  level, and  the  DIs  for  business  conditions for  all 
industries  and  enterprises in  the  December  2017  Tankan  suggest  that  business  conditions 
have improved for six consecutive quarters, being at a favorable level seen for the first time 
in 26 years, since 1991. Business fixed investment has continued on an increasing trend in a 
wide range of industries, with corporate profits and business sentiment improving (Chart 3). 
Specifically, firms in the nonmanufacturing sector in industries such as restaurants, retailing, 
and 
construction  have  been 
significantly 
increasing 
their 
labor-saving 
and 
efficiency-improving  investment  (Chart  4).  For  instance,  the  introduction  of  online 
reservation  systems  and  self-checkout  machines  across  the  country  is  no  longer  a  new 
phenomenon.  While  the  direct  cause  of  such  investment  is  acute  labor  shortage,  it  is  also 
attributable  to  new  technologies  such  as  robots  and  artificial  intelligence  (AI)  having 
become  available  for  actual  business  activities  as  a  result  of  technological  innovation  in 
recent years. For example, there have been various ideas recently related to making use of 
 2 
the  latest  technologies,  such  as  using  robots  for  heavy  labor  at  nursing  care  facilities  and 
drones  for  delivery  services.  Such  positive  corporate  activities  also  have  been  firmly 
supported by financial institutions' accommodative lending attitudes. 
 Turning  to  the  household  sector,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  labor  market  conditions  have 
continued  to  tighten  steadily  amid  economic  expansion  (Chart  5).  The  active  job 
openings-to-applicants ratio for December 2017 improved to 1.59, a level seen for the first 
time in about 44 years, since 1974, and the unemployment rate has declined to a level seen 
for  the  first  time  in  about  24  years.  In  this  situation,  wages  have  been  rising  moderately. 
Specifically,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  hourly  wages  of  part-time  employees, 
which  are  sensitive  to  economic  activity,  has  marked  relatively  high  growth  of  around  2 
percent recently. Although the pace of wage increases for full-time employees has remained 
sluggish compared to that for part-time employees, the situation is gradually changing. Base 
pay  rises  returned in  2014,  and moves  to  raise  the  starting  salaries  of  full-time employees 
have  been  observed  at  many  firms  recently,  aiming  to  secure  the  number  of  employees 
needed.  Against  the  background  of  such  improvement  in  the  employment  and  income 
situation,  private  consumption  has  been  increasing  moderately,  albeit  with  fluctuations 
(Chart 6). In detail, durable goods such as automobiles and household electrical appliances 
have  been  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend,  due  mainly  to  replacement  demand,  and 
nondurable  goods  such  as  clothes  and  food  have  been  picking  up  recently.  The  favorable 
employment situation, together with the rise in stock prices, has led to  an improvement in 
consumer sentiment, which also underpins consumption activities. 
 Outlook for Japan's Economic Activity 
Next,  I  would  like  to  turn  to  the  Bank's  outlook  for  Japan's  economic  activity.  Japan's 
economy  is  likely  to  continue  its  moderate  expansion.  Exports  are  expected  to  continue 
their  moderate  increasing  trend  on  the  back  of  the  growth  in  overseas  economies,  and 
business fixed investment and private consumption are likely to follow an increasing trend 
on  the  back  of  highly  accommodative  financial  conditions  and  underpinnings  through  the 
government's  past  stimulus  measures.  According  to  the  January  2018  Outlook  Report,  the 
medians  of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  of  the  real  GDP  growth  rates  for  fiscal 
2017  and  2018  are  1.9  percent  and  1.4  percent,  respectively  (Chart  7).  These  figures  are 
 3 
above Japan's potential growth rate, which is estimated to be in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. 
In fiscal 2019, business fixed investment is likely to decelerate, mainly reflecting Olympic 
Games-related demand peaking out, and household spending is likely to turn to a decline in 
the second half of the fiscal year due to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. 
Although  the  growth  pace  is  projected to  decelerate,  the  economy  is  expected  to  continue 
expanding,  with  the  projected  real  GDP  growth  rate  at  0.7  percent  for  fiscal  2019,  as  an 
increase  in  exports  on  the  back  of  the  growth  in  overseas  economies  underpins  the 
economy. 
 There are, of course, upside and downside risks to this baseline scenario of the outlook for 
Japan's  economic activity.  The  biggest  risk  factor  is  developments  in  overseas  economies. 
Uncertainty surrounding overseas economies seems to have abated compared to a while ago, 
as seen in economic recovery in emerging economies clearly taking hold and progress being 
made  regarding  the  debt  problem  for  the  financial  sector  in  Europe.  However,  the  U.S. 
economic policies and negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union 
(EU)  continue  to  warrant  attention.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  closely  examine 
developments in overseas economies, including geopolitical risks. 
 II. Price Developments and Their Outlook 
Price Developments 
Now,  I  will  move  on  to  price  developments.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI) in Japan has been increasing gradually since around mid-2016, 
mainly  on  the  back  of  a  rise  in  energy  prices  (Chart  8).  The  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
excluding fresh food registered 0.9 percent in November and December last year, which is 
the  level  last  seen  in  October  2014.  With  actual  inflation  rising,  people's  inflation 
expectations  shifted  from  the  weakening  phase  and  have  been  more  or  less  unchanged 
recently. 
 However, excluding the effects of energy prices, the rate of change in the CPI has remained 
slightly  positive,  continuing  to  show  relatively  weak  developments.  While  this  reflects 
temporary  factors such as a reduction in charges for mobile phone services, this is mainly 
attributable  to  the  fact  that  the  mindset  and  behavior  based  on  the  assumption  that  wages 
 4 
and  prices  will  not  increase  easily  have  been  deeply  entrenched  among  firms  and 
households.  As  evidence  of  such  mindset  and  behavior,  firms  have  been  limiting  wage 
increases -- which correspond to the labor shortage -- mainly to part-time employees, and it 
is taking time for such increases to spread to full-time employees. In addition, a wide range 
of firms have been making efforts to absorb a rise in labor costs by increasing labor-saving 
investment  and  streamlining 
their  business  processes 
through  such  measures  as 
discontinuing late-night services. 
 Outlook for Prices 
As these developments show, prices are relatively weak. Going forward, however, they are 
expected to overcome this situation, and the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely 
to  increase  toward  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  This  is  expected  to  be  realized 
through the following mechanism. 
 First, prices of items such as processed food and daily necessities -- which are responsive to 
economic  activity  --  are  likely  to  rise  gradually,  and  the  yen's  depreciation  to  date  is 
expected  to  push  up  prices  of  such  items  as  durable  goods.  Second,  as  the  output  gap 
improves further, firms' stance is likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and prices, 
and  the  inflation  rate  is  projected  to  rise  in  line  with  wage  increases.  Third,  with  these 
factors pushing up actual inflation, a virtuous cycle is expected to operate in which people's 
inflation  expectations  rise  accordingly,  leading  to  a  further  increase  in  actual  inflation. 
Bearing this mechanism in mind, the January 2018 Outlook Report shows that the medians 
of  the  Policy  Board  members'  forecasts  of  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI 
excluding  fresh  food  are  0.8  percent  for  fiscal  2017,  1.4  percent  for  fiscal  2018,  and  on a 
basis excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike,  1.8 percent for fiscal 2019 (Chart 
7). 
 The  key  to  realizing  the  inflation  mechanism  that  I  just  outlined  is  firms'  wage-  and 
price-setting  stance.  With  regard  to  the  price-setting  stance,  there  has  been  a  gradually 
increasing  number  of  cases  recently  where  firms  reflect  in  their  sales  prices  the  increased 
labor  costs  and  input  costs.  Media  reports  on  price  rises  seem  to  have  increased 
substantially  of  late.  As  mentioned  in  the  Bank's  Regional  Economic  Report,  many  firms 
 5 
reported  that  they  have  been  reaching  the  limit  to  which  they  can  undertake  labor-saving 
investment in order to absorb increasing labor costs. 
 Regarding the wage-setting stance, in a situation where labor shortage is not showing signs 
of  being  relaxed,  but  rather  is  becoming  even  more  acute,  an  increasing  number  of  firms 
seem  to  be  considering  raising  wages  of  not  only  part-time  but  also  full-time  employees. 
While such an increase in labor costs contributes to pushing up sales prices,  if many firms 
increase  wages,  households'  income  situation  will  improve  and  more  consumers 
consequently  will  come  to  accept  price  rises.  If  that  happens,  price  rises  will  not  result  in 
losing  customers,  likely  leading  to  an  increase  in  sales.  As  this  shows,  wage  increases  by 
firms also benefit themselves. 
 In  relation to  wage  increases,  some  argue  that  firms  should allocate  more  of  their cash  on 
hand to their employees (Chart 9). While it is true that corporate savings have accumulated 
to  a  substantial  degree  lately,  there  are  various  backgrounds  to  this.  For  example,  with 
memories of the severe funding conditions during the global financial crisis still fresh, some 
firms  say  that,  for  the  time  being,  they  prefer  to  accumulate  earned  cash  on  hand  to  be 
prepared for any future crisis. Others point to the fact that, even if they invest in capital and 
human  resources,  they  cannot  gain  enough  profits  as  Japan's  expected  growth  rate  is  low. 
However, in a situation where Japan's economy has been improving steadily and is likely to 
continue  expanding  going  forward,  these  do  not  seem  to  be  the  main  reasons  for  the 
increase in corporate savings. Rather, it appears that the recent rapid increase in corporate 
profits was an unexpected windfall for firms. If that is the case, the savings are likely to be 
used  for  business  fixed  investment  and  wage  increases  with  some  time  lag.  While  an 
increase in fixed investment is preceding so far, the increased savings are likely  to lead to 
wage  growth  going  forward,  as  real  wages  have  not  been  rising  in  line  with  labor 
productivity. 
 III. The Bank's Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  has  been 
conducting  monetary  policy  under  "Quantitative  and  Qualitative  Monetary  Easing  (QQE) 
 6 
with  Yield  Curve  Control"  since  September  2016.  This  framework  consists  of  two 
components (Chart 10). 
 The  first  is  an  inflation-overshooting  commitment.  This  is  the  Bank's  strong  commitment 
that it will continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the actual CPI exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. It is crucial 
that  people  actually  experience  inflation  above  2  percent  and thereby  the  perception  takes 
hold  among  them  that  prices  of  goods  and  services  tend  to  go  up  every  year  by  around  2 
percent.  With  this  in  mind,  the  Bank,  under  the  inflation-overshooting  commitment,  has 
committed  itself  to  continuing  with  large-scale  monetary  easing  until  such  situation  is 
achieved. 
 The  second  component  is  yield  curve  control.  The  Bank  facilitates  the  formation  of  the 
yield curve that is considered most appropriate for achieving the price stability target of 2 
percent, taking account of developments in Japan's economic activity and prices as well as 
financial  conditions.  At  present,  it  sets  the  short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1 
percent  and  the  target  level  of  the  10-year  Japanese  government  bond  (JGB)  yields  at 
around zero percent, conducting JGB purchases so as to achieve this target level. 
 As  I mentioned earlier, Japan's economy is expanding moderately but prices are relatively 
weak. Thus, there is still a long way to go to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. 
In  light  of  such  recent  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial 
conditions,  the  Bank  deems  it  important  to  continue  to  persistently  pursue  powerful 
monetary easing under the framework of "QQE with Yield Curve Control." 
 While  the  Bank  believes  it  important  to  continue  with  the  current  monetary  easing 
persistently, some argue that continuing with monetary easing for a long period entails risks. 
In what follows, I would like to express my views on the two risks that have been pointed 
out. 
 The first risk of continuing with the current monetary easing policy is that the efficiency of 
Japan's economy would be hampered, due to the continuation of firms' inefficient resource 
 7 
allocation and to firms with low productivity remaining in place amid funding costs staying 
at significantly low levels. However, I instead think that it would be difficult to heighten the 
efficiency and dynamism of the economy and thereby raise productivity unless the economy 
is  underpinned  by  an  appropriate  conduct  of  monetary  easing.  This  is  because,  under 
deflation,  strong  resistance  will  arise  against  the  pain  --  such  as  an  increase  in 
unemployment -- that emerges in the course of raising productivity through firms' efforts. In 
Japan's  economy  today,  monetary  policy  has  exerted  its  intended  effects,  and  supply-side 
constraints  such  as  shortages  of  labor  and  capital  have  become  evident  amid  an 
improvement in the output gap. Given this situation, now is the best opportunity for firms to 
promote  investment  in  human  resources  and  capital  for  the  purpose  of  raising  labor 
productivity.  In  the  process  of  raising  labor  productivity,  there  usually  is  a  concern  of  an 
increase in unemployment, which is one of the reasons why firms are reluctant to undertake 
fixed  investment,  including  in  software.  Nevertheless,  in  the  situation  of  the  current  labor 
shortage, there are good chances to change jobs -- enough to absorb the possible increase in 
unemployment.  In  this  context,  the  Bank's  current  monetary  policy  can  be  considered  as 
contributing  to  providing  the  conditions  for  raising  labor  productivity.  In  fact,  as  I 
mentioned earlier, a pronounced increase has been observed in investment aimed at saving 
labor and streamlining business processes in industries where labor shortage is acute. 
 Speaking  of  raising  labor  productivity,  firms  will  be  more  strongly  motivated  to  do  so 
through  creating  a  competitive  environment  by  abolishing  competition-restricting 
regulations,  including  those  on  market  entry  and  on  prices,  than  through  support  policies 
such  as  the  provision  of  subsidies  for  firms.  If  the  government  promotes  its  initiatives 
toward  enhancing  competition,  such  as  abolishment  of  the  so-called  bedrock  regulations, 
many firms are expected to enter the market. In such situation, if more firms take advantage 
of  accommodative  financial  conditions,  capital  investment  will  be  reinforced  and 
technological  innovation  will  progress,  leading  the  potential  growth  rate  to  rise  and 
monetary easing effects to become larger. As a result, the price stability target of 2 percent 
can be achieved earlier than projected. Therefore, I expect that the government's regulatory 
and institutional reforms will be pushed forward strongly. 
 8 
The second risk pointed out is that, if the current monetary easing measures will continue to 
be  taken,  fiscal  discipline  will  loosen  and  fiscal  sustainability  will  be  lost  because  the 
government  can  issue  debt  at  low  interest  rates  under  such  circumstances.  While  fiscal 
management  is  conducted  under  the  responsibility  of  the  government  and  the  Diet,  it  is 
important  to  secure  the  market's  confidence  in  medium-  to  long-term  fiscal  soundness.  In 
the joint statement by the government and the Bank of Japan in January 2013,  it says that 
the  government  "will  steadily  promote  measures  aimed  at  establishing  a  sustainable  fiscal 
structure." 
 That  being  said,  a  combination  of  accommodative  financial  conditions  provided  by  the 
central  bank  and  fiscal  spending  proactively  carried  out  by  the  government  is  called  a 
"policy mix," and it is well known as a standard macroeconomic policy that synergy effects 
from both sides can produce stronger economic stimulus effects. In Japan, under the Bank's 
QQE, the government is to conduct flexible fiscal policy as the second arrow of Abenomics. 
In  my  understanding,  what  is  meant  by  flexible  fiscal  policy  is  that  the  government  will 
formulate a supplementary budget beforehand when an economic downturn is expected, and 
thereby increase fiscal spending or implement tax reductions. 
 Then,  the  issue  would  be  how  to  reconcile  medium-  to  long-term  fiscal  soundness  and 
flexible fiscal policy. In what follows, I would like to present my view on this. 
 Please take a look at the left-hand panel of Chart 11. This shows the year-on-year rates of 
change in the fiscal balance-to-GDP ratio and the primary balance-to-GDP ratio. The higher 
the  blue  and  white  column  graphs  go  above  zero,  the  larger  the  reduction  in  the  fiscal 
deficit-to-GDP ratio and the primary deficit-to-GDP ratio, or in other words, the faster the 
pace  of  fiscal  austerity.  From  fiscal  2010  to  fiscal  2012,  the  pace  of  fiscal  austerity  was 
relatively moderate, and the degree of monetary accommodation was not enough. 
 On the other hand, from fiscal 2013 -- when QQE was introduced -- to fiscal 2015, the pace 
of  fiscal  austerity  accelerated.  In  particular,  it  surged  in  fiscal  2014  because  the 
consumption  tax  was  raised  from  5  percent  to  8  percent.  Even  though  the  government 
formulated in that fiscal year economic measures of 5 trillion yen as part of flexible  fiscal 
 9 
policy, the real GDP growth rate declined to minus 0.3 percent. 
 The  pace  of  fiscal  austerity  started  to  slow  in  fiscal  2015  and  decelerated  significantly  in 
fiscal  2016.  On  the  back  of  that  decline,  coupled  with  powerful  monetary  easing,  the  real 
GDP growth rate has been increasing since fiscal 2015, outpacing the potential growth rate 
-- which is estimated to be in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent -- by around 0.5 percentage point. 
 Please  take  a  look  at  the  right-hand  panel  of  Chart  11.  In  this  panel,  the  degree  of  fiscal 
soundness  is  shown  by  developments  in  the  ratio  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  gross 
government debt to nominal GDP, and we can see that the ratio marked the highest figure in 
2014 despite the consumption tax hike in April that year. 
 In order to properly gauge the fiscal  conditions, the ratio of the amount outstanding of net 
government  debt  --  calculated  by  subtracting  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  government's 
holdings  of  financial  assets  from  that  of  gross  government  debt  --  to  nominal  GDP  also 
should be taken into consideration. As with the case of the ratio of the amount outstanding 
of  gross  government  debt  to  nominal  GDP,  this  ratio  also  rose  in  2014,  when  the 
consumption  tax  hike  took  place.  However,  given  that  it  has  been  more  or  less  flat  since 
2012, one cannot necessarily say that Japan's fiscal conditions are becoming worse. 
 In considering the combination of fiscal soundness and monetary easing measures, it would 
be effective to look at the experience of the euro area. 
 Please take a look at Chart 12. This shows the pace of fiscal austerity and economic growth 
in  the  euro  area.  The  pace  of  fiscal  austerity  is  shown  by  the  annual  changes  in  the 
following ratios: the fiscal balance-to-GDP ratio; the primary balance-to-GDP ratio; and the 
ratio  of  structural  balance  --  calculated  by  excluding  the  effects  of  economic  fluctuations 
from the actual fiscal balance  -- to GDP. As in Chart 11, the higher the column graphs go 
above zero, the faster the pace of fiscal austerity. 
 In the euro area, the economy was under strong downward pressure from 2010 to 2012, not 
only because the degree of monetary accommodation was not enough but also because the 
 10 
pace of fiscal austerity was  accelerating. Consequently, the economy experienced negative 
growth in 2012 and 2013, and the ratios of the amounts outstanding of both gross and net 
government debt to nominal GDP rose, even though the governments continued with fiscal 
austerity. 
 Through  such  experience,  in  2013,  the  governments  in  the  euro  area  started  to  shift  their 
policy to where the pace of fiscal austerity was slowed. Against this background, monetary 
policy to increase the degree of monetary accommodation also was introduced successively, 
and quantitative easing (QE) was introduced in 2015. At one point, a concern arose that the 
euro area might fall into deflation, just as in the case of Japan. However, the combination of 
such  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  worked  well  and,  since  2014,  the  euro  area  economy  has 
recovered and its growth rate has been on an uptrend. The ratios of the amounts outstanding 
of  both  gross  and  net  government  debt  to  nominal  GDP  have  continued  to  decline,  albeit 
moderately, even though the governments slowed the pace of fiscal austerity. 
 Although it is important to achieve fiscal soundness in the medium to long run, the pace of 
achievement  --  or  in  other  words,  the  pace  of  fiscal  austerity  --  affects  the  real  economy 
largely.  If  the  government  rushes  to  achieve  fiscal  soundness  and  accelerates  the  pace  of 
fiscal  austerity,  the  growth  rate  will  decline.  If  this  happens,  fiscal  soundness  will  not  be 
achieved,  and  achievement  of  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  also  will  become 
difficult. 
 It has been nearly five years since the introduction of QQE in April 2013. In concluding my 
speech,  let  me  express  my  view  on  economic  and  price  developments,  as  well  as  policy 
effects over the past five years. 
 First,  during  the  five  years  since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  Japan's  economic  and  price 
developments  have  improved  significantly,  and  the  economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation, 
which is generally defined as a sustained decline in prices. Through the implementation of 
large-scale  monetary  easing  under  the  strong  and  clear  commitment  toward  achieving  the 
price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  people's  basic  view  on  monetary  policy  has  changed 
drastically, bringing about a rise in inflation expectations and a decline in nominal interest 
 11 
rates across the entire yield curve. Triggered by the decline in real interest rates, excessive 
yen  appreciation  has  been  corrected  and  stock  prices  have  risen  significantly.  On  the  real 
economy side, the output gap has improved and the employment situation has done so to a 
substantial degree. 
 Second,  despite  these  improvements,  we  are  only  halfway  to  achieving  the  price  stability 
target of 2 percent. I think the main reason for this is as follows: the observed inflation rates 
started  to  decline  before  inflation  expectations  anchored  at  2  percent,  due  mainly  to  the 
consumption  tax  hike  and  the  significant  decline  in  crude  oil  prices,  and  this  led  inflation 
expectations, of which formation  has been largely  adaptive, to become relatively weak.  In 
this  situation,  in  order  to  achieve  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent,  it  is  necessary  to 
raise the observed inflation rates through an improvement in the output gap, which will be 
brought  about  by  continuing  with  monetary  easing  persistently,  and  thereby  lift  inflation 
expectations. "QQE with Yield Curve Control" that the Bank currently adopts incorporates 
the  mechanism  in  which  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  can  be  achieved  through 
raising inflation expectations -- although it may take some time -- by maintaining nominal 
interest  rates  at  low  levels.  This  is  the  most  appropriate  monetary  policy  framework  at 
present,  in  that  it  has  the  largest  positive  effects  and  the  smallest  side  effects.  The  Bank 
must  keep  seeking  whether  there  is  more  appropriate  monetary  policy,  but  unless  the 
effectiveness of a new policy is assured, I think it should continue with the current monetary 
policy. 
 Third, in addition to an appropriate monetary easing policy, the government's initiatives are 
important  in  order  to  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  under  price  stability.  With  a 
view to achieving further growth in Japan's economy, I strongly expect that the government 
will set an appropriate pace for fiscal austerity, as I described earlier, and that it will carry 
out  growth  strategy  --  such  as  competition  policy  --  appropriately  and  powerfully.  In 
addition, under the current economic situation where the increase in income is sluggish and 
consumption  has  not  gained  enough  momentum,  an  income  shift  --  through  an  income 
reallocation policy -- to households with a high propensity to consume is also effective. On 
this point, the government set out measures to support child rearing and education including 
the provision of early childcare as well as higher education for free, as part of the "human 
 12 
resources  development  revolution"  in  the  New  Economic  Policy  Package.  This  is  an 
effective  macroeconomic  policy  that  can  expand  domestic  demand  led  by  consumption, 
through properly combining the tax system and fiscal spending and making sure the pace of 
fiscal austerity is appropriate. 
 With these initiatives becoming effective, I hope that Japan's economy will achieve higher 
growth in real terms in the near future under the stable inflation rate of around 2 percent. 
 Conclusion 
Since  2016,  several  natural  disasters  --  the  Kumamoto  Earthquake,  the  torrential  rain  in 
Northern Kyushu, and the 18th typhoon in 2017 -- hit Oita Prefecture and caused damage to 
its  tourism  and  agriculture.  I  would  like  to  offer  my  heartfelt  sympathies  to  those  who 
suffered, and I deeply respect the efforts by people in the region who faced difficulties. 
 In Oita Prefecture, big events are scheduled to take place this year, such as the International 
ONSEN  Summit  and  the  "National  Cultural  Festival  and  the  National  Disabled  Craft  and 
Culture Festival." In addition, the Rugby World Cup is to be held next year. I would like to 
close my speech by expressing my sincere hope that, through these opportunities, the public 
and private sectors will work together on vitalizing the local economy in various fields, and 
that the local economy will be strongly revived after the massive disasters. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
  13 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
 Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Oita 
January 31, 2018 
 Kikuo Iwata 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Real GDP 
Chart 1 
Source: Cabinet Office. 
1 
Global Economy 
Chart 2 
Global Real GDP Growth 
Projections of Real GDP Growth  
by Major Economies (as of January 2018) 
Note: The figure for 2017 is  estimated value. Figures in parentheses in the right figure show differences from the projections as of October 2017 (% points). 
Source: IMF. 
2 
Japan's Economy 
Chart 3 
Corporate Profits 
Business Conditions DI 
(Tankan) 
Business Fixed 
Investment 
Note: Figures for corporate profits are based on the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly. Excluding "finance and insurance." 
Sources: Ministry of Finance; Bank of Japan; Cabinet Office. 
3 
Labor Market Conditions and Software Investment 
Chart 4 
Employment Conditions DI (Tankan) 
Software Investment (Tankan) 
Note: Figures for the software investment plans for fiscal 2017 are forecasts from the December 2017 Tankan survey. 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
4 
Employment Situation 
Chart 5 
Active Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio 
Unemployment Rate 
 
Sources: Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
5 
Private Consumption 
Chart 6 
Consumption Activity Index 
Confidence Indicator Related 
to Private Consumption 
Notes: 1. The Consumption Activity Index is based on BOJ staff calculations. Figures for the Consumption Activity Index (travel balance adjusted) exclude inbound tourism consumption 
and include outbound tourism consumption. The figure for 2017/Q4 is the October-November average. 
     2. Figures for the "Economy Watchers Survey" are those for the current economic conditions DI. 
 Sources: Bank of Japan; Cabinet Office. 
6 
Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices 
(as of January 2018) 
Chart 7 
y/y % chg. 
Real GDP 
CPI 
(all items less fresh food) 
  Fiscal 2017 
  Forecasts made in 
October 2017  
  Fiscal 2018 
Forecasts made in 
October 2017  
  Fiscal 2019 
Forecasts made in 
October 2017  
+1.9 
+1.9 
 +1.4 
 +1.4 
 +0.7 
 +0.7 
 +0.8 
 +0.8 
 +1.4 
+1.4 
 +1.8 
+1.8 
Note: Figures indicate the medians of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates). Figures for the CPI (all items less fresh food) exclude the effects of the consumption tax hike.  
Source: Bank of Japan. 
7 
Consumer Prices 
Chart 8 
Note: Figures are adjusted for changes in the consumption tax rate. 
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
8 
Corporate Savings 
Amount Outstanding of Cash and Deposits by Firm Size 
Chart 9 
Note: Based on the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Annually. Excluding "finance and insurance." Large enterprises are defined as enterprises with a 
capitalization of 1 billion yen or more, and small and medium-sized enterprises are defined as enterprises with a capitalization of less than 1 billion yen. 
Source: Ministry of Finance. 
9 
QQE with Yield Curve Control 
Chart 10 
Inflation-Overshooting Commitment 
Yield Curve Control 
 
Source: Bloomberg. 
10 
Fiscal Conditions in Japan 
Fiscal Balance and  
Primary Balance 
Amount Outstanding of  
Government Debt 
Chart 11 
Note: The primary balance is BOJ staff calculations. 
Sources: Cabinet Office; IMF, etc. 
11 
Fiscal Conditions in the Euro Area 
Fiscal Balance, Primary Balance,  
and Structural Balance 
Amount Outstanding of  
Government Debt 
Chart 12 
Note: The structural balance is the year-on-year rate of change in the structural balance-to-potential GDP ratio. 
Source: IMF. 
12 
