    GIC Central Banking Series Conference  
Paris, 14 May 2018 
 Speech by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
A perspective on the ECB’s Asset Purchase Programme 
          Press contact: Mark Deen (mark.deen@banque-france.fr). 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Page 1 sur 5 
It  is  a great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  Paris  for  this  GIC  Central  Banking  Series 
conference. This tenth GIC conference in partnership with the Banque de France is, as the 
previous ones, a very promising opportunity for professionals and monetary policy makers to 
exchange views, especially in the current euro area context. 
It  has  been  almost  four  years  now  since  the  Eurosystem  incorporated  several  new 
instruments  to  combat  the  deflation  risks  that  threatened  the  euro  area  in  the  wake  of  the 
crisis.  One  of  our  important  tools  was  our  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (also  referred  to  as 
APP  –  the  euro-area  version  of  Quantitative  Easing)  that  was  announced  in  its  full  blown 
version  in  January  2015.  Looking  ahead,  our  net  asset  purchases  will  stop  when  we  see  a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation (“SAPI”). We are not there yet, but we are more 
and  more  confident  that  the  three  criteria  of  this  “SAPI”,  namely  convergence,  confidence, 
and  resilience i ,  will  be  met.  So,  the  time  when  our  net  asset  purchases  will  end  is 
approaching – and as I already said,  whether it will be in September  or in December is not 
a deep existential question. 
Today  is  thus  a good  time  to  reflect  on  our  experience  with  the  non-standard  measures. 
I would  like  to  share  with  you  some  views  on  the  following  three  questions.  First,  how 
effective were these non-standard instruments as a whole? Second, how much did the Asset 
Purchase  Programme  contribute  to  our  exceptionally  accommodative  stance?  Third  and 
finally, how can central banks manage the risks they face when making their way to the “new 
normal” and exiting from such policy packages?  
Needless to say, in all these issues, we benefit from the US experience, in particular of the 
Federal  Reserve  which  has  achieved,  in  recent  years,  a smooth  path  to  normalisation. We 
are  fortunate  to  have  Loretta  Mester  (President  and  CEO  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Cleveland) with us this morning. 
 I. Where do we stand on our unconventional tools as a whole?  
Since 2014, we have been playing what I like to call a quartet of non-standard instruments. 
[Slide 2]  
Our first non-standard instrument is the  APP. I will be more specific in a short while on the 
channels through which this programme operates through stocks and flows. The size of our 
asset  holdings  related  to  APP  is  now  approaching  EUR 2.37 trillion  and  should  reach 
EUR 2.55 trillion by the end of September 2018.  
  Page 2 sur 5 
 Our second instrument is the negative deposit facility rate: its purpose is to relax the zero 
lower bound constraint – therefore lowering the level of the yield curve.  
Our  third  non-standard  instrument  consists  in  providing  forward  guidance  on  the  path  of 
future interest rates to make future monetary policy decisions predictable and to signal that 
rates will stay low for an extended period of time. This has contributed to flattening the short 
to medium term of the yield curve.  
The fourth instrument is the provision of liquidity and credit to banks. Most recently, the 
second  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)  was  launched  in 
2016.  We  are  currently  lending  about  EUR 760 billion  through  this  instrument  which  eases 
credit conditions for firms and households. 
These four instruments are therefore complementary and self-reinforcing. As a consequence, 
monetary policy measures have been supporting aggregate demand as well as employment, 
and the recent economic recovery in the euro area. The Banque de France just released this 
morning  its  first  preliminary  forecast  for  French  GDP  growth  for  Q2,  at  0.3%.  But  this 
somewhat  softer  pace  could  be  influenced  by  the  exceptional  holiday  schedule  in  May.  At 
this  stage,  new  orders  remain  positively  oriented  and  do  not  point  to  a  trend  change. 
Compared with the beginning of 2014, 7 million jobs have been created in the euro area. We 
estimate  that,  without  monetary  policy  measures  taken  between  2014  and  2018,  economic 
growth  in  the  euro  area  would  have  been  1.9  percentage  points  lower  in  cumulative  terms 
over the 2016-2020 period.ii [Slide 3]  
On the inflation front: annual HICP growth was 1.5% in 2017 and is expected to rise to 1.7% 
in  2020.  Underlying  inflation  is  set  to  strengthen,  irrespective  of  short-run  fluctuations  in 
energy  inflation.  We  clearly  see  the  current  slowdown  [the  1.2%  Flash  HICP  estimate  for 
April, with a particularly low figure in Italy] as temporary, and we expect inflation to resume its 
progress in the coming months. 
 II. A comprehensive view on the Asset Purchase Programme  
In  theory,  the  effect  of  APP  on  yields  is  not  straightforward:  as  Ben  Bernanke  said  in  a 
famous statement in 2014, “the problem with Quantitative Easing is that it works in practice, 
but  it  doesn’t  work  in  theory”.iii Today  we  probably  better  understand  the  channels  through 
which this policy works, now that it has been implemented by all major central banks. We can 
distinguish  three  main  channels  through  which  our  APP  operates:  a  portfolio  rebalancing 
effect  through  “duration  extraction”,  a  signalling  effect,  and  a  reanchoring  of  inflation 
expectations. 
  Page 3 sur 5 
 Let  me  start  with  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel  through  “duration  extraction”.  By 
purchasing long-term assets, central banks replace long-term maturity and riskier assets with 
short-term  maturity  and  safer  assets  for  investors.  Investors  consider  duration  risks  as  a 
source of possible losses and they require an additional compensation – the term premium – 
for  bearing  such  risks.  By  reducing  duration  risks  for  assets  held  by  investors,  the  APP 
weighs on term premia and consequently on long-term yields. According to our estimations, 
holding a stock of assets equivalent to 10% of GDP lowers 10-year bond yields by about 45 
basis points in the euro area. [Slide 4] This estimation implies that our APP has contributed 
to  lower  long-term  yields  by  about  100  basis  points.  There  is  a  broad  consensus  around 
these estimates for the euro area.iv The magnitude of these effects is also quite similar to the 
ones  observed  in  the  United  States  or  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Beyond  extracting  duration 
risk,  the  portfolio  channel  of  APP  also  works  through  the  exchange  rate:  rebalancing  flows 
might  result  in  increased  demand  for  foreign  assets  by  domestic  residents  and/or  a 
repatriation of funds by non-residents.  
The second important channel is that APP has had a clear signalling effect on the future path 
of  short-term  interest  rates.  APP  has  served  as  a  credible  commitment  to  keeping  interest 
rates  low  for  a  long  time,  reinforcing  our  forward  guidance  policy.  Recent  Eurosystem 
research  has  shown  that  communication  surrounding  the  APP  has  been  key  for  the 
predictability of our monetary policy. As a result, markets were able to better understand our 
policy  reaction  function,  leading  to  a  reduction  in  uncertainty  and  unintended  volatility  and 
consequently risk premia on long-term yields. This effect is even much more significant when 
the  size  of  monthly  purchases  has  been  clearly  indicated.v APP  has  finally  provided  state-
contingence to our forward guidance.  
The  third  transmission  channel  of  APP  comes  from  the  re-anchoring  of  long-term  inflation 
expectations [Slide 5]. When deflationary risks are rising – in particular when the central bank 
is thought to be close to its effective lower bound (ELB) – monetary policy actions based only 
on  interest  rates  become  ineffective.  In  that  case,  implementing  APP  reassures  private 
agents  on  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  fulfil  its  inflation  mandate.  Long-term  inflation 
expectations from survey data bounced back after the APP announcement in January 2015, 
putting an end to the downward trend observed since 2012.vi  
A  positive  by-product  of  the  APP  has  been  to  contribute  to  a  further  reduction  in 
fragmentation  risks  in  the  euro  area  after  2014.  By  purchasing  long-term  sovereign  bonds, 
the APP has helped to reduce risks of speculative attacks on sovereign bonds that were not 
justified  by  economic  fundamentals.  Doing  so,  the  APP  has  improved  the  financial 
soundness  of  credit  institutions  –  especially  in  periphery  countries.  Overall,  by  reducing 
fragmentation risks on bonds yields,  the APP has improved monetary policy transmission.vii 
  Page 4 sur 5 
 [Slide 6] But we should be crystal-clear: reducing unwarranted fragmentation does not mean 
that the  ECB  is subject to  any kind  of fiscal  dominance.  Nobody  should  expect  us to  delay 
warranted  monetary  policy  normalisation  in  order  to  accommodate  debt  problems  of  any 
Member State. 
While  the  APP  had  clear  benefits,  some  have  argued  that  our  prolonged  accommodative 
monetary  policy  may  have  had  detrimental  side  effects  on  financial  stability.  The  main 
potential risk comes from high levels of debts (private and public) which would become more 
difficult to sustain with higher interest rates. I partly share these concerns and I think we need 
a better understanding of the side effects of QE. However, up to now, we have not seen any 
general  sign  of  build-ups  of  excessive  leverage  or  asset  price  bubbles  in  the  euro  area 
although  vigilance  is  in  order  in  some  particular  segments,  such  as  high-yield  corporate 
bonds  or  some  prime  commercial  real  estate. viii Since  the  crisis,  we  have  made  a  lot  of 
progress  in  addressing  vulnerabilities  in  financial  stability  –  in  particular  through  stronger 
capital and liquidity requirements on banks  – and designing better macroprudential policies. 
Still,  we  also  need  broader  liquidity  stress-tests  and  macroprudential  tools  for  non-bank 
finance.ix 
That being said, I think that an important question ahead is how to better take into account 
our  new  financial  stability  mandate,  along  with  our  core  price  stability  mandate,  in  our 
monetary policy decisions.  
 III. Managing the exit  
I  would  like  to  conclude  these  remarks  with  a  short  discussion  of  how  we  should  handle  a 
few  important  challenges  on  our  path  of  gradual  normalisation.  Let  me  start  with  two 
clarifications and then touch upon one broader open question.  
The  first  clarification  is  that  APP  will  continue  to  shape  our  monetary  stance  even  if  we 
stop our net asset purchases. As we have learnt, stocks  do  matter, so that the end of our 
net asset purchases will not mean the end of the APP. The Governing Council is committed 
to  reinvesting  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  for  an  extended  period  of  time 
after  the  end  of  our  net  asset  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary.  The 
recurrent  and  sizeable  purchases  induced  by  the  policy  of  reinvesting  maturing  assets  will 
continue to extract duration risk from the market, to signal relatively low interest rates, and to 
favour the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations. 
The  second  clarification is that, with the end of our net asset purchases approaching, our 
stance  will  rely  more  on  our  forward  guidance  on  interest  rates.  Without  a  doubt,  our 
communication  will  be  adjusted  given  that  the  current  guidance  on  policy  rates  is  explicitly 
  Page 5 sur 5 
 conditioned on the end of net asset purchases. As far as the first rate hike is concerned, we 
could give additional guidance on its timing –“well past” meaning at least some quarters but 
not years – and its contingency on the inflation outlook. Beyond that, the updated formulation 
of  our  communication  will  have  to  continue  providing  guidance  on  future  interest  rate 
movements over a relevant horizon, in order to avoid unintended volatility of the yield curve, 
especially during the transition period. 
Now looking broadly over a longer horizon, I believe we will also need a better understanding 
of  the  key  features  defining  “normal  times”  in  the  post-crisis  economic  environment.  This 
need was forcefully recalled by Vítor Constâncio in a recent speech.x  
If the real natural rate of interest were to be lower for a long period – due to structural factors 
like the savings glut –, one should expect the nominal interest rates to hit their effective lower 
bound more often in the future. Active balance sheet policies could then be de facto included 
in our “normal-time” monetary policy toolkit. This could imply that we keep operating under a 
large  balance  sheet  and  excess  liquidity. While  the  size  of  the  balance  sheet  will  definitely 
decline as a share of nominal GDP, we still do not know for sure what its new normal level 
will be. Alternatively or additionally, there is currently an academic debate about whether or 
not the quantitative definition of price stability should be revised. Loretta Mester has recently 
contributed  to  this  debate  in  the  United  States. xi For  the  euro  area  I  would  stick  to  the 
greatest  caution:  changing  the  inflation  objectives  either  by  increasing  or  lowering  them, 
would blur the credibility of our commitment to price stability.  
 But  let  me  come  back  to  my  core  message  about  the  APP.  In  the  euro  area,  our  current 
operational  framework  and  policy  strategy  have  proven  to  be  flexible  enough  to  deliver  on 
price  stability  even  in  extreme  conditions  like  the  ones  we  have  experienced  over  recent 
years. And this can give us confidence – notwithstanding patience and prudence – about the 
exit and the “new normal”, whenever they come. 
                                                                 
i « Maintaining price stability with unconventional monetary policy”, Speech by Peter Praet, Member of the 
Executive Board of the ECB, at the Council of the European Union, Brussels, 29 January 2018. 
 
ii ECB (2018), Annual Report 2017 and Marx et al. (2016), "Les mesures de politique monétaire en zone euro et 
leurs  effets  depuis  2014”,  Rue  de  la  Banque,  and  S.  Mouabbi  and  J.G.  Sahuc  (2017)  “Evaluating  the 
Macroeconomic Effects of the ECB's Unconventional Monetary Policies”, mimeo Banque de France. 
 
iii Brookings  Institution  (2014),  “Central  Banking  after  the  Great  Recession:  Lessons  learned  and  Challenges 
Ahead: A Discussion with Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke on the Fed’s 100th Anniversary”. See also A. 
Penalver,  N.  Hanaki,  E.  Akiyama,Y.  Funaki,  R.  Ishikawa  (2017),  “A  Quantitative  Easing  Experiment”,  WP  BdF 
#651 using laboratory experiments, they find some effects of QE on bond pricing. 
 
iv See  P.  Andrade,  J.  Breckenfelder,  F.  De  Fiore,  P.  Karadi  and  O.  Tristani  (2016),  "The  ECB's  asset  purchase 
programme - an early assessment" ECB WP-1956 and Arrata, W. and Nguyen, B. (2017), “Price Impact of Bond 
Supply Shocks: Evidence from the Eurosystem's Asset Purchase Program”, WP BdF #623.  
 
v See G. Coenen, M. Ehrmann, G. Gaballo, P. Hoffmann, A. Nakov, S. Nardelli, E. Persson, G. Strasser (2017), 
“Communication of monetary policy in unconventional times”, ECB WP #2080.  
 
vi See P. Andrade, J. Breckenfelder, F. De Fiore, P. Karadi and O. Tristani (2016), "The ECB's asset purchase 
programme - an early assessment", ECB WP-1956. 
 
vii Horny, G. and Manganelli, S. and Mojon, B. (2016), “Measuring Financial Fragmentation in the Euro Area 
Corporate Bond Market“, BdF WP #582. 
 
viii ECB Financial Stability Review, November 2017. 
 
ix Banque de France, Financial Stability Review, April 2018. 
 
x “Past and future of the ECB monetary policy”, speech by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the 
Conference on “Central Banks in Historical Perspective: What Changed After the Financial Crisis?” organised by 
the Central Bank of Malta, Valletta, 4 May 2018. 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2018/html/ecb.sp180504.en.html 
 
xi L.J. Mester (2018) “Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework”, 2018 US Monetary Policy Forum 
New York. L.J Mester (2018), “Monetary Policy Frameworks”, ASSA Annual Meeting Philadelphia. 
  