Anita Angelovska-Bezoska: Workshop on fintech - opening remarks
Opening  remarks  by  Ms  Anita  Angelovska-Bezoska,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  the
Republic of Macedonia, at the NBRM Workshop on Fintech, Skopje, 28 May 2018.
 Dear Mr. Jay Tikam,
Dear colleagues,
It is my great pleasure to open the NBRM workshop on a topic that has been attracting a rising
interest by regulators, supervisors and central bankers, i.e. a workshop on fIntech organizations
that, by combining new business models and innovative technology, gradually change the shape
of  the  financial  services  segment.  The  main  idea  of  this  workshop  is  to  become  better
acquainted with this rather new but very important topic. It has been organized with the support of
the European Fund for Southeast Europe, for which we are thankful.
Although in continental Europe, fintech companies account for just a small share of the markets
for  banking,  payment  services  and  asset  management,  still  they  are  on  the  rise  as  they  are
rapidly  entering  the  markets  and  competing  with  banks. According  to  Ernst&Young’s  Fintech
Adoption Index, one-third of the consumers utilize at least two or more fintech services and they
are increasingly aware of FinTech as part of their day-to-day activities. The FinTech Adoption
Index for services offered by fintech organizations, divided into five broad categories – money
transfers  and  payment  services,  financial  planning  tools,  savings  and  investments,  borrowing
and insurance, indicates that money transfers and payment services are continuing to lead the
fintech  charge  with  adoption  standing  at  50%  in  2017  and  88%  of  consumers  anticipating  of
doing so in the future.
This rapid rise in fintech organizations has posed many dilemmas: What are the benefits that
fintechs bring to the society, on the one hand, and what are the risks that they create, on the
other? Is it the end of banking or are banks going to team up with the newcomers? One of the
main  concerns  in  this  regard  is  that  while  fintech  companies  increase  financial  inclusion,
facilitate  the  access  to  finance  and  lead  to  more  competitive  markets,  they  can  also  be
conducive to cutting costs and rising risks in the traditional banking segment.  
Against this background, the FinTech topic has received an increasing attention in the central
banking  community,  including  our  central  bank.  We  have  been  closely  monitoring  the  fintech
developments, evaluating the benefits and risks that they bring and trying to strike a right balance
given the local context. An important step in this direction is the draft law on payments that is
expected to provide impulse for new companies with innovative, but safe financial services.
This workshop is conceived as a platform for getting better insight in the fintech developments,
exchanging  opinions,  sharing  ideas  with  a  view  of  drawing  the  outlines  of  our  future  FinTech
Strategy.  In  this  light,  I  am  delighted  to  invite  Mr.  Tikam  to  share  with  us  part  of  his  rich
experience and knowledge on this topic. Mr. Tikam is an experienced Executive Level Advisor
with 26 years commercial experience, having played multifaceted roles, with the last 22 years in
financial services.  Having in mind Mr. Tikam’s proficiency, I have no doubts that today we will
have fruitful discussions and valuable exchange of experiences to the benefit of all participants.   
Mr. Tikam, thank you for your efforts in making this workshop happen. The floor is yours.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
