26/03/2018 
Deputy Governor Cecilia Skingsley 
Handelsbanken, Södertälje 
 
 SVERIGES RIKSBANK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
SPEECH 
    DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
 
  Thoughts on technology and the econ-
omy* 
Thank you for your invitation to visit Södertälje. Many people come here to spend 
hours playing with their children at the science museum Tom Tits Experiment, 
which can be found here in town. This is a place where you can experiment with 
the laws of physics, puzzle over medical phenomena and observe chemical ef-
fects. I dare say that many of today’s and tomorrow’s Swedish scientists had their 
first insights into science there.  
My speech today does not deal with scientific laws but with how important tech-
nological advances are redesigning the playing field for the economy and thus the 
way in which economic policy is conducted. I will also discuss how the Riksbank 
assesses the current economic situation and its forecasts for the years ahead. Fi-
nally, I will describe how monetary policy can facilitate economic development in 
Sweden.  
 
Technological breakthroughs transform our society. 
We human beings constantly strive to make things a little better. When we 
achieve technological breakthroughs, lives and entire societies are revolutionised. 
Important examples include steam power, which made mechanised industries in-
dependent of water power possible, followed by rail transportation. The internal 
combustion engine enabled transportation independently of the rail network in 
the form of motor vehicles and aircraft, and electricity has given us light, warmth 
and the power of movement.  
Now, at the start of the 21st century, we have to deal with all the opportunities, 
but also challenges, brought by the Internet, digitalisation, robotics, biotechnol-
ogy and artificial intelligence. Experts often disagree over how revolutionary these 
technologies will turn out to be for the economy in the long run, but we can see 
how they affect us in our daily lives.  
* I would like to thank Åsa Olli Segendorf, Anders Vredin, Marianne Sterner, Charlotta Edler och Ann-Leena Mikiver for 
useful suggestions for this speech 
 
 1 [5] 
   Take, for example, digitalisation, which is impacting sector after sector.  
How many record shops are there these days? Where’s the nearest video rental 
store? How often do you find yourself keeping an eye on the time so as not to 
miss a certain TV or radio programme?  
Increasing numbers of us subscribe to streaming music and film services, read the 
news on the Internet instead of in paper newspapers, listen to podcasts and use 
catch-up TV services and YouTube channels. It’s quite fun being a consumer these 
days. 
Also on the other side of the economy, the producing side, can we see markets 
being reshaped and both the number and nature of jobs being changed. My sec-
tor, the financial system, and my workplace, the Riksbank, are also being affected 
by these changes.  
In our monetary policy assignment of maintaining price stability in Swedish 
kronor, specified as inflation of around 2 per cent, we need to understand not 
only cyclical developments but also structural transformations in the economy. 
This knowledge forms a precondition if we are to be able to make good forecasts 
and calibrate a well-balanced monetary policy, thereby fulfilling our mandatory 
task.  
To make good forecasts, we need models, and models assume that economic re-
lationships are stable. It therefore becomes complicated when structural changes 
delay or even transform old relationships. If important structural changes have oc-
curred, they turn up as so-called shocks in the models. For example, new and bet-
ter working methods should entail a positive shock in productivity. Another struc-
tural change, for example increased e-commerce, means that competition in-
creases, putting pressure on companies’ profit margins.  
However, when data on productivity and companies’ profit margins is studied, it is 
difficult to observe larger changes. Productivity growth in recent years cannot be 
described as remarkably high.1 In turn, this has an effect on wage development, 
which I shall return to. My point, however, is that technological shifts do not nec-
essarily change the way the economy works.  
But it is nevertheless clear that technological breakthroughs can push forward 
changes in what have historically been fairly stable operations and open them up 
for new participants.  
For example, technological developments in society have contributed to the use 
of cash, the money the Riksbank offers society, going into decline. If the present 
trend continues, cash could actually be phased out as a means of payment in a 
few years, as many banks and a growing number of retailers no longer offer ser-
vices involving cash.  
Sweden is a world leader in developing electronic means of payment. This is posi-
tive. But, at the same time, the public sector in a wide sense needs to ensure that 
                                                           
1 Florian Maican and Matilda Orth (Ekonomisk debatt 1/2018) describe how measures of productivity are 
adapted for the manufacturing industry and how service industries, which are growing in Sweden, require other 
measures of productivity.  
  2 [5] 
   everybody who lives in Sweden will continue to have access to secure and effi-
cient payment services. Consequently, over the last year, the Riksbank has priori-
tised the analysis and strategic development of the payment market. The Riks-
bank has also proposed that, via legislation, Sveriges Riksdag, the Swedish parlia-
ment, should clarify the banks’ responsibilities for supplying cash.2 
Financial crises, technology and competition have restrained 
wage increases 
In a city like Södertälje, with, for example, the vehicle manufacturer Scania, the 
pharmaceutical manufacturer AstraZeneca and the Port of Södertälje, there is 
long experience of working in the global economy and of technological shifts. For 
you, change is nothing new.  
If we zoom out to the entire Swedish economy, we have also been quite good, as 
a country, at managing change.  
But let me start in the present day, where we can see that the international econ-
omy is growing increasingly strong. The United States is in one of the longest 
phases of rising GDP of the post-war period and, last year, the euro area had the 
highest growth in ten years. However, it takes time for the strong economic activ-
ity to affect inflation.  
Although the recovery has come far after the years of financial crises and low 
growth, wage increases have been unexpectedly low in many advanced econo-
mies. In large economies such as the United States, Canada, Germany, Australia, 
as well as in Sweden, unemployment is close to or below levels at which wage 
growth, historically speaking, tends to pick up.  
In Sweden, we have had a number of years with a combination of low productivity 
and low expectations of inflation and wages, which partly explains the low wage 
demands up to now. Even if Sweden has had a strong employment trend in recent 
years, technological innovations and international competition will entail a trans-
formation in which jobs will disappear and need to be replaced by new ones. 
These forces, in combination with long-term stagnation in the euro area after the 
financial crisis, are also leading to employees becoming more cautious with their 
demands.3 
It is feasible that the upheaval these forces cause at workplaces may also make it 
difficult for individuals to assess whether they risk becoming unemployed and, if 
so, what their position might be on the labour market. Low wage expectations are 
a global phenomenon and can contribute towards those already in employment 
becoming less interested in looking for a better-paid job. Thus, even in an eco-
nomic boom, employers can hold back wage increases without the risk of losing 
valuable labour. Of course, these changes in wage formation may vary considera-
bly in different economies. But they interact with each other due to the global 
                                                           
2 Read more at: https://www.riksbank.se/sv/finansiell-stabilitet/det-finansiella-systemet/betalningar/ 
3 The risk of unemployment is one of many factors behind wage expectations. The experience of unpleasant mac-
roeconomic events characterises the behaviour of different age categories, as discussed, for example, by Mal-
mendier and Nagel in “Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect risk taking?” (The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 2011)  
  3 [5] 
   market for goods and to a growing part of the service sector also being traded 
globally.  
The increase in the number of self-employed people, the many part-time posi-
tions and the changed wage composition are factors that tend to crop up as expla-
nations for low wage growth in other economies but which I consider to be less 
important for understanding wage formation in Sweden. On the other hand, what 
is special for Sweden is that we have become many more on the labour market. 
The number of persons between 15 and 74 in the labour force increased by just 
over half a million between 2006 and 2016. This increase is largely due to high im-
migration but the labour force is also growing due to changed rules and reforms 
on the labour market and to tax, benefits and pension rules.4 A higher labour sup-
ply leads to greater competition for vacant jobs, thus restraining the rate of wage 
increases.  
My assessment is that there are overarching cyclical forces that suggest wages will 
rise during the forecast period, but that the rate of increase may remain low de-
spite the high level of resource utilisation.  
When the effect on the economy from upheavals such as technological advances, 
demographic changes or increased cross-border trade has worn off, employees 
should be able to increase their pay again. However, this can take time and, dur-
ing the transition, the best contribution monetary policy can make is to facilitate, 
via high resource utilisation and as far as is compatible with the inflation target, 
the various adjustments demanded by structural transformation and de-
mographics.  
Education and oversight of competition – to meet the future 
However, if Sweden as a country is to be able to meet these challenges over the 
long term, other policy areas than monetary policy will have to be used. Here, I 
would like to name two important areas: education and oversight of competition.  
In light of technological developments and population increases, opportunities for 
life-long education and professional development will be completely decisive. 
Even well-educated professional groups that have previously had low unemploy-
ment have started to become aware of a growing risk of being automated out of 
work. This applies, for instance, to investment advice, financial accounting and le-
gal support. Other experts can describe this area better and in more depth than I 
do here, but to me it seems obvious that increasing numbers of us will have de-
velop our skills further several times in the courses of our professional lives.  
The other important policy area is that of competition oversight and regulation. 
New technology brings new actors and some of these have become very large 
global actors. In markets characterised by high entrance barriers, synergies and 
network effects, far too much power can easily be concentrated in the hands of a 
                                                           
4 Flodberg and Lööf, Staff Memo, December 2017. https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/rapporter/staff-
memo/svenska/2017/staff_memo_171220_1_sv_sfx829la.pdf 
  4 [5] 
   few dominant actors. National politicians play an important part here: in coopera-
tion with other countries, they must oversee and, when necessary, regulate differ-
ent markets to safeguard the public interest.  
 
The contribution of monetary policy  
At present, we can observe that the very low level of interest rates and the Riks-
bank’s asset purchases have had clear effects. Inflation, which has shown a rising 
trend since 2014, was around 2 per cent last year and long-term expectations are 
anchored to the target.  
The Swedish labour market is moving in the right direction and employment has 
increased by 240,000 over the last three years. But unemployment for those born 
abroad remains high. Refugees settling in Sweden often lack a strong link to the 
labour market when they arrive. Only half of refugees are in employment after 
eight years in Sweden. But it is positive that their establishment on the labour 
market looks like it is starting to go faster.  
As you know, there are no guarantees in the forecasting business. It has taken a 
decade, but it seems as though the global economy has finally recovered enough 
from the after-shocks of the financial crisis to start a new chapter and that central 
banks in our part of the world will gradually be able to raise interest rates again. 
For the small Swedish economy, with its reliance on foreign trade, altogether 
premature or rapid rate rises would jeopardise the strong economy and develop-
ment of inflation.  
For the Riksbank, it is a question of remaining vigilant. A prerequisite for inflation 
to continue to develop in line with the target is that economic activity remains 
strong and has an impact on price developments. Monetary policy therefore 
needs to remain expansionary for a while. But if everything goes as expected, the 
time to start normalising monetary policy will come closer. The assessment we 
made in February was that it is probably time to slowly start raising the repo rate 
during the second half of this year. But such a turnaround requires considerable 
caution, in my opinion.  
I occasionally hear somebody say that it feels wrong to have a negative policy rate 
when the economy is going as well as it is now. But the Riksdag has assigned the 
Riksbank to conduct a monetary policy that contributes to suitably low inflation. 
Therefore monetary policy cannot be governed by how one or another interest 
rate level might feel.  
To finish where I began: In an experimental world, with many uncertainties, clear 
game rules are needed so that all parties in the economy can take well-founded 
decisions on economic transactions. Reliable price stability, in terms of purchasing 
power, is one such game rule. The alternative, which would lead to inflation de-
veloping more unsteadily, would be a poor contribution from monetary policy to 
Sweden's changeable society.  
 
  5 [5] 
