Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Luis
de Guindos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 26 July 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at their present levels at least
through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the continued
sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we will continue to make net purchases
under the asset purchase programme (APP) at the current monthly pace of €30 billion until the
end  of  September  2018.  We  anticipate  that,  after  September  2018,  subject  to  incoming  data
confirming our medium-term inflation outlook, we will reduce the monthly pace of the net asset
purchases to €15 billion until the end of December 2018 and then end net purchases. We intend
to  reinvest  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the APP  for  an
extended period of time after the end of our net asset purchases, and in any case for as long as
necessary  to  maintain  favourable  liquidity  conditions  and  an  ample  degree  of  monetary
accommodation.
While  uncertainties,  notably  related  to  the  global  trade  environment,  remain  prominent,  the
information  available  since  our  last  monetary  policy  meeting  indicates  that  the  euro  area
economy is proceeding along a solid and broad-based growth path. The underlying strength of
the economy confirms our confidence that the sustained convergence of inflation to our aim will
continue in the period ahead and will be maintained even after a gradual winding-down of our net
asset purchases. Nevertheless, significant monetary policy stimulus is still needed to support the
further  build-up  of  domestic  price  pressures  and  headline  inflation  developments  over  the
medium term. This support will continue to be provided by the net asset purchases until the end
of the year, by the sizeable stock of acquired assets and the associated reinvestments, and by
our  enhanced  forward  guidance  on  the  key  ECB  interest  rates.  In  any  event,  the  Governing
Council  stands  ready  to  adjust  all  of  its  instruments  as  appropriate  to  ensure  that  inflation
continues to move towards the Governing Council’s inflation aim in a sustained manner.
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  in  greater  detail,  starting  with  the economic  analysis.
Quarterly real GDP growth moderated to 0.4% in the first quarter of 2018, following growth of
0.7% in the previous three quarters. This easing reflects a pull-back from the very high levels of
growth  in  2017  and  is  related  mainly  to  weaker  impetus  from  previously  very  strong  external
trade, compounded by an increase in uncertainty and some temporary and supply-side factors at
both the domestic and the global level. The latest economic indicators and survey results have
stabilised and continue to point to ongoing solid and broad-based economic growth, in line with
the June 2018 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area. Our monetary
policy measures, which have facilitated the deleveraging process, continue to underpin domestic
demand. Private consumption is supported by ongoing employment gains, which, in turn, partly
reflect past labour market reforms, and by growing household wealth. Business investment is
fostered by the favourable financing conditions, rising corporate profitability and solid demand.
Housing investment remains robust. In addition, the broad-based expansion in global demand is
expected to continue, thus providing impetus to euro area exports.
The risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook can still be assessed as broadly balanced.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Uncertainties  related  to  global  factors,  notably  the  threat  of  protectionism,  remain  prominent.
Moreover,  the  risk  of  persistent  heightened  financial  market  volatility  continues  to  warrant
monitoring.
Euro area annual HICP inflation increased to 2.0% in June 2018, from 1.9% in May, reflecting
mainly higher energy and food price inflation. On the basis of current futures prices for oil, annual
rates of headline inflation are likely to hover around the current level for the remainder of the year.
While measures of underlying inflation remain generally muted, they have been increasing from
earlier  lows.  Domestic  cost  pressures  are  strengthening  and  broadening  amid  high  levels  of
capacity  utilisation  and  tightening  labour  markets.  Uncertainty  around  the  inflation  outlook  is
receding. Looking ahead, underlying inflation is expected to pick up towards the end of the year
and thereafter to increase gradually over the medium term, supported by our monetary policy
measures, the continuing economic expansion, the corresponding absorption of economic slack
and rising wage growth.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) growth increased to 4.4% in June 2018, up
from 4.0% in May. M3 growth continues to benefit from the impact of the ECB’s monetary policy
measures and the low opportunity cost of holding the most liquid deposits. The narrow monetary
aggregate M1 remained the main contributor to broad money growth.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations rose to 4.1% in June
2018,  after  3.7%  in  the  previous  month,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  households
remained unchanged at 2.9%. The euro area bank lending survey for the second quarter of 2018
indicates that loan growth continues to be supported by easing credit standards and increasing
demand across all loan categories.
The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014 continues to
significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to  financing  –  in
particular for small and medium-sized enterprises – and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from the monetary analysis confirmed that an ample degree of monetary accommodation is still
necessary for the continued sustained convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute more decisively to raising the longer-term growth potential and reducing vulnerabilities.
The  implementation  of structural  reforms  in  euro  area  countries  needs  to  be  substantially
stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce  structural  unemployment  and  boost  euro  area
productivity and growth potential. Regarding fiscal policies, the ongoing broad-based expansion
calls  for  rebuilding  fiscal  buffers.  This  is  particularly  important  in  countries  where  government
debt remains high. All countries would benefit from intensifying efforts towards achieving a more
growth-friendly composition of public finances. A full, transparent and consistent implementation
of the Stability and Growth Pact and of the macroeconomic imbalance procedure over time and
across  countries  remains  essential  to  increase  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  economy.
Improving  the  functioning  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  remains  a  priority.  The  Governing
Council urges specific and decisive steps to complete the banking union and the capital markets
union.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
