Philip R Lane: Macro-financial risk management
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Central  Bank
Economics Roundtable, Dublin, 5 September 2018.
Introduction
 In opening our annual economics roundtable, let me focus on macro-financial risk management.
At  a  country  level,  macro-financial  risks  are  managed  by  both  the  regulatory  policies  of  the
central  bank  and  national  fiscal  policy.  In  these  introductory  remarks,  I  will  address  both
dimensions.
As  outlined  in  our  latest Quarterly Bulletin, the Irish economy is currently in a phase of strong
economic performance. We project employment to grow by 2.6 per cent in 2018 and 1.9 per cent
in 2019. The 20.4 percent cumulative increase in employment from 2011 Q3 through to 2018 Q2
has been enabled by a decline in unemployment from 15.9 per cent (2011 Q4) to 5.8 per cent
(2018 Q2), together with an increase in the participation rate and inward migration. Importantly,
the  current  growth  has  not  been  fueled  by  an  unsustainable  increase  in  domestic  credit;  in
addition, it does not rely on net financial inflows: the adjusted current account measure is close
to zero.
At  the  same  time,  there  are  clear  downside  risks  facing  the  economy.  First,  an  unexpected
tightening in international financial conditions (relative to the benign environment that has been in
place for an extended period of time) through an upward revision in risk premia or term premia
could  induce  an  international  slowdown  in  investment  and  consumption,  together  with  an
adjustment in asset values in financial markets, the commercial real estate sector and housing
markets.  Second,  shifts  in  international  trade  and  tax  regimes  that  adversely  affect  the  Irish
business model constitute important tail risks, even if these risks are hard to calibrate. Third, a
disorderly Brexit would pose immediate challenges for the Irish economy and financial system.
Given this current configuration of risks, macro-financial risk management has two aims. First,
policy actions should not amplify pro-cyclical dynamics, if overheatings risks in the economy and
the  financial  system  are  to  be  contained.  Second,  macro-financial  resilience  is  enhanced  if
buffers can be built during good times that will enable Ireland to cope more easily with future
downside shocks.
In implementing this policy agenda, I will first turn to the regulatory policies of the Central Bank,
before turning to the role of fiscal policy.
Financial Regulation During Good Times: The Macro-Prudential Stance and Supervisory
Priorities
As the national macroprudential authority, the Central Bank is mandated to implement measures
to prevent excessive credit growth and leverage at a system-wide level. In line with this mandate,
the  Central  Bank  recently  activated  the counter-cyclical  capital  buffer,  which  is  expressly
designed  to  manage  cyclical  risks.  By  requiring  additional  capital  buffers  during  cyclical
upswings, the banking system will be better prepared for future downturns. In particular, in the
event of an adverse shock, this capital buffer can be released, thereby mitigating the damaging
pro-cyclical withdrawal of credit supply under adverse conditions.
In relation to new mortgage lending, our borrower-based measures that impose (flexible) ceilings
on loan-to-income (LTI) and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios have built-in features that limit pro-cyclical
dynamics.  In  the  absence  of  such  ceilings,  cyclically-strong  economic  conditions  might
otherwise drive mortgage market dynamics towards more aggressive LTI and LTV ratios due to
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
upward revisions (by lenders and borrowers) in projections of future levels of house prices and
incomes. In addition, by limiting the risks of over-borrowing by households and over-lending by
banks,  household  and  bank  balance  sheets  should  be  more  resilient  in  the  event  of  a  future
downturn. 
In relation to supervisory priorities, the current upturn in the European economy also provides an
opportunity  to  address  legacy  issues  such  as  the  excessive  stock  of  non-performing  loans
(NPLs)  that  accumulated  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis.  In  terms  of  timing,  benign  economic  and
financial conditions make it easier to identify feasible solutions for troubled loans in terms of the
repayment capacity of debtors, the value of collateral and the market appetite for loan portfolio
transactions. While the tackling of NPLs is a pan-European supervisory priority, it has particular
importance in countries such as Ireland that experienced the most severe increases in troubled
loans in the wake of the crisis.
While the direct restructuring of troubled loans by banks plays a vital role (and, indeed, has been
extensively deployed in the Irish banking system in recent years), the sale of loan portfolios is
also an important element in macro-financial risk management. In particular, the reduction in the
size of bank balance sheets (especially through holding a lower stock of NPLs) limits financial
stability risk in the event of a future downturn, in terms of the scale of potential losses and funding
challenges.  In  terms  of  risk  management,  the  transfer  of  credit  risk  and  funding  risk  to  the
investment funds that buy loan portfolios constitutes a national reduction in macro-financial risk,
given that the investors in these funds are primarily overseas.
It is critical to stress, however, that the sale of such portfolios cannot – and does not – affect
statutory consumer safeguards. The Central Bank applies itself equally to its twin mandate of
safeguarding stability and protecting consumers. Accordingly, the Central Bank is committed to
ensuring that loan sales do not affect the consumer protection framework governing mortgages.
In particular, loan owners must use a regulated credit servicing firm to manage the loans and
these firms are subject to the same codes of conduct as banks and retail credit firms. In addition,
we are currently reviewing the code of conduct on mortgage arrears (CCMA), in order to ensure
that  it  is  appropriately  designed  to  address  current  conduct  risks  in  the  handling  of  troubled
mortgages,  regardless  of  the  identities  of  the  loan  owners.  While  that  review  is  ongoing,  it  is
worth  noting  the  important  role  that  the CCMA and  related  safeguards  have  played  to  date  in
assisting  borrowers  in  difficulty.  To  end-March  this  year,  more  than  117,000  principal-dwelling
house  mortgage  accounts  have  been  restructured,  with  86  percent  meeting  the  terms  of  the
restructured arrangement.
In  relation  to  ongoing  supervision,  the  positive  economic  climate  across  Europe  has  been
accompanied  by  a  gradual  expansion  in  credit  provision.  Especially  during  phases  of  credit
growth, it is essential that supervisors insist that risk management and governance frameworks
are appropriately designed and consistently implemented if credit and operational risks are to be
contained.  Maintaining  confidence  in  the  management  and  governance  standards  of  banks  is
essential for financial stability, given the intrinsic opacity of loan portfolios and the dominant role
of  non-equity  investors  (senior  and  subordinated  bond  holders,  wholesale  investors,  non-
guaranteed large depositors) in the funding of banks. Accordingly, while shareholders (private or
public) play a vital role in the governance of banks, the leveraged nature of banks means that the
stability  of  the  financial  system  requires  that  all  banks  adhere  to  high  risk  management  and
governance standards.
Fiscal Policy Over the Cycle
In line with the mandate of the Central Bank to provide analysis and comment to support national
economic  policy  development,  the  governor  writes  an  annual  pre-budget  advisory  letter  to  the
minister  for  finance.  In  this  section,  I  explain  the  advice  I  offer  in  this  year’s  letter,  which  is
published today. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
As  a  general  rule,  the  running  of  budget  surpluses  during  phases  of  strong  economic
performance is a precondition for the running of stabilising, counter-cyclical fiscal deficits in the
event  of  a  future  downturn.  If  fiscal  buffers  are  not  built  up,  there  is  a  risk  of  repeating  the
historical  patterns  by  which  economic  downturns  have  been  amplified  by  pro-cyclical  fiscal
austerity.
There are three further reasons to set more ambitious fiscal targets in the current environment.
First, it cannot be ruled out that the surge in corporation tax revenues may have some temporary
elements,  indicating  that  some  part  of  these  revenues  should  be  categorised  as  a  windfall.
Second, to the extent that the current low interest rate environment is not expected to persist
indefinitely,  a  tighter  non-interest  budget  balance  offers  protection  against  future  increases  in
debt servicing costs. Third, the legacy of high public and private debt levels mean that Ireland is
relatively more vulnerable to reversals compared to other countries with less-leveraged public
and private balance sheets.
In  addition  to  striking  the  cyclically-appropriate  fiscal  balance,  individual  fiscal  levers  can
contribute  to  macro-financial  stabilisation,  especially  for  a  country  in  a  monetary  union.  For
instance, raising the VAT rate on labour-intensive activities during upturns proxies the stabilising
role of exchange rate appreciation, while raising taxes on investment and consumption during
phases  of  strong  growth  substitutes  for  the  cyclical  role  played  by  an  interest  rate  hike  in  an
independent  monetary  regime.  Symmetrically,  these  taxes  can  be  cyclically  lowered  during  a
future downturn to provide similar support that would be provided by currency devaluation and
interest rate reductions under an independent currency.
Conclusions
In closing, my aim in these introductory remarks has been to describe the current agenda for
macro-financial risk management. The current economic performance is very welcome – but it is
important to be pro-active in mitigating pro-cyclical dynamics and building up buffers to limit the
costs  of  future  downturns. As  I  have  outlined,  both  regulatory  policies  and  fiscal  policy  have
essential roles to play in macro-financial risk management.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
