Ravi Menon: Crypto tokens - the good, the bad, and the ugly
Speech  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at
Money20/20, Singapore, 15 March 2018.
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. And to all our foreign guests, welcome to Singapore. 
This is a conference named after Money. Money has been with us for at least 5000 years. And
over the last 300 years or so, we have come to accept Money as being issued by central banks
whose mission in life is to safeguard its value. 
Now, along comes a new phenomenon – crypto money or currency or asset. The past year has
seen explosive growth in the trading and use of these crypto assets. We have also seen a roller-
coaster ride in their prices.
Bitcoin  –  the  most  well-known  of  the  crypto  currencies  or  assets  –  hit  a  high  of  nearly
US$20, 000 in December last year.
And then lost two-thirds of its value in just over a month.
MAS has been watching the crypto space with great interest. Our views are still evolving but let
me share with you the current state of our thinking and our evolving regulatory approach.
I will use the more generic term “crypto tokens” rather than “crypto currencies” or “crypto
assets”.
Crypto tokens began life as the medium of exchange within the blockchain ecosystem.
But the token has now assumed a life of its own, outside the blockchain.
Are crypto tokens money? 
A common use case for crypto tokens is payment. But does that make them Money? 
Money – as we learnt in Economics 101 – serves three functions: as a medium of exchange, a
store of value, and a unit of account. No crypto token currently meets these three functions in
sufficient measure to qualify as Money.
My colleagues on the Financial Stability Board – Agustin Carstens and Mark Carney – have
spoken at length on this subject recently, with erudition and eloquence.
Let me briefly echo some of the key points. 
With the possible exception of the dark web, crypto tokens are not widely accepted as a medium
of exchange in any market, let alone across any variety of transactions
Payment  transactions  in  crypto  tokens  are  often  slower  and  more  expensive  than
conventional electronic transfers of funds.
Crypto tokens cannot be a store of value if their prices fluctuate so much.
Since  the  beginning  of  last  year,  the  daily  value  of  Bitcoin  against  the  US  Dollar  has
fluctuated about 20 times more than the Singapore Dollar did against the US Dollar.
People may buy some crypto tokens to speculate on their values. But with such volatility, I
doubt they will put their retirement savings into them.
Crypto tokens also fail as a unit of account. How many entities do we know of, which maintain
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
their financial statements in crypto tokens? 
So, does it mean that crypto tokens can never become Money? With technology, we can never
say never.
A  second  generation  of  crypto  tokens  is  emerging,  to  address  some  of  the  current
challenges related to network congestion, transaction time, energy costs, money laundering
risks, and importantly, price stability.
Some  of  the  best  minds  in  the  field  are  applying  their  creative  energies  to  make  crypto
tokens mainstream.
Not all developers and programmers in the crypto world are anti-establishment anarchists.
Many may have been 10 years ago, but a growing number are married and have
kids now!
They know the value of stability.
The  litmus  test  will  be  public  trust  and  acceptance.  Basically,  the  history  of  privately  issued
money has not been an inspiring one. Will people put their faith in Money that is not backed by a
trusted public institution like a central bank dedicated to protecting its value?
Perhaps – if an algorithm can mimic the reaction function of a central bank and preserve the
value of the crypto token better than central banks can do with respect to fiat currencies.
We have to wait and see.
The good, bad, and ugly of crypto tokens 
Whether crypto tokens become Money or not, they are here and they pose a variety of issues –
the good, the bad, and the ugly. 
Let me start with the good. As many have pointed out, far more significant than the crypto token
is the underlying blockchain technology that these tokens help to power. The blockchain has two
distinct characteristics that hold promise.
First, it is a distributed ledger. It provides a record of who owns a given asset at any moment
in time and an immutable record of all transactions in that asset.
Second,  it  is  a  protocol  for  establishing  trust  among  diverse  parties  in  a  decentralised
system: 
where everyone has access to the same record;
the data are secured by advanced cryptography; and
transactions are executed by smart contracts in accordance with pre-agreed terms.
The blockchain is suited for applications where it is important to know the histories of ownership
but there is no trusted central party or reliance on a central party is inefficient or costly.
Take supply chain management for instance.  
Blockchains  can  potentially  provide  the  means  for  registering,  certifying,  and
tracking the movement of goods across the supply chain, at low cost and low risk.
Or trade finance.
There  are  already  successful  proofs-of-concept  by  banks  that  show  how
blockchains can make the trade finance process safer and more efficient.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
One of the potentially strongest use cases of crypto tokens is to facilitate cross-border payments
in traditional currencies.
This is the challenge that Singapore’s Project Ubin has set itself to solve: to use blockchain
technology to enable entities across jurisdictions to make payments to one another:
without intermediaries;
with greater speed and efficiency; and
at lower risk and cost. 
Following two successful proofs-of-concept domestically, MAS has entered a collaboration
with the Bank of Canada to test and develop a cross-border solution using crypto tokens
issued by the two central banks.
But as with crypto tokens, there is a fair amount of hype around blockchains.
The blockchain is not a panacea to the problems of inefficiency and cost that we face in
many economic transactions and processes.
It does not make sense to put everything on the blockchain.
Not all use cases being experimented on will succeed.
Now,  the  bad.  The  anonymity  of  crypto  tokens  has  unfortunately  made  them  well  suited  for
facilitating illicit transactions.
A significant portion of Bitcoin transactions globally is suspected to be for illicit purposes.
Questions  abound  as  to  how  sanctions  lists,  black  lists,  KYC  or  anti-money  laundering
controls apply in crypto token transactions.
Crypto tokens have also facilitated ransomware – one of the fastest growing cyber crimes.
Cyber  criminals  inject  a  malware  into  computers  and  restrict  their  access  to  files,  often
threatening permanent data destruction unless a ransom is paid – nearly always in the form
of Bitcoins which do not leave a trace.
Finally, the ugly. Crypto tokens have sparked a speculative fever across the world, with a vicious
cycle of astronomical prices drawing a growing number of investors sparking further exponential
price increases.
History has shown us repeatedly – from Dutch tulips to South Sea stocks – that speculative
bubbles eventually end very badly.
The recent crash in prices ought to be a warning signal. But the marketing pitch by crypto
token  operators  to  seize  the  current  lower  prices  as  a  buying  opportunity  only  serves  to
illustrate how unstable, risky, and ugly this game has become.
Investors in schemes involving crypto tokens may also be exposed to a heightened risk of fraud.
These schemes are often conducted online by operators whose authenticity and credibility are
difficult to verify. 
Managing crypto risks 
The  challenge  for  central  banks  and  regulators  is  this:  how  can  we  harness  the  potentially
transformative benefits of blockchain technology and crypto tokens while containing some of their
risks? 
MAS has to-date chosen not to regulate crypto tokens directly. But we are:
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
focusing on the activities associated with crypto tokens,
evaluating the different kinds of risks these activities pose, and
considering the appropriate regulatory responses,
all the while, seeking to ensure that we do not stifle innovation.
The key risks MAS is monitoring in the crypto world are in the areas of financial stability, money
laundering, investor protection, and market functioning. 
Financial stability 
MAS  and  other  regulators  are  studying  the  nexus  between  the  crypto  world  and  the  financial
system to assess how risks to financial stability may be transmitted:
market risk from the direct exposure of financial institutions to crypto tokens;
credit risk through unsecured lending to crypto token businesses; and
leverage when borrowers pledge crypto tokens as collateral to borrow and buy more crypto
tokens.
MAS assesses that the nature and scale of crypto token activities in Singapore do not currently
pose a significant risk to financial stability. But this situation could change, and so we are closely
watching this space. 
Given the gaps in traditional information sources, MAS is exploring some unconventional ways in
which to gather data about the scale and scope of crypto token related activities.
One,  the  crypto  token  blockchains  themselves  can  provide  a  wealth  of  information  –
including time stamps, recipient and sender addresses.
Two, the Application Programming Interfaces or APIs provided by crypto-exchanges present
real-time  insights  on  current  flows  in  the  crypto  market,  including  information  on  the  fiat
currencies that are being exchanged for crypto tokens.
Money laundering 
A  clear  and  present  danger  posed  by  some  crypto  token  activity  is  money  laundering  and
terrorism financing.
Intermediaries  dealing  in  crypto  tokens  are  already  required  to  report  any  suspicious
transactions to the Commercial Affairs Department.
In addition, the proposed Payment Services Bill will require intermediaries that buy, sell or
exchange  virtual  currencies  to  specifically  address  money  laundering  and  terrorism
financing risks.
Intermediaries will be required to carry out customer due diligence and put in place controls
and processes that are commensurate with their risks.
Investor protection 
Investor protection is another immediate concern arising from the crypto mania. 
Where the crypto tokens represent ownership or a security interest over an issuer’s assets or
any  property,  or  a  debt  owed  by  the  issuer,  they  may  be  regarded  as  securities  under  the
Securities and Futures Act.
This means that unless exempted:
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
issuers must comply with prospectus requirements prior to the offer of such tokens;
intermediaries dealing in such tokens must meet licensing requirements; and
platforms facilitating secondary trading of tokens must be approved or recognised
by MAS.
With respect to the investors, MAS’ priority has been to make them aware of the risks of putting
their money in crypto tokens.
We have advised the public to act with extreme caution should they wish to invest in crypto
tokens.
They could lose their shirts if prices plunge. 
And they have no regulatory protection if there is fraud.
Market functioning 
There is also the issue of market integrity and functioning. Several cryptocurrency exchanges
abroad have suffered cyber attacks and theft of their crypto tokens.
There are also rumours and reports of rampant market manipulation and other fraudulent
activities on crypto-exchanges.
We are watching with interest developments in the US, where futures contracts based on crypto
tokens  have  been  introduced  on  regulated  exchanges.  There  may  be  some  advantages  here
from a market integrity perspective. 
These exchanges have clear rules governing trade and post-trade activities.
Such products could also potentially have a stabilising influence on crypto token prices as
they provide two-way hedging opportunities for investors.
But regulation cannot address all the concerns around crypto tokens.
The industry too has a part to play in strengthening the ecosystem, for instance, by adopting
best practices around transparency, cybersecurity, and record-keeping.
Guarding against Gresham’s Law 
I have spoken about the good, bad, and ugly of crypto tokens. To be more exact, it is the uses of
crypto tokens that assume these qualities.
Like Money, crypto tokens can a force for good or bad.
Lest we forget, money is not the root of all evil; it is the love of money that is so.
The same applies to crypto tokens – it is the enchantment with these tokens as a way to
make a quick buck and their abuse for illicit activities that are at the root of our concerns.
There is an old axiom in economics called Gresham’s Law, which is loosely interpreted as “bad
money drives out good”.
We must work together – regulators and the crypto industry – to make sure that bad money
does not take hold.
And  that  a  new  generation  of  crypto  tokens  emerges,  that  harnesses  the  potential  of
blockchain technology for social good while mitigating the risks today’s tokens pose.
This is a future worth securing and I hope that some of the talents gathered in this hall will help to
make it happen. Thank you.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
