Mario Draghi: Generation €uro Students' Award 2018 event 
Introductory remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 11 April 2018
Introduction
 Ladies and gentlemen, and especially dear students,
First of all, let me express congratulations to all the students here for reaching this stage of the
Generation €uro Students’ Award competition. It’s an incredible achievement and you should all
be proud of yourselves. Bravo!
This gathering is an important opportunity for us to continue our dialogue with you. You are the
winners of our euro area-wide competition on monetary policy, which is now in its seventh year.
The ECB also organises other initiatives to engage with young people. We have the ECB Youth
Dialogues  and  competitions  such  as  the  Euro  Video  Challenge  and  the  young  economists’
session  at  the  Sintra  conference.  Sintra  is  a  conference  that  we  do  annually  on  a  variety  of
themes around monetary policy and macroeconomics.
So far, my impression is that it has been a success, but of course I am biased. I am also aware
that  my  colleagues  from  the  national  banks  organise  events  and  dialogues  with  students  and
schools at national level.
All this basically tells you one thing: you are very important because you are our future. You are
Europe’s future and that’s why the ECB and the national central banks really give you a lot of
attention and get a lot from you.
I trust that in taking part in the competition you have been able to find out more about what we do
at the ECB, why we do it, and how our monetary policy works. It seems obvious that you should
know what we do at the ECB or what people do in their national central banks. But as a matter of
fact, if you do polls, you would be surprised by the amount of confusion that people have. For
example, lots of people, about one-third, think that central banks are like other banks, that they
are  by  and  large  not  very  different  from  what  other  banks  do.  Now,  you  will  be  the  selected
category that will know that the ECB is a central bank and that central banks are different from
banks.
And even more importantly, through this exercise, you actually got to have, at a very young age, a
European perspective. You understood what is still really missing from lots of people, who still
think in terms of national borders. It is very important, of course, but it is not the only reality that
we are living through. In fact, the European perspective becomes much more important as time
passes. Why is that? Well, because there are many challenges that are in fact supranational by
their very nature. That is to say, you can’t really respond to these challenges, and you can’t really
address the problems at national level if they are supranational. Just let me give you an example:
security is not something that people can actually address only at national level. Unfortunately,
we have seen this very frequently through various terrorist actions.
Everything in economics now is basically global. So it’s even beyond being only European. It’s
actually all over the place. The more we integrate, the better we’ll be placed to address economic
issues of this nature. Think about defence. Does it make sense today saying that countries are
able to defend themselves against global challenges? Well, less and less. Think about another
challenge: migration. Migration is not a problem of one country. It’s a problem, a challenge and an
opportunity  for  a  group  of  countries.  In  this  case,  the  European  and  eurozone  countries  are
certainly called to respond to this challenge. All this means that having a European perspective
has  become  essential  to  understand  today’s  problems  and  the  possible  solutions.  The  key
1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
question that you will be asked more and more in the future is “What can we achieve together?”
We  count  on  you  to  embark  on  this  long  journey:  we  invite  you  to  be  our  ambassadors,  to
continue the conversation on Europe in your schools and cities, with your relatives and friends.
You will have an important role to play in tomorrow’s Europe, but that role, that responsibility,
starts today. You give us not only hope for a better future, but you also inspire us to continue our
work. We should be the ones to be thankful to you.
Finally, let me express a special “thank you” to the teachers here for making this event happen,
and for the wonderful guidance and support you have given to your students. Let me also add a
“thank you” to some people who are not here, who are your families, for the support they must
have given to you to be able to reach such an achievement today. You are very lucky to be so
well taught – even if you might not have realised it; or even if your teachers might not be aware of
how much good they have given to you; or even if your families are not aware of how much good
they do to their children. It just comes with being a father or a mother.
So  again,  let  me  congratulate  you  and  congratulate  everyone  who  has  been  involved  in  your
success.
Let’s now open our discussion. Thank you.
  2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
