Stephen S Poloz: Central Bank of the Year Award
Remarks  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Central  Banking
Awards 2018, London, 1 March 2018.
 It is an honour for me to accept the award for Central Bank of the Year on behalf of the staff of
the  Bank  of  Canada.  And  it  is  a  real  pleasure  to  be  here  to  celebrate  the  successes  and
achievements  of  central  bankers  from  around  the  globe,  such  as  my  good  friend  Lesetja
Kganyago of South Africa.
Back in January, when Central Banking announced this award, you published an extensive write-
up that detailed the reasons why we were judged to be worthy of it. I am very glad that you did so,
because  the  article  illustrates  just  how  important  teamwork  is  at  the  Bank  of  Canada.  In  that
article, every employee in every department can see how their own work contributes to a central
bank  that  is  operating  at  the  top  of  its  game.  From  the  model  developers,  to  the  currency
designers,  to  the  people  who  got  us  settled  back  in  our  renewed  headquarters—everyone
contributed to an outstanding body of work with remarkable skill and dedication. So, this award
belongs to all the members of our incredible team.
I would like to particularly thank Central Banking for recognizing the work we have done in terms
of conducting monetary policy in an era of heightened uncertainty. We have been working on the
theme of uncertainty since the global financial crisis revealed the limits of our models and our
knowledge. And we have learned that it is far better to be open and honest about the uncertainty
we face, as well as how we deal with it, rather than to just assume the uncertainty away and
project a false sense of confidence.
Because profound uncertainties are everywhere, we began talking about monetary policy as an
exercise  in  risk  management,  as  opposed  to  the  precision  engineering  that  many  believe  the
practice of monetary policy to be. To be truly honest about the uncertainties we face, we stopped
providing routine forward guidance, which observers and market participants had come to rely
on.  We  took  some  grief  for  this  decision.  But  I  am  certain  that  the  best  and  most  honest
approach  is  to  communicate  openly  about  the  Bank’s  reaction  function,  and  the  key  risks  we
see.  This leaves market participants to interpret the data and make their own forecasts about
the future path of interest rates. It has taken time, but markets and observers are increasingly
adapting to our approach.
This experience shows that open communications are vitally important—even more so in a world
where  public  institutions  are  increasingly  viewed  with  suspicion  and  distrust.  We  embrace
transparency—as you recognized last year—and embed communications in all our plans at the
start of the planning process, rather than tacking them on as an afterthought at the end. This
approach  led  us  to  take  on  some  of  the  projects  that  you  have  highlighted.  We  hosted  a
conference  on  the  most  fundamental  questions  about  our  monetary  policy  framework,  and
broadcast it on the web. We encouraged unprecedented public engagement in our bank note
design. And we gave our researchers freedom to publish their best and most interesting work
without worrying about whether it follows Bank orthodoxy.
So, let me just conclude by again thanking Central Banking for this recognition. It means a lot to
everyone at the Bank of Canada. I know I would not be here without the hard work of everyone on
our team. The best employees in the world are the ones who made it all happen, and I’m grateful
to them all.
Thank you.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
