John C Williams: Now is the time for banking culture reform
Remarks by Mr John C Williams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, at the Governance and Culture Reform Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, New York City, 18 June 2018.
Introduction                                                     
 It’s  a  pleasure  to  speak  at  today’s  conference  on  this  critically  important  issue,  one  that  Bill
Dudley and his colleagues have done tremendous work bringing to the forefront over the past few
years. It’s also an honor to be sharing a stage with Bill today, and I’d like to thank him for his
outstanding leadership of the New York Fed.
I’ve learned a great deal from this conference, especially hearing the diverse perspectives and
experiences of regulators from across the globe, industry leaders, and academic experts. The
speakers and discussions have already covered a lot of ground, so I’ll keep my remarks brief.
This afternoon I’m going to talk about the urgent need to focus our attention on banking culture in
supervision and what that means in practice. Before I go any further, I have to give the usual Fed
disclaimer that the views I express are my own, and not necessarily those of anyone else in the
Federal Reserve System.
The Good Times Are When to Get Your House in Order
In  the  wake  of  the  financial  crisis  and  ensuing  economic  downturn,  the  world’s  attention  was
trained on financial services. The crisis severely eroded people’s trust in the industry, both here
and abroad.  
Governments  and  regulators  quickly  got  to  work  fixing  the  main  deficiencies  in  the  existing
regulatory framework. These included requiring much stronger loss-absorbing capital to weather
severe  economic  downturns,  demanding  greater  liquidity  cushions  to  withstand  market  and
funding disruptions, and creating a robust resolution framework to protect both the economy and
the taxpayer in the event of a failure of a systemically important firm.
These changes were appropriate and necessary. We must not lose sight of their importance in
safeguarding the soundness of the financial system and in ensuring that future generations do
not have to suffer the economic trauma that we lived through this past decade.       
Bringing  us  to  the  present  day,  we  are  in  a  much,  much  better  place,  in  terms  of  both  the
financial sector and the overall economy. We have a more robust regulatory regime in place, and
banks are well positioned to survive future storms.
Furthermore, our economy’s in great shape; we’re in the second-longest expansion in history,
and economic data from both the United States and countries around the world continue to trend
upwards. As a policymaker, solid growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our target are
all exactly what I want to see.
Paradoxically, it’s precisely this sense that things have gotten so much better that worries me
most. Although we have seen marked improvements in the critical areas of capital, liquidity, and
resolution, we have not yet fully addressed the root causes of many of the problems that have
plagued the financial sector. I am thinking of not only the excessive risk-taking and leverage in the
run-up  to  the  crisis,  but  also  the  repeated  scandals  related  to  LIBOR,  FX,  money  laundering,
sales  practices;  unfortunately,  the  list  goes  on  and  on.  Underlying  these  scandals  is  often  an
inadequate  corporate  culture,  where  accountability  and  ethical  conduct  have  fallen  by  the
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
wayside.
The good times we’re in can exacerbate these problems in three ways. First, there’s a risk of
complacency setting in—an “if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” mentality. Second, in a strong economy,
the hard numbers that we tend to focus on when examining profits, losses, capital, and liquidity
can  look  like  everything’s  coming  up  roses,  even  when  an  uncomfortable  reality  lies  beneath.
And,  finally,  culture  is  a  long-run  investment  that  takes  many  years  to  develop  and  requires
constant reinforcement to preserve. If you let it erode, you can’t go to the market and obtain a
new “culture” overnight.  
As I mentioned, establishing a more robust regulatory framework was absolutely necessary for a
healthier, more resilient financial system. But, it is far from sufficient. The danger we face today
is  that  people  may  conclude  that  the  hardened  defenses  are  enough,  and  other  supervisory
activities around culture, conduct, and governance are superfluous. 
This feeling that we’ve built a strong fortress able to withstand any onslaught may create a mood
of complacency and detract attention from the dangers that could be growing within the walls of
financial institutions.  
This  problem  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  hard  numbers  studied  by  regulators  and
supervisors should look great when the economy’s doing well. Profits are high and loan losses
low when the economy is humming along. But, strong numbers in a strong economy don’t give
you  the  full  picture.  They  can’t  always  tell  you  whether  people  are  cutting  corners,  taking
excessive  risks,  or  violating  rules  and  regulations.  Even  worse,  they  can  distract  you  from
digging into the truth and unearthing unethical business practices and misconduct that may hide
below the surface.
The  well-known  challenge  with  culture  is  that,  in  contrast  with  things  like  capital  and  liquidity,
culture  feels  “softer”  and,  therefore,  more  difficult  to  measure. And  often  in  finance  there’s  a
tendency to disregard what can’t be quantified. But just because it’s hard to measure doesn’t
mean  we  should  ignore  it  or  downplay  its  importance.  As  we  heard  throughout  today’s
conference, culture shapes every conversation, every decision, and every action; it is at the root
of whether an organization performs in a manner consistent with its mission, or not.
How to Achieve a Better Banking Culture
This  brings  me  back  to  the  issue  of  culture  as  a  long-term  investment  that  can’t  be  “fixed”
overnight. Several years ago, Rich Lyons, Dean at Berkeley’s Haas School of Business, spoke at
the  San  Francisco  Fed  and  talked  about  culture  in  a  way  that  has  stuck  with  me  ever  since.
Transforming a culture is a five- to ten-year project; keeping it that way is an ongoing mission that
requires strong leadership and consistent action.
As a leader of a large organization, I’ve taken that message to heart. I’ve found that a culture
based on the principle of open and authentic dialogue, that embraces our diverse backgrounds
and  perspectives  delivers  better  results.  I’ve  found  that  well-defined  collective  values  and
direction lead to greater collaboration and innovation. Finally, I’ve found that this work is never a
finished project, but an ongoing one that constantly evolves.
I started by saying that I feel a sense of urgency in addressing banking culture. So where do I see
the priorities for supervision?
As supervisors, we need to ensure that bank management and boards are exerting strong and
effective  leadership  with  robust  governance.  That  means  holding  management  and  boards  of
directors to high standards in terms of culture and conduct, even when the numbers look rosy. It
means ensuring corporate values are clearly articulated and incentives are squarely align with a
bank’s strategic goals. It means identifying, communicating, and mitigating risks in a timely and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
effective  manner.  It  means  that  employees  feel  empowered  to  raise  their  hands  if  they  see
wrongdoing, and that comprehensive fixes are implemented when something goes wrong.
Conclusion
In conclusion, when times are good, we rarely feel an urgency to make changes. And these are
certainly  good  times.  But  numbers  can  have  a  funny  way  of  not  revealing  the  whole  truth. A
sound spreadsheet may mask unethical behavior, a well-capitalized bank may be on the road to
ruin, and a neglected corporate culture can turn toxic.
We must stay vigilant around the “softer” side of supervision. Strong culture and robust corporate
governance are our first lines of defense. They’re a critical part of the tool kit when it comes to
protecting people, banks, and the economy from risk, scandal, and harm.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
