  13.12.2017 
 “The relationship with bank customers” 
Opening Session of the 13th Banking Industry Meeting “Competitive Banking 
in a New Society”, IESE (Madrid) 
Javier Alonso 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good morning. It is a pleasure to open this 13th edition of the Banking Industry Meeting and 
I thank the organisers, and IESE in particular, for their kind invitation to join this eminent 
gathering today.  
 
The  information  disseminated  by  the  organisers  states,  by  way  of  introduction  to  the 
programme for today’s conference, that “following an intense shake-up of the industry, the 
banking sector must address challenges and problems that place its operations at a critical 
juncture.”  
 
This has, indeed, been the central tenet of my public addresses throughout the year.  
 
In  previous  speeches  I  have  stressed  that  the  banking  business  is  facing  far-reaching 
changes whose implications are still difficult to foresee. And I have paid particular attention 
to what I consider are the  main challenges the industry must address. I have shared my 
thoughts  on  the  challenges  posed  to  banking  at  the  current  juncture  as  regards:  (i) 
maintaining appropriate profitability levels to ensure the viability of banks in the medium and 
long term; (ii) adapting to new and demanding regulations in response to the financial crisis; 
(iii)  technological  developments  and  the  so-called  fintech  firms;  and  (iv)  restoring  the 
customer’s confidence.  
 
I have emphasised that banks must and can prepare for facing and responding to these 
challenges, underscoring the fact that the industry, following the progress achieved in terms 
of solvency and cleaning up balance sheets in recent years, is today better placed and has 
greater resilience with which to tackle these challenges.  
 
Among  the  possible  courses  of  action,  I  have  advocated,  inter  alia,  moving  for  greater 
efficiency gains and continuing with the orderly correction of excess capacity, and giving 
priority to bank customer care.  
 
And it is precisely the relationship with bank customers on which I wish to focus my speech 
today. I believe this focus sits well with the title of this Meeting, namely “Competitive Banking 
in a New Society”. I consider that, amid the major changes in which banking is immersed, 
the relationship with customers will be key. It is always key, since customers are a bank’s 
most important and most fragile asset. But in the future I believe it will be even more relevant. 
 
And a fundamental factor in defining what the relationship with bank customers in the future 
will be is technology.  
 
Mindful of this, the Banco de España is stepping up the efforts it devotes both to monitoring 
technological innovation and to anticipating its potential consequences. Through a cross-
departmental working structure, various matters are being addressed in order to contribute 
to  constructing  an  informed  opinion  and  helping  define  the  central  bank’s  strategic 
positioning. Subjects under analysis are, for instance, the implications of the provisions of 
the new Directive on payment services, known as PSD2, whose partial transposition in Spain 
is imminent, under the Government’s Annual Regulatory Plan, and to which I shall shortly 
refer.  And  there  are  also  other  topical  matters,  such  as  distributed  ledger  technology, 
“cloud” computing and the phenomenon of sovereign digital currencies.  
 3/8 
 Against this backdrop, the aim of my address is to offer some observations as to how the 
new technologies are changing the traditional bank-customer relationship, and to highlight 
the  need  for  banks  and customers to  responsibly  manage  this new scenario.  Likewise,  I 
wish to stress the importance of financial education in this new scenario. Customers have 
more options, but also more responsibility, and it is essential they should be aware of this.  
 
Returning to the origins of the concern for the rights of bank customers. 
 
To set these observations in perspective, we might recall that concern in Spain to safeguard 
customer  rights  arose  in  the  1980s,  as  a  consequence  of  the  liberalisation  the  industry 
underwent and which enshrined freedom of contract – of interest rates and commissions – 
at the core of its workings.  
 
Accompanying this process, legislators adopted a series of measures aimed at boosting 
competition among banks, including most notably the enhanced comparative information 
with which banks must provide their customers, so that they may know the content of their 
rights and obligations before and once they have given their consent. However, this concern 
for  customer  rights  came  into  being  and  developed  in  a  context  of  maximum  customer 
confidence towards banks and, most importantly, towards bank employees, which, in short, 
led to a high degree of customer loyalty to banks.  
 
During the 1990s and in the first half of the last decade such loyalty was negatively and 
slowly impacted by growing competition and the subsequent need to improve net interest 
margins. And the crisis unleashed as from 2007 saw the culmination of this deterioration 
and  led  to  a  significant  loss  of  confidence  by  customers  in  banks,  giving  rise  to  a  new 
scenario.  
 
Against  this  background  of  public  mistrust  in  banks,  and  the  weakening  of  the 
aforementioned degree of loyalty, the new technologies add additional challenges for the 
industry when it comes to tending to their relationship with customers. They alter consumer 
demands,  with  consumers  now  seeking  flexible,  immediate  and  personalised  interaction 
anywhere  and  at  any  time.  They  also  lower  the  entry  barriers  to  the  business,  as  the 
extensive  networks  of  branches  to  capture  and  retain  customers  that  characterised 
traditional banking no longer seem necessary.  
 
I consider that, as regards technological innovation, it is more fitting for the moment to talk 
about  evolution  rather  than  revolution,  and  that  not  all  technological  initiatives  exert  the 
same influence on banking business and nor do they necessarily constitute projects that 
enter into direct competition with banks. But there are indeed technological innovations that 
are acting as a catalyst for firms that may come to compete with banks in specific segments.  
 
And one segment where this may have a greater impact, and specifically alter the bank-
customer relationship, is that of payment services.  
 
Bank customers and technology: the payment services segment. 
 
Allow me to illustrate the changes emerging in this segment with a brief reference to the 
new Directive on payment services, known as PSD2, as I previously mentioned.  
4/8 
   
One of the most notable aspects of this Directive is that it definitively institutionalises the 
activity of the so-called third-party service providers, or TPP. The Directive acknowledges 
the  right  of  holders  of  a  payment  account  to  expressly  authorise  a  third-party  entity, 
provided it is duly authorised, to order payments on their behalf and/or to consult certain 
information associated with this account. In the first instance, we are talking about what are 
known as “payment initiation service providers”, while in the second case they are called 
“account information service providers”.  
 
The latter offer users the possibility of gaining consolidated knowledge of the situation of 
the payment accounts the users have with different entities, thereby helping them with their 
financial planning. Conversely, payment initiation services arise as an alternative to the use 
of  cards,  for  the  payment  of  purchases  made  in  e-commerce  environments.  They  are 
consequently  characterised  by  providing  payment  beneficiaries  with  the  security  that 
payment has been initiated correctly, acting as a spur for expediting the delivery of the good 
or service.  
 
With the emergence of TPP, PSD2 makes it possible to dissociate administrative tasks –  
proper to the opening, maintenance and management of an account – from those others 
which generate revenues for banks thanks to the existence of those accounts. In this way 
the traditional role of banking as a single, or main, payment services provider is diluted. TPP 
are now legally authorised to gain access to banking infrastructure at the request of their 
customers, which threatens to weaken both customers’ links with banks and the stability of 
transactional revenues.   
 
One  of  the  ways  in  which  the  banking  industry  could  react  to  this  challenge  would  be 
through the development of Application Programming Interfaces (API), open for massive use 
by third parties. These technical means, which allow resources to be shared among different 
environments, are a clear option for the future. Not only would controlled access to banking 
environments thus be promoted, in  line with the more technical provisions  implementing 
PSD2,  but  also,  insofar  as  API  are  designed  flexibly,  they  are  set  to  open  a  window  of 
opportunity for the obtaining of new revenues, since they enable a broad range of value-
added  services  –  e.g.  those  linked  to  the  remote  identification  of  customers  –  to  be 
deployed. Moreover, like TPP, banks could make use of these same API to provide services 
equivalent to those of these new competitors, differentiating themselves and offering other, 
higher-value-added services.  
 
In this new scenario, I wish to share a thought with the customers. As I noted at the start of 
my address, I believe it is important that they should be mindful that, although technological 
developments  open  up  a  greater  range  of  options  for  them  in  terms  of  conducting  their 
transactions and financial operations, they also demand of them greater responsibility and 
involvement. It is necessary that customers fully understand the potential consequences of 
their choices and, in turn, take all due precautions so as not to be the victim of illicit actions, 
using in this connection the control tools offered to them by their banks.  
 
Customers must, for instance, strive to understand the true scope of the authorisation being 
granted to a TPP and accept, should they consider it appropriate, the possible commercial 
use of their information beyond the provision of a specific payment service. Evidently, this 
 5/8 
 will  only  be  the  case  if  the  TPP  wishes  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  obtain  broader 
authorisation than is provided for under PSD2, but this is not a remote scenario given the 
growing value of data in a digitalised society.  
 
The fact that, owing  to a lack of knowledge or of due attention, any user may ultimately 
authorise access to a volume of personal information which they would really have preferred 
to keep private is one of the concerns arising from the development of the new technologies, 
and it highlights the importance of assigning resources to familiarising customers with the 
existence of these new risks.  
 
Another concern is the area relating to cybernetic threats and fraud. In this respect, PSD2 
has paid special attention to the risks involved in carrying out electronic payment operations 
in general and, in particular, to those conducted remotely, the aim being to provide users 
with an environment of maximum safety when they opt to perform these operations.  
 
By way of illustration, PSD2 urges that measures be adopted that reduce the incidence of 
fraud and that ensure the continuity of payment services with a view to shoring up users’ 
ultimate  confidence.  Such  measures  include  most  notably  the  obligation  to  periodically 
assess the effectiveness of specific risk control and mitigation measures and the duty to 
notify the authorities of the serious security incidents that arise.  
 
Furthermore, PSD2 provides for the general application of strong customer authentication 
mechanisms, whether in payment or consultation operations. I refer here to the promotion 
of practices such as the sending of a single-use code through a mobile phone in order to 
be  able  to  complete  an on-line  purchase  transaction.  While it  is  true  that  some of  these 
measures  are  nothing  new  for  many  current  payment  services  providers,  their 
systematisation and level of granularity do indeed have a deep-seated impact in that they 
make it necessary for adjustments to be made to pre-existing uses.  
 
The deployment of strong authentication procedures adds greater operational complexity 
to the classical means of interaction with customers and here, once again, given that the 
situation  may  entail  a  certain  level  of  initial  confusion,  it  would  be  advisable  to  develop 
educational and assistance programmes that help accommodate users to the new reality.  
 
Bank customers and financial education 
 
I cannot stress this point enough. Financial and digital literacy are basic, crucial factors for 
the efficient use of financial technology and for lessening the level of risk implicit in its use. 
 
Involuntary authorisation for access to personal information or fraud, to which I have just 
referred, are merely some of the examples of this implicit risk. Other examples are: (i) the 
offering  of  complex,  opaque  projects  that  are  difficult  to  understand  and  which  may  be 
wrapped up in a user-friendly fashion for the public at large through applications (apps or 
similar);  (ii)  the  disclosure  of  relevant  information,  pre-contractual  or  contractual  alike, 
through  smart  phones  or  tablets,  in  which  the  size  of  the  screen  and  the  immediacy  of 
acceptance limit customers’ capacity to know what they are really agreeing to; (iii) limitations 
in obtaining direct and personalised advice from a qualified adviser; (iv) discrimination linked 
to  the  use  of  macro-data,  in  the  sense  that  the  use  and  knowledge  of  personal  data  by 
6/8 
  services  providers  might  result  in  discriminatory  practices  against  specific  groups  of 
consumers, normally those who are most vulnerable; and (v) the risk of financial exclusion 
linked to the lack of digital skills.     
 
And in this context, there is clearly a need to improve financial education and promote the 
development of digital skills among the public at large.  
 
The  main  challenge  bank  customers  face  is  entering  into  financial  contracts.  If  they  are 
aware of the importance of the commitment they assume in signing each contract – and by 
“signing” we also mean ticking the box that reads “I accept the terms and conditions of the 
contract” in digitally executed transactions – they will appreciate the importance of being 
fully  aware  of  this  commitment  before  signing,  and  of  knowing  what  demands  they  can 
make  during  the  life  of  the  operation  and  which  unavoidable  obligations  they  may  have 
during that time.  
 
Banks  benefit  from  having  properly  prepared  customers,  avoiding  the  unwanted 
consequences of poorly conceived consent that ultimately gives rise to legal risks and which 
may  seriously  compromise  their  reputation.  For  this  reason  banks,  while  improving  the 
information they give to their customers, should promote customer awareness, integrating 
financial education not only into their corporate social accountability programmes but also 
into their product design and governance strategies.  
 
However,  this  responsibility  for  financial  education  does  not  fall  exclusively  or  chiefly  on 
banks. It must extend to other sectors of society, including, inter alia, third persons whose 
mission is to ensure the proper understanding and scope of contractual terms. And, above 
all and primarily, financial education must be an essential part of individual learning from a 
very early age.  
 
The Banco de España has dedicated notable efforts to promoting financial education for 
many years. Along with the CNMV (National Securities Market Commission), it has since 
2008 promoted the Financial Education Plan, to which numerous institutions and public and 
private  associations  covering  a  wide  spectrum  of  social  sensibilities  have  adhered.  The 
objective of the Plan is to enhance citizens’ capacity to take well-founded financial decisions 
and, in this respect, it aims to reach out to the entire population and have a durable presence 
over time.  
 
As part of this Plan, and with the focus on the young, the Financial Education Programme 
for Schools – an initiative supported by the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sport within 
the framework of the collaboration agreement signed in 2009 with the Banco de España and 
the CNMV – has recently been launched for another year. This Programme, currently in its 
sixth edition, seeks to bring basic knowledge of personal finances to the classroom so as 
to  prepare  pupils  to  meet  the  basic  challenges  in  the  financial  area  that  they  will  face 
throughout  their  lives.  Key  concepts  such  as  saving,  income,  personal  budgeting,  what 
things cost, quality of life and responsible consumption are all developed in the Programme. 
In the past five years around 300,000 pupils have benefited from it.  
 
More generally and in order to reach out to all citizens, another notable component of the 
Financial  Education  Plan  is  the  website  finanzasparatodos,  which  has  been  open  to  the 
 7/8 
 public since May 2010. It contains informative materials which straightforwardly offer basic 
guidelines as to how to reach the end of the month, how to invest and how to manage one’s 
finances at different stages in life, or which explain the characteristics of specific, basic bank 
products and services.  
 
I  trust  that,  through  the  actions  promoted  by  the  Financial  Education  Plan,  of  which  the 
foregoing  are  just  two  examples,  the  public  and  private  authorities  and  the  financial 
supervisors are contributing to enhancing Spanish citizens’ financial culture, both for their 
own benefit and for the sustainability of the financial system.  
 
Conclusions 
 
I shall conclude as I began.  
 
The  customer  is  at  the  core.  This  is  an  idea  that  is  repeated  in  various  fora  in  which 
technological innovation in the provision of financial services and the new challenges facing 
banking are addressed. 
 
Transparency, market conduct and financial education are priority areas of attention that 
are gaining in prominence both on the European agenda and at the heart of the respective 
national  authorities.  And  more  importantly  and,  probably,  what  is  more  effective  in  the 
medium and long term, they are taking root in the very organisation of banks.  
 
Developing a responsible banking model, with suitably designed products, distributed in the 
appropriate channel, to the ideal customer, and having regard to individual needs, should 
today  be  a  priority  objective  for  all:  European  authorities,  national  authorities  and  the 
banking industry. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
  8/8 
 