Jens Weidmann: Monetary policy in a changing environment
Keynote speech by Dr Jens Weidmann, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank and Chairman
of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the joint Bank of France-
Bundesbank Research Conference "Monetary Policy Challenges", Paris, 21 June 2018.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  give  the  keynote  speech  at  this  conference  on  “Monetary  Policy
Challenges”,  organised  jointly  by  the  Banque  de  France  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank.  This
joint conference has already become a tradition. It is held every two to three years, with France
and Germany taking it in turns to host the event.
Let me start by thanking both the programme committee – Emmanuel Farhi (Harvard), Emanuel
Moench (Bundesbank) and Benoît Mojon (Banque de France) – for their ingenious selection of
papers,  and  our  host,  Governor  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  for  providing  this  delightful  venue,  for  the
warm welcome and for the excellent organisation by the Banque de France staff.
Even more remarkable is that, in choosing the 21  of June, the Banque de France has been
extremely  selfless,  as  I  would  understand  if  many  of  our  French  colleagues  had  preferred  to
watch France play Peru in the football World Cup rather than attend this afternoon’s panel.
st
st
But the 21  of June is also a special day for Germans and the Bundesbank. Exactly 70 years
ago, the Deutsche Mark was introduced in what was known as the Trizone – the three zones that
were occupied after World War II by France, the United Kingdom and the US, and that were to
become West Germany one year later.
We have indeed come a long way since those days, when much of Europe was still ravaged by
war.
The Franco-German reconciliation that developed in the following decades and eventually grew
into a deep friendship is rightly considered one of the great achievements in European history,
and it has been a catalyst for European integration.
Events like today’s bear testimony to this process – as well as to the conviction that, by working
together  in  a  spirit  of  openness,  we  have  a  much  better  chance  of  mastering  the  common
challenges that confront us.
This certainly also holds for monetary policy – both its role and its conduct – after the Financial
and Economic Crisis.
About 2,500 years ago, Greek philosopher Heraclitus of Ephesus found two words to describe a
fundamental  concept  of  human  life  and  the  world  we  live  in:  πάντα  ῥεῖ  (panta  rhei),  he  said.
Everything flows.
In 1789, Benjamin Franklin took a somewhat lighter view when he joked: “In this world nothing
can be said to be certain, except death and taxes”.
Today, I do not intend to talk about death, nor about taxes. Instead, I would like to focus on a few
aspects of change and how economists and monetary policymakers grapple with them. This is
also a central theme underlying this conference, as I am going to highlight.
From the 1980s onwards, advanced economies experienced a period of remarkable economic
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
stability.  Swings  in  inflation  and  output  growth  lessened  to  such  a  degree  that  it  came  to  be
1
known as the “Great Moderation”.
It was around the time of the Great Moderation that the idea of the inflation targeting framework
for monetary policy spread. Committing to keeping inflation low, in many cases at around 2%,
helped many central banks to anchor people’s inflation expectations and to successfully manage
short-term economic fluctuations. New Keynesian models suggested the existence of a “divine
coincidence”  – that by stabilising inflation, output swings would be minimised as well.  
2
This was certainly a period of bliss. And hopes were high that it was only the start of many more
3
years of stability to come. Some even dared to ask whether the business cycle had ended.
In retrospect, one might be forgiven for thinking that it sounded a bit like the “end of history” for
monetary policy. And – also in economics – it appears that such high hopes may be a reliable
indicator that very soon, the plot will take a surprising turn for the worse.
As  we  all  know,  this  period  of  economic  calm  ended  in  what  today  is  called  the  “Great
Recession”.  Inevitably,  several  of  the  convictions  underlying  the  pre-crisis  monetary  policy
framework have been questioned since then.
The pre-crisis consensus held, for example, that monetary policy should focus exclusively on
using short-term interest rates in order to stabilise consumer price inflation. It was thought that
identifying financial bubbles was costly and ineffective, and that monetary policy’s contribution to
financial stability should be confined to mopping up the damage once a bubble had popped.
Now, the debate is on whether to “lean” or to “clean”. Should central banks actively use monetary
policy also to prevent the build-up of asset price bubbles? That is, should they “lean against the
wind” ex ante, even if no action would otherwise be required from a purely inflation targeting point
of view? Or should central banks still confine themselves to cleaning up any possible damage ex
post?
Another  question  pertains  to  the  Phillips  curve.  Supported  by  ample  monetary  policy
accommodation, output and employment have recovered from the deep economic slump. But
even in the face of tightening labour markets, inflationary pressures have long been subdued.
Does  this  mean  that  the  structural  relationships  between  output  and  inflation  that  we  took  for
granted are no longer valid? The Sintra conference, which ended yesterday, delved into this topic
in greater detail.
Today’s conference, especially Sessions I and III, will be concerned with other topics that have
come  to  the  fore  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis:  changes  in  the  real  economy,  for  example  in
market structures, that may also have a bearing on allocative efficiency and monetary policy, and
a reassessment of the optimal rate of inflation.
In the remainder of my speech, I will comment on some of these topics as well as on last week’s
Governing Council decision.
2 Mark-ups and macroeconomic adjustment
In particular, Session I focuses on a longer-term trend that may have eluded economists and
policymakers alike in previous years – that is, the rise in mark-ups of firms in the US over the last
decades.
David Dorn has already pointed out that the increasing share of superstar firms in the US might
be at least partly responsible for this trend.  As globalisation and technical progress favour the
most productive firms in each industry, product market concentration, market power and thus
mark-ups tend to increase.
4
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In a recent article, the weekly magazine The Economist suggested that American tech giants
had  created  a  “kill-zone”  surrounding  them.  I  quote:  “Once  a  young  firm  enters,  it  can  be
extremely difficult to survive. Tech giants try to squash startups by copying them, or they pay to
5
scoop them early to eliminate a threat.”
Such  aggressive  behaviour  may  lead  to  monopoly  distortions,  which  affect  the  allocation  of
resources  within  an  economy.  The  importance  of  improving  allocative  efficiency  has  already
been discussed earlier today by David Baqaee.  In his paper with Emmanuel Farhi, he calculates
that eliminating mark-ups due to monopoly distortions could raise total factor productivity by as
much as 20%. This points to the important role that levers such as competition policy can play
for economic outcomes.
6
Indeed,  Thomas  Philippon  is  going  to  argue  that  EU  markets  have  become  more  competitive
than US markets.  Based on OECD data, he and his co-author Germán Gutiérrez find that, due
to improved antitrust policy and product market regulations, European markets today are less
concentrated and have lower barriers to entry than American markets.
7
There is more evidence to support the notion that Europe may be different from the US when it
comes to mark-ups. A Bundesbank analysis published in our Monthly Report in December 2017
took a closer look at sectoral data for selected European countries, including Germany, France
and Italy.  The study was unable to find any evidence of a long-term increase in mark-ups. Some
estimates even suggest a reduction.
8
Hence, while many studies – for a variety of reasons like the availability of suitable, high quality
data – focus on the US, not all conclusions necessarily apply to other economies. Therefore,
conducting similar analyses for other countries as well – and providing the data required to do so
– is both indispensable and insightful.
Now, given the findings just mentioned, can we say that all is well in the EU when it comes to
competition and the efficient allocation of resources?
First, while barriers to entry are very low for most goods, this might be less so for services.
Second, while antitrust policy has improved and barriers to entry have been lowered, a different
source  of  potential  resource  misallocation  seems  present  in  the  EU  today.  It  is  related  to  the
banking system.
Banks that do not have a viable business model, and at the same time carry a larger amount of
non-performing  loans  on  their  books,  are  at  a  higher  risk  of  not  putting  funds  to  their  most
efficient use.
These banks tend to prolong their loans to legacy customers so as not to have to take a potential
financial  loss.  Often,  however,  they  will  subsequently  also  grant  fewer  new  loans  to  other
customers.  This  means  that  funding  remains  with  less  productive  firms  instead  of  being
channelled towards more innovative firms.
According to this line of reasoning, weak banks tend to foster weak firms. The ensuing inefficient
distribution of funding can dampen an economy’s innovativeness and dynamism.
Work by Ricardo Caballero and others studying Japan’s experience from the 1990s onwards has
highlighted  this  relationship.   The  case  of  Europe  may  be  more  debatable.  However,  ECB
research has provided evidence of this relationship for euro area periphery countries.
10
9
Studies by the OECD confirm that a non-negligible percentage of firms in some EU countries
can be classified as ”zombie firms”.
 For instance, in 2013, 28% of capital resources in Greece,
19% in Italy and 16% in Spain were sunk in firms that were unable to cover their cost of capital.
11
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Economists Fabiano Schivardi, Enrico Sette and Guido Tabellini have shown how the health of
the banking system influences capital allocation.
 They estimate that credit misallocation in Italy
reduced  annual  GDP  growth  by  between  0.2  and  0.35  percentage  point  in  the  2008  to  2013
period.
12
What can be done to improve capital allocation? Research suggests that effective restructuring
and  resolution  regimes  incentivise  banks  to  grant  credit  prudently  and  can  therefore  improve
economic growth.
13
Progress has been made with regard to the reduction of non-performing loans on the books of
euro area banks. But more needs to be done to resolve this issue as quickly as possible.
In countries with low-NPL banking systems, it would also help to alleviate concerns about the
risks  which  might  have  to  be  shouldered  when  moving  to  a  European  Deposit  Insurance
Scheme.
The main takeaway from Session I seems to be that levers such as competition policies have to
be pulled in order to improve allocative efficiency. This resonates well with the message which
the Governing Council has been stressing for years now: Structural policies are key to shifting
the economy towards a higher growth path.
However, the findings on  mark-ups  may  also  have  important  implications  for  inflation.  Here,  it
may be convenient to distinguish between longer-term and cyclical aspects.
If mark-ups have indeed risen in the United States over a long period of time, they should have
produced  upward  pressure  on  prices,  all  else  equal.  Along  these  lines,  Jan  Eeckhout  may
suggest later that the US inflation rate was lifted by about 1 percentage point per year from 1980
to 2014, as the average mark-up rose.
14
Thus, absent this effect, inflation would have even been markedly lower in recent years than it
actually was. This would render the phenomenon of subdued inflation in the face of a tighter US
labour market all the more puzzling.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Bundesbank  study  I  just  mentioned  finds  evidence  of  a  procyclical
behaviour of mark-ups in European countries. Especially during the crisis years, the weakness of
aggregate demand appears to have compressed profit margins.
Conversely, mark-ups may rise again as the economic upturn progresses. This normalisation
could temporarily increase inflation pressures in European countries.
To sum up, a closer look at market structures can shed more light on structural determinants of
inflation. But at least according to the papers presented today they do not answer the question
why it has been so sluggish for such a long period.
3 Monetary policy new normal
Subdued inflation and low interest rates characterised the macroeconomic environment in recent
years. In the US, interest rates stayed at around the zero lower bound for seven years. Currently,
the federal funds rate is bound to a target range of 1.75% to 2%. In the euro area, the deposit
facility rate has been zero or even lower since mid-2012, and it will still take some time until we
will exceed that level again.
Much of the length of this period of ultra-low interest rates has to do with the depth of the slump
during  the  crisis.  However,  some  observers  fear  that  the  economy  may  have  reached  a  new
normal, pointing to a long-term decline in interest rates.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In that case, the central bank’s task of achieving price stability may have become more difficult,
because it means a higher probability of monetary policy hitting the effective lower bound.
Economic  theory  suggests  several  ways  to  mitigate  this  risk.  Price  level  targeting  or  nominal
GDP  targeting  advocate  a  conceptually  more  profound  change  in  monetary  policy  strategy  by
introducing an element of self-correction: inflation expectations would rise automatically for some
time after inflation had been unusually low. 
A more conventional solution is to compensate for the lost room to manoeuvre by raising the
inflation target permanently. In today’s Session III, Jordi Galí will explore the interactions between
the optimal rate of inflation and the natural rate of interest.
He and his co-authors try to estimate the costs and benefits of a higher inflation target when
there  is  a  risk  of  monetary  policy  hitting  the  lower  bound.
  Obviously,  there  is  a  trade-off
between the welfare costs of inflation and the cost of target misses at the lower bound.
15
However,  within  the  context  of  this  policy  trade-off  there  is  a  subtle  issue  that  I  would  like  to
mention,  since  it  is  underappreciated  in  the  policy  debate.  The  higher  the  inflation  target,  the
more firms become “forward-looking”. With higher trend inflation, the price-resetting firm sets a
higher price, as it anticipates that trend inflation is going to erode its relative price in the future.
As a consequence, the relative importance of current marginal costs, and therefore of the output
gap,  decreases.  Thus,  if  the  central  bank  raises  the  inflation  target,  the  (short-run)  New
Keynesian Phillips curve flattens, and the inflation rate becomes less sensitive to variations in
current output. Or, to put it differently, for a given change of the inflation rate, the central bank has
to  change  its  policy  rate  correspondingly  by  more.  It  therefore  loses  some  of  the  additional
wiggle-room  gained  through  the  higher  target.  The  relevance  of  this  trade-off  depends  on
assumptions regarding the price setting behaviour.
According to Jordi’s model, the optimal inflation target for the euro area is 1.5%. When parameter
uncertainty is allowed for, the figure increases to 2.2%. And each fall of the natural rate of interest
by one percentage point should lead to an increase of the inflation target by 0.9 percentage point.
In  my  opinion,  contributions  like  Jordi’s  are  particularly  helpful  as  they  provide  a  workable
framework within which to weigh different trade-offs inherent in an economic policy decision. As
with all models, the paper abstracts from certain aspects in order to zoom in on the interaction of
a particular set of variables. In this case, I believe that some of the aspects not included in this
model  might  shift  the  overall  assessment  of  the  benefits  and  cost  of  a  higher  inflation  target
significantly.
The  risk  of  de-anchoring  inflation  expectations  seems  particularly  relevant  in  this  regard.  Ben
Bernanke once put it like this: “If we were to go to 4% and say we’re going to 4%, we would risk a
lot of … hard-won credibility, because folks would say, well, if we go to 4%, why not go to 6%?
It’d be very difficult to tie down expectations at 4%.”
16
As  we  describe  in  our  most  recent  Monthly  Report,  which  was  published  earlier  this  week,
Bernanke’s claim can be supported by a prototypical New Keynesian framework with adaptive
learning and a central bank following a simple Taylor rule. Here, a higher inflation target makes
reaching a stable equilibrium more difficult.
Moreover, research by Klaus Adam and Henning Weber suggests that the optimal rate of inflation
at the firm level has declined in the US over time, as Klaus is going to argue tomorrow.
 Other
 have provided evidence that the reduction
studies, for example by Coibion and Gorodnichenko,
in  US  trend  inflation  in  the  1980s  was  crucial  for  the  subsequent  stabilisation  of  inflation  and
inflation expectations during the Great Moderation.
17
18
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moving  to  a  higher  inflation  target  could  jeopardise  such  stabilisation  gains.  For  reasons  like
these,  I  am  convinced  that  our  euro  area  inflation  target  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  remains
appropriate.
4 Current monetary policy challenges
Reaching this target has proven challenging for some time now, as I pointed out at the beginning
of my speech. But I am convinced that we are finally getting there.
On  the  one  hand,  the  upswing  in  the  euro  area  continues  to  rest  on  a  broad  base,  and  is
expected  to  continue,  notwithstanding  somewhat  higher  downside  risks.  On  the  other  hand,
according to the Eurosystem’s most recent projections, price pressures will pick up again due to
further rises in aggregate capacity utilisation. Domestic inflation, as measured for example by the
change in the HICP excluding energy and food, should increase steadily, from 1.1% this year to
1.9% in 2020. As the profile of energy prices is assumed to be hump-shaped, headline inflation is
expected to stay flat at 1.7% in the years 2018 to 2020. But even this figure would be broadly in
keeping with our definition of price stability over the medium term.
As an aside, additional confidence that inflation is on a sustainable adjustment path back to its
target can also be derived from the treatment of housing in the HICP: only rents actually show up
in the inflation rate, but not the cost of owner-occupied housing – unlike, for example, CPI inflation
in the US.
While  consumer  price 
indices  with  and  without  owner-occupied  housing  are  rather
indistinguishable  over  the  long  term,  at  times  they  can  differ  markedly.  For  the  euro  area,
measures that include the cost of owner-occupied housing yield inflation rates slightly above the
official HICP rate in recent years. Daniel Gros has highlighted this gap in a recent analysis for the
European Parliament, basically confirming previous calculations by ECB staff.[
19
Let me be absolutely clear: of course, this is not a call for cherry-picking measures of inflation.
That would be a sure-fire way to jeopardise credibility.
But  the  gap  between  inflation  measures  is  one  additional  aspect  that  can  give  us  even  more
confidence that we are on the right track. It lends further support to the assessment of the ECB’s
Governing Council that the pick-up in inflation has become sufficiently robust to signal an end to
the net asset purchases by the end of 2018. And it is another example of differences between the
US and the euro area that economists need to keep in mind.
Even after the net purchases have come to an end, the monetary policy stance will remain very
accommodative,  given  the  large  stock  of  assets  on  the  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheets,  the
ongoing reinvestment of proceeds from maturing assets, and the Governing Council’s signal that
its policy rates will remain at their present levels at least through the summer of 2019.
Hence, ending the net purchases is most likely just the first step on a multi-year path of a gradual
monetary policy normalisation. And that’s precisely why it has been so important to actually get
the ball rolling.  
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Coming back to Benjamin Franklin, I am convinced that there are other certainties in life besides
death and taxes. The ability of monetary policy to achieve price stability is one of them.
And as regards Heraclitus, he also said: “You cannot step into the same river twice.” The river
changes constantly, as the water flows. But this is not meant to be nihilistic – after all, in spite of
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
the changes, the river remains a river.
Similarly, as regards monetary policy and the challenges it faces, the world is subject to constant
change, but there is also continuity.
I now look forward to exploring promising avenues of thought, in an effort to capture both this
change and the continuity with you, and wish us all an exciting and rewarding conference!
On that note, I am now looking forward to the answers our esteemed participants come up with!
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Bernanke, B. S., The Great Moderation, 20 February 2004.
Blanchard, O. and J. Galí (2005), Real wage rigidities and the New Keynesian Model, NBER Working Paper
11806.
Weber, S. (1997), The End of the Business Cycle?, Foreign Affairs, 76, 65–82.
Autor, D., D. Dorn, L. F. Katz, C. Patterson and J. Van Reenen (2017), The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of
Superstar Firms, NBER Working Paper 23396.
The Economist, American tech giants are making life tough for startups, 2 June 2018.
Baqaee, D. R. and E. Farhi (2017), Productivity and Misallocation in General Equilibrium, NBER Working Paper
24007.
Gutiérrez, G. and T. Philippon (2018), How EU Markets Became More Competitive Than US Markets: A Study of
Institutional Drift, NBER Working Paper 24700.
Deutsche Bundesbank, Mark-ups of firms in selected European countries, Monthly Report, December 2017, 53–
67.
Caballero, R. J., T. Hoshi and A. K. Kashyap (2008), Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan,
American Economic Review, 98 (5), 1943–77.
Storz, M, M. Koetter, R. Setzer and A. Westphal (2017), Do we want these two to tango? On zombie firms and
stressed banks in Europe, ECB Working Paper 2104.
McGowan,  M.  A.,  D.  Andrews  and  V.  Millot  (2017),  The  Walking  Dead?  Zombie  Firms  and  Productivity
Performance in OECD Countries, OECD Working Paper 1372.
Schivardi, F., E. Sette and G. Tabellini (2017), Credit Misallocation During the European Financial Crisis, CEPR
Discussion Paper 11901.
Korte, J., Catharsis – The Real Effects of Bank Insolvency and Resolution, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion
Paper 21/2013.
De Loecker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017), The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Implications, NBER
Working Paper 23687.
Andrade, P., J. Galí, H. Le Bihan and J. Matheron (2018), The Optimal Inflation Target and the Natural Rate of
Interest, NBER Working Paper 24328.
Bernanke, B. S., Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee of Congress, 14 April 2010.
Adam, K. and H. Weber, Optimal Trend Inflation, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper 25/2017.
Coibion,  O.  and  Y.  Gorodnichenko  (  2011),  Monetary  Policy,  Trend  Inflation,  and  the  Great  Moderation: An
Alternative Interpretation, American Economic Review, 101 (1), 341–70.
Gros, D. (2018), Persistent low inflation in the euro area: Mismeasurement rather than a cause for concern?, In-
depth  analysis  for  the  ECON  committee;  ECB, Assessing  the  impact  of  housing  costs  on  HICP  inflation,
Economic Bulletin, Issue 8/2016 – Boxes.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
