   17.01.2018 
PaPanel: “New challenges for central banks”** 
 
Russia and the world: values and virtues /Gaidar Forum 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
 * On 17 January 2018, Governor Luis M. Linde participated in the 2018 Gaidar Forum panel entitled “New challenges for 
central banks”. The panel was structured around a debate format moderated by Ksenia Yudaeva, First Deputy Governor 
of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, with the participation of Jacob Aharon Frenkel, Chairman of JPMorgan 
Chase International and former Governor of the Bank of Israel, and Petr Aven, Chairman of the Board of Directors, ABH 
Holdings S.A. This note includes the thoughts on central banking that were the focus of Governor Linde’s speech. 
  Taking a step back: three main developments have defined the global economy in 
I. 
the 21st Century. 
 
  Globalisation. The period between 1990 and the early 2000´s was characterised by an intense 
process of globalisation, with rapid growth of trade and financial relations among countries. 
For instance, between 2000 and 2007 the growth of world imports averaged 7.4% per year, 
about twice as much as global GDP growth. Global banking also expanded markedly, in terms 
both of cross-border activities and local entry into banking sectors overseas. The crisis entailed 
a dramatic and severe reversal of this trend. Trade plunged by more than 10% in 2009, an 
extraordinary collapse by historical standards. Since 2012, trade has gradually recovered at a 
slower pace than pre-crisis levels, with imports growing around 3% annually. Financial markets 
experienced a sudden stop in the fall of 2008. The decline in global banking activity has been 
particularly  pronounced  in  cross-border  positions  vis-à-vis  advanced  economies,  which 
declined by 20% between 2008 and 2017, whereas cross-border lending to emerging market 
economies increased by 44% during the same period (primarily driven by very strong lending 
to China).  
 
  Global Financial Crisis. During the years of expansion of the so-called Great Moderation, from 
the mid-80s until the crisis, the global economy was progressively accumulating high levels of 
debt and leverage, assisted by easy financing conditions and the underpricing of risk. This led 
to increased vulnerability of the global economy and to the accumulation of bubbles, mainly in 
the financial and real estate sectors in advanced economies. What took us all by surprise was 
the intense depth and global nature of the crisis that exploded in 2008. In a context of high 
integration  and  complex  interconnections  between  financial  institutions,  instability  spread 
rapidly across markets and economies, leading to the most serious global financial crisis of the 
last 80 years. In the European Union, the crisis was exacerbated by a double-dip recession, 
which  hindered  our  recovery  period  and  revealed  as  well  the  weakness  of  the  institutional 
framework of the euro area.  
   Technological  change.  In  the  21st  century  we  have  seen  an  explosion  of  technological 
changes that are reshaping the global economy: internet, e-commerce, mobile phones, artificial 
intelligence and big data. In the financial sector the new fintech companies are challenging the 
traditional  banking  business  models  and  providing  services  in  all  functions  of  finance,  from 
payment  systems,  to  saving,  borrowing,  managing  risks  and  financial  advice.  This  has 
important  implications  for  productivity  and  competitiveness  and  for  further  deepening  the 
interconnectedness of the global economy.  
 II. 
Central banks have reacted to the global financial crisis in three main ways: 
   Highly  expansionary  and  unconventional  monetary  policy.  Central  banks  were  already 
applying near-zero interest rates in 2008. But interest rate policy was not effective under the 
“zero-lower bound”, which is basically the Keynesian liquidity trap at near-zero interest rates. 
Accordingly, 
the  so-called 
“unconventional monetary policy”, mainly quantitative easing and forward guidance. The result 
has been a huge increase in central bank balance sheets. In terms of GDP, the approximate 
size of the balance sheet of the central banks before the crisis was 12% in the Eurosystem, 
5% in the US and 20% in Japan. These numbers have increased between four and five times, 
to  develop  new  policy 
it  was  necessary 
instruments, 
 3/6 
 and are now at around 40% in the Eurosystem, around 4.4 trillion euro,  24% in the US (4.4 
trillion US dollars), and almost 100% of GDP in Japan (5.2 trillion Yen).  
 
  Tighter  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  Pre-crisis  regulation  was  based  on 
microprudential regulation and supervision. The crisis revealed this framework to be no longer 
effective to ensure financial stability in the new context of globalised and highly interconnected 
financial markets. The response has been centred on three main layers:  
 -  Strengthening of the microprudential framework with higher capital requirements (Basel III) 
and new resolution frameworks in most jurisdictions;   
-  The introduction of a separate and tighter framework for systemically important financial 
institutions  
-  The development of a new macroprudential policy framework addressing systemic risk  
 
  Enhanced  international  coordination.  The  global  nature  of  the  crisis  required  a  global 
response and new international institutions to coordinate the regulation of the financial sector. 
At the global level we saw the creation of the Financial Stability Board and the intensification 
of the work at the Basel Committee (BCBS). In the case of the European Union, we have taken 
an important step towards financial integration, most notably with the activation of the Banking 
Union, currently comprising two elements: the Single Supervisory Mechanism and the Single 
Resolution  Mechanism.  There  is  a  third  necessary  pillar,  the  European  Deposit  Insurance 
Scheme, which is still under political negotiations. 
 
III. 
 
1. 
Are we under a “new normal” macroeconomic environment for the macroeconomy 
and what does it mean for monetary policy? 
Four broad challenges for central banks ahead: 
 
New  normal?  Debate  about  whether  or  not  we  are  facing  a  new  structural  reality  of  secular 
stagnation that defines a “new normal” for the macroeconomy, characterised by low growth, low 
inflation and low real and nominal interest rates. Most estimates suggest that the natural interest 
rate (i.e. the real interest rate consistent with inflation stability and output at its natural level) is now 
at historically low, possibly negative, levels. Some possible explanatory factors are of a transitory 
nature (such as the still-ongoing deleveraging processes), while others are more structural ( i.e. 
low productivity growth and demographic factors). We have to deepen our analysis further in order 
to have a full grasp of this “new normal” reality. 
 
Implications for monetary policy: 
 
  New conventional? The question that arises is whether  the “new  normal” should lead to a 
“new conventional” for monetary policy. Indeed, inflation and real interest rates are likely to 
persist at a low level in the future, and therefore nominal interest rates will also be lower and 
hence closer to their effective lower bound, limiting their effectiveness as a monetary policy 
instrument,  which  will  possibly  lead  to  balance  sheet  management  as  a  permanent  policy. 
There  are  still  no  conclusive  debates  about  balance  sheet  management,  including  on  its 
marginal effectiveness, the optimal size of the balance sheet and the repercussions it could 
involve in terms of financial stability. Again, in this area, we need further analysis.  
 
4/6 
    Once the conditions for it are met, the exit strategy from the accommodative policies will 
require gradualism and predictability. As the recovery gathers speed, and as long as this 
translates into a sustained adjustment in inflation towards its objective, the need for monetary 
policy  support  will  tend  to  diminish.  Yet  the  persistence  of  low  inflation  and  the  financial 
implications of normalisation call for a gradual approach. The experience of the “taper tantrum” 
episode in the US, in 2013, showed us that markets can rapidly shift their sentiment and prompt 
an abrupt adjustment of financial variables. Predictability and a clear communication strategy 
will be important in order to avoid adverse market reactions. It will also help mitigate spillover 
effects in third countries. In any case, emerging economies are now better prepared to manage 
this new context,  given their enhanced resilience and stronger growth outlook. At the same 
time,  we  have  to  be  vigilant  regarding  the  signs  of  overvaluation  of  asset  prices,  the 
underpricing of risk and the exceptionally low levels of expected volatility. 
   Risk  of  overburdening  monetary  policy:  It  is  important  to  stress  that  we  should  avoid 
overburdening  monetary  policy.  Secular  stagnation  requires  an  overall  policy  strategy:  in 
particular, both fiscal policy and structural reforms have an important role to play in supporting 
demand, and in raising productivity and potential growth.   
 
Implementing new financial regulation  
2. 
 
  Safer scenario / implementation challenge. The new micro and macroprudential regulations 
and the strengthened supervisory framework provide a safer scenario for the financial sector. 
There  are  higher  capital  requirements  for  financial  institutions  and  enhanced  supervision, 
including new instruments for early identification of financial risks. For sure, if there is a lesson 
to be had from the crisis, it is that there is always a risk of another crisis; we cannot easily 
repeat  the  famous  “this  time  is  different”  approach.  But  we  are  now  better  prepared.  As  a 
general approach, the main challenge is to fully implement the reforms and to closely monitor 
their impact on the financial sector, and if necessary, fine-tune them. 
 
  The 
interrelation  between  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies.  Under  general 
circumstances,  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  complement  each  other.  But,  as 
shown  by  the  run-up  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  might  be  periods  in  which  achieving 
monetary policy goals does not necessarily guarantee achieving macroprudential goals and vice 
versa; low interest rates had an influence on financial imbalances and excessive risk-taking while 
inflation was contained and the real economy did not show overheating pressures. This is a trade-
off which central banks will have to deal with. It would help to design an institutional set-up that 
ensures synergies and consistency among monetary, micro and macroprudential policies, but also 
separates 
structures. 
 
 
through  Chinese  wall-type 
probably 
analysis, 
ex-ante 
   5/6 
 The fintech challenge 
3. 
 
  “Fintech” is gradually entering into the financial sector. Information technologies can have 
important  implications  in  terms  of  increasing  competition  and  redefining  the  relationship 
between  consumers  and  suppliers  of  financial  services,  fostering  efficiency  gains,  better 
financial inclusion and improvements in quality through tailored services. Compared to other 
sectors of the economy, fintech is progressing at a slower pace, especially in Europe, as new 
companies need to gain the confidence and trust of consumers and investors, which traditional 
financial institutions have gained over long periods of time having been anchored by strong 
financial regulation and supervision. 
 
  For regulators the challenge of fintech affects both prudential and consumer protection. 
 
-  Prudential perspective: supervisors have to strike the right balance between catalysing the 
innovation  and  efficiency  that  fintech  can  bring,  while  preserving  at  the  same  time  the 
regulatory level playing field and a safe and sound framework. We should seek to apply the 
same regulation to the same services. As fintech steps up its presence, it might be useful 
to place increasing emphasis on regulating services rather than institutions. 
 -  Consumer  and  investor  protection:  it  is  key  that  financial  investors  and  consumers  fully 
understand the implications of the fintech services, including credit risk, cybersecurity and 
protection of privacy risks. We have to strengthen our policies of information and financial 
education regarding fintech services. 
International cooperation  
 
4.  
 
  Need for coordination. Given the context of highly interconnected and cross-border financial 
markets, it is of paramount importance that we sustain the efforts to strengthen international 
financial coordination. We need to avoid the risks of regulatory arbitrage or a regulatory race 
to the bottom among jurisdictions. International fora such as the G20, the Financial Stability 
Board, the Basel Committee and or the IMF are key in this task. 
 
The important role of emerging economies. The world economy is now more balanced 
between advanced and emerging economies. Measured in PPP terms, China is the world´s 
first economy, representing 18% of global GDP, and Russia the 6th (3% of world GDP). We 
share the same world economy but our respective economic structures and cycles differ. 
We need a shared analysis, to learn from our respective experiences, and it is crucial that 
international coordination and regulation take into account our realities. 
6/6 
 