“THE EU (ONCE AGAIN) AT THE CROSSROADS: THIS TIME MAY BE 
DIFFERENT?” 
 Keynote speech by Professor John (Iannis) Mourmouras* 
Bank of Greece Senior Deputy Governor 
Former Deputy Finance Minister 
at the National Bank of Romania - OMFIF Economists Meeting entitled “The 
state of the euro area and conditions for accession:  
lessons from the past, tasks for the future” 
 Bucharest, 22 May 2018 
 
 
Your Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
Allow me first of all to thank the Governor of the National Bank of Romania, Mugur 
Isarescu,  and  the  OMFIF  Board  of  Directors  for  the  kind  invitation  to  deliver  the 
keynote speech at today’s National Bank of Romania-OMFIF Economists Meeting. It 
is a great pleasure and honour to be in Romania, a country in which the 1821 Greek 
Independence Revolution has its roots. Prominent Greeks originating from here helped 
to free Greece from four hundred  years of Ottoman rule. Your country today hosts a 
vibrant Greek business community, which I will be addressing at the Greek-Romanian 
Chamber of Commerce at a dinner event tonight. 
 
In its history of six decades, the EU has been faced with multiple crises; it came close 
to  breaking  point,  but  managed  to  overcome,  for  instance,  the  ‘empty  chair  crisis’, 
when  De  Gaulle  refused  to  take  part  in  Council  meetings,  the  rejection  of  the 
Maastricht Treaty by the Danes or the Nice Treaty by the Irish. The solution then and 
now is to move continuously pedalling forward, for instance, with the adoption of the 
single  currency,  the  enlargement  to  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  after  the  end  of  the 
Cold War, and the completion of EMU today. 
 
My  speech  today  will  be  structured  in  four  sections.  After  a  brief  introduction 
presenting the current economic juncture around the world, I will very briefly discuss 
the  state  of  the  euro  area  economy.  In  the  second  section,  I  will  take  a  look  into the 
incomplete architecture  of the Economic  and Monetary Union  (EMU)  and where we 
stand today, highlighting the downside risks of the lack of progress on  the necessary 
reforms and, more particularly, the populist rise. The third section will be focused on 
the  countries  of  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  (CEE)  as  candidates  for  euro  area 
accession and also present the benefits of EU membership, taking a look into the EU 
funds received under the current EU budget and how EU financing will evolve under 
the  European  Commission’s  new  proposals  on  the  new  budget  for  2021-2027.  I  will 
also  offer  my  view  there  on  Romania’s  prospective  euro  area  accession.  In  the  final 
section, I will offer some remarks about my own country, Greece, which seems to be 
finally  coming  out  of  the  woods  after  three  adjustment  programmes  within  the 
eurozone. 
                                                           
* Disclaimer: Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of 
the institutions I am affiliated with.  
 1 
1. Introduction and a few remarks on the state of the euro area economy  
 
At  a  global  level,  as  I  was  the  official  representative  of  the  Bank  of  Greece  to 
IMF/WB  Spring  Meetings  last  month  in  Washington  DC,  I  would  like  to  share  with 
you  my  takeaways:  caution  and  scepticism  are  the  two  catchwords  I  got  from  the 
Meetings.  For instance, the heightened  fears about  an escalation  of tensions between 
the US and China, in light of the US decision to impose tariffs on imports on national 
security grounds and the US stance in the negotiations over the revision of the North 
American  Free  Trade  Agreement  (NAFTA),  more  specifically,  the  US  demands  to 
limit imports from Canada and Mexico. Markets are sceptical about the upturn since, 
on  top  of  the  threat  of  a  global  trade  war,  there  are  important  risks  (including 
geopolitical  ones,  breeding  again  in  the  US  and  I  am  referring  to  the  US 
Administration’s  decision  to  pull  out  of  the  Iran  nuclear  deal  undermining  global 
stability and threatening to disrupt the global order – the oil price has risen by almost 
15%  in  the  last  month).  Trade  wars  may  be  avoided,  but  trade  tensions  have  been 
having  an  impact  on  market  sentiment,  posing  risks  for  the  upturn  in  the  global 
economy. 
 
In Europe, expectations for near-term euro area reforms are now very low. France has 
been putting pressure on Germany to come to concrete decisions on deepening EMU 
at  the  June  European  Council,  including  on  the  Banking  Union.  I  will  come  back  to 
EMU reform in more detail shortly.  
Turning now to the state of the economy in the euro area, headline inflation was 1.3% 
in  March,  while  core  inflation  was  just  1%.  Euro  area  GDP  is  expected  to  grow  at 
2.4% in 2018 and 2% in 2019 and to slow down to 1.6% in 2020 and this is worrying 
of course for the dynamics of output growth in the eurozone. Nothing lasts for good! 
The unemployment rate was 8.5% in February, the lowest since December 2008. The 
April  2018  Bank  Lending  Survey  for  the  euro  area  concluded  that  credit  standards 
eased  considerably  for  loans  to  enterprises  and  housing  loans,  and  loan  demand 
increased  across  all  categories,  thereby  continuing  to  support  loan  growth.  As  far  as 
the ECB’s QE programme is concerned, ECB holdings amount to €1.96 trillion under 
the Public Sector Purchase Programme (PSPP), while total purchases under the Asset 
Purchase Programme (APP) amount to €2.39 trillion, and the APP is expected by the 
majority  of  economists  to  come  to  a  close  by  year-end.  The  pace  of  APP  purchases 
was reduced to €60 billion per month as of April 2017 (from €80 billion previously) 
and to €30 billion per month as of January 2018. 
2. EMU reform and the risks from the lack of progress 
2.1 EMU reform 
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  the  concerns  about  the  EMU  setup,  especially  in  the 
aftermath of the euro area debt crisis. The crisis brought to the surface major flaws in 
the euro area’s functioning, which had been building up over time and did not emerge 
overnight. The eurozone remains a job half-done and, without a doubt, the completion 
of the EMU architecture could further facilitate and motivate Member State reforms in 
view of euro area accession. 
 2 
On the positive side, one has to mention the establishment of a permanent rescue fund, 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  which  provides  financial  assistance  to  euro  area 
countries  experiencing,  or  threatened  by,  severe  financing  problems,  which  can  no 
longer borrow money on financial markets as a result. A Banking Union is on track to 
be  completed,  ensuring  centralised  supervision  of  systemically  significant  credit 
institutions subject to a single rulebook applicable across the European Union and also 
ensuring  centralised  resolution  in  the  event  of  failure  of  such  a  credit  institution.  A 
Capital Markets Union is also under way, creating a new financial system that is less 
dependent on bank financing with the potential to increase risk-sharing via the private 
sector and address economic shocks. 
Although the EMU is now stronger, it is not yet fully shock-proof.  
Table 1 Elements to complete an Economic and Monetary Union 
Source: European Commission. 
 I will  stay  a bit longer on the Banking Union  which is  of direct  interest  also  to  non-
euro area EU Member States.  It  is  currently still lacking key  components that would 
ensure  risk-sharing  across  the  euro  area  and  break  the  vicious  circle  between  banks 
and  sovereigns.  A  reflection  paper  by  the  European  Commission  on  deepening  the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  proposed  concrete  steps  that  could  be  taken  by  the 
time of the European Parliament elections in 2019, but progress has fallen short of the 
European Commission’s ambitions. 
    3 
Figure 1 The three pillars of the Banking Union 
 Source: Single Resolution Board. 
There is still no agreement on the Commission’s proposal for its third pillar, consisting 
of a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS), a banking union-wide scheme to be 
introduced by 2025, pooling funding from banks across the Banking Union to provide 
stronger and more uniform insurance cover for all retail depositors in the euro area.  
Figure 2 The evolution of EDIS 
 Source: European Commission (2017), Factsheet “A stronger Banking Union”, p. 4. 
The  existing  Directive  (2014/49/EU)  on  national  Deposit  Guarantee  Schemes 
guaranteeing  deposits  of  up  to  €100,000  also  covers  CEE  Member  States.  Of  course 
later,  once  EDIS  is  in  place,  a  single  deposit  insurance  fund  would  be  of  interest  to 
CEE  countries  to  offer  deposit  guarantee  also  through  their  national  schemes, 
supported by a common pot. As you understand, this is a strong incentive to join the 
euro ultimately. 
 4 
Table 2 Deposit Guarantee Schemes in the EU and the US (EU 2012 figures in 
euro, US 2014 figures in US dollars)
Source: European Commission, “Towards a European Deposit Insurance Scheme”, 9 November 2015. 
EDIS requires only €12 billion on behalf of Germany to create the common pot of €38 
billion,  a  country  that  is  dragging  its  feet  on  the  issue.  French  banks  account  for  the 
largest  contributions  to EDIS, as  France  – keen  to  the idea  – has the largest  banking 
sector in the euro area, followed by Germany. If we look at these sums, we should see 
them as a tiny hedging against the risk of systemic bank runs.  
 5 
Remember that what is at stake is a mass withdrawal of deposits in the case of a bank 
failure,  which  can  create  systemic  financial  instability.  Even  the  announcement  of 
establishing  this  common  pot,  would  have  a  strong  confidence-building  effect  on 
European depositors in the sense of avoiding risks of self-fulfilling prophecies on bank 
runs. It is one example par excellence showing how risk sharing may contribute to risk 
reduction.  But,  of  course,  EDIS  approval  is  ultimately  a  question  of  political  will, 
subject to national sensitivities. This number (€38 billion) is not even half of the one 
percent of the total eurozone deposits (worth more than €10 trillion today). 
2.2 The risks arising from the lack of progress on reforms 
There are significant risks posed by the lack of progress towards completing the EMU 
architecture.  So  far,  actions  have  not  matched  the  rhetoric  on  completing  EMU  with 
the  risk  of  missing  what  may  be  a  limited  window  of  opportunity  to  introduce 
fundamental reforms at a time of prosperity. The euro area recorded its fastest growth 
rate for a decade and has been expanding robustly for more than five years, but the fog 
of  uncertainty  thickens,  when  it  comes  to  growth  prospects  in  the  years  ahead.  The 
Jean Monnet principle applies: “Europe is the sum of the solutions adopted to address 
the crises it is faced with”. If the flaws in the design of the euro area are not addressed 
at this opportune time, given that the next crisis may be around the corner and the job 
of fixing the EMU remains unfinished, this will come with a heavy price for the single 
currency. The collective memory tends to remember the costs rather than the benefits 
of European integration.  
Many  people,  including  myself,  feel  that  we  need  to  strike  a  balance  in  the  classic 
struggle between solidarity and national  responsibility, or the ‘new wine  in  the same 
old bottle’, namely risk-sharing (namely mutualisation of costs) versus risk reduction. 
Especially in the South of Europe, there is a strong feeling that this balance is unstable 
and in order to make it more stable and more symmetrical; what we need are stronger 
European institutions. To quote Winston Churchill, a great European, “to do our best 
is not enough; sometimes we must do what is required”. The ultimate risk is a rise in 
populism and anti-Europeanism. 
There  is  a  rising  populist  trend  across  the  world,  as  the  following  Figure  (Figure  3) 
shows. Populism is no longer a marginalised trend, but is coming increasingly into the 
mainstream. 
   6 
Figure 3 The global rise of populism 
 Source: Rodrik, D. (2018), Populism and the economics of globalisation. 
 
We can identify two major root causes of populism in Europe. First of all, it may be 
attributed  to  the  failure  of  globalisation  to  reach  some  segments  of  the  population, 
which have been left behind in terms of its economic benefits, for instance in Europe 
through chronic unemployment. Secondly, increased migration flows which triggered 
immigration fears and a stronger anti-euro sentiment and broader support for populist 
forces.  
In  Italy,  the  eurozone’s  third-largest  economy,  two  anti-establishment  parties,  the  5 
Star Movement and the  Northern League, which won 55% of the popular vote at the 
March  general  election,  defeating  the  country’s  traditional  centrist  political  parties, 
have  struck  a  deal  to  form  an  all-populist  government  with  an  anti-European 
sentiment. We should not take this prospect lightly, as Italy can be seen as a miniature 
representation of the whole of Europe. 
 
Another disguised version of populism taking advantage of the Brexit prospect can be 
seen  in  the  promise  for  broad-scale  renationalisation,  so-called  Corbynomics,  which 
would  mean  a  return  to  the  1970s,  by  the  British  main  opposition  party  leader,  who 
has announced his  intention to  return to  the model  of nationalisation of banks, water 
industries,  transport,  etc.,  through  the  back  door.  Based  on  the  pretext  of  market 
failures  identified  in  their  privatisation,  full  government  control  of  such  industries 
would be disastrous for the UK economy and the world, with a ‘megatone’ effect: 10 
times bigger than Brexit. 
 
Despite  all  this,  a  majority  of  EU  citizens  harbour  a  favourable  opinion  of  EU 
membership, which has recovered to levels close to those recorded prior to the crisis. 
57% of respondents to the European Parliament’s Parlemeter survey feel that the EU 
membership is a good thing for their country, almost as many as before the crisis (see 
Figure 4 below). 
 
  7 
Figure 4 Public opinion on EU membership 
Source: European Parliament, “Parlemeter 2017 – A stronger voice. Citizens’ views on Parliament and 
the EU”, p. 17. 
 In  view  of  the  upcoming  European  Parliament  elections  in  June  2019,  there  are 
heightened fears of a further surge in populism in the form of protest votes, amidst the 
ongoing  migration  crisis.  As  the  clock  ticks  down  to  the  critical  June  European 
Council, European leaders must rise up to the challenge of introducing brave reforms 
and give to the people more reasons to trust the European Union as an endeavour and 
especially its institutions, because ultimately what the people want is jobs, growth and 
stability. 
3. The candidate countries for euro area membership and the benefits from EU 
membership 
3.1 The candidate countries 
Following  the  accession  of  Lithuania  on  1  January  2015,  the  process  of  euro  area 
enlargement  has  stalled  and  none  of  the  8  EU  non-euro  area  Member  States  (see 
Figure  5  above)  has  so  far  actively  pushed  EMU  accession.  Out  of  the  two  Member 
States, whose national currencies are linked to the euro, Bulgaria has stated its intent 
to join the interim Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM2) and Denmark has opted out of 
euro area accession. 
  8 
Figure 5 Euro area and non-euro area member countries
 Source: European Commission, COM (2017) 821 final, “Further steps towards completing Europe’s 
Economic and Monetary Union: a roadmap”, p. 2. 
We do not expect any proposal for eventual euro area membership to be made in the 
ECB’s new Convergence Report, due to be published tomorrow (23 May), despite the 
progress  made  with  regard  to  compliance  with  the  five  economic  indicators,  well-
known as the “Maastricht criteria”, designed to ensure nominal economic convergence 
between  interested  non-euro  area  countries  with  the  Member  States  of  the  euro  area 
(see Table 3 below). 
 
Table 3 Maastricht convergence criteria 
Source: European Commission. 
  9 
The ECB publishes convergence reports every two  years, or when there is  a specific 
request  from  a  Member  State  to  assess  its  readiness  to  join  the  euro  area.  The  new 
Convergence Report should point out that none of the countries under review, that is, 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Croatia, Poland, Romania and Sweden (given 
that Denmark has an “opt-out”), is under an excessive deficit procedure and point out 
that progress has been made in addressing imbalances in their economies and further 
improvements of their fiscal positions.  
As  you  are  aware,  crucial  to  the  ECB’s  Convergence  Report  is  the  notion  of 
“sustainable  convergence”,  which  is  not  automatic  upon  fulfillment  of  nominal 
convergence criteria prior to the adoption of the euro, but also requires policy efforts 
and appropriate national reforms following the entry into the euro area. 
President  Juncker  said  in  his  State  of  the  Union  speech  on  14  September  2017  that: 
“Member  States  that  want  to  join  the  euro  must  be  able  to  do  so.”  This  is  why  he 
proposed  the  creation  of  “a  Euro-Accession  Instrument,  offering  technical  and  even 
financial assistance”. 
As shown in the following table, some of the CEE countries outperform the euro area 
average,  for  instance  on  the  government  budget  deficit  or  general  government  debt 
thresholds of 3% and 60% respectively (see Tables 4 and 5 below). 
 
Table 4 
   10 
 Table 5 Government finance indicators for non-euro area EU CEE Member 
States, EU-28 and euro area 
Country 
 Bulgaria 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Hungary 
Poland 
Romania 
EU-28 
Euro area  
General government net 
lending/borrowing (as a % 
of GDP) 
General government 
gross debt (as a % of 
GDP) 
2017 
2018 
2017 
2018 
0.9 
0.6 
1.3 
-2 
-1.7 
-2.8 
-1.1 
-0.9 
-1 
-0.5 
1.1 
-2.1 
-1.9 
-3.6 
-0.8 
-0.6 
23.9 
78.4 
34.7 
69.9 
51.4 
36.9 
83.2 
91.3 
23.6 
75.5 
32.9 
67.4 
50.8 
37.8 
81.1 
84.2 
Source: IMF World Economic Outlook (April 2018). 
 3.2 The benefits of EU membership for CEE countries 
3.2.1 EU as a soft power 
The benefits of EU membership should be clear by now to governments  and citizens 
of  CEE  countries:  considerable  economic  progress  as  part  of  the  European  Single 
Market,  the  gradual  convergence  of  living  standards  with  those  in  other  European 
Member  States,  and  of  course  progress  towards  modernity,  including  the  move 
towards a market economy, the opening up of the labour market, free movement and 
free trade, a business-friendly environment and undistorted competition, etc.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  we  are  all  part  of  the  big  European  family.  Unlike  some 
autocratic  leaders  (no  names  please)  who  want  to  be  lonely  riders  in  an  era  of 
globalisation  and  also  want  to  rule  their  central  bank  and  make  decisions  on  interest 
rates: just look at what has happened with the Turkish lira last week. 
The  European  Union  is  a  soft  power  and  a  community  of  values  that  has  become  a 
strong regional pole promoting shared prosperity, democracy, independent institutions, 
the  rule  of  law  and  transparency  across  the  European  continent.  Following  the  CEE 
countries’  EU  accession,  reform  efforts  have  had  to  be  sustained,  as  the  EU  has  the 
potential  to  act  as  an  external  constraint  by  imposing  common  rules  on  its  Member 
States  and  discipline  on  profligate  politicians,  through  the  transposition  of  the 
European acquis (for instance, combatting corruption).  
3.2.2 EU financing to CEE Member States 
CEE Member States have been net recipients from the EU budget, as shown in Figure 
6, and also in per capita terms, as shown in Figure 7. 
 11 
 
Figure 6 Net contributions to the EU budget by Member State (2016, in billion 
euro) 
Source: European Commission, EU expenditure and revenue 2014-2020. 
  12 
Figure 7 Per capita net contributions to EU budget by Member State (2016, in 
euro) 
 Sources: European Commission, EU expenditure and revenue 2014-2020, and Eurostat. 
After  EU  accession  and  entry  into  the  Single  Market  of  500  million  consumers,  the 
region  has  been  recording  rapidly  improving  economic  growth  rates  offering  an 
attractive  environment  for  foreign  investment,  stronger  demand,  easy  financing 
conditions and of course making the most of available EU funding, mainly through the 
EU’s structural and cohesion funds. 
Under  the  current  EU  budget  (formally  known  as  the  Multiannual  Financial 
Framework or MFF) for the period 2014-2020, the 6 CEE EU Member States (that are 
not members of the euro area) are allocated €157 billion or 45.4% of the total amount 
earmarked for the EU’s two structural funds (European Regional Development Fund - 
ERDF and the European Social Fund - ESF), and the Cohesion Fund. Among 6 CEE 
Member  States,  Poland  is  by  far  the  largest  recipient  of  EU  structural  and  cohesion 
funds (22% of total allocations), followed by Romania (6.4% of total allocations). By 
way of comparison, Greece has been allocated €15.8 billion, which represent 4.6% of 
 13 
total allocations. The CEE economies enjoy around 4% of GDP gross inflows from the 
cohesion and CAP funds on average during the current 2014-2020 EU budget cycle. 
Table 6 EU funds allocated to CEE Member States and Greece under the 
Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 2014-2020 
In € 
15,774,066,781 
7,312,413,787 
8,245,993,253 
21,501,038,980 
21,444,582,271 
76,345,205,832 
22,283,994,996 
346,289,772,498 
 
Country 
Greece 
Bulgaria 
Croatia 
Czech Republic 
Hungary 
Poland 
Romania 
Total 
Note 1: The figures refer to the two structural funds, namely the European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) and the European Social Fund (ESF), as well as the Cohesion 
Fund (CF). 
Note 2: EU funds allocated to other countries are estimated at about €160 billion. 
Source: European Commission. 
As % of total allocations 
4.6 
2.1 
2.4 
6.2 
6.2 
22.0 
6.4 
100 
 This  may  drop  by  0.2%-0.7%  of  GDP  during  the  next  seven-year  period.  Under  the 
new  MFF  2021-2027,  for  which  the  European  Commission  presented  its proposal  to 
the  Council  of  Ministers  on  14  May.  The  total  budget  is  worth  €1.28  trillion  and 
amounts  to  1.11%  of  EU  gross  national  income,  which  is  about  1/50th  of  most  EU 
Member State government spending. The aim is for the new budget to be approved by 
spring  2019,  but  the  proposal  has  several  contentious  parts  and  difficult  and  long-
drawn negotiations are expected between the Member States especially given the large 
budget gap to be left by the UK’s exit from the EU which may be addressed through 
additional funding from the EU-27, on which there is already strong opposition. 
3.2.3 Current status on Romania’s prospective accession into the euro area 
Romania has repeatedly pushed back its target dates for euro area accession from 2014 
to 2015, then to 2019 and now to 2022. Between 2009 and 2013, the country had been 
subject  to  an  excessive  deficit  procedure.  Romania  is  currently  experiencing  an 
economic  boom,  with  real  GDP  recording  a  post-crisis  peak  growth  rate  of  6.9%  in 
2017.  This  growth  rate  was  driven  by  a  boom  in  private  consumption  boosted  by  an 
expansionary  fiscal  policy  and  is  expected  to  remain  robust  in  the  current  year. 
According to  the ECB’s previous Convergence  Report, Romania now also  meets  the 
convergence  criterion  of  price  stability,  which  it  did  not  fulfil  according  to  earlier 
reports,  along  with  the  criteria  on  public  debt  and  government  deficit.  So  far,  no 
decision has been made for the Romanian leu to enter the ERM2. 
I  am  not  here  to  advise  when  would  be  the  right  time  to  enter  the  euro  area.  Any 
decision  to  adopt  the  single  currency  is  up  to  the  people  and  their  democratic 
institutions. But I would like to give you a word of caution concerning the conversion 
rate  between  your  currency  and  the  euro  and  my  remarks  apply  to  all  candidate 
countries for euro area membership, not only to Romania. This conversion rate is the 
key  to  euro  area  accession  and,  once  fixed,  it  is  irrevocable  for  each  participating 
currency.  With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  I  could  share  with  you  the  Greek  euro  area 
accession experience, where it is debatable even today if the entry to the euro back in 
2001 was made on the valid conversion rate (overvalued); also many people claim that 
 14 
the country needed more time to put its economy in order. Ex post, this is evident by 
the  country’s  economic  devastation  triggered  by  the  global  financial  crisis  back  in 
2008,  which  turned  into  a  full-blown  double  crisis,  namely  sovereign  and  banking 
crisis, in my country. 
In  the  case  of  Romania,  things  are  quite  simple.  You  don’t  have  to  look  at  EU 
forecasts or Convergence Reports to find out. All you have to do is listen to the wise 
man that you are very lucky to have in this country: ask your Central Bank Governor 
Mugur  Isarescu  who,  as  you  are  aware,  is  widely  regarded  as  one  of  a  handful  top 
central bankers in the world! 
4. Post-MoU Greece 
Finally, a few words about my country: Greece’s economic recovery is finally gaining 
traction after an unprecedented depression, where the country lost 25% of GDP in the 
space  of  10  years.  Real  GDP  in  2017  increased  by  1.4%  with  strong  positive 
contributions from exports of goods and services (2 percentage points) and gross fixed 
capital formation (1.2 percentage points). This positive outcome creates a strong carry-
over effect of 0.5 percentage point for GDP growth in the current year, which supports 
the outlook for a growth rate of around 2% and 2.5% in 2018 and 2019 respectively.  
Indeed, this is a fortunate moment for Greece. After 9 years of economic hardship, we 
can  say  with  confidence  that  there  is  light  at  the  end  of  the  tunnel  for  the  Greek 
economy. The economy’s progress during the last eight years of adjustment has been 
really  impressive,  both  in  terms  of  fiscal  and  external  adjustment  of  more  than  15 
percentage points of GDP. The huge twin deficits turned into surpluses. Last year, the 
primary  surplus  was  4.2%  of  GDP,  outperforming  the  target  of  0.5%.  The  current 
account during the last two years had effectively been in balance, from a 15% deficit 
eight  years  ago.  And  last  year:  an  all-time  record  of  30  million  tourists  visited  the 
country. 
Throughout this period, sweeping structural reforms have been implemented, covering 
the pensions system, the health system, labour markets, product markets, the business 
environment, public administration, etc. Moreover, there is evidence that the economy 
has  been  undergoing  a  rebalancing  towards  the  tradable,  export-oriented  sector:  the 
share of exports of goods and services in GDP increased from 19% in 2009 to 28% in 
2016, with most of the increase coming from exports of goods. 
Two weeks ago the results of the Greek banks’ 2018 stress tests conducted by the ECB 
were  published,  pointing  to  no  capital  shortfalls.  Of  course,  despite  the  positive 
outcome of the stress tests, the major challenges are still there: for instance the drastic 
reduction of the non-performing loans and the ability to provide liquidity to the Greek 
real economy (new loans to businesses). 
In view of the end of the current programme in August 2018 and a return to European 
normality,  the  Greek  people  look  into  the  future  with  optimism,  which  I  also  share, 
provided that there is no complacency, no slackening of effort, and authorities do not 
let up on reforms, especially in the public sector, cutting red tape, etc. 
The overwhelming majority in Greece still want to be within the core of Europe. This 
is our legacy as a nation that goes back to our history and our tradition. After all, the 
 15 
name  of  our  continent  Europe  comes,  in  the  first  place,  from  an  ancient  Greek 
mythological figure, a beautiful young lady with whom Zeus, the father of the twelve 
Greek  Gods,  fell  in  love,  but  since  she  was  refusing  his  advances,  he  decided  to 
transform  himself  into  a  bull  to  catch  her  and  bring  her  to  Mount  Olympus,  the 
mountain of Gods in northern Greece, where I come from! 
 Concluding remarks 
In  closing,  I  understand  that  public  sentiment  in  Central  and  Eastern  European 
countries is not very strong right now in favour of joining the single currency and that 
euro area accession is seen by some as a byword for the loss of sovereignty. The crisis 
has certainly made the euro area look less attractive for future members. In my view, 
the issue is ultimately, on the one hand, for the eurozone to persist with completing the 
EMU project and, on the other hand, for candidate countries to be at a par with the rest 
of the eurozone on all fronts (sustainable convergence). After all, CEE Member States 
have  considerable  discretion  over  the  timing  of  their  accession  into  the  euro  area. 
Amid  the  uncertainty  about  the  euro  area’s  architecture,  a  wait-and-see  approach  for 
final  outcomes  is  perhaps  the  safe-bet  policy,  given  that  any  decision  to  adopt  the 
single currency, once made, is irreversible, since the costs of exit by far outweigh the 
benefits. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 16 
