Christopher Kent: The availability of business finance
Speech by Mr Christopher Kent, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia,  at  the  30th Australasian  Finance  and  Banking  Conference,  University  of  New  South
Wales, 13 December 2017.
 I thank Ellis Connolly and Ben Jackman for invaluable assistance in preparing these remarks,
which also draw upon an article they have authored: Connolly E and Jackman B (2017), ‘The
Availability of Business Finance ’, RBA Bulletin, December, pp 55–66.
It is a pleasure to be here to discuss the availability of business finance in Australia. Businesses
need funding for their day-to-day operations and to undertake investment. These funds can be
generated  internally,  from  profits,  or  they  can  come  from  various  external  sources.  The
availability of funding has an important bearing on current and future economic activity.
My remarks today are structured around three key issues.
First, I’ll talk about the internal and external sources of funds and the way in which businesses
use  those  funds.  External  finance  has  become  available  on  increasingly  favourable  terms  for
large borrowers over recent years, including because of increased competitive pressures in this
market.  However,  for  the  business  sector  as  a  whole,  internal  funds  are  the  key  source  of
funding for investment. Growth in external funding has only a weak relationship to investment.
Debt  funding  appears  to  be  linked  to  mergers  and  acquisitions  activity,  which  has  remained
relatively modest compared with levels prior to the financial crisis.
The second issue I want to discuss is the experience of entrepreneurs seeking to start or expand
a small business. They are typically more reliant on external finance, which remains difficult for
them  to  obtain. Access  to  finance  for  such  small  businesses  is  important  though,  since  they
generate significant employment growth, drive innovation and boost competition in markets.
The third issue I’ll cover is the potential to improve access to finance for entrepreneurs.
Much  of  what  I  have  to  say  today  draws  on  the  information  from  a  Small  Business  Finance
Advisory Panel that the Reserve Bank has convened each year for the past 25 years.  We’ve
gained  a  variety  of  perspectives  by  talking  to  entrepreneurs  from  a  range  of  industries  and
locations across Australia. It’s been an invaluable way to better understand the challenges faced
by innovative small businesses.
Business funding and investment
1
But  first,  I’ll  start  with  some  observations  about  the  business  sector  overall.  Data  from  the
Australian Bureau of Statistics on the balance sheet of the Australian business sector shows that
businesses are financed by around 60 per cent equity and 40 per cent debt (Graph 1).  Business
debt  is  dominated  by  loans  from  financial  institutions,  with  debt  securities  playing  a  relatively
minor role. This capital structure is similar to most other comparable advanced economies. The
United States, to which we are often compared, is actually an outlier. Bank loans are a much
smaller share of business funding in the US.
2
 1 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
The primary source of new finance for Australian businesses is internal funding (Graph 2). That
is  supplemented  by  funds  raised  externally.  The  primary  use  of  funds  is  for  productive
investment, such as commercial buildings, machinery, software and other forms of intellectual
property. A non-trivial share, though, is used to pay dividends and to purchase financial assets,
or for mergers and acquisitions.3
 2 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is well established in the literature that businesses prefer to finance investment using internal
funds. Raising funds externally is more costly and can involve restrictions being imposed on the
managers.
Internal funding is closely related to business investment. They are similar in size. This is evident
in Graph 3, in which the dots comparing the level of internal funding (in a given year) with the level
of business investment (the following year) are clustered around the 45 degree line. Also, there is
a clear positive relationship between internal funding and investment.4
 3 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  contrast,  the  relationship  between  external  financing  and  investment  is  less  clear  in  the
aggregate  data.  External  financing  is  generally  much  smaller  than  investment  –  that  is,  the
external funding dots in Graph 3 tend to be well to the left of the 45 degree line. Moreover, there is
5
only a weak positive relationship between businesses’ external funding and investment.
Debt  funding  has  moved  more  closely  with  mergers  and  acquisitions  activity  (Graph  4).   For
instance, in the period leading up to the global financial crisis, debt finance was used by a small
number of highly leveraged firms to fund several mergers and acquisitions.
6
 4 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Like the growth of external debt, listed equity raisings have been relatively modest over the past
10 years, with relatively little capital raised through initial public offerings (IPOs) (Graph 5). This
followed  a  period  of  significant  equity  raisings  during  the  2000s,  partly  driven  by  a  number  of
privatisations through public floats.
 5 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Overall, external finance has become more readily available over recent years. Monetary policy,
both  here  and  abroad,  is  very  accommodative,  and  interest  rates  on  business  loans  and
corporate  bonds  are  near  historic  lows. Accordingly,  the  interest  being  paid  by  businesses  is
around its lowest level since the early 1960s (relative to operating profits; Graph 6).  Also, equity
raising is relatively attractive at current valuations.
7
 6 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
A  consistent  message  from  business  surveys  and  the  RBA’s  liaison  program  has  been  that
funding conditions have generally improved over the past five years.
Despite this, the demand for borrowing by businesses has been relatively moderate. Following
the  crisis,  there  was  significant  deleveraging  across  the  corporate  sector  (Graph  7).
Subsequently,  gearing  ratios  outside  the  resources  sector  have  remained  relatively  low.  Over
recent years, non-mining business investment has been growing and the outlook for investment
has improved. However, as I’ve already noted, firms have been able to finance investment from
internal sources. Even in the resources sector, while gearing rose after the global financial crisis,
it did not reach the levels that prevailed immediately before the crisis. It has declined in the past
couple  of  years,  as  resource  companies  have  been  using  the  boost  to  their  cash  flows  from
higher commodity prices and rising output to pay down debt.
 7 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Some  parts  of  the  business  sector  haven’t  seen  the  supply  of  external  funding  improve  over
recent years. The domestic banks have sought to constrain their exposures to the resources
sector and commercial property, partly in response to prudential supervision from the Australian
8
 Also, small businesses continue to find it challenging to obtain
Prudential Regulation Authority.
external finance. Indeed, this could be one factor that helps to explain why investment by small
9
businesses has been unusually weak over recent years (Graph 8).
 8 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finance for small businesses
The challenge of obtaining finance has been a consistent theme of the Small Business Finance
Advisory  Panel.  In  this  context,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  two  types  of  small
businesses. First, there are the many established small businesses that are not expanding. Their
needs for external finance are typically modest. Second, there are small businesses that are in
the start-up or expansion phase. They are not generating much in the way of internal funding.
Accordingly,  those  businesses  have  a  strong  demand  for  external  finance.  I’ll  focus  my
comments on the issues relevant to this second group of small businesses.
I should emphasise again that access to finance for small businesses is important because they
generate  employment,  drive  innovation  and  boost  competition  in  markets.  Indeed,  small
businesses in Australia employ almost 5 million people, which is nearly half of employment in the
(non-financial)  business  sector.  They  also  account  for  about  one-third  of  the  output  of  the
business sector.
10
Compared with larger, more established firms, smaller, newer businesses find it difficult to obtain
external  finance  since  they  are  riskier  on  average  and  there  is  less  information  available  to
lenders and investors about their prospects. Lenders typically manage these risks by charging
higher  interest  rates  than  for  large  business  loans,  by  rejecting  a  greater  proportion  of  small
business credit applications or by providing credit on a relatively restricted basis.
The reduction in the risk appetite of lenders following the global financial crisis appears to have
had a more significant and persistent effect on the cost of finance for small business than large
business. After the crisis, the average spread of business lending rates to the cash rate widened
dramatically.  The  increase  was  much  larger  and  more  persistent,  though,  for  small  business
loans (Graph 9). In part, this increase owed to the larger increase in non-performing loans for
 9 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
small businesses than for large business lending portfolios (Graph 10). It’s not clear, however,
whether the increase in interest rates being charged on small business loans relative to those
charged on large business loans (over the past decade or so) reflects changes in the relative
riskiness of the two types of loans.11
 10 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over  recent  years,  there  has  been  strong  competition  for  large  business  lending,  which  has
resulted in a decline in the interest rate spread on large business loans. Part of the competition
from banks for large business loans has been driven by an expansion in activity by foreign banks.
Large businesses also have access to a wider array of funding sources than small businesses,
including corporate bond markets and syndicated lending.
12
In  contrast,  competition  has  been  less  vigorous  for  small  business  lending.  Indeed,  some
providers of small business finance were acquired by other banks or exited the market following
the  onset  of  the  crisis.
  Also,  the  interest  rates  on  small  business  loans  have  remained
relatively high. This difference in competitive pressures is evident in the share of lending provided
to small business by the major banks, which is relatively high at over 80 per cent. This compares
with a share of around two-thirds in the case of large businesses. Small businesses continue to
use loans from banks for most of their debt funding because it is often difficult and costly for
them to raise funds directly from capital markets.
The RBA’s liaison has highlighted that if small business borrowers are able to provide housing as
collateral, it significantly reduces the cost and increases the availability of debt finance. Lenders
have indicated that at least three-quarters of their small business lending is collateralised and
they only have a limited appetite for unsecured lending. However, there are a number of reasons
why entrepreneurs find it difficult to provide sufficient collateral for business borrowing via home
equity:
they may actually not own a home, or have much equity in their home if they are relatively
young;
similarly, they may not have sufficient spare home equity if they’ve already borrowed against
 11 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
their home to establish a business and now want to expand their business;
and  even  if  they  have  plenty  of  spare  home  equity,  using  their  homes  as  collateral
concentrates the risk they face in the event of the failure of the business.
Many entrepreneurs have limited options for providing alternative collateral, since banks are far
more likely to accept physical assets (such as buildings or equipment), rather than ‘soft’ assets,
such as software and intellectual property.
Given the higher risk associated with small businesses, particularly start-ups, equity financing
would appear to be a viable alternative to traditional bank finance. However, small businesses
often  find  it  difficult  to  access  equity  financing  beyond  what  is  issued  to  the  business  by  the
founders. Small businesses have little access to listed equity markets, and while private equity
financing  is  sometimes  available,  its  supply  to  small  businesses  is  limited  in  Australia,
particularly when compared with the experience of other countries (Graph 11). Small businesses
also report that the cost of equity financing is high, and they are often reluctant to sell equity to
professional  investors,  since  this  usually  involves  relinquishing  significant  control  over  their
business.
Innovations improving access to business finance
There are several innovations that could help to improve access to finance by: providing lenders
with more information about the capacity of borrowers to service their debts, and connecting risk-
seeking investors with start-up businesses that could offer high returns.
 12 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Comprehensive credit reporting
Comprehensive credit reporting will provide more information to lenders about the credit history
of  potential  borrowers.  The  current  standard  only  makes  negative  credit  information  publicly
available. When information about credit that has been repaid without problems also becomes
available publicly, the cost of assessing credit risks will be reduced and lenders will be able to
price risk more accurately; this may enhance competition as the current lender to any particular
business will no longer have an informational advantage over other lenders. It may also reduce
the  need  for  lenders  to  seek  additional  collateral  and  personal  guarantees  for  small  business
lending, particularly for established businesses. Indeed, the use of personal guarantees is more
widespread  in  Australia  than  in  countries  that  have  well-established  comprehensive  credit
reporting regimes, such as the United Kingdom and the United States.
For several years, the finance industry has attempted to establish a voluntary comprehensive
credit reporting regime in Australia. Participation has so far been limited.
 However, several of
the major banks have committed to contribute their credit data in coming months. The Australian
Government has announced that it will legislate for a mandatory regime to come into effect mid
next year.
Open banking
13
The introduction of an open banking regime should make it easier for entrepreneurs to share their
banking  data  (including  on  transactions  accounts)  securely  with  third-party  service  providers,
such as potential lenders. When assessing credit risks, lenders place considerable weight on
evidence of the capacity of small business borrowers to service their debts based on their cash
flows.  For  this  reason,  making  this  data  available  via  open  banking  would  reduce  the  cost  of
assessing credit risk. A review is currently being conducted with a view to introducing legislation
to support an open banking regime.
Large technology companies
Technology  firms  can  use  the  transactional  data  from  their  platforms  to  identify  creditworthy
borrowers,  and  provide  loans  and  trade  credit  to  these  businesses  from  their  own  balance
sheets. This could supply small innovative businesses that are active on these online platforms
with a new source of finance. Amazon and Paypal are providing finance to some businesses that
use their platforms. For example, Amazon identifies businesses with good sales histories and
offers them finance on an invitation-only basis. Loans are reported to range from US$1 000 to
US$750 000 for terms of up to a year at interest rates between 6 and 14 per cent. Repayments
are automatically deducted from the proceeds of the borrower’s sales.
Alternative finance platforms
Alternative  finance  platforms,  including  marketplace  lending  and  crowdfunding  platforms,  use
new technologies to connect fundraisers directly with funding sources. The aim is to avoid the
costs and delays involved in traditional intermediated finance.
While  alternative  financing  platforms  are  growing  rapidly,  they  are  still  a  very  minor  source  of
funding  for  businesses,  including  in  Australia.  The  largest  alternative  finance  markets  are  in
China, followed by the United States and the United Kingdom. But even these markets remain
small relative to the size of their economies (Graph 12).
 13 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
Marketplace lending platforms provide debt funding by matching individuals or groups of lenders
with borrowers. These platforms typically target personal and small business borrowers with low
credit risk by attempting to offer lower cost lending products and more flexible lending conditions
than traditional lenders. Data collected by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
indicate that most marketplace lending in Australia is for relatively small loans to consumers at
interest rates comparable to personal loans offered by banks (Graph 13).
 14 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
It is unclear whether marketplace lending platforms are significantly reducing financial constraints
for small businesses. Unlike innovations such as comprehensive credit reporting, which have the
potential to improve the credit risk assessment process, marketplace lenders do not have an
information advantage over traditional lenders. As a result, they need to manage risks with prices
and terms in line with traditional lenders.
 Nevertheless, these platforms could provide some
competition to traditional lenders, particularly as a source of unsecured short-term finance, since
they process applications quickly and offer rates below those on credit cards.
14
Crowdfunding  platforms  have  the  potential  to  make  financing  more  accessible  for  start-up
businesses, although their use has been limited to date. Crowdsourced equity funding platforms
typically involve a large number of investors taking a small equity stake in a business. As a result,
entrepreneurs  can  receive  finance  without  having  to  give  up  as  much  control  as  expected  by
venture capitalists.
 Several legislative changes have been made to facilitate growth in these
markets, including by allowing small unlisted public companies to raise crowdsourced equity.
Conclusion
15
The provision of external finance to Australian businesses is dominated by the banks. Funding
from  that  source  has  generally  become  available  on  increasingly  favourable  terms  for  large
borrowers over recent years. Even so, much of business investment is financed from internally
generated  funds,  while  growth  in  business  debt  is  more  closely  related  to  mergers  and
acquisitions activity, which has remained relatively modest compared with levels seen before the
global financial crisis.
Entrepreneurs  starting  or  expanding  a  small  business  are  typically  more  reliant  on  external
finance, which remains difficult to obtain. Lending to small businesses is dominated by the major
banks and, there is less competition in this market. Interest rates paid by small businesses are
also  much  higher  than  those  paid  by  large  businesses;  it’s  not  clear  the  extent  to  which  this
 15 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  greater  risk 
to  small  businesses.
difference  reflects 
Entrepreneurs starting businesses often resort to personal credit cards for day-to-day funding,
while those seeking to expand their businesses are concerned by the collateral required to obtain
funding at lower interest rates.
in  extending 
involved 
loans 
There are several innovations that have the potential to improve access to finance, although their
use has been limited to date. The most promising development in the near term is mandatory
comprehensive  credit  reporting,  which  has  the  potential  to  lower  the  cost  of  credit  risk
assessment for all lende
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
The Panel’s discussion are a useful input into Bank work, for example Reserve Bank of Australia (2012), ‘Small
Business Finance Roundtable: Summary of Discussion’, RBA Bulletin, June, pp 91–94. Information about the
panel  can  also  be  found  on  the  RBA  website: www.rba.gov.au/about-rba/panels/small-business-finance-
advisory-panel.html.
The finances of the business sector are challenging to measure, since the boundary between businesses,
households and the government is not clearly defined and evolves over time. Unincorporated businesses tend
to  be  closely  intertwined  with  the  households  that  own  them  and,  as  a  result,  it  is  virtually  impossible  to
separately identify their balance sheets. In addition, the privatisation of many public corporations over recent
decades has shifted the responsibility for financing these businesses from the public sector to the private
sector. To deal with these challenges, the business sector is defined here to include all private and public
corporations.
Mergers and acquisitions within the Australian business sector are not captured in the data shown in Graph 2,
which is based on net transactions by the Australian business sector with other sectors, including foreigners.
A similar positive relationship is observed between internal funding and investment in the same year. However,
the correlation is larger between internal funding this year and investment next year, which is consistent with
businesses being secure about their finances ahead of committing to sizeable investment outlays. External
funding is somewhat positively correlated with investment in the same year and that correlation is a bit stronger
than between external funding this year and investment next year. This result makes sense as it would be costly
for a business to obtain external funding and then not put that funding to use as quickly as possible.
Similarly, relatively timely indicators such as business loan approvals and credit have not been found to be
useful  for  forecasting  investment.  Previous  RBA  research  has  found  a  significant  relationship  between
investment and variables such as the user cost of capital, cash flow, sales, business confidence and the terms
of  trade:  La  Cava  G  (2005),  ‘Financial  Constraints,  the  User  Cost  of  Capital  and  Corporate  Investment  in
Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2005–12 and Cockerell L and S Pennings (2007), ‘Private
Business Investment in Australia’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2007–09.
The ABS data on business debt funding, which is a broad measure of loans and debt securities, have been
weaker over the past year than RBA business credit, which measures lending by ADIs to businesses. The
weaker growth of total debt is likely to reflect companies repurchasing debt securities and reducing offshore
borrowing, particularly in the resources sector. The repayment of government loans following the privatisation of
some public corporations has also played a role.
The decline in interest paid since the late 1980s has been driven entirely by lower interest rates, as the ratio of
debt relative to operating profits has increased a little over this period.
See Byres W (2017), ‘Prudential Perspectives on the Property Market’, Remarks at CEDA’s 2017 NSW Property
Market Outlook Sydney, 28 April. Available at: .
See  Debelle  G  (2017),  ‘Business  Investment  in Australia’,  Remarks  at  UBS Australasia  Conference  2017,
Sydney, 13 November. The estimates for Graph 8 are sourced from the ABS’ BLADE (Business Longitudinal
Analytical Data Environment) database. The results of these studies are based, in part, on ABR data supplied by
the Registrar to the ABS under A New Tax System (Australian Business Number) Act 1999 and tax data supplied
by the ATO to the ABS under the Taxation Administration Act 1953. These require that such data are only used for
the purpose of carrying out functions of the ABS. No individual information collected under the Census and
Statistics Act  1905  is  provided  back  to  the  Registrar  or ATO  for  administrative  or  regulatory  purposes. Any
discussion of data limitations or weaknesses is in the context of using the data for statistical purposes, and is
not related to the ability of the data to support the ABR or ATO’s core operational requirements. Legislative
 16 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
requirements to ensure privacy and secrecy of this data have been followed. Only people authorised under the
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act 1975 have been allowed to view data about any particular firm in conducting
these analyses. In accordance with the Census and Statistics Act 1905, results have been confidentialised to
ensure that they are not likely to enable identification of a particular person or organisation.
These shares have been relatively stable over the past decade. These data refer to businesses that employ
fewer than 20 people and are sourced from Australian Industry, 2015–16, ABS Cat no. 8155.
Note that Graph 10 is based on default probabilities, not expected or actual losses, which will also depend on
losses given default. Those, in turn, will depend (among other things) on collateral held against the loans,
which in the case of many small business loans is housing.
These included, for example, Bankwest, St. George Bank and GE Capital.
Productivity  Commission  (2017),  ‘Data  Availability  and  Use:  Overview  &  Recommendations’,  Productivity
Commission Inquiry Report No 82, Canberra.
A survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that small businesses were noticeably less satisfied
with online lenders than with traditional lenders, with more complaints about the interest rates charged and the
repayment terms imposed by online lenders. Federal Reserve (2016), ‘Small Business Credit Survey’, Report
on Employer Firms’, April, available at .
Some crowdfunding platforms also allow businesses to raise funds through presales of a new product. These
platforms offer some advantages to small business, since they receive direct funding from customers, require
no collateral, and can provide a gauge of market interest. However, success on these markets is unpredictable,
and the sites are geared towards consumer-oriented products.
10
11
12
13
14
15
 17 / 17
BIS central bankers' speeches
