Mugur Isărescu: Opening speech - Annual EBRD EU-11 Meeting
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the Annual
EBRD EU-11 Meeting, Bucharest, 13 April 2018.
 Vice President Heilbronn,
Minister Teodorovici,
Your Excellences,
Ladies and gentlemen,
You are most welcome here, at the National Bank of Romania. Together with the Board of the
Bank  we  are  privileged  to  greet  you  here,  today,  for  the  Annual  European  Bank  for
Reconstruction and Development EU-11 Meeting.
Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  has  always  had  a  consistent  and
reliable cooperation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Several high
ranking  officials  from  the  EBRD  have  visited  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  Jacques  de
Larosière being one of them, in order to discuss topics of mutual interest and, of course, the
EBRD activity in Romania (especially EBRD’s contribution to the reform of the banking sector in
Romania).
I would like to recall that the National Bank of Romania has hosted, over the years, more than a
few official presentations of the EBRD Transition Report, including the 2014 edition, ”Innovation in
Transition”. On a more personal note, I confess I am among those who signed the Agreement
establishing the Bank in 1991, as the representative of Romania to that historical moment.
I will take this opportunity to acknowledge the role that the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development  had  in  mitigating  the  global  financial  crisis.  EBRD’s  involvement  in  two  very
important  initiatives,  namely  the Local  Currency  and  Local  Capital  Market  Initiative  and  the
Vienna Initiative, has been essential for Romania and the region.
I am closely following the evolution of the EBRD. I believe that it finds itself at a cross-road, as
the world has been changing rapidly due to the remarkable achievements of the past century: the
IT revolution, artificial intelligence, the technological progress and so on. EBRD, as other financial
institutions,  ought  to  adapt  itself  to  this  new  environment  and  try  to  respond  wisely  and
appropriately. In this respect, I think that EBRD has to continue its work in the countries for which
the Bank was initially created, as transition gaps still exist. We all need to share our experience
with the new countries of operations, adjusting our knowledge to new challenging environments.
We need to remain open minded and ready to tackle further challenges in this multidimensional
environment. EBRD needsto be ready to share, when and if its help is required. Together with
the other institutions of European Union, the European Commission, the EIB Group, as well as
the national development agencies of the member states, we all have a duty to help/assist the
less fortunate.
However,  as  expansion  is  a  “hot  topic”  today  in  the  EBRD,  should  it  be  considered  by  the
shareholders in the future, it needs to be calibrated with a strong and decisive intervention in the
current  countries  of  operations,  to  remove  as  much  as  possible  the  transition  gaps.  This
approach  should  be  a  consensual  approach  of  the  shareholders,  a  transparent  one,  where
everybody, sponsors and countries of operations agree on the principles and objectives.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Allow  me  to  conclude  by  saying  that  the  National  Bank  of  Romania  strongly  supports  the
partnership  with  the  European  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and  Development.  We  appreciate  the
assistance provided and its benefits and positive impact. We will remain your reliable partner, as
always.
I invite Mr. Eugen Teodorovici, Minister of Finance and Governor to the EBRD to give his keynote
speech  on “Romanian  Government  Program  and  Future  Presidency  of  the  European  Union
Council”.
I wish you fruitful and successful discussions.
Thank you.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
