Philip R Lane: Financial globalisation and central banking in Ireland
Remarks  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Financial
Globalisation Symposium as part of the programme to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the
Central Bank of Ireland, Dublin, 2 February 2018.
 It is a pleasure to welcome you to this symposium, which is part of our programme to mark the
75th anniversary of the Central Bank of Ireland. I am especially delighted that Francois Villeroy de
Galhau is joining us today to give a keynote address. I am looking forward also to learning from
the excellent lineup of speakers later in the afternoon.
The  topic  of  financial  globalisation  is  a  natural  theme  for  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland.  At  a
macroeconomic  level,  the  global  financial  cycle  is  a  primary  determinant  of  financial  stability
conditions  in  small  open  economies.  This  lesson  was  painfully  learned  across  the  advanced
economies during the international credit boom that occurred over 2003–2008.
During that period, the Irish property bubble was amplified by a surge in foreign funding raised by
the domestic banking system. In related fashion, an excess of domestic spending over domestic
incomes was financed during that period by the running of a significant current account deficit.
However, the rapid expansion in the balance sheets of the domestic banks also took the form of
an  expansion  in  lending  to  foreign  speculative  ventures,  such  that  the  scale  of  net  inflows
understated the growing exposures of Irish banks to a reversal in conditions.
It follows that the Central Bank needs to be vigilant in understanding the international financial
environment. This includes enhanced surveillance of international financial risks by tracking and
interpreting  data  on  international  financial  flows,  international  balance  sheets,  international
imbalances and international asset prices. To obtain useful insights, it is desirable to go further
by  linking  the  external  data  with  domestic  sectoral  data  in  order  to  understand  the  shifts  in
sectoral balance sheets that are the counterpart to a shift in the external balance sheet, even if
this poses significant challenges in terms of data availability.
Since Ireland is a major hub for international financial intermediation, it is also our duty as part of
the  international  regulatory  community  to  contribute  to  global  financial  stability  analysis  by
exploring the international financial flows that are routed through Ireland but where the original
investor  and  the  ultimate  destination  are  located  elsewhere.  To  illustrate  the  scale  of  the
international financial sector in Ireland, the balance sheets of the internationally-orientated banks
and insurance companies that we regulate aggregate to €519 billion. In addition, the assets of the
investment funds that we authorise amount to €2.3 trillion euro, while we also gather information
on other entities such as special purpose vehicles.
We use our data to actively contribute to the shadow banking monitors published by the Financial
Stability  Board  and  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board.  We  also  have  published  numerous
studies  on  the  characteristics  of  the  investment  funds  and  special  purpose  vehicles  that  are
located here. Since we also adopt a data-intensive approach to the supervision of investment
funds here, we find that there are significant analytical complementarities across our different
central banking and regulatory functions in advancing our understanding of international financial
flows. Our internal International Financial Data Working Group (IFDWG) provides a forum for the
different  teams  working  on  these  issues  to  share  analytical  insights  and  receive  feedback  on
work in progress.
The increasing prominence of global firms in the international financial system also means that
there  are  now  significant  crossovers  between  the  international  financial  data  and  the  national
accounts.  While  this  is  also  true  for  other  countries  with  large  multinational  sectors,  this
phenomenon  is  especially  acute  in  Ireland.  The  main  issues  relate  to  internationally-mobile
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital assets such as intellectual property and aircraft: the relocation of these assets across
borders  triggers  shifts  in  the  national  accounts  and  the  international  financial  accounts.
Developing new analytical and accounting frameworks that address this issue should be a high
priority  for  the  international  statistical  system;  there  may  be  some  lessons  from  the  modified
national income and modified current account measures that were introduced here last year.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  policy  challenges  facing  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  in  maintaining
domestic financial stability and protecting consumers in a financially-globalised world. In relation
to  the  banking  system,  the  European  system  builds  resilience  by  requiring  banks  to  maintain
sufficiently-high capital and liquidity ratios. At the national level, we can add an extra capital buffer
(the counter-cyclical capital buffer) if we assess that there is a risk of excessive credit growth.
We also have introduced borrower-based measures in the form of ceilings on loan-to-income
and  loan-to-value  ratios  in  the  mortgage  market.  These  mortgage  measures  make  the  banks
safer, while also protecting consumers from over-indebtedness. We review the calibration of all
of our macroprudential measures on a regular basis in order to stand ready to respond in an
agile manner to shifts in the distribution of financial stability risks.
At this point, it is also necessary to remind you that cross-border financial flows can also take
form  of  equity  investments,  especially  direct  investment  in  the  context  of  the  Irish  economy.
While equity investment has desirable risk sharing properties and does not generate the same
financial stability risks as debt flows, a boom-bust cycle in equity funding can still contribute to
macroeconomic  volatility.  However,  fiscal  policy  is  the  appropriate  stabilisation  instrument  to
manage such cycles, rather than our macroprudential policy tools which are designed to manage
debt-generating flows.
Let  me  also  emphasise  that  membership  of  the  monetary  union  provides  an  important  buffer
against  international  financial  shocks.  Under  the  counterfactual  of  maintaining  an  independent
currency,  international  financial  shocks  can  generate  volatility  in  exchange  rates  and  interest
rates, even if the underlying domestic macroeconomic environment is stable. Such volatility is
especially problematic for small open economies.
In a financially-globalised world, it is also the case that banks, firms and households in small
open economies may incur foreign-currency liabilities. In a crisis environment, the existence of
such foreign-currency liabilities may be destabilising, especially if foreign-exchange reserves are
insufficient  to  provide  cover  against  the  risk  of  a  run  on  these  foreign-currency  liabilities.  In
contrast, the capacity to raise cross-border funding in a common currency together with access
to the common liquidity facilities of the European Central Bank acts as a stabilising mechanism
in  the  event  of  a  crisis  event.  In  this  way,  monetary  union  can  be  an  effective  mechanism  in
addressing the macroeconomic and monetary challenges posed by financial globalisation.
In  similar  fashion,  the  coordinated  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  (ESFS)  allows
Europe  to  manage  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  challenges  posed  by  international  trade  in
financial services. A common rule book and a level playing field means that firms cannot engage
in regulatory arbitrage across the member countries, while home-host coordination issues can
be managed within the institutional framework provided by the European Supervisory Authorities
(ESAs). In banking, the successful operation of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has
proven its value in fostering the development of a unified approach to banking supervision. Of
course,  EU  regulation  and  supervision  takes  place  within  a  broader  global  context,  with  an
important  role  for  global  coordination  of  regulation  through  institutions  such  as  the  Basel
Committee  for  Banking  Supervision,  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  IOSCO.  Through
international  coordination  among  regulators,  it  should  be  feasible  for  the  industry  to  reap  the
scale economies available to multi-country financial groups, while recognising the importance of
ensuring that each individual legal entity within a group is appropriately regulated and supervised.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let  me  conclude  by  posing  the  question:  what  will  the  international  monetary  and  financial
system look like in 2043, when the Central Bank of Ireland celebrates its centenary? No doubt,
this question will be settled by the end of this afternoon’s symposium. Regardless of how the
future unfolds, I am certain that the Central Bank of Ireland will pursue with great dedication our
mandate to safeguard stability and protect consumers.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
