Michael Held: The evolving first line of defense
Keynote address by Mr Michael Held, Executive Vice President of the Legal Group of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the 1LoD Summit, New York City, 17 April 2018.
 Good morning.  It’s an honor to join you at the 1LoD Summit.  The views I express today are my
own, not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve
1
System.
I’ve heard it said that being in the risk control business can be, and often is, a thankless task.
 We get all the blame when something goes wrong, and none of the glory when things go right. 
So, I want to start my remarks with a word of gratitude to you, my fellow travelers in the world of
risk controls.  Thank you—not just for the invitation to speak today, but also for the work you
perform each day at your firms. 
The growing sophistication and stature of the first line of defense is, in my view, an unqualified
improvement in corporate governance—especially at financial firms.  Let’s begin with what you
are defending. 
The credibility and reputation of your colleagues, your employer, and your industry. 
The trust of your customers and clients.  
And, perhaps most important, the public interest.  
From my perspective, you are not just a first line of defense for your organization.  You are the
first line of defense against significant risks to the financial system.  This may sound inflated to
some.  And it is not unusual to begin a speech with a bit of flattery.  But I mean this sincerely. 
The first line of defense helps keep problems small.  It enhances a firm’s commitment to both its
private  and  public  purposes.    It  contributes  materially  to  the  trustworthiness  of  firms  and  the
financial system, and therefore promotes financial stability. 
Today’s  agenda  promises  to  inform  and  to  challenge,  and  to  help  the  first  line  develop
professionally as a distinct area of corporate controls.  For my part, allow me to share some
observations based on my work at the New York Fed. 
2
First, I want to discuss the risk of developing harmful silos in a three lines of defense model.
Second, I want to encourage you to be creative and inclusive in your approach to the first line of
defense.  You are probably already consulting with technology specialists.  But I am also thinking
of  fields  such  as  behavioral  science.    The  observations  of  neuroscientists  and  psychologists
have disrupted the field of economics, and may help firms better manage risk.
Third, I will offer some thoughts on the development of professional attributes in the first line of
defense, especially community and courage.
Three lines of defense, not three silos of defense
Since the financial crisis, we have seen a proliferation of the three lines of defense model across
3
the financial industry.  The official sector has helped promote this framework.
The three lines of defense model is a useful framework, but it is a means to an end.  It is not an
end  in  itself.    The  goal  is  a  well-controlled  firm  with  respect  to  its  risks.    There  is  a  potential
danger associated with applying the three lines of defense framework so rigidly that it detracts
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
from that goal.  Independence and expertise are desirable.  Silos are not.  Excessive formalism
can limit the overall control framework of an organization. 
I  offer  these  observations  with  humility  gained  through  experience.    I  have  witnessed  many
discussions about where lawyers fit into the three lines of defense.  First line?  Second line?  Not
in  any  line?    In  hindsight,  such  debates  are  a  distraction.    It  is  much  more  important  to  think
instead about the tasks the lawyer is performing.  How do those tasks fit in to the overall goal of
helping the organization control its risks? 
Ultimately,  substance  matters  much  more  than  form.    Of  course,  clarity  of  roles  and
responsibilities is important.  It is also important that a front line business feel accountable for
managing the broad set of risks confronting it.  Indeed, one of the benefits of the three lines of
defense  model  is  that  the  business  lines  think  more  expansively  about  the  risks  they  face,
beyond  just  traditional  notions  of  credit  and  counterparty  risk.    But  an  effective  risk  manager
worries less about whether her firm’s risk management framework exactly matches the theory of
the three lines of defense, and more about whether the risks facing the firm are well controlled. 
Get creative
It’s easy to say, in essence, “Don’t miss the forest for the trees.”  Let’s acknowledge that the
challenges you encounter in the first line of defense are a veritable thicket.  To manage effectively
the risks that your firms face requires intellectual agility and creativity.  For now, I want to touch
on  a  few  considerations:  diversity,  choice  architecture  (especially  incentives),  and  moral
reasoning.  These inputs can help you apply the three lines of defense model more effectively,
especially in the face of rapid technological innovation.
Diversity
If you want to think nimbly, embrace diversity: the way we think, our backgrounds and areas of
expertise, our experiences—including, but certainly not limited to, the ways that people treat us
because of where we were born, our race, gender, pedigree, sexual orientation—and even our
values.  Diversity can help address the problem of silos that I described earlier.  The problem
with silos is not specialization, but blind spots.  At the New York Fed, I don’t want economists
making  legal  judgments,  or  lawyers  performing  economic  analyses.    But  I  very  much  want
lawyers and economists to provide insights to each other based on their specialties. 
More generally, inviting outside views helps avoid common, human biases.   “Groupthink” is one
well-documented bias.  Another is the “endowment effect”—placing greater value on what one
already has versus what one does not.  What links these phenomena is an excessive preference
for  the  status  quo.    It  is  remarkable  how  often  problems  in  financial  firms  can  be  overlooked
because of a sense that are they part of a normal, business-as-usual state of affairs.  A diversity
of inputs can help us see the flaws in what we accept as normal. 
4
Diversity is a frequent topic of conversation, but it is not easy.  My view is that, like other ethics,
diversity is a habit that takes practice.  As first line of defense professionals, try to develop the
habit  of  seeking  out  other  points  of  view.    Diverse  points  of  view  may  come  from  junior
employees in your line of business.  They may also come from HR professionals, sociologists
and  psychologists,  communications  experts,  even  lawyers.    For  financial  firms,  prudential
supervisors can also contribute to a diversity of viewpoints.  Their horizontal view of practices
across firms not only helps promote a more stable financial system, but also helps firms identify
problem areas. 
A diverse set of views, professional training, and life experience may help you see shortcomings
in your risk management framework—even in the three lines of defense model.  Just because
three lines of defense is a sensible way to manage risk does not mean it is perfect—no model
is.  A diverse set of inputs will help you figure out how to apply more effectively the three lines of
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
defense in your organization.
Choice architecture
I  recommend  as  well  that  you  pay  attention  to  choice  architecture  in  deciding  how  best  to
construct a first line of defense.  By “choice architecture,” I mean the broad array of options that
promote decisions aligned with the values and goals of your respective firms.   How choices are
presented can have a dramatic impact on outcomes.  Taking account of ordinary, human biases
—including the ones I just mentioned—and organizational culture can help you present options in
a manner that yields better results.
5
In the world of risk controls, individuals face choices every day—choices whether to walk right up
to the line of appropriate behavior and risk crossing it; choices to get more or less compensation
in exchange for riskier behavior; and choices to raise their hands (or not) when they suspect that
something  has  gone  awry.    In  my  view,  effective  controls  require  an  appropriate  balance  of
narrowly focused, prescriptive rules, and broader principles and standards.  The precise balance
will vary, depending on the task and the firm.  But regardless of the setting, a thoughtful set of risk
controls can improve the choices that employees make. 
One other word of advice on choices.  People need time—time to stop, breathe, and ask for help
if  they  need  it.    Making  decisions  sooner  than  necessary  can  lead  to  mistakes.   As  human
beings, we do not always see consequences in the first instance.  We need time to process.  Of
course, time can sometimes seem like a luxury.  Time is, after all, money—or so we have been
told.  But the consequences of making the wrong choice because you are in a hurry can be far
more expensive.  I was speaking recently with a colleague with years of experience as a criminal
prosecutor.  She observed that the first step on the path to criminal ruin often begins with one
seemingly small, often rushed choice.  My own experience from years of seeing mistakes in the
financial services industry leads me to agree.  People—especially junior employees—too often
decide sooner than they must, without taking the time to raise their hand and ask for help.  So do
not  confuse  thinking  quickly  and  creatively  with  choosing  rapidly  in  every  instance.    When
considering what structures in your organization can help people make good decisions, consider
ways to build in adequate time to decide.
Incentives
In any discussion of choices, it is critical to consider incentives.  Compensation is a powerful
form of incentive.  We need to think creatively about how to structure compensation in ways that
promote conduct aligned with the values and long-term financial interests of the firm.  Bill Dudley,
the President of the New York Fed, has proposed one possible improvement.  Pay material risk
takers and senior managers in the form of deferred debt, which vests in line with the medium-
and long-term risks for which they are accountable.   The idea is to create a performance bond
for bankers akin to the security deposit that a tenant provides to a landlord. 
6
But, believe it or not, money is not the only way to motivate people.  One lesson of the LIBOR
scandal is that employees are motivated by more than pecuniary gain.  In that case, loyalty to a
network of professional contacts was a powerful incentive to commit fraud.  I am lucky to have
had a very different experience at the New York Fed.  I oversee a staff of legal, compliance, and
law enforcement professionals who appreciate their paychecks but, in all candor, are not in it for
the money—or, at least, not entirely in it for the money.  What matters to them is the Federal
Reserve’s public mission.  A good way to encourage their best conduct is to acknowledge their
contributions to that mission. 
But  don’t  take  my  word  for  it.   A  growing  number  of  organizational  experts  and  management
consultants have concluded that job satisfaction and other intrinsic benefits matter as much if not
more than extrinsic rewards, including pay.   This is not to say that incentive compensation is
7
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
weak tea.  It is certainly a powerful motivator.  My point is that, in your efforts to construct the
most effective controls for your organization’s risks, consider both monetary and non-monetary
incentives. 
Moral reasoning
It is also important to promote moral reasoning.  I know there’s a joke in there somewhere.  After
all, what is a lawyer doing talking about morality?  And there is some tension in advocating moral
judgment in a discussion about controls.  Controls seek consistency and objectivity.  Morality, by
contrast, can be very personal or subjective.  Controls often remove discretion.  Moral reasoning
is all about choice.
But  let’s  be  realistic.    We  cannot  rely  exclusively  on  controls  or  process  to  achieve  desired
outcomes.    Not  every  situation  can  be  anticipated.    Not  every  decision  can  be  automated. 
Controls can be out-maneuvered—sometimes unwittingly, but other times on purpose.  For all
these  reasons,  good  processes  are  necessary  but  not  sufficient.    There  will  be  situations  in
which your employees have to make choices.  Ignoring the moral dimension of choices carries
significant risk.   If you want your organization to be well controlled with regard to its risk, you
have to consider the quality of choices, not just the reliability of processes.    An  organization
should 
to  make good  choices,  not
just permissible choices. 
therefore  develop 
the  capacity  of 
its  employees 
8
9
So, how do you practice moral reasoning?  Bill Dudley has offered what I thought was a good
10
starting point.  Get rid of the notion that a separate morality applies at work than at home.
 
Bankers—and, for that matter, lawyers—cannot check their morals at the door when they step
onto a trading floor or into a courtroom. 
11
Here are some other ideas, courtesy of a 2016 report by the Financial Conduct Authority entitled
“Behaviour and Compliance in Organizations.”
  The report argues, among other things, that
ethical considerations need to remain salient in order to promote good choices.  Salience can be
achieved  by  prompting  about  moral  codes—through  language  that  emphasizes  words  like
“moral,”  “ethical,”  and  “good.”    Discussions  by  leaders  and  key  culture  carriers—that  is,
esteemed colleagues regardless of  rank  in  a  hierarchy—can  also  help  if  they  address  ethical
dilemmas  that  arise  in  the  course  of  business  decisions.    Finally,  salience  occurs  through
proximity of decision-makers to those affected by decisions.
 So, look for ways to make the
human consequences of choices more apparent.
12
In my view, a habit or culture of considering what is right, and not merely what is permissible, will
help  any  organization  attract,  retain,  and  develop  high-quality  employees.    It  will  promote
individual  wellbeing  and  will  contribute,  over  time,  to  an  industry  that  makes  fewer  errors  of
judgment.
Do not rest
Above all, remember that this is a marathon, not a sprint.  So your organization now has three
lines  of  defense—great!    But  your  work  is  not  over.    You  still  have  to  question  whether  your
organization can be better controlled vis-à-vis its risks.  The challenges and opportunities facing
your firm do not stop changing.  You need to adjust accordingly. 
I encourage you to ask questions about the three lines of defense model and how it is applied in
your organizations.  Here is one of the questions on my mind:  How do the three lines of defense
take  account  of  advances  in  technology?    Technological  solutions  in  financial  services  are
becoming  cheaper,  faster,  more  easily  available—almost  off-the-shelf—and  help  make  your
business more efficient and profitable.  But do you know how these solutions work?  Chances
are, not really.  I certainly do not, but then I’m just a lawyer.  There may be a tendency to believe
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
that brilliant people built and tested the product.  Surely they know better than you or I about how
it works.  We should therefore just trust the experts. 
I  have  seen  this  movie  before.    Similar  assumptions  existed  a  decade  ago  about  CDOs  and
other  complex  securitizations  and  hedges.    It  has  been  said  that  the  financial  crisis  occurred
because  of  a  failure  of  imagination—of  not  anticipating  risk.
    There  was  also  a  more  basic
failure.  Not enough people understood how complex financial products actually worked. 
13
It is critical that all three lines of defense—and, especially, the first line of defense—understand
technology.    I  urge  you  to  question  your  current  technology,  and  to  think  ahead  to  further
changes.  For example, how will artificial intelligence challenge traditional methods of testing and
assurance,  which  address  static  coding  rather  than  dynamic  learning?    How  will  machine
choices about access to financial services, or the cost of those services, avoid perpetuating or
exacerbating historical disparities of race, gender, age, or zip code?  These questions do not
have easy answers, and they will likely lead to more questions.  So don’t rest.  Keep learning so
that you can better anticipate risks.
Professionalism and the first line of defense
Finally, I encourage you to continue to develop a sense of your field as a profession.  Now, I do
not mean to imply that anyone in this room is unprofessional.  But, like many others, I see a role
for professionalism in finance.  The Banking Standards Board in the United Kingdom is a thought
leader in this field.  According to its most recent annual review, which I recommend to you all,
“[P]rofessionalism  comprises  the  attitudes,  judgement  and  high  standards  of  behaviour,
knowledge and skill expected of individuals working in banking. . . . [G]reater professionalism in
banking  would  help  create  a  sector  that,  now  and  in  the  future,  better  met  the  needs  and
14
expectations of its customers, clients, members, employees, the economy and wider society.”
In my view, various aspects of professions have a lot to offer.  The eligibility requirements for
many professions improve the likelihood that a practitioner will meet standards of competence
and behavior in her professional conduct.  These requirements cover character, prior record, and
reputation—not only skill or education.
Members  of  professions  also  benefit  from  codes  of  conduct  that  transcend  specialized
practices.  These principles offer an ethical framework within which to tackle problems that are
not easily resolved by narrow rules or processes.  They make it easier to make and stick with
good decisions. 
Gatherings  in  which  members  of  a  profession  can  come  together  and  exchange  ideas  and
opinions  are  crucial.    They  help  members  of  a  professional  community  keep  up  to  date  on
important industry-wide developments and raise issues that present the need for collaboration. 
They also help to instill a shared sense of purpose and responsibility for carrying out the goals of
the profession.
A profession can also provide personal accountability.  Lawyers, for instance, can be disbarred,
and complaints against them can become matters of public record.  That is added incentive to
maintain  the  skills,  character,  and  other  qualifications  required  to  become  (and  remain)  a
member of the bar.
And, critically, professions do not stop improving.  Lawyers continue—I hope—to seek a more
just society.  Doctors, a healthier one. 
I do not mean to call for the equivalent of the legal bar for bankers—although it might not be a bad
idea.  But there are elements of professions that could be useful.  For example, forums like this
one facilitate information sharing and promote a sense of community.  A code of professional
conduct  is  another  example.   Again,  I  refer  you  to  the  work  of  the  Banking  Standards  Board,
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  has  developed  a  “Statement  of  Principles  for  Strengthening  Professionalism.”    Like  Bill
Dudley,  I  have  argued  that  banking  would  benefit  from  a  misconduct  database.
  Records  of
employee misconduct would be available to future employers to combat the so-called “rolling bad
apple” phenomenon.  Hopefully  this  would  encourage  more  careful  choices  by  bankers  in  the
same  way  that  the  risk  of  disbarment  prompts  lawyers  to  think  about  the  long-term
consequences of their decisions. 
15
None of these ideas is a magic bullet.  But they may be helpful as you consider how the first line
of defense and the financial services industry develop as a profession.
Conclusion: professional courage
Let me end with one final thought on professionalism.  Looking back at the financial crisis and
more  recent  scandals,  there  must  have  been  people  who  recognized  early  that  what  was
happening was wrong, but remained silent.
  As the first line of defense develops and convenes
in gatherings like this, it is important to remember one other professional value: courage. 
16
Professional courage is key to the appropriate functioning of lawyers inside corporations.
  In
what has been called the “partner/guardian” dilemma—a bit of a misnomer since the “dilemma”
is really a good thing—lawyers are supposed to assist the firm in its mission and protect its long-
term reputation, its good name as a store of value.
  That takes courage, especially when an
action is technically legal but otherwise wrong or just plain stupid.
18
17
Your roles in the first line of defense also require professional courage.  You are partners in your
business.  You are also guardians of your firm, the investment of its shareholder owners, the
trust of its customers, and the expectations of public authorities.  That is not an easy task.  You
have my sympathy.  And you have my thanks—not just for being an attentive audience, but also
for all of your good work.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
 Pinchas Becker, Thomas Noone, and Angela Sun assisted in preparing these remarks.
See generally Gillian Tett, The Silo Effect (2015).
See, e.g., Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, OCC Guidelines Establishing Heightened Standards for
Certain  Large  Insured  National  Banks,  Insured  Federal  Savings  Associations,  and  Insured  Federal
Branches  (2014);  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision, Review  of  the  Principles  for  the  Sound
Management of Operational Risk (2014).
See  Financial  Conduct  Authority, Behaviour  and  Compliance  in  Organizations,  Occasional  Paper  24  (Dec.
2016).
Id.
See William C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry,
Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry (Oct. 20, 2014).
See Salz Review: An Independent Review Of Barclays’ Business Practices 191–92 (2013) (collecting sources).
See Wieke W. Scholten, Banking on Team Ethics: A team climate perspective on root causes of misconduct in
financial services 110–13 (2018) (summarizing psychological research on moral climates that may facilitate
misconduct).
See  Nicholas  Morris  and  David  Vines, Capital Failure  15–16  (2014)  ((“Trustworthiness  requires  conscious
choices to be made rather than merely being the outcome of a reliable process.”).
William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium, Jan. 11, 2017, (“My second
message is to reject the idea that a separate regime of ethics or morality applies in banking. I’m sure you have
heard this, or perhaps even thought this, at some point in your career. Let it end there. We often teach our
children by asking them if they would engage in that type of behavior at home. This is good professional advice
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
as well.”).
See supra n.4.
See Dan Awrey, William Blair, and David Kershaw, “Between Law and Markets: Is There a Role for Culture and
Ethics in Financial Regulation?” 38 Del. J. Corp. L. 191, 208 (2013) (“Proximity is a measure of the physical,
psychological, social, or cultural distance between a decision-maker and those whom their decisions affect.”).
Tim Besley and Peter Hennessy, Letter to Queen Elizabeth II (July 22, 2009), (“So in summary, Your Majesty, the
failure to foresee the timing, extent and severity of the crisis and to  head  it  off,  while  it  had  many  causes,
was  principally  a  failure  of  the  collective  imagination  of  many  bright  people,  both  in  this  country  and
internationally, to understand the risks to the system as a whole.”).
Banking Standards Board, Annual Review 2017/2018.
See Dudley, supra n.6; Michael Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How
Can Lawyers Help? Remarks at Yale Law School’s Chirelstein Colloquium (Mar. 8, 2017).
See Preet Bharara, Criminal Accountability and Culture, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s
Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue (Oct.
20, 2016), (“here would be less corporate crime and less painful consequences arising from the crime that
does occur if more people said something early on rather than remain silent or look the other way.”).
See Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Report of the Task Force on the Lawyer’s Role in Corporate
Governance  95  (Nov.2006),  (“Not  to  waver  or  equivocate  is  no  easy  challenge  for  lawyers  in  some
circumstances because of the economic and professional pressures already noted, and because the answers
to legal issues are seldom completely free of doubt.  It may take genuine professional courage to provide
unwelcome advice and stick to it.”).
See Ben Heineman, The Inside Counsel Revolution 7 (2016).
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
