 “Strengthening ACMECS Integration through Financial Cooperation” 
Keynote Speech 
ACMECS CEO Forum 
Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob  
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Friday, 15 June 2018 
Shangri-La Hotel, Bangkok 
Excellencies,  
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Swasdee krub, 
First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the leaders of the 
Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS) and 
the organizers for the opportunity to speak at this very important forum.                    
I believe the ACMECS and the Bank of Thailand share a common goal, a goal of 
promoting economic and financial developments to ensure sustainable well-being 
of our people. Certainly, our region has immense potential from growth 
perspectives, with abundant natural resources to population primed to embrace 
new economic opportunities. Just as important is the development of our 
financial systems to unlock the potential of our people and support growing intra-
regional trade and investment. A well-functioning financial system is a critical 
foundation for us to achieve our common goal. 
To establish suitable financial environment, financial development policies 
in the ACMECS region must focus on three key words of productivity, immunity, 
and inclusivity. Productive financial sector enables efficient resource allocation 
critical for raising the productivity of the economy as a whole. Maintaining a 
resilient financial system allows for smooth functioning of the financial market, 
improves risk management, and keeps systemic risk at bay. And, an inclusive 
financial system ensures that the benefits from economic growth can be shared 
fairly across the whole society, fostering stable social and economic environment 
conducive for sustainable growth. 
 
 1/5 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Policymakers must take on the challenges of developing our financial 
systems with a great sense of urgency. Thus far we have seen integration of the 
ACMECS economies on various fronts—through economic connectivity in trade 
and investment and through people-to-people connectivity in migration of labor 
and tourism. Yet, financial connectivity in our region lags behind developments in 
other sectors and should be prioritized so that it does not hinder further 
economic integration.  
Fortunately, today we have the opportunity to leapfrog development in 
our financial systems and regional financial connectivity because of rapid 
advancement in technology. Not at any point in history have powerful 
technologies been so affordable and accessible.  For instance, the costs of 
industrial robots and smartphones are now 30 times and 50 times cheaper than 
those with similar features just ten years ago. Moreover, there are a diverse and 
extensive number of software applications as well as know-hows available to 
satisfy businesses and consumers; many of which can be accessed online and 
obtained free-of-charge. All of these have allowed for greater adoption of mobile 
devices as well as emergence of new financial technology platforms. 
Looking around our region, there are many exciting developments taking 
place that can enhance our financial systems and strengthen their productivity, 
inclusivity, and immunity. For instance:  
a.  Emergence of faster-pay infrastructures and mobile financial services 
within our region like the FAST payment and Wing in Cambodia, Wave 
Money in Myanmar, or PromptPay here in Thailand have helped reduce 
the cost of financial services for financial institutions and the public at 
large. For Thailand, the PromptPay infrastructure has helped cut down 
cost of retail fund transfer so much so that most financial institutions 
now offer online transfers free-of-charge. These infrastructures are 
critical foundations for which new add-on services can be built upon to 
support growing e-commerce activities in our region.  
b.  In addition, we have seen firms experimenting with using alternative 
online data and machine learning for credit scoring model. A credit 
 2/5 
 scoring model created from data of payment receipts should help 
financial institutions better assess credit risks while ensure that 
borrowers, especially small enterprises, gain funding at a fair price. 
c.  Another initiative undergoing testing here in Thailand is the use of 
blockchain for cross-border financial transactions. This technology 
should make cross-border payments more secure, more efficient, and 
more affordable to businesses and a larger population in the near 
future. 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
All of these are just some examples of the developments happening in our 
financial landscape. What is more important is that we must recognize that 
financial technology is a powerful tool for us to improve on productivity, 
immunity, and inclusivity. Efficiency in financial services is enhanced, as new 
payment ecosystem can enable more efficient transfer of funds and significantly 
lower transactions costs for consumers. It also allows financial institutions to 
scale-down on the high cost brick-and-mortar model and shift to less costly and 
more efficient digital services. Meanwhile, resilience is strengthened when financial 
institutions use payment or online data to better analyze and forecast credit 
demand and credit risks. Additionally, advancement of technology like biometrics 
and blockchains can help safeguard financial information and reduce the number 
and magnitude of fraudulent activities. Finally, financial inclusion is improved as 
digitization of financial services and platforms allow access through online or 
smartphone, which can benefit consumers both in cities and in remote areas. 
Moreover, the ever-expanding universe of new financial services means there are 
a number of choices and solutions available to fulfill different needs, especially 
those currently underserved. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As financial technology can help unlock massive potential of our people, it 
is now up to us, the leaders and policymakers, to play an important role of “the 
catalysts,” to pave way for greater adoption of financial technology. On this point, 
I believe there are at least four key areas that catalysts like us must act together:  
 3/5 
 First, we must encourage common standards of technologies or platforms 
to avoid market fragmentation. Having common standards would improve 
competition and innovation, as they allow easy access for all players, especially 
small innovative players. A good example of the common standards is the 
Standardized QR Code for electronic payment here in Thailand, where banks and 
non-banks can apply the common standard to their applications. The result of 
which was the remarkable speed of adoption of QR code for payment; in less 
than one year since its launch, QR code payment is accepted by over 2 million 
merchants all over Thailand. More importantly, financial institutions within the 
region have already taken advantage of the interoperability of the QR code by 
applying the common standard in their applications for cross-border transactions 
with their partners. We are certain there will be many similar partnerships in the 
future.  
Second, we must establish basic and open digital financial infrastructure so 
that further innovation can emerge to serve a wider range of consumers. Open 
infrastructure enables service providers to build value-added services on top at 
low cost.  For instance, e-payment services were created based on our PromptPay 
infrastructure, such as bill payment and request-to-pay features. These, in turn, 
have helped facilitate e-payments for merchants and consumers and improved 
the overall e-commerce business landscape. Even charitable organizations are 
able to take advantage of the open-platform with e-donation. Meanwhile, the 
adoption of electronic payment through a common infrastructure can further 
create the data essential for information-based lending or for banks to improve on 
their risk models.    
Third, we must facilitate greater convergence of rules and regulations within 
our region to make sure that existing regulations do not impede advancement of 
financial connectivity. Efforts are being made in this area. ASEAN central banks are 
working on initiatives under the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework to make 
banking regulations more cohesive, aiming at achieving greater consistency with 
international best practice.  
Meanwhile, aiming to enhance connectivity, since June of last year the 
Bank of Thailand has undertaken Foreign Exchange Regulation Reform to relax 
 4/5 
 rules on foreign exchange controls and make foreign exchange-related 
transactions more digital, flexible, and accessible. To give a few examples, foreign 
exchange transaction forms were completely abolished, which should reduce 
document-related burden for the private sector; the working scopes of money 
changers and money transfer agents are expanded so that they can better 
facilitate retail cross-border transactions; and commercial banks can now provide 
direct Thai Baht loan to non-resident companies established in the Greater 
Mekong Sub-region (GMS). These efforts will improve connectivity as well as ease 
of doing business in our region. 
Fourth, we must foster greater cooperation on cyber security to ensure 
resilience of our financial systems. Arising with new forms of financial technology 
is our increased reliance on data transmitting devices and data usage; these come 
with greater risks of cyber threat. And, globally the number of threat incidents 
have been rising. Cyber security should be one, if not, the top priority for catalysts 
like us going forward. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The Bank of Thailand looks forward to working closely with other central 
banks, government agencies and, very importantly, private sector participants in 
the ACMECS region to support adoption of financial technology to promote 
economic and financial developments. With the affordability and availability of 
many powerful financial technologies, there is no better time for us to improve on 
our productivity, immunity, and inclusivity so that we can ensure sustainable 
improvement in the standard of living our people. I am certain the contributions 
from the ACMECS leaders present here today will go a long way towards fulfilling 
our common goal. Thank you very much for your kind attention.    
 5/5 
