Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Third pillar of central banking
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the "Providing a Safer, More Efficient, and More Inclusive Philippine
Payments and Settlements System" Conference, Manila, 27 July 2018.
 Friends  from  the  industry,  media,  fellow  BSPers,  subject  matter  experts,  esteemed  guests,
ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  The BSP is pleased to host this conference on “Providing
a Safer, More Efficient, and More Inclusive Philippine Payments and Settlements System.” 
There  are  three  pillars  of  Central  Banking.  Every  BSPer  knows  this.  The  first  pillar  is  price
stability through the conduct of monetary policy. The second is financial stability through financial
system supervision and regulation.  The third is an efficient payments and settlements system
through the issuance of currency, the operation of the real-time gross settlement system, and
oversight over the payments system. 
The spotlight is often on the first two pillars and we hail the policies and initiatives pursued to
achieve them.  The importance of the third pillar is often glossed over.  The payments system is
often compared to the plumbing system. Very important but not very exciting.
Lately  though,  this  has  been  changing.   And  this  change  excites  us  for  all  the  possibilities  it
brings!    Developments  are  unfolding  at  a  rapid  pace  and  more  and  more  digital  payments
systems and services are being introduced.
In the not-so-long-ago-early-1990s, settlement of interbank transactions was a manual system. 
Since  2002,  the  settlement  of  time-critical  and  large-value  financial  transactions  has  been
handled by PhilPaSS, the country’s very modern real-time gross settlement system when it was
installed.  In its first 5 years, PhilPaSS processed an average of 1,000 transactions daily, valued
at Php35 billion per day.  In the last 5 years, the daily average is at 6,000 transactions, valued at
Php 1.4 trillion per day!
Today, we are in the process of upgrading PhilPaSS to replace the system implemented almost
16  years  ago.    This  will  further  enhance  the  safety,  efficiency,  and  resiliency  of  the  country’s
settlement  system.   At  the  same  time,  we  are  migrating  the  communication  and  messaging
systems of the infrastructure to the global standard ISO 20022.  This shall prepare our payment
and settlement system to be regionally and globally interoperable.
Indeed, a safe and efficient payment system is a critical market infrastructure of a stable financial
system.    The  payment  system  not  only  provides  channels  for  funds  to  be  transferred  among
banks and other institutions.  It also functions as an essential tool for the effective implementation
of  monetary  policy.    It  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  the  smooth  functioning  of  money  and  capital
markets.  But it is no longer simply the large value payment system – those that has long been
recognized  as  systemically  important  –  that  are  getting  the  attention  of  regulators  and  policy
makers globally.  Retail payments are increasingly becoming an important piece of the overall
infrastructure that rightly warrants our developmental focus. 
An  efficient  retail  payment  system  has  the  potential  to  transform  the  economy  through  the
efficiency it brings to business transactions and the savings generated from a shift from paper-
based  to  digital  instruments.    It  benefits  the  consumers  and  businesses  in  terms  of  the
affordability,  convenience  and  speed  of  payment  services  –  the  most  basic  and  most  used
financial service.  This is financial inclusion.
Given these, the BSP is giving the payment and settlement system the attention it deserves.  We
recognize that having an efficient payment system is not just about operating infrastructure, but
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
also providing an enabling regulatory environment that promotes interoperability, efficiency, and
consumer protection.   
On December 9, 2015, the framework for the National Retail Payment System (NRPS) to create
a safe, efficient, affordable, and interoperable electronic retail payment system was launched. 
Ultimately, the goal is to increase retail electronic payment transactions to twenty percent (20%)
by 2020 and improve the country’s economic competitiveness. 
Realization of this goal requires an enormous collaborative effort among various stakeholders. 
We  have  achieved  significant  progress  to  date.    Two  automated  Clearing  Houses  (ACH)  –
PESONet  and  INSTAPAY  were  introduced  last  November  8,  2017  and  April  23,  2018,
respectively.    Both ACHs  provide  digital  payment  solutions  to  the  current  payment  challenges
encountered by government, businesses and ordinary consumers. 
We  have  also  issued  various  operating  guidelines  that  promote  level  playing  field  and  greater
participation  of  smaller  players  without  compromising  safety.    Our  current  efforts  include  the
development  of  a  national  QR  code  standard  to  prevent  the  proliferation  of  closed  loop
infrastructures and instead promote interoperability of systems, domestically and even regionally.
On the legislative side, we are pursuing measures to support reforms in the payments landscape
through the enactment of the Payment Systems Act which provides for the clear mandate of the
BSP for the regulation and oversight of the payment system. 
In order for the financial system to reach everywhere even to the remotest access points, we
encourage  increased  use  of  affordable  digital  channels  for  payments,  remittances  and  fund
transfers. Our regulations allow banks to prudently service even low-income clients by allowing
the participation of convenient, familiar and non-intimidating third party entities like grocery stores,
pharmacies and other retail outlets as cash agents. 
Money service businesses and remittance agents are also now covered by enhanced regulations
for anti-money laundering, risk management and consumer protection.
We recognize that with digital developments, technology-related risks have and are increasing. 
In  2017,  the  BSP  issued  various  prudential  guidelines  enhancing  information  security
management, as well as anti-money laundering/combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT)
concerns  related  with  the  use  of  fintech.  We  continue  to  pursue  policy  and  supervisory
enhancements relevant to cybersecurity. 
Even  as  we  provide  an  enabling  environment  for  technological  innovations  in  the  payments
system, the BSP likewise is internally undergoing transformation by digitalizing its own payments
processes  and  upgrading  its  organizational  resources  and  capabilities.    Recently,  a  unit
dedicated  to  studying  cybersecurity  threats  was  established  in  the  BSP.    We  are  also
strengthening the skills, proficiency and capability of IT specialists. Moreover, a new subsector
within  the  Financial  Supervision  Sector  (FSS)  has  been  created  to  conduct  the  effective
oversight of fintech and other innovative alternatives. 
We are indeed putting more focus on our third mandate.  And part of the journey is promoting
awareness and exchanging knowledge about the country’s payment and settlement system.
Ladies and gentlemen, in today’s conference, there will be discussions on the Philippine retail
payments  industry,  on  the  large-value  payments  and  settlement  system,  on  the  oversight
framework, and the value of measuring cybersecurity risks.  These are very relevant issues and
from whichever point of view you stand, whether you are from the policy group, whether you are
operators of FMIs, or come from support departments… as members of the ever increasingly
interconnected financial ecosystem, it is urgent that we know and understand the developments
in the industry.    
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  hope  you  would  take  advantage  of  this  time  to  ask  questions  and  learn  from  our  subject
matter experts who have very willingly agreed to be here for us.  It is through opportunities such
as this that we can enhance our roles in building a more efficient, safe, and inclusive national
payment system. 
Thank you and I wish everyone a good and productive day.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
