Jessica Chew Cheng Lian: Innovative risk management - GO BOLA!
(Go Beyond, Go Original, Go agiLe, Go Ahead)
Opening  speech  by  Ms  Jessica  Chew  Cheng  Lian,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  Malaysian  Association  of  Risk  and  Insurance
Management (MARIM) Conference 2018, Kuala Lumpur, 17 July 2018.
 It is my great pleasure to be here today at the MARIM Conference 2018. With well-documented
lessons on the links between corporate management and sport, and the 2018 FIFA World Cup
final  just  behind  us,  the  “GO-BOLA”  theme  must  have  been  much  too  tempting  to  resist! As
displayed  on  the  football  pitch,  the  quest  to anticipate,  defend  and overcome  continues  to
challenge risk and insurance management practitioners as we grapple with profound changes in
the operating environment.
The Allianz Risk Barometer for 2018 revealed that today’s risk management world is more fluid
than it has ever been. The impact of many of the top risks identified is also more interlinked. Not
surprisingly, business interruption and cyber incidents are the top threats for corporations of all
sizes and sectors. Risk scenarios have also expanded – going beyond traditional risk exposures
such as natural catastrophes and fires, to new risks associated with technological and social
change.
There is no question that risk and insurance managers today face significant uncertainty. This
can arise from simply not knowing what we don’t know as the world rapidly changes around us;
from  changing  paths  of  risk  due  to  more  complex  multidimensional  networks;  or  from
developments (such as social media) that amplify the probability and impact of risk events. This
in  turn  calls  for  new  ways  of  managing  and  thinking  about  risk.  For  many  organisations,  this
represents a fundamental shift in current approaches to risk management.
Reflecting on our own work in the financial sector and within the Bank’s own organisation, risk
management practices would appear to be at an inflection point. More traditional approaches to
risk management have come under increasing pressure for their tendency to overcompensate
for risk-taking, resulting in missed opportunities that are likely to cost businesses, and society at
large, much more today than before.
On the other hand, managing risks by instinct or intuition can produce massive payoffs. But I
suspect  none  of  us  in  this  room  would  advocate  abandoning  the  principles,  disciplines    and
methods of risk management that help leaders make sound decisions, particularly when those
decisions can have significant negative externalities.       
So, where to from here?
Clearly, risk and insurance management must innovate and adapt ahead of growing, new and
evolving business risks. Five years ago, Steve Culp, a Senior Managing Director at Accenture,
told Forbes that innovation and risk management are partners, not adversaries – “When properly
fused, the two disciplines can help organisations pursue opportunities that a risk-averse culture
might  leave  on  the  cutting  room  floor”.  Opportunities  that  not  only  profit  businesses,  but  that
enable private enterprise to help solve real world problems confronting society today – including
poverty, climate change and growing inequality.
As you can imagine, worrying about risks is in the DNA of central banks given our mandates to
promote monetary and financial stability. So the idea of innovative risk management itself would
typically set off alarm bells within the Bank, and probably among a number of you in this room. 
But in reality, we are living in a world where exceptional conditions exist. Monetary and financial
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
conditions that prevailed since the Global Financial Crisis have increased financial risks. Thanks
to globalisation, regulatory and political developments have a far wider international reach. And
social media that has become deeply ingrained in our daily lives has led to a world described in
the latest Global Risk Report by the World Economic Forum as “a world without common facts
and objective truth”.  
Innovative risk management is therefore not just about allowing businesses to take on more risks
in a responsible way. It is as much about strengthening our defences against new and emerging
risks. And  perhaps,  most  importantly,  it  is  about  providing  businesses  with  the  confidence  to
move beyond the present to embrace and build a better future.
For many organisations, current approaches to risk management are likely to be already severely
deficient in this new environment. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  three  important  shifts  that  I  believe  will  underpin
innovative risk management practices going forward. 
·       First is the changing role and focus of risk managers in supporting business decision-
making. 
·       Second, is a shift from risk measures to risk narratives. 
·       And third is an increasing emphasis on building resilience alongside the prevailing focus
on averting risks. 
Changing role of risk managers
One of the most important changes that corporations can make to strengthen risk management
is to appropriately position the risk function to effectively support enhanced business decision
making. 
An effective risk management function should interact with other business functions to deliver
value. This itself is hardly an innovative idea. But you would be surprised (or maybe not) to learn
that  despite  an  increasing  involvement  of  risk  managers  in  business  decision-making,  poor
alignment  between  decisions  that  are  taken  by  business  leaders,  and  the  intentions  of  senior
management and the board, continue to persist in many organisations. 
A common reason for this is the absence of, or a poorly defined risk appetite framework. And
very  few  organisations,  if  any,  have  gone  further  to  articulate  their risk  appetite  for  managing
innovation specifically.
This has important implications for risk managers. We cannot expect risk managers to be very
helpful  to  business  leaders  who  have  explicit  growth  and  revenue  targets  to  meet,  if  risk
managers are not themselves guided by a risk appetite that is equally well-defined. At best, risk
managers end up being tolerated as a necessary evil and constraint to innovation, rather than
valuable partners to significantly lift a firm’s growth potential.          
Today, risk managers are tasked to identify and mitigate risks in day-to-day business decisions.
This  inherently  assumes  that  risk  managers  in  the  office  are  going  to  be  always  better  at
identifying risks in new business ventures than the individuals on the ground who are charged to
lead and execute them. In a fast changing world, this is particularly problematic because it is
more likely to place unrealistic expectations on risk managers. Of greater concern, it may not
permit timely responses to emerging risks. It also slows the pace at which a firm can learn from
and adapt their risk tolerance to new ways of doing business as it gains experience.     
The path forward therefore lies in making business leaders better risk managers. The role of risk
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
managers  in  turn  should  evolve  from  directly  supporting  individual  business  decisions,  to
continuously  pushing  for  more  clearly  defined  risk  appetite  frameworks  through  engagements
with  the  board,  senior  management  and  business  leaders;  by  ensuring  that  management
guidance is consistent with the risk appetite; and communicating the risk appetite in precise and
specific terms across the organisation. 
Organisations will rarely get it right the first time. But encouraging a strong focus on providing as
much clarity as possible in setting the risk appetite for the organisation sets the tone and internal
conditions  for  ongoing  improvements  in  risk  culture;  it  provides  better  alignment  between
business decisions and a firm’s risk tolerance; and ultimately, delivers a better balance between
taking  on  too  much  risks  and  inhibiting  the  kind  of  innovation  that  we  depend  on  to  build
successful businesses and economies.  
Achieving these outcomes is more urgent than we might think. In an online poll by Marsh last
year, 91% of risk professionals agreed that understanding technological innovation is crucial to
stay at the forefront of their industry. This corroborates the 2017 Excellence in Risk Management
report  –  also  by  Marsh  and  the  Risk  &  Insurance  Management  Society  –  which  revealed  that
more than 90% of companies are either using or evaluating disruptive technologies, such as the
Internet of Things and wearable technologies.
Yet, more than half of organisations have not conducted risk assessments to deeply understand
the risks associated with disruptive technologies, much less define the organisation’s appetite for
such  risks.  Less  than  half  (48%)  of  respondents  said  they  have  a  cross-functional  risk
committee that manages these risks, never mind how effectively. And even this percentage has
dropped from 52% in 2016 and 62% five years ago.
These  observations  point  to  considerable  scope  to  improve  current  approaches  to  risk
management – at a time where business lines are already venturing into unchartered territory.
Moving beyond risk measures to risk narratives
Innovative  risk  management  will  also  require  new  ways  of  looking  at  measures  of  risk.  While
financial measures of risk are not likely to go away anytime soon, a good place to start is by
acknowledging that financial models do not, nor are they likely to, fully and perfectly account for
how firms will be affected by risk events.
In his book, “The End of Theory”, Richard Bookstaber who was also a former regulator at the US
Securities and Exchange Commission, wrote that we cannot know where we will end up until we
take the journey. And we cannot retake that journey once completed. 
This raises some important issues for how firms set and maintain limits that define their risk
tolerance. It does not mean that we should necessarily throw out conventional risk measures.
But it does mean that we need to supplement them with the ability to develop and maintain a
richer risk narrative that is perhaps less precise, but much more informative. 
Moving away from more mechanistic approaches to controlling risk calls for strong discipline and
higher  levels  of  competence  among  business  and  risk  managers.  Where  there  are  no  bright
lines, effective risk responses will depend on firms setting up a process that can bring together
diverse  perspectives  and  data  sets;  encourage  rigorous  debate  and  dialogue  on  risk
developments; and build an informed consensus on how much risk an organisation should be
willing and able to take to achieve its business goals. 
Such  a  process  is  undeniably  messier,  less  predictable  and  possibly  harder  to  explain  in  a
consistent  way.  But  it  is  also  precisely  these  very  characteristics  that  make  it  much  more
relevant in the world that we live in today.   
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the Bank, our work on proportionate regulation and risk culture aims to support this evolution.
For example, the innovation sandbox allows financial institutions greater regulatory room to test
innovations within a controlled environment and learn from emerging experience. We are also
examining options to better tailor the regulatory framework to the size and complexity of financial
institutions.  And  we  are  directing  greater  supervisory  focus  on  an  institution’s  prevailing  risk
culture to determine the degree of supervisory intensity that we apply to individual institutions. 
We expect these developments to pave the way for more constructive dialogue with institutions
to  achieve  regulatory  frameworks  that  will  deliver  a  sensible  balance  and  greater  synergies
between risk and innovation. 
Building resilience
The  third  important  shift  that  I  want  to  mention  concerns  a  stronger  focus  of  innovative  risk
management approaches on building resilience, in addition to simply averting or reducing risks. 
In  the  area  of  network  security,  organisations  are  increasingly  adopting  an  “assume  breach”
paradigm where they operate on the assumption that a risk event has already occurred. In the
financial world, reverse stress testing is being incorporated into risk management approaches to
identify  the  scenarios  that  would  break  an  institution.  These  approaches  acknowledge  the
practical  limitations  of  risk  mitigation  when  there  is  little  clarity  on  risk  triggers  or  their
impact.          
In the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, financial regulators vowed to end the risks that
institutions deemed too-big-to-fail posed to the financial system.  This led to strategies that were
developed  for  the  resolution  of  distressed  or  failed  financial  institutions  without  causing
disruptions  to  the  financial  system  or  heavy  costs  to  public  finances.  The  implementation  of
recovery and resolution plans has been by far among the most significant post-crisis reforms
undertaken  –  with  far  reaching  financial,  legal  and  operational  implications  that  also  extend
across borders. 
While not all businesses pose the same kind of externalities as financial institutions, the push to
move beyond a cursory treatment of business recovery and resolution plans is worth heeding. 
The idea of innovative risk management would ring hollow if everything came to a screeching halt
because an organisation had failed to correctly anticipate a risk incident, and business continuity
plans failed to support the organisation’s rapid and effective recovery from the incident. 
In a more uncertain world, the likelihood of this occurring is far from trivial.      
Despite a heightened appreciation of risk and new methods to managing risk, business recovery
and resolution plans have generated little attention in most organisations beyond the operations
of recovery centres. This is not only misguided; it misses a valuable opportunity for organisations
to design operations in a way that would enhance an organisation’s ability to reinvent itself as
circumstances  change,  and  achieve  wider  options  for  recovery  in  a  business  disruption
scenario. 
At its most basic level, building resilience is about helping organisations better understand their
operational and financial interdependencies and how this can affect their ability to recover and
respond  to  disruption  and  change.  This  not  only  assures  an  organisation’s  own  survival,  but
enhances its prospects for creating value.  
Development priorities for insurance and takaful
In  speaking  on  innovative  risk  management,  I  would  be  remiss  not  to  touch  on  the  Bank’s
development priorities in the Malaysian insurance and takaful sector to support risk management
by businesses. Let me mention some of the ongoing initiatives that are relevant to those in this
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
room today: 
·       We are raising professional standards for insurance brokers to improve the quality of advice
and risk information provided to risk and insurance managers;
·       We are reviewing existing industry arrangements to further develop domestic underwriting
capacity for large and specialised risks;
·       We are progressing a review of capital requirements to further strengthen the resilience of
insurers and takaful operators to support more complex and diverse risks; and         
·       We will continue to facilitate access to the domestic insurance market by strong global
insurers  that  can  bring  new  and  innovative  risk  solutions  to  meet  the  needs  of  Malaysian
businesses and reduce insurance outflows. 
Of note, payments abroad for insurance and reinsurance services, largely by corporates, grew
significantly  by  45%  since  2010  to  reach  RM10.2  billion  in  2017. As  our  needs  increase,  it  is
imperative that efforts be intensified to optimise onshore insurance capacity. Risk and insurance
managers  play  an  important  role  in  supporting  broader  efforts  to  develop  domestic  insurance
capacity.    More  can  and  must  be  done  to  improve  the  quality  of  risk  information  and  work
collectively with brokers and onshore insurers – both Malaysian and foreign – to develop cost-
efficient and innovative solutions that are tailored to business needs. This will go a long way to
build domestic capacity while contributing to a stronger domestic economy. 
In closing, I am reminded of the famous Italian poet, Pietro Metastasio, who said this of risks:
“Every noble acquisition is attended with its risks; he who fears to encounter the one must not
expect to obtain the other”. I cannot think of a better reason for advancing innovative approaches
to risk management that will provide the confidence and economic freedom for businesses to
grow and evolve.     
On that note, let me once again thank MARIM for the opportunity to share some thoughts with you
today and I wish you a productive conference ahead.  
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
