Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Generativity
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the YPO event "PH Business and Economy: Outlook and Forecasts
from the BSP Chief", Manila, 17 January 2018.
 Good  evening.  I  am  very  pleased  to  be  here.  I  thank  YPO  and  YPO  Gold  Philippines  for  the
opportunity to speak at this important gathering. 
This is quite a forum of business leaders and dynamic CEOs! I understand that an application to
join YPO must be approved before the applicant reaches his or her 45th birthday… Your youth,
your energy, your skills, your competence, and the level of resources at your disposal make you
a force to be reckoned with…and a significant catalyst for change.
What’s so special about the 40 to 45-year old mark?  As you know, these years are the gateway
to mid-life. You will, or probably already have, discovered that this is a positive thing. For many, it
is a time where one has a keener acceptance of self, a greater sense of security… where mental
and emotional wellbeing has found equilibrium… and where one is more focused on developing
generativity … 
1
Generativity.  I like that word.  One definition I found on the web is that it is a need to nurture and
guide younger people, and contribute to the next generation… It is also defined as the ability to
transcend  personal  interests,  a  psychological  concern  for  legacy,  and  desire  to  expand  one’s
influence and commitment to family, society, and future generations.
In my readings, there was even a warning to middle-aged adults who fail to develop generativity. 
He or she, who does not transcend oneself, is said to experience stagnation, or self absorption. 
In this regard, YPO, with its focus on engagement, learning and growth is a strong proponent of
Generativity. For this, I congratulate you all whole-heartedly. 
Generativity is a quality most cherished by the BSP as it pursues its mandates for the benefit of
not  just  the  present,  but  of  future  generations.   As  YPO  clearly  feels  the  same,  we  begin  on
common ground today.  …. There is much room for the practice of this trait as we engage in
nation building together.
The Ripe Groundwork for Greater Nation-Building
When I first assumed the Governorship of the Bangko Sentral in July of last year, I knew I had
inherited  a  strong  economy  and  a  dedicated  institution  committed  to  sound  macroeconomic
management and prudent financial supervision. 
I knew that my task was not to rebuild, but to build on already strong and built foundations.  And
what a blessing this was!
The same conditions hold true for each Filipino who desires and is in a position to make an even
greater difference for the nation… like you who are in this audience…
The current economic landscape is healthy and robust. It is ripe and ready to receive our added
investments  of  time,  energy,  creativity  and  resources.    It  is  prepared  (and  being  even  better
prepared)  for  us  to  work  together  better  to  include  more  of  our  countrymen  into  the  financial
system so that they too could participate and eventually contribute to its continued flourishing.
The  Philippines  is  one  of  the  world’s  fastest  growing  investment-grade  economies.  We
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
registered  a  6.9  percent  GDP  growth  in  the  third  quarter  of  2017  and  we  have  enjoyed  75
quarters  of  uninterrupted  economic  growth.    Last  December,  acknowledging  the  sustained
robust growth and macroeconomic regulatory environment, Fitch upgraded the Philippines to a
solid investment grade rating of BBB.
We are optimistic that this high growth will continue and we will meet the full-year target range of
7 to 8 percent GDP growth in the medium term, or from 2018 to 2022.
Demand for Philippine exports is expected to further increase with the economic recovery of our
major trading partners, as well as diversification of our export markets.
Foreign  investors  have  shown  an  increased  interest  in  the  Philippines.    The  Government  is
actively increasing the country’s competitiveness by building infrastructure, promoting the ease
of doing business, and lifting restrictions on foreign ownership for certain industries.
Amidst this economic robustness, inflation has remained manageable. In 2017, inflation was at
an average of 3.2 percent. It is expected to be within the target of 2 to 4 percent from 2018 to
2019.
The balance of payments is manageable and our gross international reserves of USD 81.5 billion
as of end-December 2017 stands as strong buffer against foreign exchange volatility.
The  Philippine  banking  system  is  safe  and  sound,  growing  rapidly  its  resources  while
demonstrating solid indicators of prudence, capital adequacy, liquidity, and profitability.
The Philippines is, no doubt, entering a period of immense opportunity.  There is a confluence of
factors  such  as  demographics, 
technological  advancements,  solid  macroeconomic
fundamentals, plus the Government’s commitment to provide an enabling policy framework to
ensure sustainable and inclusive growth.
The  private  sector,  equipped  with  the  resources,  business  acumen  and  networks  to  support
sustainable business and innovations are in a unique position to make things even better… to
engage in acts of Generativity that can uplift the quality of life of all Filipinos. 
Generativity:  We are what survives us
Erik Erikson, the Psychoanalyst that coined the term, “Generativity” had a powerful insight: “we
are what survives us.” Generativity is creating the very future. 
In the BSP, this is our goal.  First, we envision and are committed to a future of greater economic
resilience; of continued price stability; banking and financial stability; and an efficient and effective
payments settlements system…. 
We  envision  continuity  in  the  implementation  and  soundness  of  macroeconomic  policies,
banking and financial reforms, regulations and initiatives that were carefully put in place years
and decades ago.
In addition to this, we envision even more.  When I became Governor, I articulated my plans in
the  phrase,  “Continuity  Plus  Plus.”...    This  refers  to  the  goal  of  greater,  widespread  and  felt
financial  inclusion;  of  a  cash-lite  society  where  we  can  leverage  on  digital  technology  and
innovation in the delivery of financial services and products; of deeper capital markets; and of
targeted FX reforms that make cross-border business easy.
Foremost in the BSP’s plus-plus agenda is financial inclusion.  Despite the gains reported by the
economy, 1 in 5, or 21.9 million Filipinos were considered poor in 2015.       Five percent of our
working population is unemployed as of October 2017.  A lot more are under-employed.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The BSP believes that for progress to be meaningful, more must be included in the workings of
the financial system.  We advocate broad based growth through financial inclusion.  
In 2015, statistics showed that 43.2 percent of adults save money, but less than a third of the
savings are kept in banks.
We  need  to  harness  the  power  of  technology  to  expand  the  reach  of  affordable  and  efficient
financial services.
The  BSP  supports  banks’  responsible  fintech  innovations  considering  their  link  to  financial
inclusion, as well as the resultant efficiency in delivering and supporting financial transactions.
The  BSP  is  driving  the  upgrade  of  the  country’s  payment  system  by  promoting  electronic
payments and facilitating inter-operability for faster settlement of transactions. 
In November 2017, we launched the PESONet, the first Automated Clearing House (ACH) under
the National Retail Payment System. The PESONet is envisioned to be the electronic alternative
to the paper-based check system.
Next quarter, we are targeting to launch with the industry another priority ACH, the real-time low
value push payment scheme called InstaPay. It is designed to facilitate small value payments
and will enable merchants to accept digital payments from customers in real-time using cards or
any digital device especially smartphones.
Another thrust under the Plus Plus agenda is the development of domestic debt markets as a
viable  alternative  to  bank  funding.    In August  2017,  the  BSP,  together  with  the  Department  of
Finance, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Bureau of the Treasury unveiled a
roadmap on Local Currency Debt Market Development.
Operationalization  of  the  roadmap  commenced  with  the  launch  last  November  2017  of  the
interdealer government securities repurchase program.
The BSP is also introducing reforms to our FX regulatory framework.  The reforms will promote
greater  ease  in  international  business  dealings;  as  well  as  the  functioning  of  transparent  and
efficient foreign exchange markets compatible with a domestic economy that’s better integrated
into the global economy.
Generativity in Technology
May I encourage you as movers and shakers of the economy, as leaders, to capitalize too on
innovation and technology for the efficient delivery of your products and services.
Not only is this an act of generativity – as such will engage more people and empower them…
But  interestingly,  there  is  an  exponential  force  that  comes,  and  opportunities  that  are  created
from technological innovation itself. 
For  instance,  the  internet  has  acted  as  a  generative  force  allowing  users  to  create  and
communicate in previously unimagined ways.  This was not foreseen by its creators! 
Generativity  in  this  context  is  the  ability  of  a  technology  platform  or  technology  ecosystem  to
produce new output… This is precisely our goal in the BSP as we look at technology and its role
in financial inclusion. 
Perhaps  through  technology,  your  businesses  may  also  capitalize  on  opportunities  offered  by
agricultural value chains, both as a viable business and as an inclusive growth strategy.  This is
an opportunity to improve the lives of 11.1 million Filipinos employed in the agriculture industry
alone,  as  well  as  MSMEs  that  are  engaged  in  production  and  related  activities  such  as
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
processing, distribution and trading!
While there will, no doubt, be rich business opportunities as new markets are tapped by new
tools and technology,  the ultimate goal is to reach the unbanked and underserved populace.  
Jack Ma, founder and executive chairman of Alibaba  said the goal of “Fintech or Techfin is to
rebuild the system with technology…to solve the problem of a lack of inclusiveness.” 
This  is  clearly  Generativity  in  action,  both  in  terms  of  the  psychological  need  to  build  beyond
oneself,  but  also  in  terms  of  how  techonology  can  produce  and  influence  new  (and  hopefully
productive and positive) behaviours.
How auspicious!  How exciting!  We, at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas invite you to share our
enthusiasm. 
Thank you for your kind attention.
  1
Coined by the psychoanalyst Erik Erikson in 1950.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
