Nestor A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Presentation  of  New  Generation  Currency
banknotes and coins to the President
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the presentation of the New Generation Currency (NGC) banknotes
and coins to President Rodrigo R. Duterte, Manila, 9 May 2018.
 On behalf of the Monetary Board and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), we thank President
Rodrigo  Roa  Duterte  for  this  opportunity  to  present  the  New  Generation  Currency  (NGC)
banknotes and coins.  Magandang hapon po.  Thank you for having us in Malacañan Palace. 
Under the New Central Bank Act, the BSP has the sole power and authority to issue currency
within the Philippines.  The notes and coins put into circulation are liabilities of the BSP and are
fully guaranteed by the Government.  They enjoy legal tender power.
These  notes  and  coins  pass  from  hand  to  hand,  are  used  as  payment  for  public  and  private
debts, are reminders of significant moments in our history and narrate our peoples’ patriotism
and bravery.
The NGC banknotes also showcase world heritage sites and iconic natural wonders while the
coins feature endemic flora.
Today,  we  are  honoured  to  present  all  denominations  of  the  NGC  banknotes  which  bear  the
signature  of  President  Duterte  and  yours  truly  as  fourth  Governor  of  the  BSP.    We  are  also
pleased to present all denominations of our NGC Coins which will replace the previous series,
which has been in circulation since 1995 or for over 23 years.  
One  of  the  most  serious  threats  to  national  security  is  the  destruction  of  the  integrity  of  our
currency. This point was made on 9 June 1993, during the 9th Congressional Bicam-Committee
hearing on the BSP’s Charter.  In demonetizing the old banknotes series and issuing the new
coins, the BSP complies with Section 57 of R.A. No. 7653.  It provides that the BSP may call for
the replacement of banknotes which are more than five (5) years old and coins which are more
than ten (10) years old.  The NGC banknotes and coins have enhanced security features.
For the coins, the latest minting technology to prevent counterfeiting is used. Microprints and mint
marks are among the security features that make them very difficult to counterfeit.  The durability
of the coins is improved significantly with the use of nickel-plated steel.  The coins are also more
resistant to discoloration, corrosion, and everyday wear and tear.
Mr. President, Ladies and Gentlemen, the BSP is honored to discharge its mandate to maintain
currency  integrity,  to  further  promote  public  trust  and  confidence  in  Philippine  currency.    We
respectfully present these banknotes and coins.  Thank you.
Now, we have a short AVP on the NGC coin series.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
