Ravi Menon: The Goldilocks economy - will the three bears return?"
Speech by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the UBS
Wealth Insights Conference, Singapore, 15 January 2018.
 Mr Edmund Koh, UBS Head of Wealth Management Asia-Pacific,
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  Let me first wish everyone a happy 2018.  And also thank
UBS for the invitation to speak at this conference.
Global growth about as good as it gets
2017 has been a good year for the global economy.
World  GDP  is  estimated  to  have  grown  by  3.8%,  significantly  higher  than  the  3.2%
registered in 2016.
This is the strongest pace of expansion since the rebound from the global financial crisis in
2010.
All indications are that 2018 will be another good year. 
Most  of  the  world’s  major  economies  are  expected  to  continue  strengthening  over  the
course of this year.
The IMF expects growth in 2018 to be even better than 2017.
There are good reasons for optimism.  The most encouraging is investment.
Investment  expenditure,  which  had  been  largely  missing  from  the  GDP  growth  numbers
since the global financial crisis, is coming back. 
Global  fixed  investments  have  rebounded  by  almost  6%  in  2017,  after  contracting  in  the
previous two years.
Trade is another piece of good news. 
Growth in global trade has almost doubled to 4% in 2017, outpacing world GDP growth.
This has arrested a worrying trend since 2011, with global trade growing slower than global
GDP.
The  industry  trends  underlying  the  pick-up  in  trade  are  encouraging.    The  global  electronics
sector is on a strong upswing.
Semiconductor exports surged by 20% in 2017.
This reflects both a cyclical upturn as well as a structural uptrend, as products ranging from
smartphones to automobiles and home electronics become increasingly chip-intensive.
The  broad-based,  geographical  spread  of  the  current  economic  expansion  is  perhaps  the
strongest basis for its durability.  The rising tide is lifting most boats.
The advanced economies are leading the charge.
The US economy is expected to grow at or above trend, driven by strength in consumption,
a  healthy  labour  market,  and  better  prospects  for  business  fixed  investment  with  the
enactment of the tax reform package.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  Eurozone  economy  was  probably  the  most  pleasant  surprise  of  2017,  with  a  strong
recovery in household spending and private investment.  There is still slack in the economy,
suggesting that the growth momentum is likely to be sustained.
The  Japanese  economy  has  recorded  the  longest  growth  streak  in  16  years,  with  a
resurgence in exports and investment.
Emerging market economies – especially in Asia – are benefitting from the positive spill-overs
from the advanced economies as well as healthier macro fundamentals.
Emerging Asia  is  benefiting  from  the  pick-up  in  the  global  electronics  cycle,  recovery  in
commodity prices, steady domestic demand, and benign financial conditions.
China is likely to see a moderation in growth this year but not cool off sharply.
The  government  is  expected  to  rein  in  local  government  spending,  tighten  curbs  on
residential property purchases, and seek to reduce excess industrial capacity. 
But the slowdown is likely to be measured and the risk of a “hard landing” has narrowed.
A Goldilocks economy but three grumpy bears may not be far away
A striking feature of the global economy is how subdued inflation has been despite broad-based
economic expansion and highly accommodative monetary policies.
This  benign  inflation  environment  provides  the  runway  for  very  gradual  monetary  policy
tightening and credit conditions remaining accommodative for longer. 
Many analysts have characterised the current configuration of healthy growth, low inflation, and
easy financial conditions as a Goldilocks scenario: a global economy that is chugging along, not
too hot, not too cold. 
And  financial  markets  see  this  happy  scenario  as  self-reinforcing,  sustained,  and
accommodated over multiple years. 
This has supported high equity valuations, low bond yields and narrow credit spreads.
But as David Skilling reminded us recently, the Goldilocks story is not complete without the three
bears.
The absence of the bears does not mean they do not exist.  They could return any time.
There are unseen risks out there – that we ignore at our peril.
Each of us will have our own list of three bears.  Let me share with you what I see as the three
bears that might return to spoil Goldilocks’ happy stupor.
My “papa bear” is inflation; “mama bear” protectionism; and “baby bear” financial instability.
“Papa Bear” - Inflation
Let  me  start  with  “papa  bear”  inflation.    On  conventional  wisdom,  he  should  be  making  an
appearance by now.
Historically, inflation comes from high wage growth in a tight labour market during the late stages
of the business cycle – a relationship economists describe as the Phillips Curve.
Cyclical conditions are now tight in major economies, especially in the US.
US  unemployment  rate  has  fallen  to  4.1%,  well  below  the  Fed’s  estimated  Non-
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU) of 4.6%.
Yet, wage growth has remained at around 2.5%, below the pre-crisis average of 3.5%.
Whenever central bankers gather these days, this phenomenon of “missing inflation” is often the
main topic of discussion. 
Many wonder whether the Philips Curve has permanently flattened – meaning whether the
negative relationship between the unemployment rate and wage growth has fundamentally
weakened.
Some even ask if the Philips Curve is dead – if the relationship no longer exists.
Why has “papa bear” inflation been missing to-date?
The  first  and  simplest  explanation  is  that  the  headline  measure  of  unemployment  may  be
understating the level of slack in the economy.
In the US, the IMF estimates that the output gap between actual and potential GDP has only
just closed.
The output gaps in the EU and Japan are still some way off from closing.
There may also be quite some slack in the labour market that may not be fully apparent.
Part-time workers now make up about a third of the US work force, and many of them want
to transit to full-time jobs.
The labour force participation rate in the US remains near a cyclical low, at 63%.
Even  after  accounting  for  the  retirement  of  baby  boomers,  a  meaningful  segment  of  the
population could re-join the workforce.
If the labour market in reality is not as tight as the unemployment number suggests, then it is
not surprising that wage growth has been weak.
A second reason for low inflation has to do with the effects of globalisation. 
The integration into global production chains of workers from China, India, and the ex-Soviet
republics during the 1990s and 2000s is estimated to have nearly doubled the size of global
labour supply.
This  labour  supply  shock,  facilitated  by  expanding  global  value  chains,  has  exerted
significant downward pressure on tradable goods prices.
And  the  international  outsourcing  of  production  appears  to  have  dampened  the  “pricing
power” of labour and hence wage growth.
A third explanation is technology.
Industrial automation has exerted downward pressure on manufacturing wages.
Likewise,  advances  in  software  programming  and  artificial  intelligence  are  automating
knowledge work and dampening wage increases in the services sector.
More broadly, the spread of e-commerce has been eroding the monopolistic pricing power of
traditional retailers and wholesalers of goods and services – the so-called “Amazon Effect”.
I think it is premature to declare the Phillips Curve dead.
Inflation  will  return  when  tightening  cyclical  factors  outweigh  the  structural  disinflationary
forces.
And the US could be the first country to show signs of a turnaround in inflation.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Its output and unemployment gaps are more or less closed. 
And the recently announced tax cuts could end up boosting aggregate demand beyond
the productive capacity of the economy.
The structural factors could well be having a “one-off” effect on prices, rather than a continuing
dampening  impact  on  inflation.    The  disinflationary  effects  of  globalisation  may  not  persist  for
much longer.
The world has already globalised considerably over the last two decades. 
With populist pressures, it is unlikely the trend will continue at the same pace.
Technological change may still have some legs to run and its disinflationary effects may persist
for a while longer. 
But will they be strong enough to offset the short-term inflationary pressures from tightening
cyclical conditions?
So what happens if inflation returns sooner or comes in higher than expected? 
Central banks will obviously have to tighten monetary policy faster and by more. 
That in itself should not derail economic growth as long as the tightening is done judiciously
and credibly. 
No central bank wants to cure inflation by creating a recession.
But monetary policy tightening has always been a tricky business fraught with risk. 
More so now, with the economy attuned to a prolonged period of very low interest rates for
such a long time. 
An increase in interest rates could put considerable strain on debt service ratios and lead to
sharp cutbacks in household and corporate spending.
For investors, inflation is the biggest bear to watch because monetary policy could tighten at a
quicker pace than expected by the markets.
Markets are currently pricing in only about three Fed rate hikes to end-2019, so it may not
take much to unsettle the markets.
Equities, whose valuations are premised on low discount rates, could sell off in a hurry.
“Mama Bear” - Protectionism
Let me now turn to “mama bear” protectionism.  And let us not take a hibernating bear for a dead
one.  This is a bear that may not wake up for a very long time, maybe never.  But if it does, it
could be ferocious.
Protectionism was the biggest fear this time last year.
There were populist backlashes against globalisation, represented most vividly by the results
of the Brexit referendum in the UK and presidential elections in the US.
The great relief of 2017 was that this risk did not materialise sufficiently to threaten the global
economy or financial markets. 
But globalisation continues to face challenges.
The WTO ministerial meeting last month ended inconclusively.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
The US pulled out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) early last year and has threatened
to leave NAFTA.
In Europe, the risk of a hard Brexit is not trivial.
If negotiations break down, both the UK and EU will bear high disruption costs.
Protectionism can do much harm to the global economy because its reach extends beyond the
flow of goods and services, to the flow of capital and technology.  Large countries have been
toughening restrictions on foreign acquisitions and flow of technologies.
The  US  Committee  on  Foreign  Investments  objected  to  a  record  number  of  requests  by
overseas investors in 2017.
The EU is planning to implement a screening framework for cross-border acquisitions.
US  tax  reforms  may  potentially  have  adverse  consequences  for  international  trade  and
investment flows.
The finance ministers of France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the UK have written to the US,
warning that some provisions of the US Tax Cuts and Jobs Act may contravene international
trade agreements and tax treaties.
For example, a 20% excise tax could be imposed on payments an American company
makes for buying goods or services from its foreign subsidiary.
We will do well not to get complacent about the return of “mama bear” because the underlying
causes for populist anger and support for protectionism are deeply rooted.
Income inequality in many advanced economies remains wide.
According to research by McKinsey, two-thirds of households in the US and Western
Europe have experienced stagnating or falling real income between 2005 and 2014.
Trade and immigration are the obvious scapegoats for voters frustrated by the stagnation in
living standards.
The risk remains that some countries may erect trade and investment barriers and others may
do so in retaliation.
A protectionist spiral will almost certainly derail the growth momentum, not just for 2018 but
beyond.
“Baby Bear” - Financial Instability
And finally, the “baby bear” of financial instability.  A financial crisis is a sure way of thwarting
economic growth, as we saw nine years ago.  What is the risk now?
From  one  perspective,  the  wide-ranging  post-crisis  regulatory  reforms  have  made  the  global
financial system more robust and resilient.
Large banks are stronger, more liquid, less leveraged.
Derivative  markets  are  safer,  with  central  clearing  covering  more  than  90%  of  OTC
derivatives trades in the major jurisdictions.
Yet, from another perspective, the risk of financial instability is not small.  This is mainly due to
the build-up of leverage in recent years.
In the G7 economies, the ratio of government debt to GDP has increased by 45 percentage
points since the crisis and is now at its highest since World War II.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In emerging Asia, corporate debt issuance has ramped up to about US$200 billion p.a. since
2014, three times the average volume in the preceding five years.
Household  debt  has  built  up  sharply  in  many  advanced  as  well  as  emerging  market
economies, with escalating house prices a key driver.
High leverage is a risk factor for financial instability. 
I spoke earlier about how an increase in interest rates in a high leverage environment can
create debt servicing pressures. 
If these pressures lead to widespread credit defaults, financial instability is usually not
far off.
Another  channel  of  causation  from  high  leverage  to  financial  instability  is  through  sharp
corrections in asset prices, particularly real estate prices.
The financial stability risks in the US and China warrant close monitoring, simply given the size of
their economies and financial markets, not to mention the build-up of leverage.
In the US, financial stresses are most apparent in the credit markets. 
Corporate debt has increased by 30% since the crisis, and much of the funds raised has
gone into stock buybacks or to highly leveraged corporates.
The Institute of International Finance estimates that about 8% of US firms (by assets) are
unable to cover their annual interest payments.
Unanticipated  increases  in  lending  rates  or  a  slowdown  in  earnings  growth  could  tip
these vulnerable firms into bankruptcy.
In China, the Bank for International Settlements has estimated total leverage in the system has
reached nearly 260% of GDP in 2017.
The risk is of a hard landing in the overheated Chinese property market, which has been
fuelled by rapid lending by trust companies and asset managers.
Chinese authorities have made reducing systemic financial risks a key priority but have to
tread very carefully to avoid destabilising the financial system in the process.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. 
There are good reasons to be optimistic about growth in 2018.
The Goldilocks scenario – at least for this year – is a reasonable baseline view. 
But we need to be watchful of the three bears who may show up at the front door any time:
inflation, protectionism, financial instability.
And of course, there are other creatures in the wild that we must pay heed to: geopolitical
risks like the situation in the Korean peninsula, the South China Sea, and the Middle East.
Unlike fairy tales which tend to have a “happily ever after” ending, the real world is characterised
by cycles of good times and bad times.
Let us hope and work for the former, but also prepare for the latter.
And the best way to prepare for bad times is to avoid excesses and build up buffers during
good times.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you, and wishing everyone once again, a good year ahead.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
