 Speech 
   Embargo 
3 May 2018, 6 pm 
Why sovereign money would hurt Switzerland 
Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance at the 
University of St. Gallen (s/bf-HSG) 
 
Thomas J. Jordan 
 
Chairman of the Governing Board∗ 
Swiss National Bank 
Zurich, 3 May 2018 
© Swiss National Bank, Zurich, 2018 (speech given in German) 
   ∗ The speaker would like to thank Petra Gerlach for her support in preparing this speech. He also thanks Claudia Aebersold Szalay, Simone 
Auer, Peter Kuster, Carlos Lenz and Alexander Perruchoud as well as SNB Language Services. 
   Page 1/8 
     Ladies and gentlemen 
Today, the Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance at the University of St. Gallen celebrates 
its 50th anniversary. Let me extend my sincere congratulations on reaching this milestone. 
Our financial system has evolved steadily over the past five decades. In the early years of the 
institute, the world was still dominated by Bretton Woods, the post-war monetary system with 
its fixed exchange rates and the US dollar as anchor currency. Thereafter, flexible exchange 
rates were the order of the day, and more recently, banks have had to face the challenges of 
the financial crisis. 
I would like to take this opportunity today to address a topic which has also arisen from the 
challenges of the financial crisis – the Swiss sovereign money initiative. This initiative raises 
unrealistic expectations, and adoption by the people and the cantons on 10 June 2018 would 
have serious consequences for Switzerland. A sovereign money system would hurt our 
country as a whole and also make it difficult for the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to fulfil its 
mandate. The SNB, like the Federal Council and Parliament, therefore firmly opposes the 
initiative. 
But what is the aim of the initiative? According to its authors, the goals are ‘crisis-safe 
money’ and a reduction in the burden on taxpayers. To achieve these, they propose that 
customers’ sight deposits at commercial banks be converted into so-called sovereign money 
accounts, and that ‘debt-free’ payments be made by the SNB to the state or the people. 
Furthermore, the initiative’s authors want to separate the creation of money from the granting 
of loans because they regard money creation by commercial banks as the main cause of 
financial crises. 
Sovereign money makes lending more complicated 
The Swiss sovereign money initiative testifies to a deep mistrust of our monetary system in 
general, and of the current credit system in particular. Yet, credit is a cornerstone of our 
economic system. It is the tool whereby capital that is not needed at one point in the system 
can be used productively elsewhere. The credit system facilitates projects – in the areas of 
consumption and investment alike – which would not be possible otherwise, and thereby 
makes our economy dynamic and flexible. This promotes growth and prosperity. 
Money and credit have always been closely linked. Today, money creation and lending take 
place in a two-tier system, namely via the SNB and the commercial banks. The SNB provides 
banks with so-called central bank money in exchange for financial assets. They can hold this 
central bank money as sight deposits at the SNB or withdraw it as banknotes. Banks use 
central bank money to carry out transfers for their customers and for customer withdrawals. 
Equally, the commercial banks need central bank money for paying out loans. These 
payments lead in turn to the creation of new money in the banking system. 
What exactly happens when credit is granted? The process always begins with the bank 
customer, for example when he or she applies for a mortgage loan. The bank then has to 
  Page 2/8 
     check whether the customer is creditworthy and whether the loan is economically viable from 
a risk/return perspective. Furthermore, the bank must determine whether it has, or whether it 
can obtain, sufficient central bank money to pay out the loan. The payment is usually made 
electronically by crediting the house seller’s sight deposit account, which is generally held at 
another bank. Consequently, overall sight deposits in the banking system rise and new money 
is created. Although money created when a loan is granted is not central bank money, private 
customers’ sight deposits at commercial banks have equal status in payment transactions and 
can also be exchanged by customers for SNB banknotes at any time. 
On the one hand, payments into sight deposits – for instance customers’ salary payments or 
proceeds of selling their house – are an important source of central bank money for banks. On 
the other hand, this liquidity can flow out again rapidly since customers are able to access 
their sight deposits at any time. Yet, it is not usually the case that all of a bank’s customers 
simultaneously want to withdraw all of their savings or use them for payments. As a result, 
the bank does not need to hold ready an equivalent value of central bank money for every 
franc of sight deposits; it can use some of this liquidity for granting and paying out loans. 
One point I would like to stress here is that money creation is not a privilege through which 
commercial banks can feather their own nests. A bank can grant loans when there is customer 
demand and it has central bank money at its disposal. To this end it is important that other 
customers are prepared to hold sight deposits at the bank. Here the bank is in competition 
with other banks. If the bank is not competitive, customers will be unwilling to apply for 
loans or hold sight deposits there. In granting loans, the bank also takes a business risk. Thus, 
banks do not ‘create money out of thin air’. Rather, their money creation is the product of 
intermediation between savers and borrowers, and is made possible by the fact that customer 
sight deposits do not have to be fully covered by central bank money.1 
Sovereign money would radically change our current system. In a sovereign money system, a 
bank is no longer permitted to use its customers’ sight deposits to finance loans. Instead, it is 
obliged to call solely on investors who provide it with money for loans on a more long-term 
basis. These may be customers with savings deposits, investors on the capital market, other 
commercial banks, or even the SNB, which can grant the bank a loan. Because sovereign 
money impairs the useful intermediary function played by banks in the monetary system 
today, lending would become more difficult and complicated – to the detriment of customers, 
be they savers or borrowers. 
 1 For more on maturity transformation as a traditional bank function and its importance to the economy, cf. Jordan, Thomas J., How money is 
created by the central bank and the banking system, speech held at the Zürcher Volkswirtschaftlichen Gesellschaft, Zurich, 16 January 
2018. 
   Page 3/8 
     The initiative’s undeliverable promises 
Financial stability 
So, what benefits do the initiative’s authors see in sovereign money? They want to separate 
the creation of money from the granting of loans because they believe this will enhance 
financial stability. To achieve this goal, they call for customers’ sight deposits to be held in 
so-called sovereign money accounts as off-balance sheet items, just like securities custody 
accounts are today. This offers security in as far as this money is not at risk should the bank 
fail. However, barring the banking system from creating money is the wrong approach to take. 
In financial crises, savers and investors lose money for two reasons: first and foremost, 
because their pension funds and direct investments such as stocks, bonds and real estate lose 
value, and also second, because taxpayer money has to be used to rescue banks. Financial 
crises occur when risks are underestimated and price expectations of investments are 
exaggerated. This can lead to credit and asset price bubbles which sooner or later burst. When 
banks do not hold enough equity capital to absorb the losses they incur, they fail. 
Sovereign money would do nothing to change this situation. Risks can be underestimated and 
future returns overestimated in a sovereign money system too. Even without recourse to sight 
deposits, banks can grant loans which are too risky, hold too few provisions for times of crisis 
and become insolvent if a bubble bursts. Moreover, a key problem in the financial crisis was 
banks’ heavy reliance on short-term financing from the money market. These interbank loans 
proved to be a less stable source of financing than private customers’ sight deposits; in fact 
they dried up at the very start of the financial crisis in 2008. Sovereign money would not help 
to eliminate this risk of instability either. 
There are other, far more effective approaches to stave off credit and asset price bubbles than 
sovereign money. The significant increase in the capital and liquidity requirements for banks 
in the aftermath of the financial crisis is one such approach. Macroprudential tools such as the 
countercyclical capital buffer are an additional means of strengthening our financial system. 
But a liberal economic system entirely devoid of crises is an illusion. To prevent crises 
altogether would ultimately mean to constrain the economy to such an extent that our 
prosperity would be significantly impaired in the longer term. However, it is possible to limit 
macroeconomic risks to an acceptable level using appropriate regulatory measures. This is 
where we have directed our efforts since the financial crisis and we are continuing to work 
closely on this with other parties at national and international level. 
‘Debt-free’ payments to the Confederation, cantons or citizens 
The initiative is likewise not able to deliver on its second promise to reduce the burden on 
citizens through ‘debt-free’ payments by the SNB to the Confederation, the cantons or the 
people. Although ‘debt-free’ payments seem attractive at first glance, they will not bring any 
financial benefit to the people in the long term, despite what the initiative’s authors would 
have us believe. A sovereign money system will not turn the SNB into a cash cow. 
  Page 4/8 
     Switzerland’s prosperity is determined not by the way money is created but by the output the 
country generates. 
What is meant by ‘debt-free’ payments? In the current system, the SNB creates money by 
purchasing foreign currency and investing it, or by granting banks loans. Every franc of 
central bank money which enters circulation in the economy in this way therefore has a 
countervalue that yields profit over time. The SNB takes stock at the end of each year and 
distributes part of these profits to the Confederation and the cantons. If the SNB had to pay 
out money ‘debt-free’, as called for by the initiative, it would be giving money away without 
receiving an equivalent amount in return. However, the SNB would not be able to earn 
income on the money it gives away. In a system with ‘debt-free’ payments, we would 
therefore be unable to make an annual distribution to the Confederation and the cantons. 
It is important to recognise that economically speaking, the two approaches are ultimately 
equivalent. We can distribute the profits on our investments every year, or we can give newly 
created money away, but then no longer pay out any profits. In other words: Under 
established practice today we distribute the interest on our capital, while under a sovereign 
money system we would be selling off the family silver, as it were. ‘Debt-free’ payments 
would not make our country any richer.  
The initiative’s authors also suggest that, with the introduction of sovereign money, the SNB 
would be able to redirect the profits that banks currently earn from money creation to 
taxpayers. This idea is based on the assumption that, by creating money, banks are filling their 
own coffers. But, in reality it is all the banks’ customers – private individuals as well as 
companies, savers and borrowers – who benefit from the creation of money by banks. Loan 
conditions are more favourable and the terms on sight deposits are better than they would be 
under a sovereign money system. Since banks have to compete with each other, they are left 
with only enough of the profits from money creation to enable them to remain in business. 
In a sovereign money system, money creation would be centralised at the SNB, from where 
the corresponding profits would be distributed. But total profits would be no higher than 
under the current system. For the general population then, the whole thing would be, at best, a 
zero-sum game. 
Damaging effects of sovereign money 
The fact that the Swiss sovereign money initiative promises too much is only one issue. Even 
more serious is that adoption of the initiative would have profound implications for 
Switzerland on three levels, namely the real economy, monetary policy and economic order. 
Real economy 
The initiative would negatively impact the real economy through lending because banks 
would no longer be able to draw on sight deposits. Instead, they would have to attract 
liquidity from other sources. A key such source would be savings deposits. However, since 
  Page 5/8 
     savings – like any funds which investors forego for an extended period – are more expensive 
than sight deposits that can be withdrawn at any time, borrowing becomes more costly in a 
sovereign money system. 
The Swiss sovereign money initiative affects us all directly, as borrowers and savers. Of the 
loans granted in Switzerland, 94% go to households and SMEs; 86% are mortgages. Equally, 
savers would be adversely affected. Their sight deposits in so-called sovereign money 
accounts would not earn interest and services would be more expensive, so they too would 
lose out. 
Sovereign money would be like throwing grit in the gears of our credit system. Banks would 
not be able to react as flexibly to the demand for credit, and this would reduce consumption, 
investment and ultimately prosperity in our country. 
Monetary policy 
A sovereign money system would also complicate the implementation of our monetary 
policy. The ‘debt-free’ issuance of money is based on an outdated idea of managing money 
supply and fails to recognise the advantages of the modern implementation of monetary 
policy. The issuance of ‘debt-free’ money would technically correspond to monetary targeting 
and would therefore be like turning the clock back to the last century. The fact that all major 
central banks today practise interest rate targeting is no coincidence but is built on the 
pertinent experience of the last decades. Interest rate targeting is superior to monetary 
targeting and guarantees a flexible supply of liquidity to the economy, particularly during 
times of crisis.2 
Furthermore, it is fundamentally unclear how the SNB could absorb liquidity in a sovereign 
money system if the money supply had previously needed to be significantly expanded. How 
can you reclaim money you have just given away? 
Just how difficult that would be – and how far sovereign money would complicate our work – 
can be illustrated by taking the example of our monetary policy during the last financial crisis. 
Over a very short space of time, we created a vast amount of money; initially to ensure 
liquidity in the banking system, and thereafter to counter the massive upward pressure on the 
Swiss franc. This led to a significant expansion of our balance sheet. How would we have 
proceeded in a sovereign money system? We would probably not have reacted so decisively 
given the difficulty of reducing liquidity once it has been created in a sovereign money 
system, which can therefore lead to higher inflation further down the line. A weaker monetary 
policy reaction would have exacerbated the negative consequences of the crisis for the real 
economy. 
Quite apart from that, it is doubtful whether we would even have been able, in a sovereign 
money system, to react as we did because the initiative limits the number of tools we would 
 2 As regards the SNB’s shift from monetary targeting to interest rate targeting, cf. Meyer, Hans, On monetary policy in the new year, speech 
held at the University of St. Gallen, St. Gallen, 20 January 2000. 
   Page 6/8 
     have available. Interventions in the foreign exchange market, which have played a central role 
in combating the overvaluation of the Swiss franc, would not actually be allowed under a 
sovereign money system. When we intervene in the foreign exchange market, we exchange 
new Swiss francs for foreign currency instead of giving them away. The creation of money in 
the context of foreign exchange market interventions is thus not ‘debt-free’. 
Economic order 
Another problem is that the Swiss sovereign money initiative is etatist and imposes an 
unnecessary burden of responsibility on the SNB and disempowers the private sector. This 
does not fit in with the Swiss concept of the state and runs counter to proven principles of 
economic order. In order to achieve its aims, the initiative also does not shy away from 
providing for the possibility of general restrictions in economic freedom. This is clearly set 
out in the second sentence of the proposed article in the constitution. 
Adoption of the initiative would impose additional tasks on the SNB. The SNB today has the 
clear and appropriate mandate to ensure price stability and has a large degree of flexibility in 
fulfilling it. Under the sovereign money system, the SNB would have to assume tasks which 
far exceed this mandate. The initiative imposes two additional tasks on the SNB: first, making 
‘debt-free’ payments and, second, guaranteeing the supply of credit to the Swiss economy. 
The latter is problematic because it could lead to a conflict of interest between price stability 
and credit supply. Above all though, it means that the SNB would have to decide precisely 
who should receive the loans. 
Yet, the SNB has no information advantage over banks, which make this decision today in a 
competitive environment, taking into account the local circumstances and needs of various 
industries. The new division of roles would therefore be inefficient and would turn the SNB 
into a central authority steering industrial policy. Just imagine companies in a particular 
industry, be it automotive suppliers, the textile industry or the hotel trade, struggling to obtain 
loans. How should the task to ensure credit supply be interpreted? Would the SNB have to 
step in where, under the current system, no loans would be granted? A centralised, state-
controlled credit supply does not befit our federalist, business-friendly country and would 
jeopardise the Swiss success model. 
The ‘debt-free’ payments to the Confederation, the cantons or the people are also fraught with 
problems from an economic order perspective because the SNB would then be directly 
involved in the debate on distribution issues. Who should get how much? Such decisions are a 
matter of fiscal not monetary policy. ‘Debt-free’ payments would politicise the SNB and 
would detract from our ability to perform our real task of ensuring price stability. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, the financial system has evolved steadily over the years since the 
Institute of Banking and Finance at the University of St. Gallen was established. The authors 
of the Swiss sovereign money initiative want to convince voters that a transition to sovereign 
  Page 7/8 
     money would just be another minor change to the system. This is misleading. Adoption of the 
initiative would represent a tectonic shift in our monetary and economic system, which has 
developed over a period of many years. Furthermore, the uncertainty in the transition phase 
would be enormous. 
The initiative is aimed at ensuring financial stability. This is a noble goal and one which the 
SNB shares. But there are far better ways of achieving this than sovereign money. The 
initiative’s goal of fully nationalising money creation is flawed and would hurt the Swiss 
economy as a whole. The idea of ‘debt-free’ payments is dangerous: The initiative would 
encumber the SNB with added responsibilities, which would inevitably expose it to a higher 
level of political influence. There is a high risk that this could lead to excessive inflation. The 
legal and institutional framework in which the SNB has hitherto operated has stood the test of 
time. It ensures a fair balance of independence and democratic control. Today the SNB is 
protected from political influence and this enables it to pursue an effective monetary policy in 
the interests of the country as a whole. 
Given all these considerations, sovereign money is an unnecessary and dangerous experiment, 
which would inflict great damage on our country. Thank you for your attention. 
  Page 8/8 
 