Yves Mersch: The role of euro banknotes as legal tender
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the 4th Bargeldsymposium of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 14 February 2018.
 First of all, I would like to thank the Deutsche Bundesbank organisers for inviting me to speak at
this  symposium.  The  particularly  good  cooperation  between  the  various  Eurosystem  central
banks  in  the  field  of  cash  is  not  only  part  of  our  core  business.  It  also  serves  the  people  of
Europe, for whom euro cash has an important function. But our cash has recently come in for
greater criticism.
1
Last year alone, five Member States  consulted the ECB on measures to limit the use of
cash. This represents a sharp increase compared with the number of consultations on this
topic in previous years.
Opposition to cash is coming from different quarters. On the one hand, the “law and order”
school  says  that  criminals  use  cash  to  finance  their  illegal  activities.  Others,  meanwhile,
who have developed business models involving new electronic payment methods, point to
the “cost” of cash. We have to address these arguments.
In the next few minutes, I would like to consider the following questions:
2
Why  does  the  Treaty   grant  (privileged)  legal  tender  status  to  euro  banknotes?  In  other
words, why is there legal tender status at all?
What  is  the  role  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  in  protecting  this  status?  And  what
implications does this have for our activities in the Eurosystem?
Euro banknotes, and only euro banknotes, are protected as legal tender under the primary law of
Article 128(1) TFEU . But what exactly is legal tender?
3
There is a Commission recommendation on this point . It is not binding. But it does provide for
the following key elements:
4
mandatory acceptance (unless explicitly agreed otherwise)
legally recognised means for repaying a debt, i.e. with a discharging effect
at face value, with no levying of additional fees permitted (as is the case, for example, with
credit cards).
Precisely what else can be deduced from the legal tender status is a question of interpretation:
the  Treaty  and  the  binding  secondary  legislation  do  not  define  the  content  of  the  legal  tender
status. The national arrangements of the 19 Member States of the euro area relating to the legal
tender  status  which  predate  the  introduction  of  the  euro  continue  to  apply.  In  practice,  they
determine the concrete effects of the legal tender  in daily payment transactions. This includes
restrictions  on  the  use  of  the  legal  tender  by  way  of  national  regulatory  arrangements.  Such
restrictions can certainly vary from one Member State to another, but the legal tender status as
such,  so  to  speak  the  “nature”  of  our  banknotes,  including  the  core  elements  of  this  status
mentioned before, must be preserved. We monitor this. I’ll come back to this shortly.
Why does legal tender status exist at all?
5
The  relevant  provision  in  the  Treaty   does  not  itself  constitute  a  fundamental  right  or  is  not
equivalent to a fundamental right (in any case not according to prevailing opinion). So there is no
“right to cash” or “right to cash payment in all cases”. But the granting of legal tender status to
6
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
euro  banknotes  under  the  TFEU,  and  thus  at  constitutional  level,  does  concern  fundamental
rights and fulfils at the same time an important institutional function. Euro banknotes do not exist
“for their own sake” or to allow us central banks to obtain seigniorage, but for reasons that are
protected under constitutional law.
Cash as legal tender facilitates freedom
Cash, as a medium of transaction in many instances, opens the way for the exercise of many
fundamental rights – it costs money to live and money has to be earned. Cash allows privacy
and thus safeguards fundamental rights, such as the right to “informational self-determination”,
freedom of action and freedom of speech. Citizens can use cash to exercise their fundamental
rights  without  the  state  or  other  third  parties  being  able  to  immediately  track  any  financial
transactions involved.
This  aspect  is  particularly  relevant  considering  the  criticism  I  mentioned  before  that  cash-
facilitated  privacy  aids  and  abets  criminal  activities.  Protection  of  privacy  matters  to  all  of  us.
Privacy protects people from the risk of a surveillance state and thought police. No particular link
can be established statistically between cash and criminal activities. The focus must be on the
fight  against  crime.  Cash  must  not  be  made  the  scapegoat.  It’s  astonishing  that  alternative
means of payment, such as bitcoin – very popular among cybercriminals – are subject to much
less criticism than cash despite the risks they entail and the scope for misuse.
Cash as legal tender allows equality and participation
7
The store-of-value function of cash is directly linked to property rights.
The easy accessibility to cash, especially for the elderly, the socially vulnerable or minors, allows
people to participate in society and, for example, allows children to learn how to handle money. In
particular, when socially vulnerable people use cash, they face none of the barriers involved in
applying for a credit card or, despite all their efforts, opening a current account.
Cash as legal tender provides security and protection
Cash “always works”. If alternative means of payment are no longer possible, e.g. because of a
power or network failure, society can continue to function because of cash – in any case as long
as the ATMs work or we manage, for example, in times of crisis to replace this infrastructure
unbureaucratically.  Cash  thus  clearly  enhances  the  resilience  of  society  and  ensures  its
functioning particularly in critical periods.
Many people use cash to buy everyday items, but not to pay larger sums. They cleverly weigh up
the  risks,  burdens  and  benefits,  such  as  protecting  their  privacy  by  making  anonymous  cash
payments. The statistics show that “average” Europeans have about €1,600 net at their disposal
every month. Once rent and other fixed costs have been deducted, many people evidently carry
out “cash-suitable” transactions above all. Of course, “shoe leather costs” play an important role
in  people’s  calculations,  such  as  the  distance  from  an ATM  or  the  acceptance  of  euro  cash
abroad.  People  who  frequently  have  to  handle  large  sums  of  money  or  who,  for  business  or
private reasons, often (have to) stay in other currency areas may find it practical to make their
payments with a card and not to have to go first to an ATM or a bureau de change. But that
certainly doesn’t mean that these people – especially here in Germany – would be willing to give
up their cash.
What is the role of the ECB and the Eurosystem in protecting the legal tender?
The ECB, as the European institution at the heart of the Eurosystem, has a particular role to play,
and not just in terms of monetary policy in general. As the central bank which authorises the
issuance of euro banknotes,  the ECB is also responsible in particular for protecting the status of
8
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
euro cash as the sole legal tender. This includes guaranteeing the existence of euro cash and its
usability as legal tender.
In fulfilling these tasks, the ECB ultimately ensures that people can go about their lives, with their
fundamental rights protected, using euro banknotes and coins.
The ECB establishes the legal framework that protects euro banknotes, for example. We decide
what types of reproduction are permitted  and, together with the national central banks, clamp
down on unauthorised reproductions . This helps to preserve public confidence in euro cash.
We keep a constant eye on costs, in terms of regulation too, to ensure that the provision of cash
remains  cost-effective.  Here  we  have  an  obligation  to  the  public  to  increase  efficiency  even
further.
10
9
We ensure that cash retains its scope for use and we take action if the legal tender status is at
.
risk.
In the legislative field, our efforts to protect and safeguard the currency mainly take the form of
ECB opinions on legislative proposals at national or EU level which relate to our tasks. The ECB
has to be consulted on all such legislative proposals,
 especially when they have the effect of
limiting the legal tender status of euro banknotes.
11
Until  2016,  these  consultations  by  Member  States  on  limiting  the  use  of  cash  were  a  routine
exercise. From the first consultations the ECB established the position  that national measures
in this area must:
12
have a legitimate purpose and to that end
be proportionate, that is
suitable, necessary and adequate.
“Suitable”  in  this  case  means  that  the  planned  legislative  measures  will  actually  be  able  to
achieve their aim, i.e. that they are efficient and effective. On the basis of this position, the ECB
has  recognised,  in  particular,  the  fight  against  money  laundering,  terrorist  financing  and  tax
evasion as legitimate purposes. There has been no criticism when Member States have planned
proportionate measures to address these issues.
Since around 2016, and with the peak I mentioned in 2017, the ECB, with increasing regularity,
has  had  to  address  in  detail  the  topic  of  limits  to  cash  payments.  We  have  maintained  a
consistent  position  on  this  and,  for  the  first  time,  we  found  ourselves  having  to  comment  on
measures that were not suitable.
These measures involved limiting the use of cash for transactions that are not subject to tax. The
national legislator had justified the measures on the grounds that they would help prevent tax
evasion. However, limits on non-taxable payments do not help to combat tax evasion . With due
respect for the prerogative of the legislator to evaluate the matter, the ECB must point out such
errors of assessment.
13
We also faced for the first time, in the context of a consultation on a very low proposed cash
limit, the question of whether the legal tender status of a banknote is undermined if limits on cash
payments  make  it  impossible  to  use  a  certain  denomination  in  transactions .  This  would  be
tantamount  to  abolishing  that  denomination.  But  only  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  can
make such decisions about the denominations of euro banknotes, and that includes the decision
on whether to discontinue certain denominations. So there must be scope for all denominations
of the legal tender to be used, otherwise this competence of the Governing Council would be
undermined.
14
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
General, non-sector-specific limits on cash which largely preclude the use of a denomination are
therefore likely to be very difficult to justify.
In this context, I would like to comment on our decision on the €500 banknote. We have decided
not to issue a €500 banknote in the second series of euro banknotes. However, €500 banknotes
from the first series – which some Europeans probably have under their mattresses – retain their
status as legal tender. So people need not worry that their €500 banknotes will lose their value
and can continue to use them as a means of payment.
Ultimately, the Treaty includes a limit to limits on cash by assigning legal tender status to the
euro banknote denominations as determined by the Governing Council of the ECB. We at the
ECB monitor compliance with this provision.
We  would  also  intervene  –  but  fortunately  have  not  yet  had  to  –  if  there  were  cases  of
discrimination against cash as legal tender compared with alternative private payment methods.
This could happen, for example, if a payment fee were to be levied. You will recall that a core
feature of legal tender is that banknotes must be accepted at their face value. Anyone who has
paid  by  card  when  booking  a  flight  is  aware  of  the  difference.  In  the  case  of  card  payments,
additional payment fees are allowed and are standard practice.
Conclusion: What are the implications for our activities within the Eurosystem?
I will conclude by saying that printed euro banknotes will retain their place and their role in society
as legal tender for a very long time to come. There is no viable alternative to euro cash. There is
good reason to believe that banknotes don’t only have to take the form of printed paper, cotton or
polymer.  However,  printed  banknotes  will  remain  our  core  business.  And  if  there  is  public
demand for digital central bank money, this should only be a technical variant of cash.
Alternative  payment  methods  cannot  replace  euro  cash;  they  can  only  complement  it.  The
Eurosystem must therefore continue to ensure the existence of euro cash. This is the only way
we  can  safeguard  the  role  that  euro  banknotes  and  coins  play  in  protecting  the  fundamental
rights and freedoms of the people of Europe.
Protecting the legal tender status of our banknotes will still call for a high level of vigilance from
the ECB and the NCBs, in particular in order to prevent unwarranted limits and thereby ensure
support for the euro and its existence. New legislative initiatives, such as those at EU level to
define  what  constitutes  legal  tender,  require  intensive  dialogue  between  the  ECB  and  the
legislators.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Cyprus, Bulgaria, Belgium, Portugal and Denmark.
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, Article 128(1).
Article 128(1) TFEU: “The banknotes issued by the European Central Bank and the national central banks shall
be the only such notes to have the status of legal tender within the Union”. The legal tender status of euro coins
is only granted under secondary legislation (Article 11 Regulation EC/974/98); their existence is recognised by
the Treaty (Article 128(2) TFEU), but it says nothing about their legal tender status.
Recommendation 2010/191/EU.
The European Commission states on its website: “…beyond the basic principles in the Treaty the various pre-
euro national principles continue de facto to shape the concrete effects of the legal tender of the euro in the
participating  Member  States”;  see ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/articles/euro/2010–03-22-legal-tender-
euro_en.htm.
Article 128(1) TFEU.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
This is even more developed in many Member States. For example, the Italian constitution (Article 47) even
protects people’s savings. Ultimately, the primary objective of monetary policy – ensuring stable prices – also
serves the social objective of safeguarding the value of our currency and protecting people’s savings from being
devalued by excessive inflation.
Article 128(1) TFEU.
Article 2 of Decision ECB/2013/10.
Guideline ECB/2003/5.
Article 127(4) TFEU.
The  stricter  position  found  in  the  legal  literature  –  which  denies  Member  States  any  competence  to  take
measures  that  have  a  limiting  effect,  even  if  the  focus  of  the  measure  lies  elsewhere,  since  legislative
measures limiting the legal tender status of euro cash can only be taken at EU level – was not followed.
CON/2017/18 — Portugal, paragraphs 3.1 and CON/2017/27 — Bulgaria, paragraph 2.9.
See CON/2017/27, Bulgaria, paragraph 2.11.The Bulgarian legislator followed the ECB’s opinion and did not
implement the too-low limit on cash payments.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
