 BANKERS ASSOCIATION OF BOTSWANA  
BANKING AND WEALTH EXPO 
  Keynote Address 
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botswana 
 November 16, 2017 
  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  indeed  an  honour  and  great 
pleasure  for  the  Bank  of  Botswana  to  co-host  this  Executive  Networking 
Dinner  as  part  of  the  events  of  the  inaugural  Banking  and  Wealth  Expo 
organised  by  the  Bankers  Association  of  Botswana.    In  line  with  the 
theme  of  the  Expo,  “Bridging  the  Inclusion  Gap  through  Financial 
Literacy”,  my  remarks  this  evening  will  focus  on  four  areas,  namely,  (a) 
importance of financial inclusion, especially for inclusive economic growth 
(b)  financial  literacy  as  an  essential  ingredient  for  inclusive  financial 
sector;  (c)  impact of financial sector  regulation  and  (d) the  role of  sound 
and stable macroeconomic environment, with emphasis on price stability.  
 As  His  Honour  the  Vice  President  indicated,  in  his  official  opening 
remarks  yesterday,  financial  inclusion  has  been  identified  as  one  of  the 
key  strategic  priorities  for  financial  sector  development  in  Botswana.  In 
this  regard,  a  number  of  related  initiatives  form  part  of  key  policy 
documents  such  as  National  Development  Plans,  and  the  Financial 
Sector Development Strategy (2012 - 2016).  
 Distinguished  Guests,  the  basic  elements  of  financial  inclusion  can  be 
summarised as a state in which individuals and businesses have access 
to a full suite of quality financial services, at affordable prices, provided by 
a  range  of  financial  institutions,  in  a  stable  competitive  market,  in  a 
convenient  manner,  with  respect  and  dignity,  to  financially  capable 
clients.  In  this  way,  households  and  businesses,  regardless  of  income 
level,  are  able  to  have  access  to  and  can  effectively  use  appropriate 
financial services, to meet their needs. Therefore, an indicator of financial 
inclusion  would  be  the  proportion  of  firms  and  individuals  using  financial 
products  and  services.  These  typically  include  transactions,  payments, 
savings and insurance provided in a responsible and sustainable manner.  
 The  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion,  which  is  the  world’s  leading 
organisation on financial inclusion policy and related regulation, estimates 
that about 2 billion adults, globally, that is, more than half of the total adult 
population  of  the  world,  do  not  have  an  account  in  a  formal  financial 
institution.  About 90 percent of these unbanked adults are in developing 
countries.    However,  the  good  news  is  that,  according  to  the  2015  Bill 
Gates  Annual  Letter,  it  is  estimated  that  by  2030,  about  2  billion  people 
who do not have bank accounts today, will be storing money and making 
payments with their mobile phones.  It is anticipated that, by then, mobile 
money  providers  will  be  offering  the  full  range  of  financial  services, 
including interest-bearing accounts, credit and insurance. 
 Research  by  the  World  Bank,  conducted  in  137  countries  from  2005  to 
2011, observes that lack of access to finance constitutes a major problem 
for households and acts as a barrier to the growth of small enterprises. It 
is  therefore  evident  that  financial  inclusion  empowers  poor  households 
and  small  enterprises  by  bringing  them  into  the  mainstream  economy 
thereby reducing extreme levels of poverty and inequality.   There is also 
evidence,  based  on  a  number  of  research  work,  that  financial  inclusion 
promotes  economic  development,  especially 
for  women,  and  that 
financially  empowered  women  are  more  likely  to  improve  social  welfare. 
Overall, women’s financial exclusion limits the growth-promoting potential 
 2 
 of  finance  and  it  may  also  prove  costly  in  terms  of  elevated  risks  to 
financial stability. 
 Distinguished  Guests,  in  recognition  of  this  developmental  impact, 
financial  inclusion  is  becoming  a  global  priority  for  policy  makers, 
regulators  and  development  agencies.  Among  others,  financial  inclusion 
has  been  identified  as  an  enabler  for  seven  of  the  17  Sustainable 
Development  Goals.  In  this  regard,  the  World  Bank  Group  considers 
financial  inclusion  as  a  key  enabler  in  reducing  extreme  poverty  and 
boosting shared prosperity, and has, therefore, put forward an ambitious 
global goal to attain universal financial access by 2020. Furthermore, the 
G20 has committed to advancing financial inclusion worldwide.  
 Distinguished  guests,  one  area  in  Botswana  where  there  has  been  a 
significant impact, and continues to provide a huge potential, is the non-
discretionary  savings,  in  the  form  of  defined  contribution  pension 
schemes.  It  is  notable  that  the  Pension  Fund  industry  in  Botswana  has 
grown  substantially 
in 
the 
last 
two  decades,  mostly  driven  by 
establishment of the Botswana Public Officers Pension Fund in 2001. As 
at  the  end  of  2016,  pension  funds  assets  amounted  to  P75  billion  or  44 
percent  of  national  income  (nominal  GDP)  compared  to  total  banking 
assets of P81 billion.   
 In this regard, the pension industry  was a major driving force behind the 
cumulative  expansion  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  past  ten  years;  100 
percent growth in real terms, compared to 52 percent for the economy as 
a  whole.    However,  the  main  beneficiaries  and  industry  customers 
continue to be the long-term employed, to the exclusion of the traditionally 
disadvantaged cohorts. Therefore, national policy and the financial sector 
should increasingly find solutions to provide wider coverage for retirement 
funds to include the self-employed and younger generation.  
 3 
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  now  to  turn  to  financial 
literacy as a key component of financial inclusion. Experience has shown 
that  low  levels  of  financial  literacy  and  capability  in  developing  countries 
form  a  significant  barrier  to  accessing  and  effectively  using  financial 
services.    Financial  literacy  is  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  on  financial 
products  and  services;  while  financial  capability  refers  to  the  application 
of  the  financial  knowledge  gained  into  desirable  financial  behaviour. 
Without  financial  capabilities,  a  financially  literate  individual  may  not 
increase  savings  and  investment  or  reduce  debt  and  risky  financial 
behaviour.  Therefore, financial institutions have to re-direct their financial 
inclusion  strategies 
to 
incorporate  enhancement  of 
the 
financial 
capabilities of their customers. It is in this regard that financial capability is 
an  integral  part  of  financial  inclusion;  hence,  effective  empowerment 
strategies  for  financial  capability  need  to  focus  on  providing  practical, 
easy-to-understand  and  impartial  advice  so  that  consumers  can  make 
informed decisions.  
 As  you  would  be  aware,  in  general,  the  rate  of  financial  inclusion  is 
relatively  low  in  sub-Saharan  Africa  and  other  the  emerging  market 
economies.  For  example,  according  to  the  2014  Finscope  Survey,  more 
that  68  percent  of  the  adult  population  in  Botswana  have  access  to 
financial services; this compares with 58 percent in Namibia, 70.3 percent 
for  South  Africa;  39  percent  in  Mexico  and  53  percent  in  India.  Overall, 
the  average  financial  inclusion  measures  for  South  Asia  and  Latin 
America  as  well  as  the  Caribbean  are  lower  than  those  for  Botswana  at 
46.6  percent  and  51.4  percent,  respectively.    In  contrast,  financial 
inclusion is high in the developed countries. According to the World Bank, 
94  percent  of  adults  in  35  high  income  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-
operation  and  Development  (OECD)  countries  had  access  to  financial 
services in 2015.  
  4 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, as in other countries, the main policy objective of 
the  financial  inclusion  agenda  in  Botswana  is  to  improve  household 
welfare, 
increase  economic  efficiency  and  support 
inclusive  and 
sustainable  economic  growth.  In  this  regard,  advances  in  technology, 
have engendered an increase in opportunities and scaling up of financial 
inclusion.  Thus,  modern  communications 
infrastructure,  particularly 
mobile money and advances in the payment systems and platforms, play 
a  significant  role  in  financial  inclusion.  Thus,  the  availability  of  user-
friendly  and  cost-effective  information  and  communication  products  and 
platforms play an important role in broadening safe and secure access to 
financial services.   
 Notably,  we  have  seen  a  significant  increase  in  the  number  and 
functionality  of  automated  teller  machines,  including  deposit-taking 
machines; mobile money remittances and payments service; internet and 
web-based access and transacting; and the promotion of card payments. 
These  platforms  augur  well 
for  enhanced 
financial 
inclusion. 
Notwithstanding,  I  wish  to  implore  banks  to  move  at  a  measured  pace, 
taking  into  account  the  resilience  of  public  infrastructure  and  other 
development  needs,  in  transitioning  from  brick  and  mortar  banking 
branches to e-channels. There is anecdotal evidence which suggests, for 
various reasons, such as, cultural, literacy and human psychology factors, 
that  customers,  even  in  this  digital  age,  need  physical  access  and 
engagement  with  a  human  being  and  not  “Siri”  to  access  financial 
services, to understand and resolve account queries. 
 I  am  well  aware  and  commend  financial  institutions  engaged  in  various 
financial literacy programmes that also reach out to school going children, 
in  the  form  of  booklets,  drama  and  radio  quizzes  on  financial  products 
and  services.  In  this  regard,  it  is  equally  important  to  engage  customers 
on  ways  and  means  for  optimising  the  benefits  of  digital  and  electronic 
 5 
 platforms,  but  also  highlighting  the  associated  risks  and  mitigation 
measures. It is worth mentioning that banks need to practice, at all times, 
acceptable  market  conduct  through  increased  transparency,  fair  pricing, 
quick and timely resolution of both failed transactions and fraud incidents.   
 Distinguished  Guests,  in  line  with  the  2012  -  2016  Financial  Sector 
Development  Strategy,  a  number  of  initiatives  are  underway  to  enhance 
cost-effective  access  to  finance,  including  the  establishment  of  a  robust 
and  effective  credit  information  system  as  well  as  promulgation  of 
electronic  payments  services  regulations.  Also,  as  announced  by  the 
Minister  of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  in  the  2015  Budget 
Speech,  Government  has  adopted  Making  Access  Possible  approaches 
to financial inclusion.  This is a multi-country initiative to support financial 
inclusion  using  a  process  of  evidence-based  country  diagnostic  and 
stakeholder  dialogue.  Some  of  the  Making  Access  Possible  priorities 
include,  improving  the  payments  eco-system,  both  domestic  and  cross-
border  transactions,  facilitating  low  cost,  accessible  savings  products 
through the use of mobile savings accounts and less onerous Know Your 
Customer requirements for low risk savings accounts. 
 I  will  now  address  financial  regulation  as  a  perceived  barrier  to  financial 
inclusion.  Distinguished  guests,  the  domestic  regulatory  framework  is 
gradually being modernised to keep pace with financial innovation.  I must 
admit that, given the dynamic, evolving and innovative financial sector, it 
is  always  going  to  be  a  challenge  to  come  with  smart  and  cost-effective 
regulations.  This  challenge  is  even  greater  for  digital  finance,  which  is 
currently  and  prospectively,  the  main  conduit  of  the  financial  inclusion, 
especially in a sparsely populated country like Botswana.  
 It  is  generally  accepted  that  rigid  and  excessive  regulation  can  be  an 
obstacle  to  financial  inclusion.  Therefore,  the  Bank  and  other  domestic 
 6 
 financial  sector  supervisors  endeavour  to  regularly  review  and  amend, 
where  necessary,  those  provisions  of  the  law  that  can  impede  effective 
access  to  finance.  The  immediate  regulatory  issues  are  the  provisions 
relating  to  the  sharing  of  customer  creditworthiness  information,  both 
positive  and  negative  data,  know  your  customer  requirements  and  the 
Anti-Money  Laundering  and  Combatting  of  the  Financing  of  Terrorism 
protocols.  The  Banking  Act  confidentiality  provisions  are  also  being 
reviewed to allow for the sharing of customer creditworthiness information 
and to facilitate the establishment of credit bureaux.  
 As  regards  the  anti-money  laundering  and  combatting  the  financing  of 
terrorism measures, much as both the Financial Intelligence Agency and 
the  Bank  of  Botswana  subscribe  to  a  risk-based  approach  and  seek  to 
avoid  undue  regulatory  burden,  it  is  equally  important  to  safeguard  the 
integrity  and  overall  stability  of 
the  country 
financial  system  by 
implementing  and  adhering  to  the  international  standards  on  AML-CFT 
matters. Moreover, there is need to guard against the impact of de-risking 
and loss of correspondent banking relationships that could be detrimental 
to trade, procurement, financing and payments arrangements. 
 Distinguished guests, the Bank of Botswana, as a primary partner in the 
evolution  of  the  financial  landscape,  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  there 
exists  an  enabling  environment  for  enhanced  financial  inclusion  of  the 
unbanked  members  of  our  society.    For  the  Bank,  greater  financial 
inclusion enhances the potency of its policies and functions. In particular, 
given  that  monetary  policy  is  transmitted  by  the financial sector,  it  has  a 
greater  and  wider  effect  when  a  greater  part  of  the  population  and 
businesses  use  financial  services  and  products.  For  example,  an 
individual  or  business  that  use  the  financial  system  to  save  or  borrow  is 
affected  by  a  change  in  interest  rates;  therefore,  their  reactions  in  that 
 7 
 regard,  collectively  affects  the  rate  of  increase  in  prices  and  economic 
activity.   
 It  is,  therefore,  notable  that  the  key  mandates  of  the  Bank  collectively 
relate  to  protecting  the  intrinsic  value  of  the  national  currency;  and  that 
achievement  of  the  Bank’s  objectives  promotes  financial  inclusion, 
literacy  and  capability.  In  particular,  the  Bank  has  responsibility  for 
issuance of good quality banknotes and coin, while pursuing stability with 
respect to domestic prices, the exchange rate and the financial sector. To 
the  extent  that  these  objectives  are  met,  the  Bank  helps  to  minimise 
erosion  of  the  purchasing  power  of  the  currency,  while  ensuring  that  it 
remains  integral  to  storage  of  value,  monetary  valuations,  means  of 
payment,  and  access  to  foreign  currencies  as  needed,  as  well  as 
credibility  of  the  domestic  financial  system.  In  the  horizon,  there  are 
issues  of  digital  currencies  and  block  chain 
technologies.  While 
Distributed  Ledger  Technologies,  albeit  not  yet  mature,  offer  hope  and 
opportunities  for  enhancing  the  efficiency  and  resilience  of  the  payment 
infrastructure, for central banks,  digital  currencies are  not  yet  convincing 
and, in my view, rightly remain an area for other stakeholders. This is not 
to  suggest  that  these  developments  are  not  keenly  watched  and 
monitored.    
 The  Bank  has  also  entrenched  a  transparent  and,  I  would  say,  effective 
policy  framework  for  management  of  inflation  and  related  expectations 
that  has  so  far  been  successful.  Since  2013,  inflation  has  been  within 
and,  at  times,  even  below  the  objective  range  of  3  –  6  percent.  In  this 
environment,  there  is scope for  affordable  access  to  financial  resources, 
their productive deployment and greater opportunities for generating real 
returns.  The  transparency  of  the  exchange  rate  framework  and  absence 
of exchange controls removes uncertainty and encourages use of various 
platforms for financial inclusion, as well as informed decision-making and 
 8 
 planning by economic agents.  Effective supervision of the banking sector 
and  oversight  of  the  payments  system  and  related  infrastructure  also 
contributes  to  financial  inclusion.  In  particular,  this  is  to  the  extent  that 
policy, legislative and regulatory developments embrace advances in the 
provision  of  financial  services,  new  technology  and  payments  methods, 
while ensuring that integrity, resilience and stability of the financial system 
is maintained. In this regard, there is continuing patronage and growth in 
usage  of  the  financial  sector  and  related  services,  as  evidenced  by  the 
sustained expansion of financial services and increasing share in GDP.  
 In  concluding,  Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment, characterised by low and predictable levels 
of  inflation,  safe,  sound  and  inclusive  financial  sector,  supportive 
regulatory environment and well-informed consumers of financial services 
is  positive  for  wealth  creation  and  preservation,  as  well  as  inclusive 
growth.  
  I thank you for your kind attention.  
 9 
 