Sabine Lautenschläger: A stable financial system - more than the
sum of its parts
Keynote speech by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at the 
Dutch Banking Day 2018, Amsterdam,15 February 2018.
 Logic  can  be  a  tricky  thing. Apply  it  in  the  right  way,  and  you  always  arrive  at  a  consistent
conclusion. But apply it in the wrong way, and it can lead you astray. And that happens all too
easily.
There are indeed many wrong ways in which we can apply logic.
One of them is known as the fallacy of composition. It refers to the idea that the whole always
equals the sum of its parts. Well, that idea is wrong. As we all know, the whole can be more than
the sum of its parts – or less.
Consider this statement: if each bank is safe and sound, the banking system must be safe and
sound  as  well.  By  now,  we  have  learnt  the  hard  way  that  this  might  indeed  be  a  fallacy  of
composition.
Let me give you just one example. Imagine that a certain asset suddenly becomes more risky.
Each bank that holds this asset might react prudently by selling it. However, if many banks react
that way, they will drive down the price of the asset. This will amplify the initial shock, might affect
other assets, and a full-blown crisis might result. Each bank has behaved prudently, but their
collective behaviour has led to a crisis.
The  business  of  banking  is  ripe  with  externalities,  with  potential  herding  and  with  contagion.
These  factors  may  not  be  visible  when  looking  at  individual  banks,  but  they  can  threaten  the
stability of the entire system. This is one of the core insights from the financial crisis.
Countering the cycle and boosting resilience
Indeed, the financial crisis showed us that we had to do more than just look at each part of the
system,  at  each  bank.  The  system  as  a  whole  had  to  be  taken  into  account  as  well.  The
microprudential approach must be complemented by a macroprudential approach.
And thus, a new policy area was born out of the crisis. Age-wise, macroprudential policy could be
the grandchild of policy areas such as banking supervision and monetary policy. It still has to
grow up. Theories need to be elaborated, empirical evidence gathered, and practical experience
gained. A long childhood lies ahead.
But at the same time, much has already been achieved. Over the past few years, we have set up
a macroprudential framework for Europe. We have defined objectives, developed tools and set
out how different policy areas interact. Let us have a closer look at how macroprudential policy
works in Europe.
A core concept of macroprudential policy is the financial cycle, that steady succession of ups
and downs, of booms and busts. And each time the cycle turns, each time boom goes bust,
everyone  runs  for  the  exit.  Market  participants  sell  the  assets  concerned,  and  prices  tumble;
investors incur losses, as do the banks which financed their investments. This shock might even
hit banks which were prudent enough not to participate in the boom. The financial system is so
interconnected that even they cannot escape contagion. And as goes the financial system, so
goes the real economy. Credit dries up, growth drops off and everyone suffers.
1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  story  is  a  bit  simple,  of  course.  Still,  it  allows  us  to  define  two  goals  of  macroprudential
policy:
First, make the financial system as a whole more resilient.
Second,  dampen  the  cycle  of  booms  and  busts.  In  very  general  terms,  this  is  what
macroprudential policy aims to do in Europe.
The tools of macroprudential policy reflect these objectives. Some of them focus on increasing
the  resilience  of  market  participants.  Take,  for  example,  the  countercyclical  buffer.  It  requires
banks to set aside more capital in upturns to make them more resilient. Once the downturn sets
in, banks can draw on the buffer, which helps them absorb losses. Furthermore, having to set
aside more capital in an upturn makes it more costly for banks to grant loans. This might, as a
positive side effect, dampen excessive credit growth and hence the cycle. Likewise, reducing
capital requirements in a downturn may help to spur lending.
Other tools focus on the general resilience of the financial system, going beyond the financial
cycle. Various capital buffers have been designed for that purpose.
There is, for instance, the systemic risk buffer, which can be applied to all banks or to specific
groups of banks. It aims to make banks more resilient to structural risks that affect the entire
system.
And then there are buffers for globally systemic banks, the G-SII buffers, and for locally systemic
banks,  the  O-SII  buffers.  By  making  systemic  banks  more  resilient,  these  buffers  address
potential sources of contagion. At the same time, the buffers put a price on the impact systemic
banks  would  have  on  the  financial  system  and  the  economy  should  they  fail.  This  helps  to
internalise this impact.
Micro or macro? Separating the tools
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  said  that  macroprudential  policy  is  a
relatively  new  policy  area.  However,  the  relevant  tools  look  and  feel  familiar  to  banking
supervisors.  They  mostly  apply  to  banks,  and  often  focus  on  capital.  Thus,  the  distinction
between micro and macro is less clear than it should be. This ambiguity might cause conflicts of
interest, and this leads us to the question of how to deal with them.
The  answer  is  simple:  we  have  to  clearly  separate  the  tools  of  macro-  and  microprudential
policy. To channel the spirit of the famous Dutch economist Jan Tinbergen: each risk needs its
own tool.
Let’s start with what is known as Pillar 2 in the context of the Basel framework. Under Pillar 2,
supervisors  can  apply  a  range  of  measures  to  individual  banks.  The  goal  is  microprudential:
address  bank-specific  risks  and  bank-specific  resilience.  Now,  under  current  European  rules,
Pillar 2 measures could also be used to achieve macroprudential goals.
And this could lead to a conflict of interest. Imagine that there is a downturn in the financial cycle.
From  the  viewpoint  of  each  bank,  credit  risks  increase  and  microprudential  supervisors  may
want  to  increase  Pillar  2  capital  demands.  Looking  at  the  same  trend,  macroprudential
supervisors might want to support credit growth and counter the cycle over a longer time horizon
and from a systemic point of view. Thus, they may want to decrease Pillar 2 capital demands.
Who should prevail? And how should Pillar 2 be calculated when two different approaches are
used by two different stakeholders? To avoid such tricky questions, Pillar 2 should be defined as
a micro tool only – the current review of the Capital Requirements Directive offers the chance to
do so. This would help to focus on the initial idea of Pillar 2: determining a bank’s individual level
of capital based on the bank’s specific risks.
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  looking  at  the  macroprudential  framework,  is  it  enough  just  to  define  Pillar  2  as  a  purely
microprudential tool, or is the macroprudential toolbox lacking in efficient tools?
And indeed, the toolbox defined by the EU legal framework may be too small to address all types
of  systemic  risk.  The  available  tools  address  only  those  who  grant  loans  –  the  banks.  They
neglect those who take out loans – households, for instance.
Take, for example, the real estate sector, which often plays a big role in the ups and downs of the
financial cycle. When house prices are on the rise, the potential gains from buying a house might
be high enough to dwarf any increase in the cost of credit triggered by the countercyclical buffer.
Here, borrower-based tools would dampen the boom more effectively. I am thinking, for instance,
of  loan-to-value  ratios,  LTVs.  In  some  countries  in  Europe  LTVs  and  other  borrower-based
measures are already part of the macroprudential toolbox. Harmonising these tools at European
level might be a good next step.
At the same time, we should acknowledge that there is a drawback to tools which only focus on
banks. The crisis has shown that the financial sector reaches far beyond banks. And when we
only  tighten  rules  for  banks,  certain  activities  might  be  shifted  to  other,  less  strictly  regulated
parts of the financial system, namely the non-bank sector. Consequently, risks build up outside
the scope of banking regulation and supervision. Eventually, these risks might spill over into the
banking sector. So banks might be protected from the first wave of a crisis, but would be hit by
the second wave.
Ignoring  this  part  of  the  financial  system  would  leave  the  door  wide  open  to  risks  and  crises.
Thus, there is a need for tools that address non-banks and their business.
One  of  these  tools  concerns  margins  and  haircuts  for  securities  financing  transactions  and
derivatives. As they stand, these margins and haircuts are pro-cyclical: they go down in a boom,
and rise in a bust. Thus, there might be a case for having tools that would make margins and
haircuts vary in a more countercyclical manner.
To sum up, we need to clearly separate micro- and macro tools, and we need to expand the
macro toolbox.
But  there  is  more:  we  also  need  to  clearly  separate  macro  tools  from  each  other.  This  is
particularly relevant in respect of various structural buffers: the O-SII, the G-SII and the systemic
risk  buffers.  Each  of  these  buffers  is  meant  to  address  a  specific  structural  risk.  In  practice,
however, they are often used to achieve the same goals. In this context, the fact that currently all
three buffers are treated in combination might play a role: only the highest of them applies.
Given  that  the  buffers  for  systemically  important  institutions  and  the  systemic  risk  buffer  are
supposed to address different risks, they should rather be set up separately and then added up.
The institutional backdrop to macroprudential policy
Ladies and gentlemen, so far, I have discussed the tools of macroprudential policy. What I have
not  discussed  are  those  who  apply  the  tools  and  how  they  do  so. And  this  brings  me  to  the
institutional backdrop to macroprudential policy. As you can imagine, in Europe this is a complex
issue.
Macroprudential powers were assigned to the ECB when European banking supervision came
into being. This sounds straightforward, but it is not.
First of all, the ECB does not have exclusive powers. It shares them with the national authorities.
And this makes sense. After all, there is a national angle to systemic risk: financial cycles and
structures  vary  across  countries.  So  sharing  powers  makes  sense  but,  at  the  same  time,  it
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
makes things a bit trickier.
How  does  this  work?  Well,  in  fact,  it  is  the  national  authorities  that  take  macroprudential
measures.  The  ECB  then  has  the  power  to  tighten  –  or  “top  up”  –  those  measures  that  are
covered by EU law.
This approach seeks to achieve two goals: first, it helps to counter any inaction bias on the part
of national authorities. And second, it helps to take into account any cross-border effects.
And it’s not just the ECB and the national authorities that are involved. The European Systemic
Risk Board, or ESRB for short, and, in certain cases, the European Banking Authority also have
a role in assessing the adequacy and implementation of certain macroprudential measures. All in
all, a number of different EU institutions may be involved in macroprudential policy, depending on
the measure used.
The  process  of  activating  macroprudential  tools  is  a  long  and  complex  one,  and  it  does  not
promote the proactive and timely use of those tools. In addition, each tool comes with a different
activation mechanism.
So I am convinced that these activation procedures need to be simplified. And the notification and
information  procedures  need  to  be  harmonised  and  streamlined  too.  This  could  be  done,  for
instance, by establishing the ESRB as the central information hub for all notifications regarding
macroprudential  measures  in  the  EU.  This  would  reduce  the  overall  notification  burden  on
national authorities.
Furthermore, one might think that the authorities were free to choose the tool that they deem best
suited to address the risk at hand. Well, not quite.
With  regard  to  certain  macroprudential  tools,  a  rigid  sequence  has  to  be  followed.  You  can’t
implement certain tools without first having considered using other tools. More specifically, if you
want to apply tools such as macroprudential liquidity requirements or risk weights to target asset
bubbles, you first have to consider tools such as Pillar 2 requirements or various capital buffers.
This sequence is known as the “pecking order” of tools.
But  an  effective  and  efficient  macroprudential  framework  should  permit  the  flexible  use  of  all
available tools laid down in EU law to prevent systemic risk. Instruments should be chosen on
the basis of their effectiveness, not as a result of mandatory sequencing.
The  conclusion  therefore  is  that  the  pecking  order  should  be  removed  and  the  activation
mechanisms should be harmonised and streamlined.
Now, as I said before, macroprudential policy is a relatively new field in terms of both theory and
practice. So, two things will happen over time: the theory will advance, and we will gain practical
experience.
Against this backdrop, the European macroprudential framework should be reviewed on a regular
basis. This would help to make it more effective and more efficient.
The current situation
But the framework is just a means to an end. And that end is to ensure a stable financial system.
So, where do we stand on this front? Are there any risks to financial stability in the euro area?
We at the ECB currently see four major risks.
The first risk is a sudden reversal of risk premia. Recent events have shown that markets can be
subject to corrections even when the macroeconomic environment continues to be supportive.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
So far, the high volatility in the equity market has not spilled over into other markets, which is
certainly good news. That said, some market segments need to be closely monitored.
Residential  real  estate  is  one  such  segment.  Prices  are  broadly  in  line  with  the  average
valuations recorded over recent decades. However, in some large cities, real estate prices have
increased  more  rapidly  than  household  income.  In  addition,  prices  for  prime  commercial
properties rose strongly in 2017, and the fundamentals suggest that valuations are a bit stretched
here. Euro area corporate bond spreads for some lower-rated issuers also look increasingly tight
[compared with fundamentals.
The second risk lies in the low profitability of banks. As only profitable banks can reliably serve
the economy, weak banks are indeed a concern.
The  third  risk  is  that  markets  might  again  doubt  the  ability  of  public  and  private  borrowers  to
service their debt.
And finally, there are liquidity risks in the non-bank sector which might spill over into the entire
financial system.
So, there are risks, but, from the ECB’s point of view, they are not too pronounced. In addition,
the  euro  area  economy  is  recovering,  and  this  will  help  to  alleviate  some  financial  stability
concerns. That said, the situation differs from country to country, of course.
And as this is Dutch Banking Day, let’s turn our attention to the Netherlands.
There are two things in this country that the ECB is watching closely. The first is the real estate
sector.  Since  2013,  prices  for  residential  real  estate  have  been  rising  strongly.  This  applies
mostly to large cities, where we now see tentative signs of overvaluation. Prices increased faster
than household income.
But mortgage lending is still growing more slowly than house prices. This seems to be largely
due  to  the  fact  that  many  borrowers  are  repaying  existing  loans;  since  2013,  mortgage
repayments have totalled around €60 billion.
This has been driven by low interest rates and a gift tax exemption for home purchases. But even
when we take this into account, mortgage lending is still growing more slowly than house prices.
So other factors are still in play. These include demography and the limited home equity of many
households.
But it’s not just residential real estate. There is also commercial real estate, and that market is
quite  large  relative  to  the  size  of  the  Dutch  economy,  mainly  because  real  estate  investment
funds play a big role in the Netherlands – more so than in other countries.
And prices for prime commercial real estate are rising. On average, they are still below peak
levels, but, again, we see tentative signs of overvaluation – particularly in large cities. At the same
time, loans have begun to grow faster, and lending standards have started to ease – but they are
still tight compared with the pre-crisis period.
Against this backdrop, both residential and commercial real estate markets need to be closely
monitored. And the two markets need to be seen in combination. After all, they are closely linked,
and risks might spill over from one to the other.
We  also  keep  a  close  eye  on  household  debt.  Over  the  past  few  years,  households  have
reduced  their  debt,  but  the  level  is  still  high.  At  106%  of  GDP,  the  debt  burden  of  Dutch
households is among the highest in the euro area. The same is true of the debt-to-income ratio,
which stands at more than 200%. Moreover, as house prices are rising and more loans are being
granted, the reduction of debt might come to an end.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Against this backdrop, there might be a need for more active macroprudential policy. And by this I
mean a tightening of existing borrower-based measures.
With that in mind,  the  Dutch  Financial  Stability  Committee  and  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  have
recommended that maximum loan-to-value, or LTV, ratios be further reduced to 90% over the
next ten years.
In  my  view,  this  is  called  for. After  all,  LTV  ratios  in  the  Netherlands  are  higher  than  in  other
countries. Combined with the high levels of household debt, this poses a risk to financial stability.
In  addition,  some  have  been  calling  for  the  tax  deductions  applicable  to  interest  on  mortgage
loans to be brought down more quickly. Here too, the Netherlands stands out, with higher levels
of tax relief for mortgage loans than in other countries. This kind of tax policy has proven to be
pro-cyclical and has made the household sector more vulnerable. It would thus be sensible to
speed up the reduction of tax relief.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
Macroprudential policy is a relatively new thing. And what is new is almost never perfect; that is
also true of macroprudential policy. It still has to mature. We still need to refine the theory and
translate it into tools that are fit for purpose, policies that work and an institutional architecture
that is both lean and stable. All this requires further work and regular reviews of the status quo.
Let us now return to the fallacy of composition. Each of you is made up of billions of cells. Each
of these cells is unconscious. Therefore, you must be unconscious as well. But unless you fell
asleep  during  my  speech,  you  are  very  much  conscious.  I  admit  that  this  is  a  bit  more
philosophical  than  macroprudential  policy,  but  the  basic  idea  remains  the  same:  the  whole  is
more than the sum of its parts.
Thank you for your attention.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
