Peter Praet: Economic developments in the euro area
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Cercle de Lorraine, Brussels, 1 February 2018.
 The  robust  pace  of  economic  expansion  clearly  shows  that  our  monetary  policy  has  been
effective in preparing for a return of inflation to a rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium
term.  Inflation  developments  remain  subdued,  however,  and  we  are  still  some  distance  away
from meeting the Governing Council’s criteria for a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.
Overall,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains  necessary  for  underlying  inflation
pressures to continue to build up and support headline inflation developments over the medium
1
term .
The euro area economic expansion is strong and broad-based. Real GDP in the euro area has
expanded for 19 consecutive quarters, growing by 2.7% year on year during the fourth quarter of
2017, according to preliminary data. This compares with the latest potential growth estimates for
2
the euro area of around 1.5%.
The latest economic data and survey results point to continued growth momentum at the end of
last  year.  The  composite  output  Purchasing  Managers’  Index  –  which  correlates  closely  with
growth in the euro area – remains above its long-term average and is close to a 12-year high.
Moreover,  Eurostat’s  Economic  Sentiment  Indicator  is  around  its  highest  level  for  17  years.
Forward-looking components of surveys also point to growth in the quarters ahead.
The ongoing recovery has led to solid employment gains. The number of people employed in the
euro area has increased by almost 7.5 million since hitting a low in mid-2013. This means that all
of the job losses recorded during the crisis have been recovered. Additionally, the unemployment
rate is now at its lowest level for around nine years and continues to decline, despite an increase
in labour force participation.
Employment growth, together with the gradual increase in employee compensation, is supporting
households’  disposable  income  and  underpinning  solid  consumption  dynamics.  Robust
consumer spending is being driven by buoyant sentiment, favourable bank lending conditions and
the  notable  progress  achieved  with  respect  to  deleveraging.  The  investment  outlook  is  also
positive,  supported  not  only  by  a  need  to  modernise  the  capital  stock  after  years  of  subdued
investment and an improving outlook for profitability, but also by easy financing conditions as our
policy  measures  have  passed  through  financial  markets,  benefiting  businesses  and  their
customers.
Since the announcement of our policy measures in June 2014, bank lending rates for euro area
non-financial corporations have fallen by around 120 basis points and those for households by
around 110 basis points. Rates on very small loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  have  declined  by  around  200  basis  points.  The
significant  improvement  in  funding  conditions  for  SMEs  is  especially  encouraging  as  these
companies provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro area. Heterogeneity
of lending rates across countries has also fallen sharply. For example, the difference between
the average lending rate for firms in countries which were severely affected by the crisis and that
in  other  countries  has  narrowed  by  more  than  100  basis  points  over  this  period.  The  pass-
through of monetary policy has become more even.
Banks  are  also  passing  on  the  favourable  funding  conditions  to  their  customers  due  to  the
second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II), which further supports
3
these positive developments.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
4
which continues to improve, according to the latest survey results.
Furthermore, bank lending volumes have been gradually recovering since early 2014. According
to the latest Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises, covering the period from April to
September 2017, euro area SMEs have continued to see improvements in the availability of bank
loans.  Market-based  funding  conditions,  too,  have  improved  significantly  in  response  to  the
corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
Against the backdrop of this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand has
become  the  mainstay  of  growth  in  the  euro  area,  making  the  recovery  more  resilient  to
developments  overseas.  Meanwhile,  real  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  remain  above  potential
growth  in  the  coming  years.  The  acceleration  in  the  cyclical  momentum  and  the  ongoing
reduction of economic slack strengthen our confidence that inflation will converge towards our
inflation aim of below, but close to, 2%.
But inflation continues to be lacklustre. After lingering at levels well below 1% for three years, with
occasional dips into negative territory, euro area headline inflation increased towards the end of
2016 and has fluctuated between 1.3% and 1.5% since May of last year. Annual inflation stood at
1.3% in January, according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. Looking ahead, on the basis of current
futures prices for oil, annual rates of headline inflation are likely to hover around current levels in
the  coming  months.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  subdued  and  have  yet  to  show
convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
Muted wage dynamics are one important element keeping a lid on underlying price pressures.
These are shaped by many factors. In addition to weak productivity developments, the significant
degree of remaining labour market slack is limiting wage growth. When assessing slack, it is
important  to  look  also  at  broader  measures  than  the  unemployment  rate.  The  so-called  “U6
measure” captures unemployment, underemployment (meaning workers who would like to work
more hours) and marginal attachment, which refers to those members of the workforce who are
not seeking employment very actively either because, for example, they are not available to start
a  new  job  at  short  notice  or  have  been  discouraged  by  a  fruitless  search  for  work.  The  U6
measure currently covers around 17% of the labour force and is thus considerably higher than
5
the unemployment rate.
Looking forward, although there still appears to be a disconnect between growth and inflation, the
ongoing economic expansion is expected to further contribute to a narrowing of the output and
unemployment gaps. As slack in the economy continues to be absorbed, price pressures will
gradually build up and the traditional Phillips curve relationship between inflation and the business
cycle should eventually reassert itself.
inflation  has  weakened.  This  weakening  might  be  partly 
That being said, current estimates still appear to point to a flatter slope of the Phillips curve than
in the past, which could be interpreted as an indication that the relationship between economic
slack  and 
the  result  of  a
mismeasurement of slack (because of structural changes in the labour market) or an unstable
relationship between slack and inflation over time. At the same time, this effect could also result
from discrete parallel shifts in the Phillips curve. Such parallel shifts can arise due to temporary
changes in wage and inflation mark-ups or an incipient dis-anchoring of inflation expectations,
which is of greater concern to a central bank. Empirically disentangling these factors is extremely
difficult,  so  we  need  to  be  mindful  of  such  considerations  when  discussing  the  relationship
between economic slack and inflation developments. Our primary task as a central bank is to
ensure that the traditional relationship between the real and the nominal sides of the economy
reasserts itself at a steady-state rate of inflation that is below, but close to, 2%.
We  have  not  yet  accomplished  our  mission:  with  inflation  convergence  proceeding  only
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
gradually, patience and persistence in our monetary policy remain warranted. In the light of this,
the Governing Council in January maintained all elements of its accommodative monetary policy
stance.  Together,  our  monetary  policy  measures  will  preserve  the  ample  degree  of
accommodation  that  remains  necessary  for  inflation  pressures  to  continue  to  build  up  and
support headline inflation developments over the medium term.
Looking  ahead,  monetary  policy  will  evolve  in  a  data-dependent  and  time-consistent  manner.
Once  the  Governing  Council  judges  that  the  three  criteria  for  sustained  adjustment  –
convergence, confidence and resilience – have been met, net asset purchases will expire, in line
with  our  guidance.  From  that  point  in  time,  the  evolution  of  inflation  will  remain  conditional  on
reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time and on policy rates remaining at their
present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases. The stock of long-duration assets
held in our portfolio will continue to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates well
beyond the end of our net purchases. Policy rates remaining at their present levels well past the
end of our net purchases will contribute to holding the short to intermediate portions of the yield
curve  in  check  for  as  long  as  necessary,  thereby  ensuring  that  financial  conditions  remain
consistent with a sustained adjustment of inflation.
1
2
3
4
5
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her support in preparing this speech.
See,  for  example,  the  European  Commission’s  “European  Economic  Forecast  – Autumn  2017”.  Potential
growth was estimated at 1.4% for 2017 and 1.5% for 2018 and 2019.
For more details, see the box entitled “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-
up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, January 2018, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, April to September 2017.
See the box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
