Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore 
A Future for Europe. Conference in memory of Giacomo Vaciago 
   Monetary policy in the euro area:  
past, present and near future 
 Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Fabio Panetta 
  Milan, 6 April 2018 
    1. Introduction1 
The  figure  of  Giacomo  Vaciago  is  part  of  our  country’s  recent  history.  Following  his 
studies  at  the  Catholic  University  of  Milan  and  at  Oxford,  Giacomo  was  a  Professor  of 
Economics at Ancona and then Professor of Political Economy and Monetary Economics at the 
Catholic University of Milan. In 2016 the Catholic University awarded him the title of Emeritus 
Professor, closing the circle that began with his graduation in 1964. The strength of Giacomo’s 
commitment to society and its institutions is well-known: columnist for the newspaper Il Sole 
24  Ore  from  1983;  advisor  to  the  Minister  for  the  Treasury  (1987-1989)  and  to  the  Prime 
Minister  (1992-1993);  Mayor  of  Piacenza  (1994-1998);  advisor  to  the  Ministry  of  Art  and 
Culture (2003-2005) and to the Minister of Labour and Social Policies (2014-2016).  
Giacomo was a committed European. His last book, Un’anima per l’Europa (A soul for 
Europe),  posed  some  key  questions  about  the  future  of  the  Union.2  Four  years  ago  he  urged 
Europeans to ‘pool their virtues rather than their vices’ – something they had often done in the 
past – and his words still hold true today.  
But  first  and  foremost,  Giacomo  was  a  friend  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  work  with  on 
several occasions. Our conversations were an opportunity to look more closely at problems and 
analyse them rigorously, but also a way to defuse situations, tongue-in-cheek. 
The page commemorating Giacomo on the Catholic University’s website opens by noting 
that ‘students who attended Giacomo Vaciago’s lessons on Monetary Economics and Political 
Economy were very fortunate, because they learned things that are not in the textbooks’. Indeed, 
the monetary policy of recent years can certainly not be found in a textbook: it is no coincidence 
that Giacomo observed it carefully and was a strong supporter.3 
In a speech I gave in April 2016 my starting point was the observation that in the decade 
following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  central  banks  have  been  more  creative  and 
 1   I would like to thank Piergiorgio Alessandri, Marco Casiraghi, Pietro Rizza, Stefano Siviero, Emilio Vadalà 
and Gabriele Zinna for their useful comments and help in preparing the text.  
2   ‘Continue along the path of Union? How? Only a small part of what we have today is an economic union: the 
decisions  of  national  and  local  governments  and  the  many  corporations  in  each  country  still  count  for  too 
much. Nor can we speak of monetary union until banking union has been achieved. So what is lacking in our 
very incomplete union?’ 
3   Interviewer:  ‘But  can  quantitative  easing  work?’  Giacomo  Vaciago:  ‘It  took  Draghi  a  year  to  convince  the 
Germans that it was possible and he has never backed down on this; it is he who is the true German at heart’. 
(AGI Roma, 8 March 2015). 
 1 
enterprising than might have been expected.4  It’s natural to wonder what has changed in the 
last two years and to revise those reflections in the light of the challenges that central banks face 
today. 
2. Inflation in Italy and in the rest of the world: the outlook beyond the short term 
Inflation in the leading economies has been anomalous recently for at least two reasons. 
First  of  all,  after  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis,  inflation  was  very  low  compared  with  that 
recorded after World War II (Figure 1).5 Moreover, it has varied considerably less than in the 
past. This exceptionally and persistently low inflation has provoked a debate over the adequacy 
of central bank objectives, tools and strategies. 
The  scale  and  variety  of  the  monetary  policy  interventions  implemented  by  the  major 
countries in the last few  years is well-known and there is no need for  me to list them here.6  
Less well-known is the evidence for the strong impact of these interventions on inflation and 
growth in the Eurozone.7 The first clear sign of their effectiveness is the lower risk of deflation: 
in  2014,  before  the  announcement  of  the  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (PSPP),8  the 
probability of deflation over a five-year time horizon was more than 30 per cent (Figure 2);9 this 
gradually declined to practically nil in 2017. As for growth, our estimates show that the Asset 
Purchase  Programme  (APP)  raised  productive  activity  by  almost  2  percentage  points 
cumulatively  in  the  two  years  2016-2017,10  which  is  consistent  with  President  Draghi’s 
assessments.11  
The  benefits  of  monetary  stimulus  have  not  come  to  an  end.  In  the  light  of  the  recent 
positive signs for the economy, last October the ECB Governing Council decided to extend its 
 4   Cf. Panetta (2016).  
5    Low (or negative) inflation rates were more common between the end of the 19th century and World War II. 
But things were different then: the gold standard limited the money supply and full employment and growth 
did not influence the decisions of the monetary authorities (Bordo and Schwartz, 1999). 
6   Cf. Visco (2016) and Bank for International Settlements (2015). 
7   Cf. Casiraghi, Gaiotti, Rodano and Secchi (2016). 
8   The  PSPP,  launched  in  March  2015,  provided  for  the  purchase  on  the  secondary  market  of  public  sector 
securities with remaining maturities of between 1 and 30 years. Purchases are limited to an issue share of 33 
per cent, mainly so as not to influence market prices. 
9   Estimates were based on inflation option prices; see Cecchetti, Natoli and Sigalotti (2015). 
10   Estimates were calculated using the model proposed by Burlon, Gerali, Notarpietro and Pisani (2015).  
11   Cf. Draghi (2018).  
 2 
asset  purchases  until  September  2018,  reducing  the  monthly  pace  from  €60  billion  to  €30 
billion, and strengthen its forward guidance at the same time.12  
Inflation and growth signals are encouraging, but the objective has not yet been reached. 
It is crucial, therefore, to analyse the causes of low-flation. The fundamental question is to what 
extent  low  inflation  is  a  structural  rather  than  a  cyclical  phenomenon.  The  answer  to  this 
question has implications both for managing monetary policy in the short term and for deciding 
on central banks’ strategies and tools for the next few years.  
3. The causes of low-flation 
Among the root causes of low-flation, experts often cite the structural changes that have 
taken place in recent decades, first and foremost the globalization and technological progress 
that are transforming production processes worldwide.13 
Globalization – and with it the entrance of several emerging countries, notably Eastern 
European  countries  and  China,  on  the  world  trade  stage  –  has  fostered  the  delocalized 
production of goods and services, making inflation in the advanced countries less sensitive to 
domestic economic conditions, especially in the labour market. In the advanced economies this 
has caused production costs in a number of traditional sectors to fall, converging towards those 
of the emerging countries.14 
The  second  factor,  i.e.  the  spread  of  new  technologies,  can  directly  curb  inflation  by 
raising productivity or by exerting downward pressure on wages and by reducing or eliminating 
certain  low-value-added  jobs  that  are  increasingly  taken  over  by  machines.  Productivity, 
however, has slowed in the advanced economies in the last ten years.15 Technology can affect 
inflation  indirectly  as  well,  by  fostering  globalization  and  the  development  of  global  value 
chains.16 The ‘Amazon effect’ is one such technology factor:17 the internet allows consumers to 
compare  prices,  thereby  reducing  retailers’  margins  with  repercussions  on  price  levels  and 
dynamics.18  
 12   Rates will be raised and reinvestment interrupted only well past the horizon of the ECB’s net asset purchases. 
13   See, for example, Jens Weidmann’s speech on 18 January 2018.   
14   Cf. Auer, Borio and Filardo (2017). 
15   See Manaresi and Pierri (2017).  
16   A global value chain is a type of organisation in which the individual stages of production are carried out by 
companies located in different countries.    
17   See Forbes (2016).  
18   Cf. Yellen (2017). 
 3 
Thus,  a  country’s  inflation  would  be  largely  independent  of  the  domestic  economic 
situation, making it harder for central banks to control it.  
This is only part of the story, however. Globalization and technology have undoubtedly 
exerted downward pressure on prices. Such factors have been at play for some time, though, and 
may account in part for the slow decline of inflation in recent decades, but for the very same 
reason they cannot explain the rapid decrease of recent years.  
Moreover,  globalization  has  been  slowing  lately,  not  accelerating.  This  has  happened 
with integration through global value chains: the share of export value added generated outside 
the exporting country has ceased to grow worldwide since the onset of the crisis in 2008 (Figure 
3).19  The  same  applies  to  e-commerce,  which  in  recent  years  appears  to  have  had  less  of  an 
effect on prices than before: in the United States the Amazon effect is estimated to have reduced 
personal  consumption  expenditure  inflation  by  0.1  per  cent,  which  is  less  than  the  Walmart 
effect did at the beginning of the millennium.20 The profit margins of traditional retailers cannot 
keep falling forever: once equilibrium is reached, any cost increases are bound to be transmitted 
to the prices of final goods. 
The  integration  of  the  markets  for  goods  and  factors  of  production  seems  to  have 
produced limited effects. The link between Eurozone inflation and global unutilized capacity is  
tenuous.21  Empirical  analyses  support  the  hypothesis  that  globalization  has  not  altered  the 
relationship between inflation and output gap.22 
All told, it is difficult to pinpoint the causes of low-flation without resorting to standard 
explanations  from  macroeconomics  textbooks:  a  negative  output  gap  and  weak  inflation 
expectations. Such an interpretation fits the observation that inflation has become increasingly 
sensitive to the Eurozone economic cycle in recent  years,23 but the data need to be  analysed 
with care.  
The rate of unemployment in the Eurozone has diminished by some 3 percentage points 
since  2013,  falling  to  the  current  level  of  9  per  cent.  Unemployment  is  back  to  what  it  was 
before the sovereign debt crisis, but inflation is still below the level observed at that time. This 
 19   OECD (2017).  
20   Charbonneau, Evans, Sarker and Suchanek (2017). 
21   Several  studies  have  looked  at  the  possibility  of  including  measures  of  global  value  chains  and  unutilized 
capacity in analyses of Eurozone inflation based on the Phillips curve; see European Central Bank (2017). 
22   See, for example, Gaiotti (2010).  
23   Riggi and Venditti (2015).  
4 
 seemingly contradicts the explanation of low-flation as being due to factor underutilization and 
below-potential economic activity.  
The  contradiction  is  only  apparent,  however.  The  unemployment  rate  is  an  imperfect 
measure of actual labour utilization as it only considers job-seekers. In fact it rises to 18 per cent 
if labour utilization is calculated to include underutilized labour.24 The figure is not far off the 
value recorded in 2013 (20 per cent), at the end of the last recession.25 Empirical analyses26 lend 
support to the hypothesis that wage growth was held down in the last expansionary phase of the 
cycle by the fact that actual labour utilization was less than the unemployment rate indicated.27  
The  second  traditional  determinant  of  inflation  –  i.e.  expectations  regarding  its  future 
path  –  can  also  be  influenced  by  low  observed  inflation.  When  the  economic  context  is 
undergoing change, firms and households without exhaustive information about the state of the 
economy may form their inflation expectations through a process of gradual learning, attributing 
the  greatest  weight  to  recent  dynamics.  Hence,  a  series  of  deflationary  shocks  (like  those 
observed in the euro area from 2013 on) may contribute to de-anchoring inflation expectations, 
making convergence towards the central bank’s aim a lengthier and more costly process.28 This 
type  of  mechanism  fits  the  data  in  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  Survey  on  Inflation  and  Growth 
Expectations:  in  recent  years  firms’  expectations  have  been  heavily  influenced  by  (low) 
inflation.  Moreover,  firms  now  concur  in  forecasting  low  inflation,  whereas  previously  an 
inflation  rate  that  was  far  from  the  objective  was  associated  with  a  wide  dispersion  of 
expectations.  This  would  suggest  that  low-flation  is  no  longer  regarded  as  an  anomaly,  but 
increasingly as the norm.29 Lower and less widely dispersed inflation expectations entail a risk 
they will become de-anchored, so that observed future inflation will be more likely to remain 
low.  
These trends are reflected in wage negotiations. On several occasions between late 2015 
and early 2016, the social partners in Italy did not take inflation expectations into account in 
their negotiations,30 so that many of the contracts signed at the time either ignored inflation or 
 24   Underutilized labour includes part-time workers (who would be willing to work longer hours), job-seekers not 
immediately available and discouraged workers (those willing to work but no longer actively job-seeking). 
25   The number of hours worked per employee is still 4 per cent below the pre-crisis average.  
26   Bulligan, Guglielminetti and Viviano (2017).  
27   Nominal wages grew on average by 1.3 per cent from 2013, well below the pre-crisis rate. 
28   Cf. Busetti, Ferrero, Gerali and Locarno (2014). 
29   Cf. Bartiloro, Bottone and Rosolia (2017). 
30   This is also due to an attempt by firms to recoup at least part of the pay rises paid in 2013-15 over and above 
observed inflation. 
 5 
included automatic ex-post wage indexation. In other cases the renewal of expired agreements 
was postponed. As a result, less than a fifth of the labour contracts in force at the end of 2016 
included expected inflation among the parameters for calculating pay rises. 
Thus, the data indicate that labour is still a widely underutilized factor of production and 
that  inflation  expectations  reflect  the  deflationary  shocks  of  recent  years.  These  are  cyclical 
problems, not structural ones. 
4. Monetary policy implications 
These considerations explain and justify the Eurosystem’s current expansionary monetary 
policy  stance,  which  is  designed  to  stimulate  demand,  increase  factor  utilization  and  exert 
upward  pressure  on  wages.  The  goal  is  to  secure  a  self-sustained  return  of  the  inflation  rate 
towards levels that are below but close to  2 per cent, one that is not solely based on current 
policies  or  on  temporary  factors  like  oil  prices.  As  President  Draghi  has  pointed  out,  this 
requires  trust  in  the  effects  of  monetary  policy,  persistence  in  pursuing  the  objective,  and 
patience in waiting for the effects to emerge.   
The Eurosystem’s policies reflect the degree of prudence required during this phase. The 
ECB Governing Council has recently recalibrated its asset purchases, both public and private,  
and has reinforced its forward guidance. It has announced that rates will remain at their present 
levels for a prolonged period of time, well past the end of net purchases under the programme, 
which will continue at least until September 2018. In addition, the Eurosystem will reinvest the 
principal payments from maturing securities for an extended period of time after the end of its 
net  asset  purchases,  and  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary.  It  has  also  clarified  that  the 
intensity  of  the  monetary  stimulus  will  depend  on  economic  and  financial  conditions  in  the 
Eurozone.  In  March,  the  Council  adjusted  its  communication  to  reflect  the  economy’s  lower 
exposure to tail risk as compared with the past.31  
Naturally, this does not eliminate the need to assess well in advance, even as of now, the 
implications of monetary policy normalization, which will occur sooner or later. The experience 
of others countries32 indicates that the normalization process is a delicate transition, one where 
 31    Reference  to  the  possibility  that  the  Council  might  increase  the  amount  and  duration  of  purchases  was 
eliminated following particularly weak inflation dynamics. 
32   The Federal Reserve ended its asset purchase programme in 2014 and raised rates for the first time one year 
later.  Only  subsequently  did  it  reduce  the  stock  of  securities  in  its  portfolio.  The  Bank  of  England’s 
normalization was altered by the unexpected outcome of the EU referendum, requiring additional expansionary 
measures.   
 6 
tensions and sudden increases in volatility are possible.33 But even this process, if prudent and 
gradual, may be managed without shocks to the financial system and the economy. The Federal 
Reserve  Chairman  Powell  underlined  the  importance  of  gradualism  in  adjusting  monetary 
policy to the macroeconomic outlook and in achieving the Federal Reserve’s objectives.34  
There is no reason to believe that monetary policy normalization in the Eurozone cannot 
be achieved without shocks to the financial system or the real economy, as long as it takes place 
gradually,  within  a  context  of  robust  growth.  Gradualism  is  always  essential  when  there  is 
marked uncertainty about current macroeconomic conditions – and in the euro area this largely 
reflects the difficulty of accurately measuring potential output and labour utilization. Prudence 
is also needed to ensure that inflation expectations are consistently in line with the objective of 
price stability following the long phase of low-flation.  Lastly,  another important factor is the 
asymmetric distribution of risks – an early exit would involve greater risks than a late one, in 
that it could hamper the recovery and the return to price stability. 
The signs are encouraging. For example, labour contracts signed in Italy in recent months 
have  again  started  to  refer  to  expected  inflation.35  But  monetary  policy  must  remain 
expansionary for an extended period of time.  
5. The outlook for the Italian economy 
The Italian economy is able to absorb a rise in the yield curve as long as it is associated to 
a strengthening of the business cycle. Compared with the most serious phase of the crisis, GDP 
has returned to steady growth, boosted by both domestic and foreign demand. The improvement 
in labour market conditions and in confidence is buoying consumption. Given the favourable 
expectations  for  demand,  investment  has  returned  to  sustained  growth;  it  should  regain  pre-
crisis  levels  in  2019.  The  growth  in  exports  since  2010  exceeds  that  of  potential  foreign 
 33   In  the  spring  of  2013  the  first  signs  of  a  possible  reduction  in  monetary  stimulus  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
provoked a brusque reaction in the markets (the ‘taper tantrum’): interest rates in dollars rose sharply, causing 
a  drop  in  share  prices  and  an  increase  in  volatility  and  risk  premiums.  The  Federal  Reserve  kept  its  asset 
purchases unchanged until the end of the year, underlining the difference between changes in the programme 
and the management of interest rates. An increase in volatility was also recorded in February, when the release 
of better than expected employment figures generated fears that rates would increase faster than projected. The 
correction was amplified by the widespread use of ‘short volatility trades’. Cf. Bhansali and Harris (2018).  
34   ‘We  are  in  the  process  of  gradually  normalizing  both  interest  rate  policy  and  our  balance  sheet’.  ‘In  the 
[FOMC’s] view, further gradual rate increases in the federal funds rate will best promote attainment of both of 
our objectives’ (Powell, 2018).  
35   Some contracts signed in the third quarter of 2017 (trade, telecommunications, goods transport and logistics, 
postal  services)  provide  for  significant  wage  increases  (see  Banca  d’Italia,  2018).  Moreover,  unlike  in  the 
previous two-year period, they did not incorporate automatic adjustments for actual inflation, which could limit 
wage growth in a context of low inflation. 
 7 
demand; it was more than 5 per cent in 2017, despite the appreciation of the euro. The balance 
on current account, which had been positive since 2013, recorded a surplus of nearly 3 per cent 
of GDP in 2017. The net debtor position has decreased considerably, from 25 per cent of GDP 
in  2014  to  less  than  7.5  per  cent  in  2017,  the  lowest  figure  since  2002.  According  to  our 
projections,  the  net  international  investment  position  will  continue  to  improve  over  the  next 
three years, to the point where it will turn positive. 
Against this background, the financial situation of households and firms and that of banks 
has  improved.  The  latter,  as  well  as  recording  a  sharp  drop  in  the  flows  and  stocks  of  non-
performing loans, will benefit from the increase in profits stemming from the upturn in market 
yields.36 
Despite the high debt-to-GDP ratio – partly a legacy of the crisis – an increase in yields 
under  orderly  conditions  would  not  put  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  at  risk.  After 
increasing by 30 percentage points since the onset of the crisis, over the last few years the debt-
to-GDP ratio has remained essentially stable thanks to the improvement in growth and to the 
primary  surpluses.  Furthermore,  the  high  average  residual  maturity  –  more  than  7  years  – 
significantly tempers the sensitivity of the cost of debt to interest rate shocks. According to our 
estimates,  a  permanent  increase  of  1  percentage  point  in  debt  issuance  costs  would  mean  an 
increase in the ratio of interest expense to GDP of about 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 percentage points over 
one, two and three years respectively.37 
While these trends may be reassuring, they are not sufficient to eradicate doubts or fears 
regarding the sustainability of debt in the medium term. Over the next decade, the public debt-
to-GDP ratio is expected to narrow, partly owing to an increase in interest rates, but only if the 
differential between the cost of debt and real GDP growth remains small and budgetary policy is 
prudent (Figure 4). In this type of scenario, debt could fall to 100 per cent of GDP in ten years if 
the primary surplus stays in line with the objectives set out last September in the Update to the 
Economic and Financial Document.38 
The  main  element  in  these  analyses  is  not  just  the  real  interest  rate  –  ‘r’  as  the 
macroeconomists call it – but the gap between this rate and that of real GDP growth, i.e. ‘r-g’: 
 36   Bank of Italy (2017a). 
37   Bank of Italy (2017a). 
38   In the baseline scenario in Figure 4, in which the public debt-to-GDP ratio falls below 100 per cent in 2027, we 
assume  that  the  primary  surplus  rises  to  3  per  cent  in  2020,  that  GDP  grows  by  1.5  per  cent  and  that  the 
average real interest rate paid on government debt converges to 2.5 per cent over the next 20 years.  
 8 
given  the  same  initial  debt,  a  rapidly  growing  economy  can  clearly  bear  greater  financial 
burdens.39  
We must not forget that the cost of debt also depends on the sovereign spread demanded 
by investors. Keeping the spread down is obviously easier if the outlook for growth is solid, so 
robust  growth  is  crucial  to  ensure  debt  sustainability  against  a  backdrop  of  growing  interest 
rates.40 Without it, no financial alchemy or miraculous measures of austerity can guarantee the 
correction of the public finances.  
Nor  should  we  forget  that,  when  the  time  is  right,  monetary  policy  will  gradually  be 
normalized at a pace in line with the macroeconomic trends in the euro area as a whole and not 
with  those  in  Italy.  The  economic  situation  is  improving  in  this  country,  but  any  increase  in 
potential  long-term  growth  –  indicated  by  g  –  requires  us  to  persevere  resolutely  with  the 
reforms already under way to resolve the structural problems of Italy’s economy.  
It  is  a  question  of  expanding  the  potential  for  growth  and  no  longer,  or  not  only,  of 
narrowing  a  negative  output  gap.  If  we  act  quickly  we  will  be  able  to  exploit  the  synergy 
between monetary and structural policies: an expansionary monetary policy to sustain aggregate 
demand helps in carrying out reforms, thereby reducing the short-term costs. 
Seizing the opportunities provided by the current favourable economic situation will also 
provide greater room for manoeuvre to deal with adverse cyclical situations in the future. Lower 
public debt would also make it possible to reduce the distortions caused by a high tax burden 
and to boost investment in human and physical capital.  
These  reflections  on  the  normalization  of  monetary  policy  remind  us  that  a  prudent 
budgetary policy is in Italy’s interests, regardless of the indications provided by the international 
institutions. It is also vital for economic and financial stability, and for growth.  
6. Conclusions 
Monetary policy has played a fundamental role in steering the economy and the financial 
system  out  of  the  crisis.  Low-flation  makes  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy 
 39    If  the  cost  of  debt  exceeds  GDP  growth  (r>g),  stabilizing  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  requires  a  primary  surplus 
(revenue exceeding expenditure net of interest payments). The higher the interest rate and the lower the GDP 
growth  rate,  the  larger  the  balance  needed  to  guarantee  stability.  Cf.  Domar  (1944).  For  an  analysis  of  the 
outlook for the public finances in Italy see Visco (2017). 
40   A rise in interest rates accompanied by higher growth would not undermine stability even in countries with 
high  debt  levels  such  as  Italy  and  Japan.  Only  an  increase  in  interest  rates  that  is  not  tied  to  prospects  for 
growth would produce risks; cf. Blanchard and Zettelmeyer (2017). 
 9 
necessary. In due course, monetary normalization will have to be gradual and calibrated to the 
macroeconomic situation. The Italian economy need not fear this normalization process, but it 
could deal with it from a much stronger position were it not hampered by a high debt-to-GDP 
ratio.  
The debate on monetary normalization will bring the topic of reform to the fore. In an 
economy with high public debt and low productivity, reform is essential for increasing potential 
growth and making the economy less vulnerable, and it is in everyone’s interest to pursue it.  
In an interview in 2013, Giacomo Vaciago answered a question on the pros and cons of 
the Fiscal Compact as follows: ‘I still see people carrying pieces of paper from one office to 
another in many public institutions … I still get e-mails from people asking me to send a fax or 
letters  that  have  to  be  put  into  envelopes  and  stamped…  If  we’re  still  using  20th  century 
technology  we’re  clearly  not  ready  for  growth’.  If  we  all  made  a  concerted  effort  to  adopt 
reforms and use ‘this century’s technology’, we would be doing a favour, posthumous maybe, to 
the colleague and friend we are remembering today.  
 10 
  Figure 1: Inflation, 1946 - present  
 
averages.  
Annual 
Source: C. Reinhart and K. S. Rogoff, ‘From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis’, NBER Working Paper, 
15795.   
5-year  moving 
consumer 
growth 
index, 
price 
rates 
the 
of 
 Figure 2: Inflation expectations derived from option prices 
Eurozone risk-neutral 5-year inflation probability derived from the price of inflation options. For the 
methodology  used,  see  Cecchetti,  Natoli  and  Sigalotti  (2015).  The  risk-neutral  probability  reflects 
both expected inflation and risk premiums. The figure shows the change in the probability of inflation 
falling  within  various intervals in  the next 5  years. The probability of zero or negative  inflation is 
shown in the lower section (dark area) of the figure.  
 
  11 
  Figure 3: Global value chains and inflation 
 
For the construction of the data on global value chains, see Borin and Mancini (2015). Core inflation 
is  calculated  net  of  energy  and  fresh  food  products  and  refers  to  the  average  for  OECD  countries. 
Source: OECD. 
 Figure 4: Simulation of the trend in the debt-to-GDP ratio 
Baseline  scenario:  potential  growth  (g)  of  1.5%;  average  real  interest  rate  on  the  public  debt  (r)  
converging to 2.5% in about 20 years; primary surplus (D) increasing to 3.0% (in 2020). The other 
scenarios are constructed by adjusting some of the hypotheses in the baseline scenario. Yield shock: r 
increases  by  1  percentage  point  in  2018,  converging  to  3.5%  in  about  20  years.  Higher  growth: 
g=2.5%. Lower growth and primary surplus: g=0.5% and D=1.5%. Lower growth: g=0.5%. 
 12 
  References 
Auer R., Borio C. and Filardo A. (2017), ‘The globalisation of inflation: the growing importance 
of global value chains’, Bank for International Settlements, Working Paper No 602. 
Bank for International Settlements (2015), Annual Report, Chapter IV. 
Banca d’Italia (2017), Economic Bulletin, 1. 
Banca d’Italia (2017a), Financial Stability Report, 2. 
Banca d’Italia (2018), Economic Bulletin, 1. 
Bartiloro  L.,  Bottone M. and Rosolia A. (2017), ‘What does the heterogeneity of the inflation 
expectations of the Italian firms tell us?’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza 
(Occasional Papers), 414. 
Bhansali  S.  and  Harris,  L.  (2018),  ‘Everybody’s  Doing  It:  Short  Volatility  Strategies  and 
Shadow’, Financial Analyst Journal. 
Blanchard  O.  and  Zettelmeyer  J.  (2017),  ‘Will  Rising  Interest  Rates  Lead  to  Fiscal  Crisis?’, 
Petersen Institute for International Economics, Policy Brief, 17-27. 
Bordo M. D. and Schwartz A. J. (1999), ‘Monetary Policy Regimes and Economic Performance: 
the  Historical  Record’,  in  Handbook  of  Macroeconomics,  vol.  1,  ed.  J.B.  Taylor  and  M. 
Woodford. 
Borin A.  and Mancini M. (2016), ‘Follow the  value added: bilateral  gross export accounting’, 
Banca d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), 1026. 
Bulligan G., Guglieminetti E. and Viviano E. (2017), ‘Wage growth in the euro area: where do 
we stand?’, Banca d’Italia, Questioni di Economia e Finanza (Occasional Papers), 413. 
Burlon  L., Gerali A., Notarpietro A. and Pisani M. (2015), ‘Inflation, financial conditions and 
non-standard  monetary  policy  in  a  monetary  union.  A  model-based  evaluation,’  Banca 
d’Italia, Temi di Discussione (Working Papers), 1015. 
Busetti M., Ferrero G., Gerali A. and Locarno A. (2014), ‘Deflationary shocks and de-anchoring 
of  inflation  expectations’,  Banca  d’Italia,  Questioni  di  Economia  e  Finanza  (Occasional 
Papers), 252. 
Business Community (2013), (http://www.businesscommunity.it/m/_Gennaio2013/cover/Vaciago). 
Casiraghi  M.,  Gaiotti  E.,  Rodano  L.  and  Secchi  A.  (2016),  ‘The  Impact  of  Unconventional 
Monetary Policy on the Italian Economy During the Sovereign Debt Crisis’, International 
Journal of Central Banking. 
Cecchetti  S.,  Natoli  F.  and  Sigalotti  L.  (2015),  ‘Tail  co-movement  in  option-implied  inflation 
expectations  as  an  indicator  of  anchoring’,  Banca  d’Italia,  Temi  di  Discussione  (Working 
Papers), 1025. 
Charbonneau K., Evans A., Sarker S. and Suchanek L. (2017), ‘Digitalization and Inflation: A 
Review of the Literature’, Bank of Canada, mimeo. 
Domar  E.  (1944),  ‘The  Burden  of  the  Debt  and  the  National  Income’,  American  Economic 
Review, 34(4). 
Draghi M. (2018), Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European 
Parliament, 26 February. 
European  Central  Bank  (2017),  ‘Domestic  and  global  drivers  of  inflation  in  the  euro  area’ 
 13 
Economic Bulletin, 4. 
Gaiotti E. (2010), ‘Has Globalization Changed the Phillips Curve? Firm-Level Evidence on the 
Effect of Activity on Prices’, International Journal of Central Banking. 
Forbes (2016), ‘How the Internet Economy Killed Inflation’, 28 September. 
Manaresi F. and Pierri N. (2018), ‘Credit supply and productivity growth’, Banca d’Italia, Temi 
di Discussione (Working Papers), 1168.  
OECD (2017), A Genie in A Bottle? Globalisation, Competition and Inflation. 
Panetta  F.  (2016),  ‘Central  banking  in  the  XXI  century:  never  say  never’,  Remarks  at  the 
SUERF/BAFFI  CAREFIN  Centre  Conference  ‘Central  Banking  and  Monetary  Policy: 
Which Will Be the New Normal?’. 
Powell  J.H.  (2018),  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 27 February. 
Riggi  M.  and  Venditti  F.  (2015),  ‘Failing  to  Forecast  Low  Inflation  and  Phillips  Curve 
Instability: A Euro-Area Perspective’, International Finance, 18, 47-68. 
Visco  I.  (2016),  ‘Modelli  e  metodi  quantitativi  per  le  decisioni  di  politica  monetaria:  limiti  e 
nuove prospettive’ (only in Italian). 
Visco I. (2017), ‘Sviluppo dell’economia e stabilità finanziaria: il vincolo del debito pubblico’ 
(only in Italian). 
Yellen  J.  (2017),  ‘Inflation,  Uncertainty,  and  Monetary  Policy’,  Speech  at  the  ‘Prospects  for 
Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals’ 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association 
for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, 26 September 2017. 
   14 
