Ong Chong Tee: Banking supervision - the path ahead
Opening address by Mr Ong Chong Tee, Deputy Managing Director (Financial Supervision) of
the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  13th Asia-Pacific  High  Level  Meeting  on  Banking
Supervision, Singapore, 28 February 2018.
 Mr Agustin Carstens, General Manager, BIS 
Mr Fernando Restoy, Chairman, FSI 
Mr William Coen, Secretary General, BCBS 
Ms Chuchi Fonacier, Chairman, EMEAP WGBS and Deputy Governor, BSP
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
1   Good morning. My colleagues and I at the MAS are pleased to host this 13th Asia-Pacific High
Level Meeting on Banking Supervision. It is also my honour to be able to offer some remarks to
precede the interesting panel sessions over the next two days.
Basel III reforms
2      It  has  been  a  decade  since  the  2008  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Since  then,  wide-ranging
regulatory reforms have been formulated to further safeguard the stability and functioning of the
global financial system.
One major set of the reforms is the Basel III standards for banks; and this includes boosting
capital buffers, new liquidity requirements and limiting overall leverage.
The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  also  led  work  to  address  “too-big-to-fail”  concerns.
Global  Systemically  Important  Banks  (G-SIBs)  are  now  subject  to  higher  capital,  more
intense supervision, and resolution planning requirements.
3   The recent finalisation of the 2017 Basel III reforms complete the post-crisis banking reform
agenda.  The  Basel  Committee  and  global  banking  regulators  have  shifted 
to
implementation  of  the  revised  standards.  Given  the  considerable  attention  on  the  Basel  III
reforms, it is easy to forget that a core mandate of the Basel Committee is with respect to its
work on supervisory practices.
focus 
4   So this morning, allow me to share some thoughts on three areas with respect to banking
supervision:
    i. The Next Phase – beyond the review on Capital and Liquidity rules; 
    ii. Banking Supervision as a Craft; and  
    iii. Supervisory Challenges and Opportunities.
The next phase
5   As many of us will be familiar, the Basel III framework has a second Pillar that pertains to risk
management and supervision including accounting for risks not captured under Pillar 1. Indeed,
the Basel Committee devotes considerable attention to various pieces of work under this Pillar,
such  as  on  stress  testing,  accounting  standards,  corporate  governance  and  supervisory
colleges. Disclosure requirements are further reviewed under Pillar 3 to foster market discipline.
6   Following the recent finalisation of Basel III, the next phase will be centred on a “full, timely and
consistent” implementation globally. This is important to reduce risk of regulatory arbitrage. Every
jurisdiction or region will of course be different in the degree of openness, internationalisation,
and the maturity and sophistication of their banking systems. The Basel Committee has been
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
mindful  that  its  standards  are  calibrated  as  minimum  requirements,  and  in  limited  situations,
some supervisory discretions have been provided including the use of Pillar 2.
 
7   Risk proportionality is not a new concept in international banking rules. The Basel Committee
has sought to further embed risk proportionality within its framework.
One such example is the simplified alternative to the Standardised Approach to Market Risk,
or SA-MR in short. This simplified alternative will make it easier for supervisory authorities to
implement the market risk rules for less complex banks.
For such simplified approaches to be fit-for-purpose, it has to take into account the differing
conditions across a broad range of jurisdictions. This is especially so for emerging market
economies with less complex banking systems. In this respect, forums such as the Basel’s
Regional  Consultative  Group  (RCG)  and  the  Executives’  Meeting  of  East  Asia-Pacific
Central  Banks  (EMEAP)  can  be  important  platforms  for  regional  regulators  to  continue  to
provide feedback or regional concerns.
Where the outcomes from impact studies are less certain, the Basel Committee has been
careful  not  to  rush  into  a  particular  rule.  One  example  is  the  treatment  of  sovereign  risk
exposures. In this case, the Basel Committee has decided to put out a discussion paper to
solicit further views.
8      The  Financial  Stability  Institute  (FSI)  has  also  recently  published  an  insightful  report  on
proportionality  in  banking  regulation.  The  report  provides  a  very  useful  overview  of  the
proportionality approaches in different jurisdictions.
 
9   Another example is the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) evaluation of effects of reforms. The
initial  focus  is  on  infrastructure  financing,  which  will  be  relevant  to  Asia  given  the  immense
infrastructure demands.
10      Asian  regulators  on  the  Basel  Committee  and  on  the  FSB  can  help  to  present  Asia’s
perspectives at these international forums. Central banks as well as international organisations
such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) should
also  weigh  in  to  lend  insights  from  their  economic  surveillance  work.  This  will  allow  regional
concerns to be sufficiently factored into the global rule-making and evaluation process. 
The craft of supervision
11   Rules  and  standards  cannot  replace  judgment.  Good  supervisory  instincts  and  technical
competence are required to discover, scrutinize and evaluate key risks. This can only be done if
banking supervisors do not see their role as a mere compliance function. An effective banking
supervisor must be able to assess a bank’s understanding of its risks, its business practices as
well as judge its corporate governance and culture.
12   The need for consistency and rigour also mean that supervisory judgment is not just an
operational  matter.  Having  formal  supervisory  decision-making  forums  is  an  important
component of a good supervisory process. For example, in the MAS, our Banking Supervision
heads  come  together  in  regular  meetings  to  guide  supervisory  reviews  and  decisions. As  an
integrated  supervisor,  I  also  chair  a  Management  Financial  Supervision  Meeting  as  well  as  a
Regulatory  Actions  Meeting  that  oversees  the  broad  scope  of  our  supervisory  policies  and
enforcement  actions  respectively,  across  banking,  insurance  and  capital  markets  activities.  In
other  words,  supervisory  practices  require  as  much  thought  and  policy  considerations  as  the
rules  and  regulations.  This  is  also  why  exchanges  with  fellow  regulators  during  supervisory
colleges are very helpful and important too.
13   I have earlier mentioned that rules and regulations should be risk proportionate. This is true
as  well  for  banking  supervision.  It  is  impossible  for  supervisors  to  review  and  inspect  all  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial institutions under our charge to a wide and deep extent given finite resources and time.
This is neither feasible nor desirable.
14   It is more logical and effective to differentiate our supervisory intensity according to the risk
profiles of each bank. In recent years, MAS has also moved towards greater use of thematic
reviews and inspections. This means that we inspect a peer group of institutions at a time in a
specific risk area. We find that such a peer group approach also facilitates better identification of
vulnerabilities, and allow for industry benchmarking as well as the sharing of best practices.
15      An  effective  supervisory  process  should  also  involve  a  preparedness  to  take  tough
enforcement  actions.  It  is  a  practical  reality  that  no  amount  of  regulations  and  supervisory
reviews can catch all possible potential misdemeanours or excessive risk-taking. To do so, a
financial  regulator  would  have  to  be  regularly  and  extensively  intrusive  to  a  point  that  a  bank
would find it hard to function. Ultimately, a bank’s Board and Management must be responsible
for its business conduct and risk management.
 
16      Hence,  it  is  far  more  effective  that  the  supervisory  process  work  alongside  strong  and
effective  Boards  and  Management  in  banks.  If  there  are  failings  or  violations  that  bypass  our
supervisory reviews, then enforcement actions must be meted out accordingly.
17   This supervisory philosophy is underscored in what is commonly described as the four lines
of defence in a 2015 BIS Occasional Paper, as well as the 2015 Basel Committee’s guideline on
Corporate  Governance  principles  –  that  describe  the  roles  of  (a)  Boards,  Management  and
Business  Units,  (b)  Risk  and  Compliance,  (c)  Internal  as  well  as  External Audit,  and  (d)  the
Regulator.
Challenges and opportunities
18   Much has been reported about innovations in the FinTech space, and the disruptions brought
about by technology in practically every aspect of economic and social activities.
19      Recent  technological  developments  have  also  presented  regulators  with  both  new
challenges  and  opportunities.  For  instance,  the  foray  by  hitherto  non-regulated  entities  into
various  aspects  of  payments  and  financial  services  could  necessitate  a  change  from  an
institution-based  regulatory  approach  towards  an  activity-based  framework.  But  at  the  same
time, this can also allow a regulator to “right-size” regulations for both traditional and evolving
business models according to the risks the activity poses. I can cite two examples:
Virtual  currencies  first  emerged  about  10  years  ago.  Since  then,  we  have  observed  an
increase in the number of initial coin (or token) offerings in Singapore. As with most financial
regulators,  MAS  does  not  regulate  virtual  currencies.  But  we  regulate  the  activities  that
surround virtual currencies if these pose specific risks. An example would be the Anti-Money
Laundering/Combating  the  Financing  of  Terrorism  (AML/CFT)  requirements  that  we  have
imposed  on  intermediaries  providing  virtual  currency  services.  We  are  assessing  if
additional regulations are required for investor protection.
Another  example  is  the  wave  of  new  payment  services  that  have  been  enabled  by  new
technology.  Consumers  are  increasingly  making  and  receiving  payments  through  digital
payment platforms, which fall outside of our existing regulatory frameworks. In recognition of
the risks that these digital payment platforms can pose to the system as a whole if they are
not adequately secure, MAS will be issuing a new Payment Services Bill (PSB). This will
streamline  the  regulation  of  payment  and  remittance  service  providers  under  a  single
regulatory framework, and calibrated to whether an entity offer one, some or all parts of the
retail payments value chain. It will also seek to enhance user protection and facilitate the
adoption of electronic payments.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
20      Regulations  should  not  stifle  innovation.  The  reality  is  that  innovations  will  always  move
ahead  of  rules.  The  key  is  in  understanding  whether  a  particular  innovation  or  new  business
model is simply a regulatory arbitrage. If so, we should deal with that directly such as by bringing
that  activity  within  the  regulatory  ambit  or  even  banning  it  altogether. Another  consideration  is
whether an innovative business model while purposeful will create incoherence or inconsistency
of treatment. In such a case, a review of that regulatory policy may be necessary. There is no
one-size-fits-all supervisory answer. It simply means that as regulators, we need to keep abreast
with technological developments. Only then, can we exercise thoughtful judgment. The fact that
many  financial  regulators  including  the  MAS  have  allowed  regulatory  sandboxes  to  be  set  up
highlights a preparedness to  allow  innovative  financial  models  to  first  be  tested  within  defined
parameters.
Harnessing technology to strengthen supervision
21      There  is  a  growing  area  of  technology  use  that  will  be  directly  relevant  to  financial
supervision  –  Regulatory  Technology  (or  RegTech).  This  is  the  use  of  advanced  technology
systems and algorithms to enhance risk management and regulatory compliance.
22   Many financial institutions have embraced RegTech, such as:
Predictive analytics being used in stress testing;
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning-powered systems to identify  money  laundering
risks; and
Cognitive computing and behavioural algorithms to detect suspicious trading and possible
misconduct.
23   On the supervisor’s end, the MAS is developing our own ‘SupTech’ to improve and sharpen
our surveillance and analytical capabilities. Since about a year ago, we have set up a dedicated
unit for SupTech within our Data Analytics Group.
24      The  aim  is  to  make  greater  use  of  technology  and  “smart  tools”  to  guide  our  financial
surveillance and supervision functions. To do so, building the infrastructure for our data analytics
projects  is  important.  We  are  putting  in  place  an  MAS  Private  Cloud.  This  will  serve  as  the
foundation to provide computing power to all data analytics projects in MAS. There are a number
of ongoing system-enhancement projects around data storage, accessibility and usability. But
importantly to fully benefit from the insights of a broader set of high-frequency real-time data, in
both structured and unstructured formats, our supervisors will also need to acquire strong digital
fluency in various data analytics and visualisation tools.
25   Only then can we harness the full computational capabilities from better data analytics to
sharpen  our  surveillance  and  understanding  of  different  risks,  and  to  support  more  effective
decision-making. There is also a nascent area that MAS is studying together with an industry
grouping.  This  relates  to  data  ethics  such  as  on  fair  and  transparent  use  of  data  by  financial
institutions. I am sure this will be a discussion topic in future forums.
Managing cyber threats
26   Given the technological developments in the financial services sector, a key priority area for
regulators must be the work on Cybersecurity. To do this well, regulators will have to work in
close partnership with financial institutions, law enforcement agencies, sector agencies such as
in  telecommunications  and  power,  as  well  as  fellow  regulators  given  the  often  cross-border
nature of cyber threats.
To further foster the exchange of cyber intelligence in the region, MAS collaborated with the
Financial Services – Information Sharing & Analysis Centre (FS-ISAC) to establish an APAC
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regional Intelligence and Analysis Centre. This centre in Singapore provides 24/7 coverage
of actionable intelligence and resources to respond to incidents.
MAS  also  implemented  a  24/7  Sectoral  Security  Operations  Centre  (SOC)  to  obtain
information from intelligence sources on cyber threat targeting our financial sector.
We have partnered the Association of Banks in Singapore (ABS) to update MAS’ Technology
Risk Management Guidelines.
Also in partnership with the ABS, we are in the process of establishing guidelines for “red-
teaming” to enhance cyber security testing.
27      I  know  that  this  theme  of  technology  will  feature  prominently  over  these  two  days.  Such
mutual sharing and learning will be an important aspect of regulatory up-levelling.
Integrity and Conduct
28      Last  but  not  least,  let  me  wrap  up  my  remarks  by  highlighting  the  importance  of  strong
integrity  and  proper  conduct  in  the  financial  industry.  No  amount  of  regulatory  reforms  or
supervision  can  assure  a  stable  financial  system  if  the  culture  and  conduct  of  firms  and
individuals are flawed. Around the business complexities of different firms, the core should be the
same – a business culture centred on doing right and doing good.
29   MAS will be stepping up our supervisory reviews on various aspects of risk governance and
culture in financial institutions. Recently, we conducted a culture and conduct survey among a
number of the key institutions. Based on the survey responses, we are carrying out dialogues to
ascertain commonalities and differences in industry practices. We are sharing our supervisory
experiences with other regulators to learn from one another. From these, we hope to provide the
broader industry with our observations on best practices and areas for improvement.
Conclusion
30   I have probably spoken longer than I should. I think this only goes to show the many areas of
supervision which the different panels will no doubt delve further into. May I wish everyone a most
fruitful and interesting meeting. I do hope that all visitors in this meeting will also be able to set
aside a little time to enjoy Singapore’s lively sights and sounds.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
