Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
OPENING REMARKS BY 
TIMOTHY N. J. ANTOINE 
GOVERNOR, EASTERN CARIBBEAN CENTRAL BANK 
Single Insurance and Pension Market Project (SIPMP) 
Change Management Strategy Meeting 
  2 July 2018 
(ECCB Headquarters) 
   Salutations: 
This  meeting  has  been  in  the  making  for  some  time  and  I  am  pleased  that  we  are  all  finally 
here.  I  apologise  for  my  physical  absence,  but I  am  nonetheless  happy  to  join  you  by  phone 
for, at least, part of today’s proceedings.  
 Colleagues,  two  weekends  ago  I  was  in  Basel,  Switzerland  for  the  Annual  Meetings  of  the 
Bank for International Settlements.  Those Meetings, as some of you are aware, bring together 
regulators  from  all  over  the  world  and  the  following  standard  setting  bodies:  Financial 
Stability  Board,  Basel  Committee  on  Bank  Supervision,  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market 
Infrastructure, 
International  Organisation 
for  Securities  Commissions, 
International 
Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors  (IAIS)  and  the  International  Association  of  Deposit 
Insurers. 
 Though  acknowledging  noteworthy  progress,  the  meetings  focused  on  the  need  to  complete, 
the  Post  Global  Financial  Crisis  Reform  Agenda.    In  short,  there  is  still  some  unfinished 
business – not just to minimise the risks of certain recurrences but also to prepare for the next 
crisis. 
 Those of us who have toiled in the vineyard of financial sector regulation know only too well, 
that  like  hurricanes,  crises  will  occur  from  time  to  time.    But  we  must  do  our  utmost  to 
minimise those risks and we must build resilience.   
 We must be prepared. 
 Johnathan Dixon, Secretary General of the International Association for Insurance Supervisors 
indicated that the current priorities of the IAIS included: 
  Developing a common framework for groups,  
  Developing a framework for the migration of systemic risk, and  
  FINTECH and Cyber-resilience. 
 Page 1 of 3 
Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
  Regarding the latter, I commend your attention to the IAIS report on FINTECH developments 
in insurance that was published last year (2017). Against this backdrop and from my vantage 
point, my key messages to you, this morning, are as follows: 
1.  We  too  have  unfinished  business  in  the  ECCU.    Following  the  debacle  of  BAICO 
and  CLICO,  the  Monetary  Council  determined  that  we  should  proceed  to  establish  a 
single  regulator  for  insurance,  pension  funds  and,  ultimately,  for  credit  unions  to  be 
called the Eastern Caribbean Financial Services  Commission.  To that end, we would 
also need a uniform insurance law.   
 Colleagues, the stark reality is that almost 10 years after the global financial crisis and 
the  ensuing  BAICO/CLICO  debacle,  the  ECCU  has  neither  a  regional  regulator  for 
insurers nor a uniform insurance law.  Needless to say, we definitely have unfinished 
business.   
 If  we  were  to  reflect  on  the  past  10  years,  we  would  readily  recognise  the 
interconnectedness of our financial sector, we would also recognise the vulnerabilities 
in our system and we ought to recognise that we are not quite prepared should a similar 
situation arise. Evidently, we do have some urgent unfinished business. 
2.  The work on which we are engaged is truly bigger than all of us.  I salute and pay 
tribute to you for the work you have done and are doing, in the area of financial system 
supervision, this is an important work, but I think you know as well as I do, that this 
work  is  not  about  us  but  our  region  and  the  people  we  serve  –  their  protection  and 
enhanced  quality  of  life.    For  example,  the  work  that  the  ECCB  is  currently 
undertaking  on  deposit  insurance  is  intended  to  add  an  important  safety  net  in  our 
banking system. 
 I  am  on  record,  from  day  one,  stating  that  my  desire  to  see  our  work  on  deposit 
insurance extend to credit unions.  Of course, for that to become a reality, the sector 
would have to meet certain regulatory expectations and requirements. 
 Ultimately, the important  work that we are doing and must do, is about our sustained 
growth and shared prosperity.  May that firm understanding compel us and propel us to 
create a legacy that will endure well beyond our time of service. 
   Page 2 of 3 
  Eastern Caribbean Central Bank 
 3.  Regional cooperation is the only viable and effective way forward.  As I sat in Basel 
and listened to the various heads speak about their work, I was struck by the level of 
cooperation  within  the  international  community.  Many  of  the  participants  are  from 
large  countries  with  well-developed  and  sophisticated  financial  systems,  and  yet,  they 
understand that individual country action is not enough. They understand that there is 
an imperative to come together and take collective action to minimise contagion risk in 
an  international  financial  system  that  is  highly  interconnected  and  yet  increasingly 
diversified. And so, it seems to me colleagues, that within the ECCU, we have a duty, 
an  obligation  and  I  hope,  a  sense  of  urgency,  to  pursue  regional  cooperation  on 
financial sector regulation.   
 I  have  said  from  the  outset  that  I  do  not  feel  that  the  development  of  a  regional 
regulator  would  disenfranchise  country  national  regulators  because  I  see  it  filling 
critical gaps and securing critical mass for the demanding task of integrated and cross-
border  financial  sector  regulation.  These  enhanced  resources  (actuarial,  legal  or 
otherwise)  cannot  typically  be  found  in  any  one  country.    Indeed,  our  best  prospect, 
like the ECCB has demonstrated over the past 35 years, is for us to come together and 
work together. 
  In sum, my expectations for today at this change management session and, tomorrow, at our 
meeting of the Regulatory Oversight Committee (ROC) are for us to reflect on: from whence 
we  have  come,  where  we  are  now  and  acquire  a  sense  of  urgency  about  taking  collective 
action to secure our financial system.  
 With  that  in  mind,  I  urge  your  support  to  complete  the  implementation  of  the  SIPMP.  In  so 
doing, we would secure a strong legacy for generations to come. 
 These  then  are  my  opening  remarks.  Again,  I  thank  each  of  you  for  coming  and  for  your 
attention. 
   Page 3 of 3 
