Gent Sejko: Future Balkans - towards a global inclusion
Speech  by  Mr  Gent  Sejko,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Albania,  at  the  Tirana  Economic  Forum
"Future Balkans: Towards a global inclusion" Leadership, Institutions and Policies Convergence
2017-2020, Tirana, 24 January 2018.
 Your Excellency Mr President,
Your Excellency Deputy Prime Minister of Albania,
Your Excellency Deputy Prime Minister of Kosovo,
Honourable Minister of Finance and Economy,
My fellow Colleagues and Honourable Participants,
It is a pleasure for me to participate at this Conference, convened to discuss on the importance
of regional integration, which should be promoted by a forward-looking leadership and supported
by the policies convergence.
I believe that the dialogue that focuses on sharing our vision for the future, the convergence of
perspectives  about  the  challenges  ahead  of  us,  and  identifying  the  objectives  and  drafting
agendas for joint action, will be a fruitful dialogue to all of us. Policy convergence, both within and
between countries, promotes efficiency and minimizes negative spill-overs.
The role of institutions in the growth and development
Institutions are the backbone of any modern society, in as much as they generate and implement
laws, regulations and policies of development, thus laying out the rules of the game in a market
economy. From a broader perspective, these rules should provide for a stable and transparent
environment, thus enabling a predictable and long-term decision-making process. They should
promote fair competition and equality of opportunities, and they should engender fairness and
social cohesion.
It  is  clear  that  richer  economies  and  stable  societies  tend  to  have  stronger  and  more  stable
institutions.
It is, therefore, my belief that our region should not subscribe to an ‘organic model’ of institutional
growth.  By  ‘organic’,  I  mean  a  growth  model  where  institutions  catch  up  to  economic
development, and tend more to ensure a certain level of prosperity rather than instigate it.
To  the  contrary,  I  believe  institutions  and  policies  should  lead  the  growth  and  development
processes. In this context, our task as policy makers is to define goals, to identify impediments,
and to undertake the required countermeasures. This, in essence, is the role of leadership.
Let me illustrate my point with just a few examples of the challenges facing us as a region:
First,  problems  with  the  business  environment,  including  corruption  and  informality,  rank
high on the list of growth impediments, both in Albania and in the region.
Second,  our  economic  and  financial  stability  should  be  further  enhanced,  in  order  to
increase our resilience to shocks and to decrease our financing costs.
Third, it is becoming increasingly clear that our financial systems have become over-reliant
on  banks.  Looking  ahead,  we  should  rely  more  on  capital  markets  in  order  to  finance
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
domestic growth.
Fourth, a common complaint frequently heard from potential foreign investors is the limited
attractiveness of small and fragmented markets. While partly incorrect, we should do more
to increase our trade and infrastructure integration.
Fifth, in competing for the same pool of international investors, countries in the region often
attempt to raise their individual profile through offering tax break or other subsidies. This race
to the bottom does not prove to be productive.
Resolving any of these issues requires foresight, strong institutions, determined policy action,
and regional coordination.
Institutions and integration
Our region is actively involved in the EU integration process. This objective is the lighthouse for
our institutional reform efforts and has produced notable benefits. The EU integration is aiding
authorities in the region to anchor their institutional reforms and policies. On the other hand, the
EU institutions provide oversight and lend credibility to the process. Additionally, since individual
countries are working towards common objectives, regional policy is better coordinated.
However,  I  also  believe  countries  in  the  region  could  do  more  to  share  their  experiences  and
learn  from  each  other. Albania  offers  a  positive  example  in  terms  of  economic  and  financial
stability.  Macedonia  has  done  exceptionally  well  in  terms  of  attracting  high-value-added  FDIs.
Serbia is on the regional vanguard of financial market development. All of us should learn from
our individual success stories; all of us should avoid mistakes we have individually made in the
past.  Our  countries  share  more  commonalities  than  differences:  what  works  for  one  is  more
likely than not to work for others, and vice versa.
Furthermore, I believe we should look at regional integration as a goal in itself, rather than as an
instrument to EU integration. Joint EU integration would supersede certain regional integration
frameworks,  such  as  trade  and  factor  mobility,  but  it  would  not  supplant  the  need  for  further
policy dialogue and common regional perspectives and solutions.
Let me now to briefly describe the role of institutions in structural reforms in Albania.
Institutions and structural reforms in Albania
It  is  virtually  impossible  to  do  justice  to  the  breadth  and  depth  of  reforms  in Albania  over  the
limited allotted time. Therefore, I will try to highlight only its main items.
In  order  to  improve  our  business  environment,  the Albanian  authorities  have  engaged  in
comprehensive reforms of the property rights, of the tax regime, of the electricity sector, of
the  general  infrastructure,  and  remain  engaged  in  the  fight  against  informality.  The  most
recent measure in this regard is a banking sector regulation that aims to put an end to the
practice  of  lending  through  uncertified  company  balance  sheets.  Further,  to  enhance
efficiency and tackle corruption and informality, a determined drive to improve the functioning
of the public administration, which broadly speaking encompasses also the judicial system
reform, has been undertaken.
In order to increase economic stability and to improve financial resilience, we have initiated a
wide ranging set of reforms. To that end, the Government has improved its public finance
management  procedures,  has  adopted  a  fiscal  responsibility  framework,  and  has
undertaken measures to reduce debt. The Bank of Albania has strived to model itself after
the  ECB.  Its  professionalism  has  increased  while  its  independence,  transparency  and
credibility  have  all  improved.  Through  a  joint  effort  of  institutional  stakeholders,  we  have
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
managed to reform the Financial Supervisory Authority and enhance the role of the Deposit
Insurance  Authority.  Together  with  the  Albanian  government,  we  have  implemented  a
comprehensive NPL resolution strategy, which has already brought encouraging results, we
have  approved  a  Bank  Resolution  Law  and  we  have  jointly  designed  a  de-euroization
strategy, aimed at tackling financial vulnerabilities, improving the transmission mechanism
and intensifying the use of the domestic currency. We have also established a new inter-
institutional  Financial  Stability  Advisory  Group,  vested  with  coordination  powers  on
systemically-important stability–related issues.
In order to further develop financial markets, the Albanian authorities have accelerated the
development of capital markets, through the establishment of the Albanian Stock Exchange,
the  licensing  and  functioning  of  several  investment  and  asset  management  funds,  the
encouragement of the on-going consolidation in the bank and non-bank financial institutions,
the  tax  encouragement  of  private  pension  schemes,  the  on-going  efforts  to  improve  the
functioning of secondary markets for government papers, etc.
However, I am convinced the sharing regional experience would result in an additional impetus to
the process. Furthermore, regional solutions can be sought to common problems.
This brings me to my last point.
Improving regional cooperation
Coordination and cooperation cannot run standalone in an ever integrated and intertwined world.
The same concept applies to our region, where policy initiatives, aimed at achieving a common
objective, should be implemented jointly.
Let me highlight a few potential cooperation areas:
First, I believe there is scope for greater regional dialogue and greater policy convergence, at
all relevant areas of public policy and private sector development.
Second, I believe there is more to be done in order to finish the job of regional integration. In
particular, standards on products and services should be agreed upon.
Third,  beyond  the  convergence  of  financial  development  policies,  I  remain  convinced  we
should  explore  the  idea  of  joint  financial  development  projects.  Although  fraught  with
difficulties, a regional stock exchange is a meaningful potential project.
Fourth,  I  believe  the  region  should  strive  towards  establishing  the  lowest  acceptable
common  denominator  in  terms  of  tax,  labour  market,  financial  sector,  and  environment
regulation. ‘Beggar-thy-neighbour’ policies through constantly undercutting each other in any
of these areas are only damaging the region in the long term.
Fifth,  the  regional  infrastructure  remains  rather  fragmented.  This  refers  not  merely  to  the
transport infrastructure, but also the electricity and IT network.
Honourable participants,
Some  of  the  issues  I  professed  here  might  seem  utopian  or  unrealistic.  However,  I  remain
convinced that through an honest common endeavour, such ideas might, someday, in the not-
too-distant future, become reality.
Thank you!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
