Nestor  A  Espenilla,  Jr:  Opening  remarks  during  the  chat  with
analysts
Chat with analysts by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP,
the central bank of the Philippines), via audio teleconference, Manila, 25 July 2018.
 Good afternoon.  Whether you are here with us today at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) or
are participating via audio-conferencing, it is my pleasure to welcome all of you. 
Thank you for joining this first by-invitation-chat we have organized for economic and financial
analysts.  Our  objective  this  afternoon  is  to  promote  better  understanding  of  the  BSP’s  policy
actions  and  provide  background  on  developments  that  have  prompted  our  monetary  policy
decisions.
Let me begin with our mandates.  The BSP has three. Our primary mandate is to promote price
stability conducive to a balanced and sustainable growth of the economy.  We are also tasked
with maintaining financial stability and developing the payments system.
Since 2002, the BSP has been committed to the inflation targeting framework.  This calls for
monetary policy decisions to be forward-looking and dependent on comprehensive and rigorous
assessment  of  all  relevant  data  and  forecasts.    The  framework  also  calls  for  flexibility  of  the
exchange  rate  so  that  we  can  conduct  independent  monetary  policy  primarily  focused  on
domestic conditions.  Nevertheless, external factors are always considered.  We also react to
excessive exchange rate volatility particularly if this affects inflation expectations and poses a risk
to the inflation outlook.
Our IT framework has been reinforced with the adoption of the interest rate corridor (IRC) system
in  2016.    With  the  development  of  auction-based  instruments  complementing  the  overnight
reverse repurchase borrowing rate as the policy rate signal, the BSP has expanded its options
for maintaining firm monetary control.
Early this year, economic data suggested that an adjustment in policy rate was not yet warranted
as  the  uptick  in  prices  was  driven  mainly  by  supply-side  factors.    Moreover,  our  forecast
continued  to  show  inflation  upticks  as  transitory  and  moderating  within  the  target  in  2019. 
Nevertheless, recognizing increasing volatilities in world oil prices and interest rates, the BSP
responded to changing monetary conditions and allowed the term deposit facility (TDF) rates to
rise.  Market rates have correspondingly risen.
Our two successive policy rate hikes in May and June were measured and deliberate responses
to the evolving economic environment and dynamic market conditions.    These were meant to
help  anchor  rising  inflation  expectations  and  to  temper  second-round  effects.    The  rate  hikes
were  also  made  in  the  context  of  increased  traction  in  the  economic  activities  of  advanced
economies and the unwinding of accommodative monetary policy in the US and other advanced
economies, driving capital flows away from emerging economies.
The balance of payments remains manageable notwithstanding significant external headwinds. 
Recent and planned interest rate hikes by the US Fed and brewing trade tensions among key
economies  have  exerted  additional  depreciation  pressures  on  the  peso  even  as  a  flexible
exchange  rate  policy  continues  to  be  a  stabilizing  mechanism  against  the  build-up  of
unsustainable imbalances.
We reaffirm our strong resolve to ensure that inflation returns to target by 2019.  We are certainly
taking  into  account  the  potential  price  pressures  of  excessive  exchange  rate  volatility.    We
remain confident that our fundamentals are solid and healthy.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  recognize  that  sustained  pressures  on  the  peso  could  adversely  affect  inflation
expectations.    Further,  some  demand  side  pressures  may  already  be  feeding  into  inflation
considering the sustained strong economic growth. These warrant a firm and timely monetary
response. We are therefore considering strong follow-through monetary adjustment at the next
meeting of the Monetary Board in August.
Coming to our second and third mandates, we recognize that monetary policy must evolve in the
context a financial system that is fast evolving and is becoming increasingly more sophisticated. 
Thus, we are pursuing game-changing financial sector reforms – the plus plus of our Continuity
++ agenda.  Our current reform agenda – reducing reserve requirements, deepening debt and
FX  markets,  digitalization  of  the  payment  system,  as  well  as  macro  and  micro-prudential
measures  complement  our  price  stability  mandate.    These  are  all  strategically  pursued  to
systematically reinforce the country’s resilience amidst a dynamic landscape.
Now let me talk about our initiative to reduce our ultra-high reserve requirement ratio to align it
with  other  Asian  jurisdictions.    Reduced  reliance  on  the  reserve  requirement  for  managing
liquidity  conditions  signals  a  shift  towards  a  more  market-based  implementation  of  monetary
policy.    It  is  an  essential  element  of  a  broad  financial  market  reform  agenda.    This  will  lower
friction costs in the banking sector, create more efficient financial intermediation, and help curb
shadow banking given the rise of strong alternatives offered by fintech and digital innovations. 
Moreover,  the  shift  helps  support  the  price  discovery  process  and  establishment  of  more
accurate interest rate benchmarks. 
We are also deliberate in the timing of the reduction of reserve requirements.  We waited for
alternative mechanisms to be developed before embarking on this journey in order for the reform
to be policy neutral.  With the recent firm anchoring of market rates to the IRC, we now have
room  for  the  reduction  of  reserve  requirements  over  the  medium-term  as  an  operational
adjustment, which we started early this year.  I would like emphasize that the RRR cuts are not
intended to be expansionary as these are offset by compensating actions.  Excess liquidity is
reabsorbed through our open market operations and significant FX operations.  The upward trend
in market rates validates tighter market conditions.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that the RRR cuts will be gradual and phased over a number of
years.  We have already achieved significant progress this year.  A total of 200 bps reduction in
2018 is in line with our medium-term goal of reducing RRR from 20 percent to single-digit level
over a six-year period.
Moving forward, the BSP will continue to review and improve the operational features of the IRC
system to ensure greater flexibility and efficiency in conducting monetary operations.
Indeed, these are important reforms that make us very optimistic about the continued growth of
the Philippine economy in a sustainable manner.
We thank you for your time and interest in wanting to hear about these initiatives.  We will be
happy to take your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
