Benoît Cœuré: What yield curves are telling us
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Financial Times European Financial Forum "Building a New Future for International Financial
Services", Dublin, 31 January 2018.
Accompanying slides.
 The US Treasury yield curve flattened considerably last year, reducing the spread between ten-
year and two-year US Treasury yields to less than 60 basis points. When Alan Greenspan first
referred to a bond market “conundrum” in 2005, the spread was around 80 basis points.  In the
euro area, by contrast, the term spread remained broadly unchanged last year.
1
At face value, a simple reconciling factor of recent international bond price developments is the
tightening cycle that has gained traction in the United States. It is well known that a rise in policy
rates  typically  leads  to  a  flattening  of  the  sovereign  yield  curve  as  long-term  rates  tend  to
increase by less than short-term rates.
In my remarks this morning I will try to shed some more light on the potential factors currently
affecting long-term rates. I will argue that, in and of itself, policy normalisation in the US cannot
fully  explain  the  pronounced  flattening  of  the  US  Treasury  curve.  I  will  argue  instead  that  two
factors are likely to weigh on long-term yields in the US – and, in part, also on the yields in other
advanced economies, including the euro area – which are fairly global in their nature and origin,
namely cross-border capital flows and a depressed inflation risk premium.
The  implications  for  policymakers  are  twofold.  First,  unlike  in  2005,  international  capital  flows
mainly  reflect  portfolio  rebalancing  efforts  by  private  investors  and  are  less  the  result  of
interventions by official institutions.  This suggests that, while the present episode shares some
similarities with Greenspan’s bond conundrum, changes in bond prices are likely to be driven by
more price-sensitive investors this time around.
2
Second, because the decline in long-term inflation swap yields in recent years is mainly due to a
fall in the inflation risk premium, market-based inflation expectations at these tenors remain well
anchored at levels consistent with price stability, both in the US and the euro area. We therefore
see  no  evidence  that  the  long  period  of  low  inflation  has  undermined  the  credibility  of  central
banks’ inflation aims.
Are current yield curves signalling recession risks?
Let me set the scene with a snapshot of the recent trend in the slope of the US Treasury and the
German Bund curves.
You can see this on my first slide, measured as the simple difference between ten-year and two-
year yields. You can see the marked flattening of the Treasury curve last year which has only
recently come to a halt. The US yield curve is currently at its flattest level for more than ten years,
with ten-year Treasuries yielding just about 60 basis points more than two-year bonds. At the
start of 2017, the difference was around 130 basis points.
You  can  also  see  that  the  German  Bund  curve  is  currently  about  twice  as  steep  as  the  US
Treasury curve and has remained relatively stable, with ten-year bonds over most of the time
yielding  around  100  basis  points  more  than  two-year  bonds  –  not  very  far  from  the  average
observed over the past 20 years.
My second slide focuses on the US Treasury curve. What you can see here is the ten-year yield
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and  a  model-based  breakdown  of  the  yield  into  its  two  main  components:  the  average  of  the
current and expected future short-term interest rates over the maturity of the bond and the term
premium. All series are shown as cumulative changes since the start of last year.
Two facts can be drawn from this chart.
The  first  is  that  the  recent  marked  flattening  of  the  curve  reflects  what  markets  call  a  “bear
flattening” – that is, short-term rates have been rising faster than long-term rates. This is evident
from the fact that the ten-year yield – the blue solid line – today is about the same as it was a
year ago. Short-term interest rates, meanwhile, have risen by around 90 basis points.
At face value, this would suggest that the repricing of interest rate expectations at the short end
of the US curve has not been passed through to long-term rates. This interpretation is incorrect,
however.
Indeed, and this is my second point, the broad stability of the ten-year yield masks two sharply
diverging  developments:  a  marked  fall  in  the  term  premium  –  the  yellow  area  –  and  an
appreciable repricing by markets of the expected future path of short-term interest rates – the
dark orange area. You can see this clearly on the slide.
Put simply, if it weren’t for the parallel fall in the term premium, ten-year Treasuries would trade
some 50 basis points above their January 2017 levels and we wouldn’t be having a discussion
about  flattening.  US  long-term  yields  have  resisted  upward  pressure  only  because  of  a
considerable re-compression of the term premium. Only shortly after the UK’s referendum on EU
membership in summer 2016 was the US ten-year term premium more negative than it is today.
This allows for one preliminary conclusion but begs one question.
The conclusion is that markets seem sanguine about the prospects for the US, and probably
also for the global, economy. Judging from the average expected short-term rate over the next
ten years, the markets appear to have shaken off some of the pessimism that caused them to
tread very carefully over the past few years.
Past and currently expected policy rate changes are predicted to last. This also means that the
flattening of the US yield curve is unlikely to signal a looming recession, as it may have done in
previous business cycles.
The question, then, is what has caused the US term premium to fall to such an extent since the
start of last year.
In  answering  this  question,  I  will  distinguish  between  two  broad  factors.  The  first  relates  to
international portfolio rebalancing considerations and the second to investors’ views of the risks
surrounding the medium to long-term inflation outlook.
International capital flows and long-term yields
I have already examined the first factor in other speeches.   Today  I  would  like  to  shed  some
more light on the direction and extent of cross-border spillovers that might currently contribute to
keeping long-term yields compressed.
3
To recall, from mid-2014 onwards we observed a striking turnaround in capital flows in the euro
area from net inflows to net outflows, just when the ECB had announced its first credit easing
package  and  when  expectations  were  gradually  growing  among  market  participants  that  we
would also soon begin purchasing government bonds. You can see this on my next slide.
Since then, capital outflows have remained substantial, peaking at nearly 5% of euro area GDP.
What  has  happened  is  that  bond  investors,  both  inside  and  outside  the  euro  area,  have
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
rebalanced  their  portfolios,  moving  out  of  euro  area  debt  securities  and  into  the  closest
substitutes – bonds issued by the safest sovereigns outside the euro area. And within that asset
class,  most  market  participants  have  rebalanced  their  portfolios  towards  US  Treasuries  and
government  agency  bonds.  This  confirms  that  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel  has  been
instrumental in delivering the intended benefits of our quantitative easing.
Slide 4 shows the extent of this rebalancing more clearly. Since the start of our asset purchase
programme (APP), euro area investors alone accounted for more than half of foreign purchases
of US debt securities. History suggests that these shares are highly unusual for the euro area.
Only recently has the share started to decline again.
Now, according to conventional models of the term structure, such capital flows should play no
direct  role  in  determining  yields.   In  these  models,  the  term  premium  reflects  the  covariance
between  expected  bond  returns  and  the  representative  investor’s  stochastic  discount  factor.
However, the conditions under which the supply of and demand for bonds are entirely neutral on
yields are very restrictive and unlikely to hold in practice.
4
Indeed, it is now widely accepted that arbitrageurs are often risk-averse and that many investors
have  so-called  preferred  habitats  for  certain  assets  or  segments  of  the  yield  curve.   Pension
funds, for example, typically need to invest a significant portion of their assets in safe long-dated
bonds  to  match  the  liability  side  of  their  balance  sheet.  With  arbitrageurs  capital-constrained,
changes in the demand from preferred habitat investors can then affect the price of duration risk
and hence term premia. The effectiveness of central bank asset purchase programmes rests on
6
this critical assumption.
5
It is now easy to see that these programmes can trigger substantial cross-border capital flows
and that these are likely to affect the term premia of assets in the receiving economy. As a result,
returns on US Treasuries, German Bunds and Japanese government bonds, given their close
similarities  in  terms  of  safety  and  liquidity  characteristics,  are  often  driven  by  a  common
component as investors attempt to equalise their risk-adjusted returns.
Slide 5 illustrates this mechanism through the lens of a Japanese investor. It shows the evolution
of the return on a ten-year Bund and equivalent US Treasury on an exchange rate-hedged basis.
You can see that, in recent years, a Japanese investor in US Treasuries would have been able to
lock in a significant yield pick-up over a domestic government bond, and at times also over a
German Bund without incurring exchange rate risk. Only recently has it become more attractive
for  a  Japanese  investor  to  invest  in  German  Bunds,  reflecting  the  increased  cost  of  hedging
resulting from the rise in US short-term yields.
Empirical analysis on the direction of international spillovers in bond markets corroborates this
view. On slide 6 you can see that ECB researchers, using the Diebold-Yilmaz methodology, find
that bond market spillovers from the euro area to the United States spiked sharply by mid-2014,
just when capital flows started to turn. According to this methodology, spillovers from the euro
area  accounted  for  around  half  the  variance  in  US  Treasuries  for  most  of  2015.  And  these
spillovers have been regaining momentum since mid-2017.
Strong correlation between international asset prices therefore doesn’t necessarily result from a
common  shock.  Indeed,  in  the  light  of  the  strong  idiosyncratic  forces  that  have  increasingly
driven  a  wedge  between  the  monetary  policy  cycles  of  advanced  economies  in  recent  years,
portfolio rebalancing by private investors due to domestic shocks is likely to have increased over
time.
A dominant chase for yield by private investors, in turn, also distinguishes the current situation
from that in 2005 and 2006, which was the last time global yield curves were unusually flat. Back
then, purchases by foreign official institutions – themselves often reflecting large current account
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
surpluses in certain parts of the world – coincided to drive down long-term yields in the United
States, whereas official investors have been net sellers of US long-term Treasuries over the past
couple of years. You can see this clearly on my next slide. To the extent that private capital flows
are  more  volatile,  the  ECB’s  November  2017  Financial  Stability  Review  noted  the  risk  of  a
sudden repricing in fixed income markets should investors decide to rebalance their portfolios.
Low inflation risk and bond term premia
This brings me to my second factor.
One  feature  that  may  cause  global  investors  to  rebalance  their  portfolios  in  the  future  is  a
reappraisal of the prevailing outlook for inflation and, hence, for monetary policy across advanced
economies. Such a reappraisal may occur as we are currently observing that the long period of
very low global inflation may have affected investors’ deep-seated beliefs about the future. This is
most visible when looking at current levels of long-term inflation risk premia in both the United
States and the euro area.
You can see this on my next slide. Here we have a decomposition of long-term inflation-linked
bonds and swaps into the same two components that I showed for nominal bonds on my second
slide,  namely  expected  future  inflation  and  an  inflation  risk  premium.  The  interpretation  is
identical: just as investors demand a premium for interest rate uncertainty, they also demand a
premium for the uncertainty around the expected future inflation rate.
And  while  in  the  past  this  premium  tended  to  be  positive  on  average  –  even  during  the  most
turbulent times of the great financial crisis – it fell sharply in 2014 and is still in negative territory in
the United States today. In other words, investors are willing to pay a higher price for nominal
bonds because they value them as a hedge against low inflation.
So, this slide conveys two messages. The first is that markets do not question the credibility or
ability of central banks to steer the economy towards their inflation aims. Medium-term inflation
expectations per se have remained firmly anchored around levels consistent with price stability.
This is in line with our reading of survey-based inflation expectations.
The second message is that markets are, however, deeply sceptical that inflation can surprise
much on the upside in the future. This is corroborated by survey-based measures, which show
that, since the financial crisis, survey participants have been more concerned about deviations in
the  direction  of  lower  inflation  and  less  concerned  about  deviations  in  the  direction  of  higher
7
inflation.
Another way of looking at this is to consider the option-implied distribution of average inflation
over the next five years. You can see this on my next slide in the case of the euro area. Although
this  distribution  reflects  expectations  over  a  nearer  horizon,  it  re-emphasises  the  point  that
investors assign only a small probability for inflation to surprise much to the upside. But it also
demonstrates  convincingly  that  markets  have  by  and  large  priced  out  deflationary  risks  in  the
euro  area. As  you  can  see,  when  we  announced  the APP  in  January  2015  these  risks  were
considered to be very different.
I  see  two  main  factors  that  may  help  explain  why  investors  and  professional  forecasters  are
currently casting doubt on positive inflation risks.
The first is related to how we form our beliefs, opinions and attitudes.  Specifically, the peculiar
economic cycle that followed the global financial crisis – where very low interest rates around the
world succeeded in reducing economic slack and in inflating the value of some assets, but not
the prices of goods and services – may have made investors doubt the recurrence of upside
inflation  risk.  And  this  may  have  led  to  a  downward  migration  of  the  future  inflation  risk
distribution.
8
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This means that large shocks can push the economy into a previously unknown state – in our
case a low inflation state – where the absence of, or break with, past regularities, such as the
relationship  between  slack  and  inflation,  may  imply  a  long  transition  phase  to  a  new  steady
state.  Worse, if the beliefs I just mentioned guide our actions, then low growth or low inflation
can be the result of self-fulfilling pessimistic expectations and can lead to so-called “stagnation
traps”.
10
9
The  second,  related,  factor  is  that  the  nature  of  the  uncertainties  we  face  today  may  have
changed compared with the pre-crisis period. For example, Barbara Rossi and co-authors find
that  while  risk  fell  sharply  after  the  great  financial  crisis,  Knightian  uncertainty  –  situations  in
which  people  might  be  unable  to  assign  correct  probabilities  to  future  outcomes  –  remained
persistently high even after the end of the crisis.
 In these cases, investors still have to make a
decision, and judgement – often based on current observables – is usually the only basis they
have.
11
Whatever the ultimate reasons, does it matter if the inflation risk premium is low?
There are two sides to the discussion. From a monetary policy perspective, what matters most
is that inflation expectations remain at levels consistent with price stability. At the margin, a low
inflation risk premium is positive as it signals increased confidence in the central bank’s ability to
achieve its inflation aim.
But from a financial stability perspective, and here I again refer to previous work presented in the
ECB’s Financial Stability Review, a low inflation risk premium may be a matter of concern if it
indicates complacency about future adjustments.
 In this case, a reappraisal of investors’ view
about future risks to global inflation may cause a correction of global risk premia, in particular in
an environment of historically low volatility, as you can see on my next slide.
12
Oil prices may be a potential catalyst. ECB internal research finds that energy price shocks have
become considerably more persistent lately, which could fool investors into believing that they
are bound to stay at current moderate levels in the foreseeable future. Incidentally, as oil prices
moved higher in recent weeks, the inflation risk premia also rose amid an increasing willingness
on the part of investors to hedge against inflation in an environment of strongly declining deflation
probabilities.
This  is  also  consistent  with  survey-based  evidence.  For  example,  a  recent  survey  of  62  fund
managers by Bank of America Merrill Lynch revealed that a rise in inflation is thought to be the
most  underestimated  tail  risk  for  global  financial  markets  in  2018.  One  fund  manager  in  two
considers a rise in inflation as a risk to current market prices.
Now, whether or not this risk is real, or how much we should worry about it, is an entirely different
question. I will pass no judgment on the US. In the euro area, however, we see no such inflation
tail risks at the current juncture. Inflation is expected to converge only very gradually to levels
closer  to  2%.  For  this  reason,  an  ample  degree  of  monetary  stimulus  remains  necessary  for
underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up, and we expect the ECB’s key interest rates
to remain at their present levels for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of our
net asset purchases.
At the same time, we currently see no reason to believe that the distribution of future inflation
risks has moved permanently lower.
 It is true that it is taking longer than usual for inflationary
pressure to emerge. But this is likely to reflect the delayed effects of the double-dip recession
rather than structural changes to the economy.
Conclusion
13
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Let me conclude.
Current  financial  market  conditions  have  given  rise  to  much  comment.  Concerns  have  been
voiced  that  low  long-term  yields  are  a  precursor  to  economic  slowdown  or  recession.  These
concerns, however, are inconsistent with the marked rise in expected future short-term rates in
some jurisdictions and the parallel increase in stock prices in many others. We currently see no
concrete  evidence  of  market  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of  the  current  economic
expansion.
We do see evidence, however, suggesting that market participants globally consider upside risks
to future inflation to be limited at present. While this might be a natural corollary of the protracted
period of low inflation, it may also be a matter of concern if it indicates complacency over future
adjustments.
However,  we  see  no  such  risks  in  the  euro  area  today.  Accordingly,  an  ample  degree  of
monetary stimulus remains necessary for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build up,
and  we  expect  the  ECB’s  key  interest  rates  to  remain  at  their  present  levels  for  an  extended
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases.
Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
See  Greenspan, A.  (2005),  Testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Banking,  Housing,  and  Urban Affairs,  U.S.
Senate, February 16.
See e.g. Warnock, F. and V. Warnock (2009), “International capital flows and U.S. interest rates”, Journal  of
International Money and Finance, 28, pp. 903–919; and Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2009), “Global
Imbalances and Financial Fragility”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 99:2, pp. 584–588.
See Cœuré, B. (2017), “The international dimension of the ECB’s asset purchase programme”, speech at the
Foreign Exchange Contact Group meeting, 11 July; and Cœuré, B. (2017), “Monetary policy, exchange rates and
capital  flows”,  speech  at  the  18th  Jacques  Polak Annual  Research  Conference  hosted  by  the  International
Monetary Fund, Washington D.C., 3 November.
See e.g. Eggertsson, G. B. and M. Woodford (2003), “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and OptimalMonetary
Policy”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity No 1, pp. 139–211.
See e.g. Culbertson, J. (1957), “The Term Structure of Interest Rates”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 71, pp.
485–517; and Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila (2009), “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest
Rates”, NBER Working Paper, No 15487.
See e.g. Cœuré, B. (2015), “Embarking on public sector asset purchases”, speech at the Second International
Conference on Sovereign Bond Markets, Frankfurt, 10 March; and Altavilla, C., G. Carboni and R. Motto (2015),
“Asset purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No
1864; and Blattner, T. and M. Joyce (2017), “Net debt supply shocks in the euro area and the implications for
QE”, ECB Working Paper No 1957.
Dovern, J. and G. Kenny (2017), “The long-term distribution of expected inflation in the euro area: what has
changed since the great recession?”, ECB Working Paper No. 1999.
See Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp and V. Venkateswaran (2015), “The Tail that Wags the Economy: Beliefs and
Persistent Stagnation”, NBER Working Paper No. 21719. The authors argue that if people base their beliefs on
past  realisations,  then  extreme,  albeit  transitory,  events  can  generate  persistent  changes  in  our  cognitive
framework.
See e.g. Gerba, E. and D. Żochowski (2017), “Knightian uncertainty and credit cycles”, ECB Working Paper No
2068.
See e.g. Benigno, G. and L. Fornaro (2017), “Stagnation traps”, ECB Working Paper No 2038.
See  Rossi,  B.,  T.  Sekhposyany  and  M.  Souprez  (2017),  “Understanding  the  Sources  of  Macroeconomic
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
13
Uncertainty”, Barcelona GSE Working Paper No 920.
See e.g. ECB (2017), Financial Stability Review, May and November.
See  e.g.  Draghi,  M.  (2017),  “Accompanying  the  economic  recovery”,  speech  at  the  ECB  Forum  on  Central
Banking, Sintra, 27 June.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
