Timothy Lane: Canada's economic expansion - a progress report
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Greater
Vancouver Board of Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 8 March 2018.
 I would like to thank Eric Santor and Garima Vasishtha for their help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
I am delighted to be spending International Women’s Day here in Vancouver, a city that has long
been a leader in fostering diversity, tolerance and inclusiveness.
Earlier today in Halifax, Governor Stephen S. Poloz and Finance Minister Bill Morneau unveiled
the new $10 bank note, featuring a portrait of the late Viola Desmond.
Her story is an inspiring one. In 1946, Ms. Desmond, a Black Nova Scotian businesswoman,
refused to leave a whites-only area of a movie theatre in New Glasgow and was jailed, convicted
and fined.
She confronted this discrimination with grace and courage. And she made history, bringing forth
the first known legal challenge against racial segregation by a Black woman in Canada. Her case
was an inspiration for change and part of a wider set of efforts toward racial equality across the
country.
The  bank  note  will  begin  circulating  later  this  year.  I  hope  you’ll  agree  that  its  imagery  and
symbols reflect the progress we have made as a nation—and the road still to be travelled—in the
pursuit of human rights and social justice.
Now,  I  will  turn  from  these  lofty  themes  to  the  main  topic  of  my  speech  today:  Canada’s
continuing  economic  expansion,  which  has  brought  the  Canadian  economy  close  to  its  full
potential. This is the setting for the monetary policy decision that we announced yesterday.
For those who may not know, we make eight decisions on the policy interest rate each year.
Four of these come with the publication of our quarterly Monetary Policy Report, which provides
a complete forecast and detailed explanation of how we see risks to our inflation outlook evolving.
The Governor and Senior Deputy Governor hold a press conference the same day.
Until now, the other four decisions would come with only a press release—about one page long.
We’ve decided that, starting today, one member of the Bank’s Governing Council will also give a
public speech—an “economic progress report”—a day or so after each of these four interest rate
announcements. The idea is to shed further light on how we see the economy evolving and the
considerations that figured most prominently in our deliberations.
So, this speech kicks off a new initiative—another step in our ongoing efforts to help Canadians
better understand our actions and decisions as Canada’s central bank.
Now, let me begin.
Global and Canadian economic developments
The Canadian economy is progressing well. Following a decade of many setbacks, 2017 was a
year of robust economic growth—3 per cent for the year as a whole.
After many years in which the growth was uneven, it has become more balanced.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The material slack that existed in the economy, and especially in the labour market, has been
largely absorbed. Inflation is running close to our target rate of 2 per cent. While the future is
subject to some notable uncertainties, which I’ll discuss, trends over the past few quarters have
been  quite  encouraging.  The  trends  have  been  broad-based  across  regions  and  sectors,  but
these favourable economic conditions are particularly evident in some parts of Canada, including
British Columbia.
Global developments
Of  course,  Canada  is  a  very  open  economy,  and  its  growth  is  supported  by  what  is  now  a
synchronous global expansion. This too is encouraging. We are now seeing solid growth not only
in the United States and China but also in Europe, as well as in many other emerging-market
economies.
The US economy has been on a path of mostly solid growth and job creation for a few years. At
the beginning of 2018, the data indicated stronger momentum for the United States, and the tax
cuts announced just before Christmas were expected to boost demand further. Developments
since then have largely supported this story. US economic growth remained robust, at an annual
pace of 2.5 per cent during the fourth quarter of 2017, and the US economy is essentially at full
employment, with the jobless rate at a 17-year low. Wage growth has also edged up in recent
months.  Meanwhile,  US  business  confidence  remains  high.  And  increases  in  government
spending legislated in February are likely to provide a further boost in the next couple of years. 
The  US  economic  picture  still  has  upside  potential.  The  current  expansion  could  create  a
virtuous  circle,  triggering  “animal  spirits”  among  businesses  and  consumers  and  driving  even
faster  growth  than  expected.  If  that  happened,  stronger  business  investment  and  household
spending in the United States would likely benefit our economy. So, as always, we are watching
developments in the United States closely.
On that note, we saw some sharp movements in US and global stock markets a few weeks ago,
ushering  in  increased  market  volatility  (Chart  1).  While  these  shifts  were  clearly  amplified  by
technical  factors—and,  of  course,  markets  are  prone  to  overreaction—the  repricing  reflects  a
shifting economic outlook.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Market expectations about the path for inflation in some major advanced economies have been
shifting upward—in the United States, for example, where inflation had persistently been running
short of target. The shift in expectations about inflation and the strength of the global economy
brings forward, to some degree, market expectations of less stimulative monetary policy. Over
time, rising bond yields in the United States can be expected to put upward pressure on yields
elsewhere, including in Canada. In effect, as markets digest what the changing dynamics could
mean for central banks, markets themselves are bringing about some of the tightening that would
be consistent with an improving world economy. 
The rise in volatility came after a long period of exceptional calm in global financial markets—not
just in stock markets but also in fixed-income markets. That tranquility reflected, at least in part,
the influence of monetary policy: in many advanced economies, policy interest rates have been
constrained by their effective lower bounds, and their central banks have relied on unconventional
tools,  including  quantitative  easing  and  forward  guidance. As  the  global  economic  expansion
becomes  more  secure,  we  may  be  reaching  a  turning  point  where  the  volatility-suppressing
effects of monetary policy are diminishing and more normal levels of volatility are returning to
markets.
At the same time, the global outlook remains subject to considerable uncertainty, notably around
geopolitical developments and increasing protectionism. I’ll talk more about this uncertainty a little
later.
Canadian developments
Turning back to Canada, as I’ve said, 2017 was a year of robust growth for our economy.
We were expecting growth to moderate to a more sustainable pace going into 2018, and the
latest National Economic Accounts data confirm that it has. In fact, growth of real gross domestic
product (GDP) during the fourth quarter of 2017 slowed more than we anticipated in our January
forecast. Yet, even as the annual pace of growth came in at 1.7 per cent, under the 2.5 per cent
pace in our projections, the underlying details suggest that the economy is progressing much as
we  thought  it  would.  Specifically,  what  we  economists  refer  to  as  “final  domestic  demand”
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
increased at around a 4 per cent pace for a fourth consecutive quarter (Chart 2).
The slower-than-expected headline GDP growth number was largely due to higher imports, while
exports made only a partial recovery from their third-quarter decline. The gain in imports mainly
reflected stronger business investment, which adds to the economy’s capacity. There were also
some temporary factors influencing imports in the fourth quarter.
In  addition,  housing  and  government  spending  contributed  more  than  expected  to  economic
growth. On that note, we’ll incorporate the implications of the recent federal budget for the outlook
for growth and inflation in the Bank’s April projection.
All that said, uncertainty about the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and growing
global trade tensions will need to be watched, for their possible impact on the outlook. Recent
developments  with  respect  to  steel  and  aluminum,  alongside  increased  protectionist  rhetoric,
carry potentially serious consequences. We do not know how or when the NAFTA talks or other
trade disputes will conclude, and we do not know how industries, or governments, will react. The
range of possibilities is wide, which means that trying to quantify any scenario in advance would
not be useful for monetary policy purposes. For now, our working assumption is that existing
trade arrangements will stay in place over our current two-year projection horizon. As and when
concrete  outcomes  emerge,  we  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  assess  their  impact  on  the
Canadian economy.
But even with no changes in our trading arrangements, the uncertainty around them is affecting
business  investment  decisions.  The  US  tax  reforms  may  further  reduce  the  relative
attractiveness  of  investing  in  Canada.  For  both  these  reasons,  firms  may  decide  to  redirect
some of their planned investment spending from Canada to the United States. Our economic
projections have been incorporating the judgment that such effects are likely to dampen business
investment—as discussed in January. As we prepare our April forecast, we’ll assess whether
the  degree  of  caution  we’ve  applied  is  still  appropriate.  An  important  indicator  will  be  our
spring Business Outlook Survey (BOS), which we will publish on April 9.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
There are a couple of additional points to note on the export and investment picture.
First, with respect to energy exports, spot prices for crude oil have fallen since we published our
January forecast, but remain relatively high compared with 2017 (Chart 3). However, Canada is
not seeing the full benefit of oil’s recovery because of wider-than-average differences between
benchmark  global  oil  prices  and  prices  for  Canadian  heavy  oil.  To  the  extent  that  these
differences stem from ongoing transportation bottlenecks, we expect them to persist. This could
have a dampening effect on investment in the energy sector.
In  addition,  although  Canadian  manufacturing  activity  has  been  solid  in  recent  quarters,  non-
energy  goods  exports  could  disappoint,  given  ongoing  competitiveness  challenges.  Indeed,  in
2017, these challenges meant Canada was unable to benefit fully from a strengthening in global
trade.
Another  key  element  of  our  economic  outlook  is  household  spending—consumption  and
residential  investment.  In  our  January  projection,  this  spending  was  expected  to  remain  solid,
while contributing less to growth as we go forward.
But there are a lot of moving parts. The effects of various provincial government measures in
British Columbia and Ontario are still working their way through major housing markets. Federal
authorities introduced new mortgage underwriting guidelines, which came into effect on January
1. And higher interest rates are also expected to dampen household spending. This effect is likely
to be stronger than in the past, since the average household is now more heavily indebted.
The timing of these effects can vary and is hard to predict. For example, we expected that some
home resale activity would be pulled forward into the last quarter of 2017 as buyers and sellers
tried  to  book  transactions  before  new  underwriting  guidelines  took  effect.  The  strong  pace  of
resales  late  last  year  and  the  recent  sizable  drop  (Chart  4)  appear  consistent  with  that  pull-
forward idea. But it’s too early to tell how all these measures—not to mention measures that the
BC government announced two weeks ago—will affect housing markets over the longer term.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
We  will  continue  to  watch  the  data  closely.  We  will  also  continue  to  assess  how  sensitive
consumption is to higher interest rates, given high household debt. On that front, it’s worth noting
that household credit growth has been decelerating in recent months. It’s still too early to firmly
call it a trend, and credit data can be volatile, but it’s what one would expect to see.
Turning  to  labour  markets,  despite  a  fall  back  in  January,  Canada  has  made  considerable
progress in job creation over the past year, notably with strong gains in full-time employment.
The jobless rate is consequently near a historically low level (Chart 5). Wage growth has firmed,
although it remains slower than would be typical in an economy with no labour market slack.
Going  forward,  we  will  be  monitoring  the  extent  to  which  minimum-wage  increases  in  key
provinces may be affecting broader wage pressures. For now, it is a bit early to say. Meanwhile,
even as regions such as British Columbia experience wage pressures and intensifying labour
shortages, the elevated long-term unemployment rate and relatively low youth participation rate
nationally suggest that there is still some slack in the Canadian labour market. Reflecting this, the
Bank’s composite labour market indicator—which is designed to capture broad labour market
developments—has fallen by less than the unemployment rate.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Now, I’d like to go into a bit more detail about inflation, both globally and in Canada.
Global and Canadian inflation dynamics
I mentioned earlier that recent developments in global financial markets would seem to reflect
shifting expectations about the path for inflation in some advanced economies.
Only  a  few  months  ago,  the  fact  that  inflation  in  advanced  economies,  including  the  United
States, the euro area and Japan, was either slowing down or remaining weak, despite material
slack  being  absorbed,  caused  some  to  question  whether  the  inflationary  process  may  have
structurally changed.
At a global level, there are a number of possible explanations for why inflation has been slow to
pick up. For instance, there may be more leftover economic slack. Inflation expectations may
have drifted lower in response to persistently low inflation. The competitive effects of the rise of
the digital economy and ongoing globalization may be playing a role in holding down prices. Or it
may  simply  be  a  matter  of  time:  inflation  never  picks  up  smoothly  and  does  not  follow  a
mechanical process.
Our staff have been working hard to assess these possible explanations. To date, they’ve found
no compelling evidence that the underlying inflationary process has changed globally. That’s not
to  say  it  hasn’t—we  need  to  continue  to  study  this.  But  for  now,  our  view  remains  that  key
relationships remain intact. Given the depths of the post-crisis recession and varying degrees of
slack  in  different  economies,  inflation  has  taken  longer  in  some  countries  than  others  to
materialize on a sustainable basis.
Meanwhile, here in Canada, inflation has lately been running close to our 2 per cent target. The
Bank’s core measures of inflation are also edging up, as we expected.
Still,  inflation  in  Canada  will  be  influenced  this  year  by  temporary  factors  related  to  gasoline,
electricity and minimum wages. For example, we expected that inflation would drop temporarily
below 2 per cent in January because of effects from gasoline prices a year earlier (Chart 6). But
the decline in inflation, to 1.7 per cent, was a bit less than we had anticipated, reflecting a number
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  factors.  Inflation  is  expected  to  climb  back  to  around  our  target  in  the  coming  months  as
gasoline prices pick up on a year-over-year basis.
Our latest policy decision
That brings me to yesterday’s decision to hold our policy rate, the target for the overnight rate, at
1.25 per cent.
This  decision,  as  always,  is  grounded  in  our  assessment  of  developments  in  the  Canadian
economy and what they mean for the outlook for inflation. In that regard, global and Canadian
economic  data  have  come  in  much  as  we  expected.  That  confirmation  gives  us  greater
confidence that inflation will remain sustainably near our 2 per cent target.
Our  decision  yesterday  also  takes  into  account  some  important  context.  First,  our  policy  rate
remains appropriately below what we call the normal, or neutral, rate—the policy rate that would
balance the economy in the longer run. We’ve estimated the neutral rate to be in the region of 2.5
to 3.5 per cent. I say it’s appropriately below because accommodative monetary policy is working
to  offset  several  factors  weighing  on  demand:  persistent  competitiveness  challenges  facing
Canadian exports, the chilling effect of heightened uncertainty about future US trade policies, and
the burden of high household debt levels.
The second piece of context is that, starting last summer, we increased our policy interest rate
three  times,  for  a  total  of  75  basis  points.  In  these  moves,  we’ve  been  balancing  the  risk  of
undermining the economic expansion by moving too quickly with the risk of delaying too long and
needing to raise rates sharply later to rein in inflation.
By  moving  gradually,  we’ve  been  able  to  take  in  new  data  and  conduct  analysis  on  four  key
issues.  First,  when  an  economy  is  running  close  to  full  capacity,  it  can  actually  create  more
capacity as firms invest and discouraged workers are drawn back into employment. Second, as
I’ve  already  discussed,  inflation  dynamics  could  be  changing  in  the  new  economy,  and  it’s
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
important  to  understand  those  dynamics.  Third,  despite  strong  employment  gains  and  an
economy operating close to capacity, wage growth has been slower than would be expected.
And, finally, with household debt at high levels, the economic effects of interest rate increases
could be different than in the past.
In  our  deliberations  for  yesterday’s  decision,  we  took  stock  of  recent  developments  related  to
these issues. As job creation has absorbed slack in the labour market, we have started to see
wages pick up. With respect to the impact of higher interest rates on housing markets and the
economy, although it is still too early to make a full assessment, we have seen a deceleration in
household borrowing. And while it’s also too early to tell how much additional potential output in
the economy is being created, last week’s strong investment figures are encouraging. We will be
providing a fuller assessment of potential growth, as well as of the neutral interest rate, in our
April Monetary Policy Report.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude. All things considered, we decided yesterday that the current policy rate
remains  appropriate.  While  the  economic  outlook  is  expected  to  warrant  higher  interest  rates
over  time,  some  continued  monetary  policy  accommodation  will  likely  be  needed  to  keep  the
economy operating close to potential and inflation on target. My Governing Council colleagues
and I will remain cautious in considering future policy adjustments, guided by incoming data in
assessing the economy’s sensitivity to interest rates, the evolution of economic capacity, and the
dynamics of both wage growth and inflation.
Rest assured that, as always, the Bank of Canada will continue to do our part to ensure that we
safeguard, and build on, the progress that has been made so far.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
