Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Going back to basics
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the 2018 MCPI Annual Conference, Manila, 26 July 2018.
 Honorable SEC Chair Emilio Benito Aquino, Citibank Philippine Country Head Aftab Ahmed, MCPI
Chair Fr Jose Victor Lobrigo, fellow microfinance stakeholders, distinguished guests, ladies and
gentlemen, it is a pleasure to be with you today for the 2018 MCPI Annual Conference and the
launch of the 16th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards.
As we gather here today, the digital revolution is fundamentally reshaping the financial inclusion
landscape and traditional financial value chains. Rapid digital innovations in financial technologies
have led to the emergence of new market players and more dynamic business models. Given
this  backdrop,  what  does  your  theme  “Going  Back  to  Basics”  mean  to  the  Philippine
microfinance industry?
Keeping Things SIMPLE
It  can  be  a  lot  of  things.  “Going  Back  to  Basics”  can  be  about  MFIs  fully  embracing  and
welcoming this new operational reality. After all, you were once the original “disruptors” in the
delivery  of  microfinancial  services  more  than  20  years  ago!  You  had  pioneered  the  bold  and
novel idea that challenged mainstream thinking – that the poor could be as creditworthy as the
rich.
“Going Back to Basics” can also mean stepping back in order to further strengthen foundations –
returning and reinforcing your core values and fundamental objectives. To revisit what has made
microfinance work in the first place… to what made it stand the test of time.
Going back to basics can also be about keeping things… SIMPLE.
And with this I mean having, first, INTEGRITY – by conducting all our dealings fairly and honestly.
Mark Twain wrote, “If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything”.
Integrity is doing what is right. We should ensure that all transactions with our customers and
other stakeholders are open, transparent, fair and ethical.
Second,  having  a  SOUND  CORPORATE  GOVERNANCE.  This  leads  to  achievement  of  our
organization’s  fundamental  goals  and  objectives  and  attainment  of  long-term  sustainability.
Sound  corporate  governance  is  not  just  about  simply  conforming  to  the  basic  tenets  of
transparency and accountability. It is about instituting a culture that drives and creates value for
our businesses and clients by safeguarding the interests of our stakeholders.
Third, we should MANAGE RISKS EFFICIENTLY AND EFFECTIVELY – therefore building trust
and credibility in the industry and creating new opportunities for sustained growth. A sound risk
management framework allows institutions to deliver competitive and appropriate products and
services to its customers as well as assess new growth opportunities. This is especially crucial
for MFIs as you virtuously take into account not only your financial performance but also both
your social and environmental impact as well.
Fourth,  it  is  important  to  espouse  and  instil  greater  PROFESSIONALISM  and  self-discipline
across  all  levels  of  the  organization.  This  is  necessary  to  raise  the  profile  of  microfinance
professionals  and  the  Philippine  microfinance  industry  as  a  whole.  Greater  professionalism  is
also essential to achieve operational excellence and improve sustainability efforts.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Fifth,  become  financial  industry  LEADERS  in  being  client-centric.  We  can  gain,  build  and
maintain  customer  loyalty  when  we  provide  products  and  services  that  are  designed  to  meet
their needs and even exceed their expectations.
It is only when we think with our customers’ best interests in mind when we deliver responsive
and appropriate products and services, can we achieve industry leadership status.
And  finally,  sixth,  by  maintaining  an  enduring  commitment  towards  EXCELLENCE  –  by
benchmarking for success!
We must always aim to achieve a standard of excellence in everything we do. Excellence does
not  happen  by  default.  Creating  and  cultivating  a  culture  of  excellence  in  our  respective
organizations  is  therefore  a  conscious  decision  to  apply  considerable  thought  and  meaningful
execution to everything we do.
Launching of the 16th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards
At the core of our “going back to basics” mantra are, of course, our clients. Amidst all the talk
about innovation, technology, and disruption, at the very heart of it are still, our clients.
It is only appropriate, therefore, that we continue to showcase truly inspiring success stories of
microfinance clients as we launch the 16th Citi Microentrepreneurship Awards (CMA). The CMA
was conceptualized in 2002 by the Bangko Sentral, MCPI and the Citi Foundation. Through the
years, it has served as a vehicle that inspires micro entrepreneurs nationwide to achieve greater
heights… to believe that by putting in the hard work, anything is possible!
May the stories of our clients serve as reminders of the value and nobility of our work.
Thank you to our partners, MCPI and Citi Foundation. Our partnership is a significant contribution
to the BSP’s Continuity Plus Plus Agenda – one aspect of which is ensuring that our financial
system is inclusive and leaves no one behind.
While much has been accomplished, I hasten to remind you that much is still expected of us. In
this light, we must therefore continue to challenge ourselves to become the best in service to our
stakeholders.  This  requires  us  to  evolve  beyond  who  and  what  we  are;  to  be  innovative  and
adaptable  to  the  dynamic  environment  within  which  we  operate;  to  embrace  change  with  a
positive  outlook  because  it  presents  opportunities  for  organizational  growth  and  development;
and most importantly, to safeguard our reputation and integrity as we continue to reinforce our
role in nation building.
To  the  microfinance  players,  proudly  carry  along  our  legacy  and  identity  as  the  original
disruptors!  Your capacity “to disrupt” runs deep in your DNA. Continue to “disrupt” in providing
better and more efficient products and services to our clients.    
Maraming salamat at mabuhay ang microfinance!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
