 News conference 
   Berne, 14 December 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
Introductory remarks by Thomas Jordan 
 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Swiss National Bank’s news conference. I will 
begin by explaining our monetary policy decision and our assessment of the economic 
situation. I will then hand over to Fritz Zurbrügg, who will speak about current developments 
in the area of financial stability. After that, Andréa Maechler will review the situation on the 
financial markets and the progress in reference interest rate reform. Finally, we will – as  
ever – be pleased to take your questions. 
Monetary policy decision 
Let me begin with our monetary policy decision and the inflation forecast. 
We are maintaining our expansionary monetary policy in order to stabilise price 
developments and support economic activity. Interest on sight deposits at the SNB is  
to remain at –0.75% and the target range for the three-month Libor is unchanged at  
between –1.25% and –0.25%. We will remain active in the foreign exchange market as 
necessary, while taking the overall currency situation into consideration.  
The Swiss franc has depreciated in recent months. The overvaluation has thereby decreased, 
yet overall the franc remains highly valued. The depreciation of the franc reflects the fact that 
safe havens are currently less sought after. However, this development is still fragile.  
Therefore, despite the easing of the situation, the negative interest rate and our willingness to 
intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary remain essential. These measures keep 
the attractiveness of Swiss franc investments low and thus ease pressure on the currency. A 
renewed appreciation would still be a threat to price and economic developments.  
The new conditional inflation forecast for the coming quarters is higher than it was in 
September. This is mainly due to increased oil prices and the further weakening of the Swiss 
  Page 1/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 14 December 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
franc. The longer-term inflation forecast is virtually unchanged. For the current year, it has 
risen marginally to 0.5%, from 0.4% in the previous quarter. For 2018, we anticipate an 
inflation rate of 0.7%, compared to 0.4% in September. For 2019, we continue to expect 
inflation of 1.1%. The conditional inflation forecast is based on the assumption that the three-
month Libor remains at –0.75% over the entire forecast horizon. 
Global economic outlook 
I would now like to turn to economic developments abroad, as these have a considerable 
bearing on the inflation and economic outlook in Switzerland. 
The past few months have seen further improvements in the international environment. The 
global economy exhibited strong, broad-based growth in the third quarter. International trade, 
in particular, remained very dynamic. In view of companies’ improved capacity utilisation 
and growing confidence, investment continued to recover. Developments in employment 
remained positive, which helped to raise household confidence, too. In most countries, 
inflation moved sideways. 
Economic signals for the coming months are positive, as well. We expect the global economy 
to continue developing favourably. For the euro area and the US, we have revised our growth 
forecasts slightly upwards.  
Economic recovery and convergence with the inflation target are most advanced in the US. 
This prompted the US Federal Reserve to carry out a number of interest rate adjustments and 
to initiate the reduction of the balance sheet this year. The coming quarters are likely to see a 
gradual continuation of monetary policy normalisation in the US. By contrast, the European 
Central Bank intends to pursue its asset purchase programme until at least September 2018, 
and to leave its key rates unchanged beyond that horizon. In Japan, too, monetary policy is 
expected to remain expansionary. 
Alongside the global economic baseline scenario, the risks also need to be taken into 
consideration. In the short term, global growth could be stronger than projected in the baseline 
scenario, due to the significant upturn in household and business confidence. In the medium 
term, however, risks for the international economy are still to the downside. These risks 
include ongoing structural weaknesses, political developments in certain countries, and 
potential international tensions. Furthermore, the normalisation of monetary policy in the 
advanced economies presents challenges. An abrupt rise in the currently very low capital 
market interest rates and risk premia, in particular, could negatively impact the global 
economy. 
Swiss economic outlook 
I shall now turn to the economic outlook for Switzerland.  
GDP grew in the third quarter at an annualised 2.5%, lending further momentum to the 
economic recovery. Growth was primarily driven by manufacturing, which benefited from 
  Page 2/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 14 December 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
dynamic global economic developments and the weaker Swiss franc. Accordingly, exports 
recorded marked gains. Investment in equipment also grew noticeably. 
In the wake of this development, capacity utilisation in manufacturing increased further. The 
overall economic situation improved, too. Higher capacity utilisation, a more robust earnings 
situation and favourable global economic prospects contributed to a further rise in business 
confidence. These factors generally strengthen the willingness to invest. 
The gradual recovery on the labour market has also continued. The unemployment rate 
declined again slightly through to November. The demand for labour among companies has 
gradually picked up. Due to continued pressure on prices and costs, however, businesses are 
only cautiously increasing their headcounts. Employment growth is therefore likely to remain 
moderate. 
Given the supportive global environment and favourable monetary conditions, the recovery in 
the Swiss economy looks set to continue in the coming months. For 2018, we expect GDP 
growth of around 2%, following 1% in 2017. Compared to the current year, 2018 should be 
characterised by stronger growth stimuli mainly from exports and corporate investment. 
Inflation expectations, interest rates and exchange rates 
I will now review changes in inflation expectations and monetary conditions.  
Inflation expectations for Switzerland have remained practically unchanged over the past half 
year. Households and companies still expect low inflation of around 0.5% in the short term. In 
the longer term, expectations lie at approximately 1%. A similar view emerges from the talks 
conducted every quarter with over 200 companies by the SNB’s delegates for regional 
economic relations. Inflation expectations are thus within the range that is consistent with the 
SNB’s definition of price stability. 
Like inflation expectations, short and long-term interest rates in Switzerland have hardly 
changed since summer. Short-term money market rates have remained close to –0.75%, and 
the yield on ten-year Confederation bonds has fluctuated between 0% and –0.2%. The interest 
rate differential with the euro area has been largely stable. By contrast, the interest rate 
differential with the US has widened somewhat, due to higher US interest rates resulting from 
tighter monetary policy. 
There has, however, been movement since June with respect to exchange rates. Over the past 
six months, the Swiss franc has depreciated against the euro by about 7%. In addition, since 
the last monetary policy assessment in September, a mild weakening has occurred against the 
US dollar. The trade-weighted nominal exchange rate for the Swiss franc is currently about 
5% lower than in June. The depreciation in real terms is roughly similar. The weakening of 
the Swiss franc has contributed to reducing the overvaluation. However, the franc is still 
highly valued. 
What lies behind these exchange rate movements? In the first phase, from June to September, 
the Swiss franc depreciated against the euro, while remaining largely stable against the US 
  Page 3/4 
  News conference 
 Berne, 14 December 2017 
Thomas Jordan 
dollar. These movements reflected the euro’s recovery following the French elections and the 
attendant easing of political uncertainty. The Swiss franc’s depreciation against the euro and 
the US dollar since September reflects the fact that it is currently less sought after as a safe 
haven, because of increased confidence in the euro area’s recovery and the vitality of the 
global economy. However, we still consider the situation on the foreign exchange market to 
be fragile. The SNB’s willingness to intervene as necessary therefore continues to be 
important. In her remarks, Andréa Maechler will go into more detail on the market 
environment for the Swiss franc. 
Monetary policy outlook  
Ladies and gentlemen, let me summarise my key points.  
Inflation in Switzerland remains modest, and the recovery of our economy is continuing at a 
gradual pace. Inflation expectations are well anchored.  
The rise in oil prices and the weaker Swiss franc have pushed up our short-term inflation 
forecast slightly. In the longer term, however, inflationary pressure in Switzerland has not 
increased.  
Our expansionary monetary policy remains appropriate in order to underpin the recovery, and 
thereby ensure price stability, while taking due account of economic developments. The SNB 
is therefore maintaining the negative interest rate, as well as its willingness to intervene in the 
foreign exchange market as necessary.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. It is now my pleasure to give the floor to 
Fritz Zurbrügg. 
 
   Page 4/4 
 