Mario Draghi: Hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary
Affairs of the European Parliament
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the ECON
committee of the European Parliament, Brussels, 24 September 2018.
 Mr Chairman,
Honourable members of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be back at the European Parliament before your Committee.
Ten  years  ago,  the  euro  area  entered  a  severe  recession.  That  crisis  exposed  structural
weaknesses and forced us to address them. The work is not yet over, but we are reaping the
benefits of our efforts: growth has been positive for more than five years, and the unemployment
rate is at its lowest level since November 2008.
In my remarks today, I will discuss the current economic environment and the role that the ECB’s
monetary policy plays in it. At the request of your Committee, I will also discuss central bank
communication, which nowadays forms an integral part of monetary policy.
The euro area outlook
The information that has become available since my last visit in July broadly confirms an ongoing
broad-based expansion of the euro area economy, which grew by 0.4% in the second quarter of
2018. Despite some moderation following the strong growth performance in 2017, the economy
continues  to  exhibit  high  levels  of  capacity  utilisation,  and  labour  markets  are  tightening  with
signs of labour shortages in some countries and sectors. This is reflected in the unemployment
rate in the euro area, which stood at 8.2% in July. Since reaching a trough five years ago, euro
area employment has increased by about 9.2 million. On account of the improving labour market
and overall conditions, households’ disposable income in the euro area is currently growing at
the highest rates observed in the last ten years. Higher income supports private consumption,
which is expected to increase by 1.5% in 2018. These factors, together with business investment
being  fostered  by  the  favourable  financing  conditions,  rising  corporate  profitability  and  solid
demand, continue to support spending.
Looking  ahead,  the  latest  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections  confirm  the  outlook  for
continued broad-based growth of the euro area economy. Average annual growth is foreseen to
be 2.0% in 2018, 1.8% in 2019 and 1.7% in 2020, with a slight downward revision for 2018 and
2019, mainly reflecting weaker global trade. Risks surrounding the euro area outlook can still be
viewed  as  broadly  balanced,  although  the  threat  of  protectionism,  vulnerabilities  in  emerging
markets and financial market volatility have become more prominent recently. Fiscal policies in
several euro area countries might be less neutral than we expected some time ago.
Regarding  inflation  developments,  HICP  inflation  stood  at  2.0%  in August,  down  from  2.1%  in
July. Headline inflation remains somewhat higher than in the first months of the year, reflecting
the  strong  increase  in  oil  prices.  Measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  generally  muted  but
have  been  increasing  from  earlier  lows  as  domestic  price  pressures  are  strengthening  and
broadening. Underlying inflation is expected to increase further over the coming months as the
tightening labour market is pushing up wage growth. For example, annual growth in negotiated
wages in the euro area increased from 1.5% in 2017 to 1.7% in the first quarter to 2018 and to
2.2% in the second quarter. This supports our confidence that the pick-up in wage growth will
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
continue, as wage agreements often last two years or more.
Looking forward, annual rates of HICP inflation are likely to hover around current levels in the
coming  months  and  are  projected  to  reach  1.7%  in  each  year  between  now  and  2020.  This
stable  profile  conceals  a  slowing  contribution  from  the  non-core  components  of  the  general
index,  and  a  relatively  vigorous  pick-up  in  underlying  inflation.  Reflecting  these  dynamics,  the
ECB projections foresee inflation excluding food and energy reaching 1.8% in 2020.
The ECB’s monetary policy and its effectiveness
Overall,  recent  developments  vindicate  the  Governing  Council’s  earlier  assessments  of  the
medium-term inflation outlook. Accordingly, at our last meeting the Governing Council decided to
maintain the significant monetary policy stimulus in its present configuration and, in line with the
conditional plan announced at our press conference in June in Riga, to reduce the monthly pace
of net asset purchases to €15 billion from October until the end of the year. We anticipate that,
subject  to  incoming  data  confirming  our  medium-term  inflation  outlook,  we  will  then  end  net
purchases.
This doesn't mean that our monetary policy will cease to be accommodative. For our baseline
expectations  of  a  rising  inflation  path  to  materialise,  we  need  to  remain  patient,  prudent  and
persistent in calibrating the monetary policy stance. In line with this approach, we will continue to
provide substantial monetary stimulus by combining three policy measures: first, our enhanced
forward guidance on the key ECB interest rates, which we expect to remain at present levels at
least through the summer next year, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure the
continued convergence of inflation towards our aim; second, the residual net asset purchases
that we will be conducting until the end of this year; and third, the reinvestment of the sizeable
stock of acquired securities.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  made  a  very  substantial  contribution  to  the  positive
economic developments in the euro area. If we consider all the policy measures taken since mid-
2014, our staff estimates show that the overall impact on euro area real GDP growth and euro
area inflation is – in both cases – around 1.9 percentage points cumulatively between 2016 and
2020.
Importance of central bank communication
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  topic  of  central  bank  communication  that  you  suggested  for  today’s
meeting.
Regarding this topic, forward guidance has indeed become an important instrument for all major
central banks as conventional monetary tools have reached their effective lower bound, and the
ECB is no exception.
Forward guidance on our policy interest rates has evolved considerably over time, since we first
introduced it in July 2013.
Roughly speaking, it has gone through three phases. When we first gave forward guidance in
2013,  our  goal  was  to  insulate  euro  area  financing  conditions,  and  especially  the  near-term
segment  of  the  term  structure  of  money  market  interest  rates,  from  the  heightened  volatility
emanating from the US money market as a result of the “taper tantrum” episode of May-June
2013.
During the second phase, our forward guidance served to reinforce the effectiveness of the net
asset purchases. By expressing the Governing Council’s expectations about the likely future path
of interest rates, we ensured that the downward impact that the asset purchases were exerting
on longer-term yields was not counteracted by unanchored market expectations of short-term
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
interest rate increases.
Since June 2018 we have expressed our expectation that, subject to incoming data confirming
our medium-term inflation outlook, net purchases will likely end after December 2018. As we had
for  some  time  tied  the  horizon  for  our  rate  path  to  the  end  of  our  net  purchases  –  giving
indications  that  interest  rates  will  remain  at  their  present  levels  “well  past  the  end  of  our  net
purchases”  –  announcing  a  conditional  plan  for  terminating  net  purchases  by  a  certain  date
made it necessary for us to re-anchor the rate guidance. Steering expectations of the policy rate
path  was  critical  because  the  path  of  inflation  that  the  Governing  Council  viewed  as  moving
closer  to  the  objective  of  a  sustained  adjustment  was  –  and  still  is  –  conditional  on  a  term
structure of interest rates that embodies expectations of constant policy rates over an extended
period of time after December 2018.
It was important for us to retain firm control over the signalling implicit in our monetary policy
announcements. At that critical juncture, we had to reassure investors and the public that the
likely  change  in  the  course  of  our  asset  purchases  will  not  stymie  the  recovery  and  frustrate
progress toward inflation normalisation.
With this in mind, in June 2018 we said that we expected interest rates to remain at their present
levels “at least through the summer of 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary to ensure
that  the  evolution  of  inflation  remains  aligned  with  our  current  expectations  of  a  sustained
adjustment  path”.  This  rate  guidance,  which  we  reasserted  back  in  July  and  also  this  month,
actually contains two parts: first, the “through the summer of 2019” formulation is a calendar-
based  element,  which  refers  to  when  we  anticipate  conditions  that  might  warrant  a  first  rate
increase; and second, a state-dependent component, indicating our expectation that rates will
remain  unchanged  in  any  case  for  as  long  as  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  sustained
convergence of inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
As it turned out, the realignment of market expectations with those of the Governing Council was
immediate and smooth. The new formulation has helped market participants to better understand
our reaction function and adjust the outlook on which they base their plans accordingly.
Of course, steering financing conditions – by guiding the expectations of market professionals –
is only part of our task. We are responsible for ensuring price stability for the 340 million people
of the euro area who use the euro and make economic decisions every day.
Reaching out to citizens is the key to maintaining public confidence in their central bank, and in
the appropriateness and efficacy of its policies. In this respect, hearings before the European
Parliament are a fundamental – absolutely fundamental – channel through which we can explain
to the people of Europe the reasons for our decisions and how those decisions impact their lives.
The  ECB  and  the  European  Parliament,  building  on  the  framework  enshrined  in  primary  law,
have  responded  to  the  demand  for  stronger  scrutiny  that  arose  during  the  crisis  and  have
ensured a high degree of accountability throughout it.  Nevertheless, this should be no reason for
complacency.  We  are  well  aware  that  maintaining  people’s  trust  in  the  ECB  calls  for  tireless
efforts on our side.
1
Facing  challenging  times,  we  have  sought  to  enhance  understanding  of  our  decisions.  For
instance, since January 2015 the ECB has been publishing regular accounts of the Governing
Council’s  monetary  policy  discussions. As  the  exchanges  and  conversations  we  have  in  this
room testify, this additional set of information enables you – and anyone who is interested in the
conduct of monetary policy – to enhance scrutiny of the ECB’s policies. At the same time, this
has provided us with greater opportunities to explain our decisions and demonstrate that we are
acting in accordance with our democratic mandate.
Over  the  past  few  years,  we  have  also  stepped  up  our  efforts  to  overcome  the  key
communication challenges posed by the euro area structure, namely reaching out to citizens in
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
19  countries,  who  naturally  have  different  expectations  regarding  the  ECB.  We  have  thus
enhanced  our  communication  strategy,  directly  addressing  a  wider  range  of  audiences.  In
addition to our institutional activities, my fellow Executive Board members and I have participated
in about 180 events over the last two years, a quarter of them in centres of education.
If  I  include  think  tanks,  foundations,  non-profit  organisations  and  governmental  bodies,  we
delivered more speeches to these fora than at the ECB and the NCBs. ECB staff members have
complemented  these  efforts  with  a  dedicated  outreach  programme  aimed  specifically  at
secondary schools and universities which goes into the functions and purpose of a central bank
in an advanced economy, and also explains the financial crisis and the ECB’s role in alleviating
its effects on the people of Europe. We have covered similar ground in our expanded website,
which now features videos, explainers and charts that describe complex issues in an accessible
way. We have started using new tools, such as YouTube and LinkedIn, as well as Twitter, where
we have almost 440,000 followers.
 
The  European  Parliament,  which  represents  EU  citizens,  is  the  key  to  fostering  people’s
understanding of and trust in ECB decisions. In this sense, it contributes to the effectiveness of
our monetary policy.
But your contribution, as parliamentarians, does not end here. You, as co-legislators, have a role
to play in making sure that Europe is well prepared if the risks I mentioned in my introduction
were  to  materialise.  We  have  seen  that,  far  from  damaging  growth,  a  strong  regulatory
framework is essential in ensuring strong long-term economic performance.
Today, ten years since the start of the financial crisis, there is still important unfinished business
when it comes to improving the EU financial legislative framework. As we are approaching the
end  of  this  legislative  term,  we  need  to  seize  the  opportunity  now.  I  thus  count  on  the
Parliament’s  support  to  make  sure  that  the  framework  provides  the  necessary  stability  to  the
markets, thus protecting EU citizens, as customers, workers and taxpayers.
Thank you for your attention. I am at your disposal for questions.
1
The ECB and the European Parliament have increased the frequency of their interactions, made innovations
regarding the format and sharpened the focus of their exchanges. For more details, see “The evolution of the
ECB’s accountability practices during the crisis”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 5, ECB, 2018.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
