  Introductory remarks by Francois Groepe, 
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the Financial Stability Forum and release of the first edition 
of the Financial Stability Review for 2018 
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
 25 April 2018 
 Members of the press, guests and colleagues, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Welcome to the release of the first edition of the Financial Stability Review (FSR) for 
2018. The FSR has been published twice a year since 2004. Through this publication, 
the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) communicates its assessment of systemic 
risk in the domestic financial system. 
 Your presence at this Financial Stability Forum is appreciated, as the forum intends to 
encourage informed debate on, and therefore to enhance the understanding of, the 
complex and challenging matters related to financial stability. 
 Consensus  is  growing  globally  that  regulatory  frameworks  should  focus  more  on 
mitigating the risks to the financial system as a whole, as significant risks can build up 
and threaten the stability of the financial system while individual financial institutions 
seem stable and sound. In pursuing this goal, the Financial Sector Regulation Act 9 of 
2017  (FSR  Act)  confers  on  the  SARB  an  explicit  statutory  mandate  to  protect  and 
enhance  financial  stability.  The  SARB  and  National  Treasury  have  consequently 
developed  new  legislation  that  will  facilitate  the  orderly  resolution  of  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  that  are  failing,  which  is  an  important  pillar  of  the 
SARB’s expanded mandate. This legislation will be effected through amendments to 
the FSR Act. A key component of the resolution framework is the establishment of an 
explicit deposit insurance scheme for banks in order to protect depositors from losses 
in the event of a bank failure. 
 Page 1 of 5 
Overall, the message of this FSR is that the stability of the financial system in South 
Africa  has  improved  notably  since  the  previous  FSR.  This  is  based  on  a  more 
synchonised and more sustained economic recovery in  the advanced economies, a 
more positive (albeit still a challenging) domestic economic growth outlook, as well as 
improved levels of confidence  domestically  following positive political developments 
and ratings outcomes. Against this background, the SARB has assessed the risks to 
financial  stability  with  a  view  to  identifying  and  mitigating  any  vulnerabilities  in  the 
domestic financial system; it has also analysed the probabilities and potential impacts 
of  these  risks  in  the  FSR.  In  the  presentation  to follow,  Dr Greg Farrell  will  share  a 
more detailed assessment of these risks. 
 During the reporting period, a number of event risks occurred that proved not to be 
systemic in nature but which had potential financial stability implications. These risks 
included  the  announcement  of  an  investigation  into  accounting  irregularities  at 
Steinhoff International Holdings in December 2017, followed by the resignation of their 
Chief Executive Officer and Chairman. The Group’s share price subsequently declined 
by more than 80%, which resulted in a short-term liquidity crisis within the Group. To 
date,  the  Group  has  taken  various  actions  in  an  effort  to  stabilise  its  finances  and 
operations in the medium term. Any potential financial implications arising from this 
event  would  most  likely  be  the  result  of  some  form  of  default  risk  in  respect  to  the 
Group and related parties’ debt obligations that the financial sector may be exposed 
to.  While  such  a  default  could  cause  losses  for  banks,  lenders  and  investors,  it  is 
unlikely to result in financial instability as most of the exposure to the Group and related 
parties’  lies  with  foreign  banks.  Developments  relating  to  this  situation  are, 
nevertheless, closely monitored. 
 Furthermore, since December 2017 we have observed an increase in the volatility of 
selected  equities  listed  on  the  JSE  Limited.  The  sharp,  though  brief,  decline  in  the 
share  price  of  Capitec  Bank  (Capitec)  was  likely  been  triggered  by  a  ‘short-selling’ 
strategy  applied  by  certain  investors.  The  common  traits  of  such  a  ‘short-selling’ 
strategy  include  influencing  market participants’  perceptions by  means  of  extensive 
use of social media platforms and potentially, running an ongoing campaign against 
the targeted entity. 
  Page 2 of 5 
This  type  of  ‘short-selling’  strategy  has  the  potential  to  create  financial  instability, 
especially if the targeted company is a deposit-taking institution. Although a decline in 
a bank’s share price does not necessarily create systemic risk, there may be a risk to 
financial  stability.  This  could  transpire  if  the  information  being  spread  by  the 
‘short-selling’ campaign, whether it be true or not, results in a negative feedback loop 
between lower investor confidence, as reflected in a decline in the equity price of the 
targeted institution and a loss of depositors’  and lenders’ confidence in the targeted 
deposit-taking institution. This may ultimately result in a decline in deposits or a ‘run’ 
on the bank. The negative feedback loop can exacerbate the circumstances even if 
the trigger event was based on inaccurate information. In the Capitec case, statements 
by the SARB and appropriate responses by Capitec calmed fears and led to a recovery 
in Capitec’s share price. 
 VBS Mutual Bank (VBS) was placed under curatorship on 11 March 2018 in order to 
maintain the functioning of the bank and to promote the safety of  depositors’ funds. 
This  intervention  was  deemed  necessary  to,  among  other  objectives,  preserve 
depositors’ confidence and trust in the South African banking system. After a thorough 
assessment of VBS, the curator recommended that an independent review of VBS’s 
business  conduct  be  undertaken,  after  which  the  SARB  commissioned  a  forensic 
investigation into the affairs of the bank. 
 Other potentially systemic events that occurred during the reporting period included 
two  settlement  failures  at  domestic  financial  market  infrastructures  causing  certain 
trades  to  either  fail  or  remain  in  an  unsettled  state  in  the  securities  market.  These 
events were reported via the Financial Sector Contingency Forum and then managed 
by  the  SARB  through  its  interaction  with  market  participants.  A  review  of  these 
settlement  disruptions  has  been  commissioned,  and  they  will  be  addressed  and 
monitored in future. 
 Globally, economic conditions continued to improve during the second half of 2017, 
and it appears that a broad-based cyclical recovery is underway. In January 2018, the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised upwards most countries’ economic growth 
outlooks for 2018 and 2019, but also warned against possible risks to economic growth 
recovery, including subdued productivity, increased protectionism, higher geopolitical 
 Page 3 of 5 
pressures,  and  the  possibility  of  sharp  financial  market  corrections  in  cases  where 
asset valuations were overextended. 
 Institutional soundness remains a feature of the financial system in South Africa. The 
analysis presented in this FSR confirms that banks are well-capitalised and profitable, 
and that they hold sufficient levels of liquidity. Although impaired advances and credit 
impairments increased in January 2018, this was largely a result of the implementation 
of International Financial Reporting Standard 9 (IFRS 9). It inter alia specifies how an 
entity  should  classify  and  measure  financial  assets  and  liabilities  and  one  of  the 
fundamental changes that IFRS 9 introduces is the concept of Expected Credit Loss 
(ECL) provisioning. This new principle replaces the current incurred losses model and 
has  materially  changed  the  way  in  which  companies,  and  in  particular  banks,  are 
required to account for impairments for credit losses. 
 Similarly, the insurance sector seems to be sound. A selection of indicators commonly 
used  to  identify  macroprudential  risks  in  the  industry  did  not  reveal  any  significant 
concerns  from  a  systemic  risk  perspective  despite  the  subdued  level  of  economic 
growth  and  which  impacts  negatively  on  the  insurance  industry’s  premium  income, 
lapses and surrenders. Pension funds are subject to risks stemming from a sovereign 
credit  rating  downgrade  because  of  the  size  of  their  bond  holdings.  Their  large 
exposure  to  this  asset  class  does  not,  however,  present  a  financial  stability  risk  as 
pension funds normally hold these bonds to maturity. 
 A  healthy,  well-functioning  financial  system  is  integral  to  an  environment  in  which 
structural, fiscal and monetary policies can be most effective. Recent assessments of 
the South African financial system by the IMF claim that regulatory reform has made 
the system relatively safer. Designated procedures for systemically important financial 
institutions  have  been  put  in  place;  stress  testing  has become  a  regular  part of  the 
supervisory toolkit; capital buffers have been increased; new rules to address liquidity 
vulnerabilities have been introduced; resolution frameworks have been strengthened; 
and over-the-counter derivative regulation has been enhanced. 
  Page 4 of 5 
There  are  important  areas  where  more  progress  is  still  required,  including  the  full 
implementation  of  strengthened  resolution  frameworks,  measures  to  increase  the 
resilience  of  central  counterparties,  and  measures  to  address  the  systemic  risk 
emanating  from  asset  management  activities.  New  challenges  are  emerging  from 
technological  changes  and  innovation,  such  as  the  digitisation  of  finance.  Ongoing 
financial innovation, changes in business models, and strengthened bank regulation 
have all supported an increasing shift from bank lending to market-based finance, and 
the importance of non-banks has continued to grow. 
 In conclusion, it is clear that the global and domestic financial systems’ have become 
more resilience since the publication of the previous FSR in November 2017. Some 
global  uncertainties  caused  by  a  number  of  economic  and  financial  developments 
remain, including faster-than-expected monetary policy normalisation in the advanced 
economies,  as  well  as  protectionist  measures  and  possible  retaliatory  actions  by 
others. 
 Despite these challenges, the South African financial system continues to efficiently 
facilitate financial intermediation and mitigate negative spillovers and disruptions. 
 Overall,  despite  some  headwinds  from  a  moderate  economic  growth  scenario  and 
some remaining fiscal challenges, the  South African financial sector is assessed as 
strong  and  stable.  The  sector  is  characterised  by  well-regulated,  highly  capitalised, 
liquid  and  profitable  financial  institutions,  supported  by  a  robust  regulatory  and 
financial infrastructure. 
 I have briefly highlighted the key issues raised in this FSR. More detailed analyses are 
available  in  the  publication  itself,  and  some  of  these  will  be  highlighted  in  the 
presentation  by  my  colleague,  Dr Farrell.  I  trust  that  you  will  find  these  interesting, 
stimulating,  and  relevant  to  the  current  environment,  and  I  invite  you  to  share  your 
views as part of the all-important process of ongoing debate on financial stability. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 5 of 5 
