François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Between  "shadow"  banking  and  an
angelic vision of the market – towards a balanced development of
non-bank finance
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the presentation of
the 22nd Financial Stability Review, Paris, 25 April 2018.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I am very pleased to welcome you this morning to this presentation of the 2018 Financial Stability
Review (RSF), dedicated to non-ban k finance. Intended as a forum for dialogue and exchange,
the  FSR  offers  leading  personalities  from  diverse  backgrounds  the  chanceto  have  an  open
debate. I am delighted to see many of this year’s contributors here among us this morning, and I
would like to extend my warm thanks to all the speakers: Klaas Knot, President of the Dutch
Central Bank; Philip Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland; Robert Ophèle, President of
the Autorité des marches financiers; Paul Hamill, Global Headof FICC at Citadel Securities; Yves
Perrier, CEO of Amundi; and Richard Portes, Professor of Economics at the London Business
School.
The topic we have chosen to address is far from anodyne: [slide 2] according to the Financial
Stability Board (FSB), non-bank financing totalled USD 160 trillion in 2016 [Monitoring Universe of
Non-Bank Financial Intermediation, MUNFI], up 50% relative to 2008 and accounting for close to
half of all financial assets held by financial institutions worldwide, compared with 40% in 2008.
And yet – or maybe precisely because of this – there is still much heated debate over its scope
and  over  what  exactly  it  should  be  called.  In  order  to  better  understand  it,  we  need  to  rid
ourselves  of  two  mindsets:  first,  one  of  irrational  fear,  as  non-bank  finance  also  enables  the
financing of growth and innovation; and, in contrast, an over-idealised or “angelic” vision of the
sector,  as  shadow  banking  does  indeed  carry  risks  and  regulators  have  a  role  to  play  in
mitigating them.
1. Overcoming our irrational fears: the benefits of market-based financing
To overcome our irrational fears of non-bank finance, the words we use to describe it matter.  Is
it “shadow banking", with all the negative connotations this implies, or rather, as some regard it,
“market-based finance” or “non-bank credit intermediation"? For the title of this FSR, we have
chosen  the  term  “non-bank  finance”  in  its  broadest  sense.  The  work  carried  out  by  the  FSB
enables  us  to  better  determine  its  scope:  the  higher  measure,  which  is  entity-based  [Other
Financial Intermediaries or OFIs], puts the total at USD 99 trillion. However, those activities liable
to  pose  a  risk  to  financial  stability,  that  is  “narrow  shadow  banking",only  account  for  USD  45
trillion, in other words a little under 30% of total non-bank finance.
Market-based finance is still not very widespread in the euro area: [slide  3] it accounts for just
20%  of  total  non-financial  corporation  debt,  with  the  remaining  80%  taking  the  form  of  bank
lending. In the United States, these proportions are reversed. We should stress here that, of the
larger euro area countries, France has the highest proportion of market-based financing, at 40%.
Non-bank financing in France totals EUR 1.748 trillion, and the leading asset manager in Europe
is a French firm, Amundi. France also has an internationally recognised regulator, in the form of
the AMF,  while  Paris  is  home  to  the  European  Securities  and  Markets Authority,  ESMA. After
Brexit, I also have every reason to believe that a significant share of the market activities of the
largest global banks will be based in Paris.
First of all, I want to put an end to the non-debate over whether market-based financeis better
than bank-based finance and vice versa, and the misconception that the US system should be
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
replicated  in  Europe:  working  towards  a  balanced  development  of  non-bank  finance  simply
means giving companies the option of diversifying their debt financing. Fun damentally, the real
debate  lies  elsewhere:  it  is  about  switching  from  debt  to  equity.This  is  crucial  in  advanced
economies, where growth is  dependent on innovation. Equity financing is better suited to the
uncertainty  and  often  long-term  returns  associated  with  innovative  projects.  The  euro  area  is
seriously lagging behind in this respect: equity only accounts for 74% of GDP, compared with
125% in the United States. Moreover, it only makes up half of the total external financing of euro
area corporations (equity + debt), compared with three quarters in the United States.
In practice, how can we successfully diversify the sources of financing? At the national level, I am
pleased to see that the “Pacte” law drafted by the Minister for the Economy and  Finance seeks
to foster long-term an d equity-based life insurance contracts – by overhauling Eurocroissance –
and encourage and simplify retirement savings, including the annuity component which has the
longest investment horizon. Moreover, one approach supported by the Banque de France is the
implementation of an ambitious European framework: [slide 4]a “Financing Union for Investment
and  Innovation”  to  better  channel  the  euro  area’s  EUR  400  billion  savings  surplus  into  equity
financing and innovation. This Financing Union needsto unite and build on existing initiatives, first
and foremost the Capital Markets Union, but also the Banking Union and the Juncker Investment
Plan. It also means making concrete progress in several areas: the revision of accounting rules,
taxation and insolvency lawsin order to facilitate cross-border investment, notably in equity; the
European-wide  development  of  long-term  savings  products  and  investment  vehicles  such  as
venture capital funds; the completion of the Banking Union.
2.  Avoiding an angelic vision: monitoring, testing, regulating
So no irrational fears in the face of the shadows; but no angelic vision either. [slide 5] A portion of
shadow banking is still overly exposed to credit, liquidity, leverage and maturity risk, and there is
significant potential for these to spread to the rest of the financial system and cause financial
instability. We discussed this issue at the IMF and G20 meetings in Washington just last week.
In my view, therefore, there are three priorities for regulators [slide 6]: monitoring, testing and
regulating. Monitoring first, thanks to the compilation of detailed data on shadow banking. The
FSB already contributes to this with its annual report on shadow banking, as does the ESRB with
its European Union shadow banking monitor. But we need to go further: we need an even more
precise picture of the sector as participants and business models can vary considerably from
one country to another, and are sometimes extremely complex. It is particularly crucial to put
together a mapping of the interconnections within the shadow banking sector and with traditional
banks and insurers.
The second priority is to be able to test for systemic risks, using appropriate tools. In order to
measure the global impact of shocks, we have a particular need for liquidity macro stress-tests
that take into account investment funds: the latter are especially vulnerable to runs, in the event
of a stock market crash for example, if they are open-ended and have no system of gates. To
achieve  this,  we  need  to  develop,  jointly  and  at  a  global  level,  a  harmonised  framework  for
systemic stress tests: the FSB already recommended such tools in 2017, but there is a real risk
that they will remain in the exploratory phase, and that no action will be taken at the level of the
financial system. 
The  third  and  last  priority  is  to regulate.  Following  the  finalisation  of  the  Basel  III  reform  in
December 2017, the main focus for financial regulation is no longer bank solvency, but non-bank
liquidity. We nonetheless need to avoid making two mistakes. The first would be to favour one
sector over another, be it banks or shadow banking: the existence of opportunities for regulatory
arbitrage  could  to  lead  to  the  transfer  of  capital-intensive  activities  to  less  regulated,  or  even
unregulated entities, which would be counterproductive. The other mistake would be to impose
banking regulation on shadow banking, as the risks are not the same; in particular, the same
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital requirements cannot be applied.
At  the  global  level,  the  non-bank  sector  needs  to  be  provided  with  microprudential  and
macroprudential  regulations  that  are  tailored  to  its  particular  business  model  and  risks.  With
regard  to  macroprudential  regulation,  France  is  a  pioneer  in  this  field  with  its  decision  to
introduce,  as  of  1  July  this  year,  a  measure  regarding  large  enterprises  that  also  takes  into
account their market debt. We shall publish details on how it will work this week. But we need to
be honest with ourselves and admit that our experience of using macroprudential tools outside
the bank sector is still very limited. One of our priorities in terms of regulation should also be to
develop liquidity management tools for investment funds, and to refine the measurement of their
leverage, two issues that, fortunately, the FSB has already identified. It is also important that we
increase the transparency of shadow banking activities. In this respect, the entry into force of the
European regulations EMIR2 and SFTR should be a considerable step forward.
As  I’ve  been  talking  about  macroprudential  measures  regarding  large  corporations,  and  our
subject is financial stability, I’d like to bring you up to date on bank lending in France: lending to
the private sector – to households and businesses – is growing rapidly in France, at a rate of
close to 6% per year. At the next meeting of the High Council for Financial Stability (HCSF) in
June, we shall look at whether we need to introduce additional measures.
To sum up, we have not yet finished exploring the issue of non-bank finance and I am certain that
today’s event will make a valuable contribution to the debate. I would like to pass the floor now to
Aurélia End, who will host the round table, and wish you all an excellent morning.  
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
